 
   
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
  
 
ELECTORAL DISQUALIFICATIONS 
 
 
 
Report No. 244 
 
 
February, 2014 
 
 


ii 
 
 
 
The 20 th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three years from 1 st 
September, 2012 by Order No. A -45012/1/2012-Admn.III (LA) d ated the 8 th 
October, 2012 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, 
Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi. 
The Law Commission consists of a full time Chairman, four full -time Members 
(including Member -Secretary), two Ex-officio Memb ers and five part -time 
Members. 
 
Chairman 
Hon’ble Justice A.P. Shah 
 
Full-time Members 
Justice S.N. Kapoor 
Prof. (Dr.) Moolchand Sharma 
Justice Usha Mehra 
Mr. N.L. Meena, Member-Secretary 
 
Ex-officio Member 
Mr. P.K. Malhotra, Secretary (Legislative Departm ent and Department of Legal 
Affairs)  
 
Part-time Members 
Prof. (Dr.) G. Mohan Gopal 
Shri R. Venkataramani 
Prof. (Dr.) Yogesh Tyagi 
Dr. Bijai Narain Mani 
Prof.(Dr.) Gurjeet Singh 
 
 
 

iii 
 
The Law Commission is located in  
14th Floor, Hindustan Times House,  
K.G. Marg,  
New Delhi-110 001 
 
Member Secretary 
Mr. N.L. Meena 
 
Research Staff 
Dr. (Smt.) Pawan Sharma  : Additional Law Officer 
Shri A.K. Upadhyay   : Additional Law Officer 
Shri S.C. Mishra   : Deputy Law Officer 
Dr. V.K. Singh   : Deputy Legal Adviser 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The text of this Report is available on the Internet at : 
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in 
 
 
      © Government of India 
 Law Commission of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 
D.O. No. 6(3)240/2013-LC(LS) 
 
Dated, the 24th of February, 2014 
 
Dear Shri Kapil Sibal Ji, 
 
1. While the Law Commission was working towards suggesting its 
recommendations to the Government on Electoral Reforms, an Order was 
passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 16.12.2013 in Public Interest 
Foundation and Ors. Vs. Union of India and Anr. , vid e D.O. No. 
4604/2011/SC/PIL(W) dated 21st December, 2013.  
2. In the aforesaid Order, the Hon’ble Supreme Court noted that Law Commission 
may take some time for submitting a comprehensive report on all aspects of 
electoral reforms. However, the Hon’ble Court further mentioned that “the 
issues with regard to de -criminalization of politics and disqualification for filing 
false affidavits deserve priority and immediate consideration” and according ly 
requested the Law Commission to “expedite consideration for giving a report by 
the end of February, 2014, on the two issues, namely: 
1. Whether disqualification should be triggered upon conviction as it 
exists today or upon framing of charges by the court or upon the 
presentation of the report by the Investigating Officer  under Section 
173 of the Code of Criminal procedure? [Issue No. 3.1(ii) of the 
Consultation Paper], and  
 
2. Whether filing of false affidavits under Section 125A of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 should be a ground for 
disqualification? And if y es, what mode of mechanism needs to be 
provided for adjudication on the veracity of the affidavit? [Issue No. 
3.5 of the Consultation Paper]” 
 
3. The matter was accordingly adjourned for three months within which period, 
the Law Commission was expected to sub mit its response on the aforesaid two 
issues to the Government of India to be forwarded to the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court. 


v 
 
4. Pursuant to the above order dated 16.12.2013, the Law Commission took up 
the two issues as mentioned above. The Commission had detailed di scussions 
with cross -section of stakeholders and members of the general public along 
with detailed deliberations within the Commission including the National 
Consultation organized by the Commission.  
5. Accordingly, the Commission has prepared its recommenda tions in the form of 
244th Report titled “Electoral Disqualifications” enclosed herewith. 
6. As per the directions of the Hon’ble Court, the present Report is required to be 
placed before the Court. The next date of hearing in the matter before the 
Hon’ble Court is 10.03.2014. 
7. The Commission appreciates the valuable assistance rendered by young 
lawyers, Mr. Arghya Sengupta, Ms. Srijoni Sen, Mr. Gaurav Gupta, Ms. Prachee 
Satija and Ms. Manu Panwar, to the Law Commssion of India. 
 
Regards and Wishes 
 
Yours Sincerely, 
 
(Ajit Prakash Shah) 
Shri Kapil Sibal 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice, 
Shastri Bhawan, 
New Delhi – 110 001
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION REPORT ON ELECTORAL 
DISQUALIFICATIONS 
I. INITIATION OF THE PROCESS ........................................................................................... 3 
II. RESPONSES RECEIVED TO THE CONSULTATION PAPER ....................................... 5 
III. NATIONAL CONSULTATION ........................................................................................... 7 
IV. THE NEED FOR REFORM ................................................................................................ 12 
A. FREE AND FAIR ELECTIONS .................................................................................................................... 12 
B. THE EXTENT OF CRIMINALISATION IN POLITICS ........................................................................... 14 
C. THE ROLE OF POLITICAL PARTIES ....................................................................................................... 16 
D. EXISTING LEGAL FRAMEWORK ............................................................................................................. 19 
E. SUPREME COURT JUDGMENTS INTERPRETING THIS FRAMEWORK  ........................................ 21 
F. PREVIOUS REPORTS RECOMMENDING REFORMS........................................................................... 23 
V. DISQUALIFICATION AT THE STAGE OF FRAMING OF CHARGES ..................... 27 
A. RATIONALE ................................................................................................................................................... 27 
B. REFORM PROPOSAL ................................................................................................................................... 30 
C. SAFEGUARDS................................................................................................................................................. 37 
D. CHARGES FRAMED AGAINST SITTING MPs/MLAs ............................................................................ 40 
E. RETROACTIVE APPLICATION ................................................................................................................. 42 
VI. CONSEQUENCES UPON FILING OF FALSE AFFIDAVITS ...................................... 43 
A. RATIONALE ................................................................................................................................................... 43 
B. REFORM PROPOSAL ................................................................................................................................... 47 

2 
 
VII. RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED SECTIONS ............................................ 50 
A. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ......................................................................................... 50 
B. PROPOSED SECTIONS ................................................................................................................................. 51 
 
  

3 
 
I. INITIATION OF THE PROCESS 
The Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India had addressed a letter dated 16th 
January, 2013  requesting the Twentieth Law Commission to consider the issue of ‘E lectoral 
Reforms’ in its entirety and suggest comprehensive measures for changes in the law.  
Accordingly, the Commission initiated work on the different facets of the subject by collecting, 
collating and analysing the literature on the subject including p revious reports by several 
Committees and Commissions. Apart from the above, recognising the complexity of the subject 
and its integrated relationship with the status and health of democracy, the Commission 
considered it imperative to elicit views and opin ions from different stakeholders. This included 
political parties, jurists, academics, eminent persons in public life , civil society representatives 
and others, who were consulted on various debates, dialogues and issues on the legal, political, 
social and other facets of the subject, necessary for determining the Commission’s approach to 
making recommendations. After detailed deliberations, a Consultation Paper was prepared by 
the Commission under the guidance of the then Chairman, Mr Justice (Retd.) D. K. Jain, former 
Judge of the Supreme Court  of India . The paper concentrated on several suggestive issues 
including, inter alia,  de-criminalisation of politics and disqualification of candidates with 
criminal antecedents, and the need to strengthen provisions  relating to the period of 
disqualification. 
The Consultation Paper was widely circulated to obtain feedback from various stakeholders and 
members of the general public and a number of responses have been received. We shall advert 
to the responses received and the Commission’s views thereon below. 
While the Commission was working towards suggesting its recommendations to the 
Government on reforms in electoral laws, W.P. (Civil) No. 536 of 2011 titled Public Interest 
Foundation. v. Union of India ,a public in terest litigation (PIL)was filed in the Supreme Court 
in the year 2011 praying inter alia for guidelines or framework to be laid down by the Court to 
deal with the menace of criminalisation of politics and debar those charged with serious 
offences from contesting elections. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the above noted matter has, 
on 16 th December, 2013, taken note of the Consultation Paper prepared and circulated by the 
Commission. Appreciating that the Commission may take some time for submitting a 
comprehensive report on all the aspects of electoral reforms, the Court in its order dated 16 th 
December, 2013 in the aforementioned petition, has observed that “the issues with regard to de-
criminalisation of politics and disqualification for filing false affida vits deserve priority and 
immediate consideration” and accordingly directed the Law Commission to “expedite 
consideration on the two issues, namely,  
“1. Whether disqualification should be triggered upon conviction as it exists 
today or upon framing of cha rges by the court or upon the presentation of 

4 
 
the report by the Investigating Officer under Section 173 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure? [Issue No. 3.1(ii) of the Consultation Paper], and  
  2. Whether filing of false affidavits under Section 125A of the  
Representation of the People Act, 1951 should be a ground for 
disqualification? And if yes, what mode and mechanism needs to be 
provided for adjudication on the veracity of the affidavit? [Issue No. 3.5 of 
the Consultation Paper]” 
The matter was according ly adjourned for three months within which period the Law 
Commission was expected to submit its response on the aforesaid two issues to the Government 
of India to be forwarded to the Hon’ble Court. 
  

5 
 
II. RESPONSES RECEIVED TO THE CONSULTATION PAPER 
The Consultation Paper prepared by the Law  Commission was  disseminated  to all registered 
political parties, both at  the  national  and  state  level,  the  Houses  of Parliament, the State 
Legislatures, to the High Courts, Bar Associations, Election  Commissi on, Heads of important 
National Commissions and institutions,  National Law Universities,  prominent media 
personalities, associations and civil society organisations as well as many other public spirited 
persons. The Consultation Paper was also uploaded on the website of the Law Commission. 
Out of over 157 responses received till August, 2013, largest number of responses have been 
received from individuals followed by various civil society organizations and associations. 
Amongst various Commissions, only the  Election Commission of India responded. The 
response to the Consultation Paper from the political parties and Members of the Parliament 
has been tepid with only one national political party viz. the Indian National Congress and a 
registered political party being the Welfare Party of India  having sent their views on the issues 
raised in the Consultation Paper. Only eight sitting Members of Parliament have responded to 
the Consultation Paper, four each from Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha.  
The civil society gr oup, Public Interest Foundation, suggested that the existing provisions 
relating to disqualification to contest elections need to be amended to ensure that 
disqualification is triggered upon framing of charges by the court on serious and heinous 
offences amounting to imprisonment for a term of minimum five years or more, which should 
include the expanded list largely drawn from Justice JS Verma Committee (JVC) Report but 
restricted only to serious and heinous offences attracting an imprisonment of five or m ore years 
in the propos ed Section 8(1)(a) of The Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter 
“RPA”). In this scenario, only cases filed in the court and charges framed by the court six 
months prior to an election would lead to disqualification of a  candidate. This proposed 
recommendation is to co -exist with the present provision for disqualification as state d under 
Section 8(3) of the RPA  debarring candidates from contesting elections on being convicted of 
any offence and sentenced to an imprisonment of two or more years. 
The Public Interest Group further suggested that, w ith respect to elected representatives to the 
House of Parliament and the Legislature of State facing criminal charges, a new sub -section (5) 
be inserted to Section 8 of the RPA for establishing special fast -track courts for time bound 
disposal of the cases. This sub -section could act as a deterrent to those with cases of criminal 
offence, pending against them in the court from contesting elections in order to avoid a speedy 
and time bound adjudication of the case by a special fast -track court resulting in their possible 
conviction and imprisonment. The case with respect to charges pending against an elected 
representative and also, where charge has been framed after the declaration o f election results 
should automatically be placed under the consideration of the special fast -track court of 
competent jurisdiction immediately after the candidate is declared elected. These fast -track 
courts should be required to dispose  of the cases within six months from the date the court has 

6 
 
taken cognizance of the offence committed by the elected representative. The appellate courts 
in such instances shall dispose the cases finally within six months of the date of the order of the 
original court. 
An alternative proposal has also been suggested where, a person charge-sheeted for serious and 
heinous offences amounting to imprisonment for a term of minimum five years should be 
allowed to contest elections. In case a candidate facing charges is elected to be a Member of 
Parliament (MP)/Member of Legislative Assembly of States (MLA), then the case against the 
concerned individual will automatically be placed under the special fast -track court in the 
proposed sub -section of 8(5) to the RPA for time bound disp osal of the matter. This would 
apply to an elected representative who has been charge sheeted by a court after elections. The 
elected representative should be allowed to discharge his/her duties in full pote ntial until he  is 
convicted, or convicted and sentenced by the fast-track court. 
Once the conviction of the elected representative has attained finality, the representative should 
automatically be disqualified by the Speaker or Presiding Officer of the House. It is clarified 
that the disqualification would also apply in cases where an elected representative has not filed 
any revision/appeal on conviction. 
The Association for Democratic Reforms (ADR) has recommended that any person against 
whom a charge has been framed by a court of law, in a criminal case  for which the punishment 
is imprisonment of two years or more should not be allowed to contest elections. In particular, 
any candidate against whom charges have been framed for serious offences like murder, rape, 
kidnapping etc. should be banned from contesting elections.  
On the issue of consequences on the candidature and membership of a person who furnishes 
false information in the affidavit filed alongwith the nomination paper, there is unanimity on 
the need for prescribing stringent consequences in la w for filing false affidavits, in particular, 
making it  a ground for disqualification. The Election Commission has also suggested that 
Section 125A should be included in the list of offences provided under Section 8(1) which 
attract disqualification irrespective of the quantum of punishment. It has also been suggested by 
Mr. P.P. Rao, S enior Advocate that filing of false affidavits should be made a ground for 
setting aside election under Section 100.  
The Commission has also conducted deliberations with Mr . T.S. Krishnamurthy (Former Chief 
Election Commissioner under whose aegis the 2004 Report on Electoral Reforms was prepared 
by the Election Commission), Dr. S.Y. Quraishi (Former Chief Election Commissioner), Mr. 
S.K. Mendiratta (Consultant -cum-Legal Advi sor to the Election Commission of India), Mr. 
K.F. Wilfred (Principal Secretary, Election Commission of India) and Prof.Jagdeep S. Chhokar 
(Founder Member of Association for Democratic Reforms). All of their recommendations have 
greatly influenced the Commission and the recommendations in their report.  
 

7 
 
 
III. NATIONAL CONSULTATION 
In addition to the aforesaid Consultation Paper and responses received to it, a one -day National 
Consultation on Electoral Reforms was organized by the Commission on 1 st February, 2014 in 
New Delhi. Considering the short span of time within which the Report on the two issues of 
disqualification of candidates with criminal background and consequences of filing false 
affidavits was to be submitted, the Consultation was confined only  to the two specific issues of 
decriminalisation of politics and consequences of filing false affidavits.  
The National Consultation was widely advertised in the press and media to ensure maximum 
participation and political parties and other delegates were  invited by sending invitations 
through post and email.All India NR Congress (Pondicherry) , All Jharkhand Students Union 
Party (Jharkhand ),Biju Janata Dal, Communist Party of India ,Communist Party of India 
(Marxist), Nationalist Congress Party, , J & K Nat ional Panthers Party, , Rashtriya Lok Dal,), 
and TelanganaRashtraSamithi were represented. All the registered National and 
RegionalParties were invited though most did not attend. The fundamental idea behind holding 
the National Consultation was to receive as many and as varied inputs from various 
stakeholders as possible, and to draw upon the expertise on the two issues from a cross-section 
of those involved in administering the political system. This was based on the widespread belief 
that electoral reforms must flow from the floor of the House rather than being imposed from the 
outside. To create momentum for change, in the words of Mr.Fali S. Nariman, “we need to rely 
on the public opinion on the outside to put pressure on those inside to do the right and  the 
honourable thing”. 
The Consultation began with an Opening Session and comprised three Technical Sessions. 
Mr.Justice (Retd.) B.P. Jeevan Reddy (Former Judge of Supreme Court and former Chairman 
of the Law Commission of India) under whose Chairmanship the 170 th Report on Electoral 
Reforms was submitted by the Law Commission in 1999 and which Report remains the 
reference point for all subsequent work on the issue, gave the inaugural address in the Opening 
Session. The First Technical Session after the op ening ceremony focused on the increasing 
criminalisation of the Indian polity and the means to deal with the same . Mr Fali S. Nariman 
(Senior. Advocate) presented the opening ideas and issues and proffered valuable suggestions 
on the same. The second sessi on focussed on the determining stage of the legal procedure in 
criminal cases for the disqualification of candidates and sitting Members of Parliament and 
Legislative Assemblies/Councils accused of criminal offences. Mr T.R. Andhyarujina (S enior. 
Advocate and former Solicitor General of India) and Mr P.P. Rao  provided impetus to the 
discussion by putting forth two opposite perspectives on the issue.  The third and final 
Technical Session was devoted to the consequences of furnishing false information in th e 
affidavit filed along with nomination paper . Mr. Soli J. Sorabjee (S enior Advocate and former 

8 
 
Attorney General of India) and Mr. K.N. Bhat (Senior Advocate) advanced their suggestions on 
the issue of filing false affidavits.  
Besides the abovenamed, the Consultation was attended by Dr. S.Y. Quraishi (Former Chief 
Election Commissioner), Mr. S.K. Mendiratta (Consultant -cum-Legal Advisor to the Election 
Commission of India), Mr. K.F. Wilfred (Principal Secretary, Election Commission of India), 
Mr. H.K. Dua (Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha), Mr. Dinesh Dwivedi, (S enior Advocate) 
along with several other representatives from the Bar, Bench, civil society organizations, 
concerned citizens, academia, media and other stakeholders all of whom fruitfully particip ated 
in the debates and discussions. The participants put forth several suggestions, reflections, 
observations and comments all of which have been duly recorded in the minutes of the 
Consultation prepared by the Commission.  
Broadly, the public consultation brought to the fore sharply divided opinions, with views on the 
one end of the spectrum suggesting that individual interest or concerns if any in the context of 
representing people in democracy should be sacrificed to secure the larger public good, namely, 
purity and integrity of the electoral democratic process, and on the other end emphasised the 
view that the time tested principles of criminal jurisprudence of the presumption of innocence 
until a person is tried and convicted should not be jeopardized or diluted. 
On the issue of criminalisation of politics, Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy stayed firm in his opinion 
that the field of disqualification of candidates has to be enlarged by providing that candidates 
against whom charges have been framed for offence s (under the IPC or any other enactment) 
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or for ten years (with or without fine) shall stand 
disqualified, provided such charges are framed six months prior to the date of scrutiny of the 
nomination papers. He also suggested the introduction of a List System of elections. The List 
system would involve publication by the Election Commission of a constituency-wise list of 
candidates having declared criminal background.  
Justice Reddy also proposed a reduction in the period between publication of validly nominated 
candidates and the day of polling. These measures, he opined, would have the merit of breaking 
the b ond between candidates and the c onstituency, leaving minimal scope for influencing 
voters.  
Mr Fali S. Nar iman found that  the procedure relating to criminal cases prescribed in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 held all the answers. He  ruled out disqualifica tion upon filing of 
charge-sheet or report under Section 173 by the Police in the Magistrate’s Court,  and strongly 
advocated disqualification upon framing of charges by the competent Court. He articulated the 
need for enlarging the whole concept of disqualification and emphasized that the law needs to 
go ahead in order to promote purity and integrity of t he democratic process . I n his opinion , 
there are sufficient safeguards within the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973 (CrPC) which can 
address the concerns against false prosecution.  

9 
 
According to Mr P.P. Rao, credibility is the life -blood of institutions in a democracy. 
Accordingly a person who is under a cloud should not be allowed to function as it damages the 
faith of the people in the institutions. He submitted that the presence of tainted people is the 
main reason for deterioration in the credibility enj oyed by the institutions and therefore said 
that the time has come to make efforts to regain it. He admitted that the criminal justice is 
protracted and many legislative terms may pass by before conviction or acquittal is 
pronounced. But the changing reali ty with changing times demands innovative method s. In the 
light of the same, he also suggested disqualifying candidates upon framing of charges by the 
competent Court. Representing the Biju Janata Dal, Mr.PinakiMisra,, while strongly supporting 
disqualification upon framing of charges for aspiring candidates , opined that automatic 
disqualification of sitting members upon charges being framed would mean re -election for that 
seat. He suggested that the disqualification for a sitting MP should not be triggered 
immediately as huge investments are made in the conduct of elections and it is impossible to 
turn the clock back, and that the membership should be kept in abeyance as in cases of electoral 
offences. He cited the example of the interim order of the Supreme  Court of India in Indira 
Gandhi v Raj Narain  judgment. His suggestion was that the court must expedite the cases of 
such indicted MPs.  
All the other political parties that participated in the Consultation strongly dissented on the 
introduction of disqual ification upon framing of charges. ShiromaniAkali Dal in its written 
response on the issue has stated that the existing provisions of the RPA are sufficient to prevent 
entry of people with criminal antecedents in to the political arena and therefore need no  
amendment. The overpowering consideration behind the common thread running through the 
opposition from the political fraternity to disqualification being triggered upon framing of 
charges is the fear of its misuse on account of ‘political vendetta’. 
Mr T.R. Andhyarujina also opposed the operation of disqualification upon framing of charges 
though for different reasons. He highlighted the legislative history of Section 8 of the RPA to 
bring home the fact that when it was enacted, the yardstick for disqualif ication was conviction 
and not framing of charges. Admitting that the moral perception of the first Parliament was 
drastically different from the present situation with several elected representatives with 
“criminal” antecedents, he still stressed that our  settled jurisprudence of presumption of 
innocence until proven guilty ought not to be subverted. The disclosure of information 
including criminal antecedents in the affidavits are sufficient for the electorate to make well 
informed choices. Dr S.Y. Qurais hi and Mr S.K. Mendiratta in this regard pointed out that the 
jurisprudence of presumption of innocence until found guilty already has been displaced to a 
large extent in practice inasmuch as there are lakhs of under-trial prisoners in our country.  
A valuable suggestion by one of the participants was that if a person is disqualified fro m being 
a candidate for election or a member of the Parliamen t, then he must be disallowed from  
holding any position in the party as well for a certain period of time. Allow ing the disqualified 
person to hold a position in the party has the potential of the same member issuing a whip on 

10 
 
the other members of the party and ultimately achieving indirectly what could not be achieved 
directly. It was further suggested that any pol itical party that allows a position to a disqualified 
person should be de-recognized. 
On the aspect of filing of false affidavits, Mr Soli J. Sorabjee, stressed that filing of false 
affidavits in the matter of elections is a serious issue having a direct b earing on the purity of an 
election. He said that the Supreme Court has acknowledged the right of the elector to have 
‘correct’ information about the candidate who is standing for the elections in order to make an 
informed choice. Thus filing of false affi davit should certainly be made a ground for 
disqualification, particularly in cases of returned candidates who furnished false information in 
affidavits. This is essential to ensure free and fair elections which is a basic feature of our 
Constitution. He s uggested that  the CVC may be entrusted with the task of auditing the 
information in the affidavits to ascertain the correctness thereof. The CVC on finding falsehood 
having been practiced, shall send a report to the Election Commission. The Election 
Commission after hearing the returned candidate, shall report to the President of India and the 
President after examining the report and the material may disqualify the returned candidate so 
as to not allow him to enjoy the fruits of his victory achieved by filing false affidavit.  
Mr K.N. Bhat, stated that even though Sections 33A and 125A have been inserted in the statute 
book after the 170th Report of the Law Commission (1999) , yet false affidavits are filed 
routinely. Delay in the court procedures resulting in an unduly long period between the framing 
of charges and conviction , coupled with only six months punishment under Section 125A 
makes a mockery of the provision. He suggested the omission of the words “with the intent to 
be elected in an election” in Sec tion 125A as in his opinion falsehood is always deliberate.  He 
also suggested that a week’s time may be given after the filing of the affidavit for filing 
objections and subsequently, the Returning Officer must have the right to reject the candidature 
based on valid evidence. He further suggested that Section 125A be included under Section 123 
as a corrupt practice, as an election petition can be filed thereafter and election can be set aside 
on this ground under Section 100.  
While some other participants also suggested making filing of false affidavits a corrupt practice 
under Section 123 of the RPA and thus a ground for setting aside election, the same has been 
disagreed by others on the ground that discovery of falsehood after the limitation for filing 
election petition expires would enable the wrongdoer escape the consequence. Mr 
NripendraMisra from the Public Interest Foundation (the petitioner  in the PIL pending before 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court ) also suggested that punishment under Section 125A should be 
enhanced to two years with no alternative of fine. He recommended that power should be given 
to the Chief Election Commissioner to hear and decide the issue of falsity of affidavit on a 
reference being made to him by the Returning Officer instead of the CVC investigating it. 
However, the same has been disagreed with by the other participants as being impractical 
particularly owing to the time gap between nominations and polls being only 14 days. Further, 
he suggested that the disqualification for violati on of Section 125A should be three years as in 

11 
 
Section 10A. Dr S.Y. Quraishi also added that disqualification for filing false affidavit should 
not be limited to the returned candidate but equally to all candidates who have been found 
guilty of having furnished false information. Mr S.K. Mendiratta, put forth the proposals of the 
Election Commission on the issue at hand i.e. punishment under Section 125A should be at 
least 2 years and not 6 months and Section 125A should be included in the offences covered 
under Section 8(1) so that conviction thereunder irrespective of the quantum of sentence would 
lead to disqualification of the candidate, returned or otherwise. 
The Commission took into consideration the diverse views expressed at the National 
Consultation while preparing its recommendations in this Report. At the same time it 
recognised a distinct sense emerging from the day -long meeting, i.e. that the law relating to 
disqualification of tainted politicians needs  to be enlarged in order to be attuned to mo dern 
realities. A detailed justification of why such enlargement needs to happen and the exact scope 
of such enlargement are discussed in turn in the next three chapters 
  

12 
 
IV. THE NEED FOR REFORM 
 
A. FREE AND FAIR ELECTIONS 
“If the people who are elected are capable and men of character and integrity, then 
they would be able to make the best even of a defective Constitution. If they are lacking 
in these, the Constitution cannot help the country. After all, a Constitution like a 
machine is a lifeless thing. It acquires life because of the men who control it and 
operate it, and India needs today nothing more than a set of honest men who will have 
the interest of the country before them…It requires men of strong character, men of 
vision, men who will not sacrifice  the interests of the country at large for the sake of 
smaller groups and areas…We can only hope that the country will throw up such men 
in abundance.” 
- Dr Rajendra Prasad,President, Constituent Assembly of India,  26th November, 
1949 before putting the motion for passing of the Constitution on the floor 
Democracy as a form of governance was the central plinth of the constitutional scheme 
envisaged by the framers of the Constitution of India. The ultimate aim, as evidenced in the 
Constituent Assembly debate s and gleaned from their personal writings, was the empowering 
of each and every Indian citizen to become a stakeholder in the political process. To this end, 
the citizen was given the power to elect members of the Parliament and their respective  State 
Legislative Assemblies through the exercise of their vote, a system that the framers believed 
would ensure that only the most worthy candidates would be elected to posts of influence and 
authority. Representative government, sourcing its legitimacy from the P eople, who were the 
ultimate sovereign, was thus the kernel of the democratic system envisaged by the Constitution. 
Over time, this has been held to be a part of the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution, immune to 
amendment, with the Supreme Court of India declaring,  
“It is beyond the pale of reasonable controversy that if there be any unamendable 
features of the Constitution on the score that they form a part of the basic structure of 
Constitution, it is that India is a Sovereign Democratic Republic.” 1 
Thus, inherent in the model of representative government based on popular sovereignty is the 
commitment to hold regular free and fair elections . The importance of free and fair elections 
stems from two factors — instrumentally, its central role in selecting  the persons who will 
govern the people, and intrinsically, as being a legitimate expression of popular will. Stressing 
                                                           
1Indira Gandhi v. Raj Narain and Others, 1975 Supp SCC 1, 252 para 664.  

13 
 
the importance of free and fair elections in a democratic polity, the Supreme Court held in 
Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commissioner,2 
 
“Democracy is government by the people. It is a continual participative operation, not 
a cataclysmic periodic exercise. The little man, in his multitude, marking his vote at the 
poll does a social audit of his Parliament plus political choice of this proxy. Although 
the full flower of participative Government rarely blossoms, the minimum credential of 
popular government is appeal to the people after every term for a renewal of 
confidence. So we have adult franchise and general elections as constit utional 
compulsions… It needs little argument to hold that the heart of the Parliamentary 
system is free and fair elections periodically held, based on adult franchise, although 
social and economic democracy may demand much more.” 
To ensure free and fair e lections, and give impetus to the vision of the framers, Parliament 
enacted The Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter ‘RPA’) which inter alia 
provides qualifications and disqualifications for membership of Parliament and State 
Legislatures, lays down corrupt practices that are punishable by law, creates other offences in 
connection with such elections and for the resolution of disputes arising out of or in connection 
with them. The underlying rationale for the legislation is thus to create a s ystemic framework 
conducive to free and fair elections. Implicit in this framework is the need to prescribe certain 
qualifications and disqualifications, which are deemed to be respectively essential or unsuitable 
for holders of public office.  
It is  a truism that criminal elements of society, i.e. those accused of breaking the laws that their 
predecessors have given the force of law, and which they are themselves entrusted with 
enforcing being MPs and MLAs , would be antithetical to the vision of the frame rs, the nature 
of Indian democracy and the rule of law. The Supreme Court held as such in K Prabhakaran v. 
P Jayarajan3where it said, 
“Those who break the law should not make the law. Generally speaking the purpose 
sought to be achieved by enacting disqual ification on conviction for certain offences is 
to prevent persons with criminal background from entering into politics and the house – 
a powerful wing of governance. Persons with criminal background do pollute the 
process of election as they do not have m any a holds barred (sic) and have no 
reservation from indulging into criminality to win success at an election.” 
DrRajendra Prasad, in his concluding address to the Constituent Assembly categorically said,  
                                                           
2(1978) 1 SCC 405, 424 at para 23.  
3 (2005) 1 SCC 754, 780 para 54.  

14 
 
“A law giver requires intellectual equipment but even more than that capacity to take a 
balanced view of things to act independently and above all to be true to those 
fundamental things of life – in one word – to have character.”4 
A three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Centre for Public Interest Litigation v. Union of 
India5(the “CVC case”) raised the standards of qualification for appointment to a public office. 
Holding it imperative for the members to uphold and preserve the integrity of the ‘institution’, 
it was laid down that not the desirability  of the candidate alone but the “institutional integrity” 
of the office which should be the reigning consideration in appointments to a public office. The 
spirit of this judgment, appli cable to all public offices, is  that it is not only imperative for the 
candidate for such office to have the highest standards of integrity, but independently that the 
integrity of the institution must be preserved. Having criminal elements in politics, no matter 
whether they are convicted or not, indubitably tarnishes the latter, if not the former as well.  
B. THE EXTENT OF CRIMINALISATION IN POLITICS 
Despite the best intentions of the drafters of the Constitution and  theMembers of Parliament at 
the onset of the Indian Republic, t he fear of a nexus between crime and politics  was widely 
expressed from the first general election itself in 1952. In fact, as far back as in 1922, Mr 
C. Rajagopalachari had anticipated the present state of affairs twenty five years before 
Independence, when  he wrote in his prison diary: “Elections and th eir corruption, 
injustice and tyranny of wealth, and inefficiency of administration, will make a hell of life 
as soon as freedom is given to us…” 6 
Interestingly, observers have noted that the nature of this nexus changed in the 1970s. 
Instead of politician s having suspected links to criminal networks,  as was the case earlier, it 
was persons with extensive criminal backgrounds who began entering politics. 7 This was 
confirmed in the Vohra Committee Report in 1993 , and again in 2002 in the report of the 
National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC). The Vohra 
Committee report pointed to the rapid growth of criminal networks that had in turn 
developed an elaborate system of contact with bureaucrats, politicians and media persons. 8 
A Consu ltation Paper published by the NCRWC in 2002 went further to say that criminals 
                                                           
4 Vol. XI, C.A.D. (November 26th, 1949).  
5 (2011) 4 SCC 1.  
6 Per C Rajagopalachari in Kishor Gandhi,  India's Date with Destiny: Ranbir Singh Chowdhary Felicitation 
Volume, 1st Ed. (Allied Publishers, 2006) 133. 
7 Milan Vaishnav, ‘The Market for Criminality: Money, Muscles and Elections in India’ (2010) 
<http://casi.sas.upenn.edu/system/files/Market+for+Criminality+-+Aug+2011.pdf> accessed 14 January 2014.  
8 Government of India, ‘Vohra Committee Report on Criminalisation of Politics, Ministry of Home Affairs’ (1993) 
< http://indiapolicy.org/clearinghouse/notes/vohra-rep.doc> accessed 13 January, 2014.  

15 
 
were now seeking direct access to power by becoming legislators and ministers 
themselves. 9 
Since the judgment of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Association for Democrat ic 
Reforms ,10 which made the analysis of criminal records of candidates possible by requiring 
such records to be disclosed by way of affidavit, the public has had a chance to 
quantitatively assess the validity of such observations made in the previous repor ts. The 
result of such analysis lead s to considerable concern.  
In the ten years since 2004, 18% of candidates contesting either National or State elections 
have criminal cases pending against them (11,063 out of 62,847). In 5,253 or almost half 
of these c ases (8.4 % of the total candidates analys ed), the charges are of serious criminal 
offences that include murder, attempt to murder, rape, crimes against women, cases under 
the Prevention of Corruption Act,  1988, or under the  Maharashtra Control of Organised  
Crime Act,  1999 which on conviction would result in five years or more of jail, etc. 152 
candidates had 10 or more serious cases pending, 14  candidates  had 40 or more such cases 
and 5 candidates had 50 or more cases against them. 11 
The 5,253 candidates wit h serious cases together had 13,984 serious charges against them. 
Of these charges , 31 % were cases of murder and other murder related offences, 4% were 
cases of rape and offences against women, 7% related to kidnapping and abduction, 7 % 
related to robbery and dacoity, 14% related to forgery and counterfeiting inclu ding of 
government seals and 5 % related to breaking the law during elections. 12 
Criminal backgrounds are not limited to contesting candidates, but are found among 
winners as well. Of these 5,253 ca ndidates with serious criminal charges against them, 
1,187 went on to winning the elections they contested i.e. 1 3.5% of the 8,882 winners 
analysed from 2004 to 2013. Overall, including both serious and non -serious charges, 
2,497 (28.4% of the winners) had  9,993 pending criminal cases against them.  
In the current Lok Sabha, 30% or 162 sitting MPs have criminal cases pending against 
them, of which  about half i.e.  76 have serious criminal cases. Further, the prevalence of 
                                                           
9 National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution, ‘A Consultation Paper on Review of the 
Working of Political Parties Specially in Relation to Elections and Reform Options’ (2002) 
<http://lawmin.nic.in/ncrwc/finalreport/v2b1-8.htm> accessed 13 January, 2014.  
10 (2002) 5 SCC 294.  
11 Association for Democratic Reforms, ‘Press Release - Ten Years of Election Watch: Comprehensive Reports on 
Elections, Crime and Money’ (2013) 1, <http://adrindia.org/sites/default/files/Press%20Note%20 -
%20Ten%20Years%20of%20Elections,%20Crime%20and%20Money_0.pdf> accessed 14 January, 2014  
TrilochanSastry, ‘Towards Decriminalisation of Elections and Politics’, Economic & Political Weekly, 4 January, 
2014. 
12TrilochanSastry, ‘Towards Decriminalisation of Elections and Poli tics’, Economic & Political Weekly, 4 
January, 2014. 

16 
 
MPs with criminal cases pending has i ncreased over time. In 2004, 24% of Lok Sabha MPs 
had criminal cases pending, which increased to 30% in the 2009 elections. 13 
The situation is similar across states with 31% or 1,258 out of 4,032 sitting MLAs with 
pending cases, with again about half being serious cases. 14 Some states have a much higher 
percentage of MLAs with criminal records: in Uttar Pradesh, 47% of MLAs have criminal 
cases pending. 15 A number of MPs and MLAs have been accused of multiple counts of 
criminal charges. In a constituency of Utt ar Pradesh, for example, the MLA has 36 
criminal cases pending including 14 cases related to murder. 16 
From this data it is clear that about one -third of elected candidates at the Parliament and 
State Assembly levels in India have some form of criminal tain t. Data elsewhere suggests 
that one -fifth of MLAs have pending cases which have proceeded to the stage of charges 
being framed against them by a court at the time of their election. 17 Even more disturbing 
is the finding that the percentage of winners with c riminal cases pending is higher than the 
percentage of candidates without such backgrounds. While only 12% of candidates with a 
“clean” record win on average, 23% of candidates with some kind  of criminal record win . 
This means that candidates charged with a crime actually fare better at elections than 
‘clean’ candidates . Probably as a result, candidates with criminal cases against them tend 
to be given tickets a second time. 18 Not only do political parties select candidates with 
criminal backgrounds, there i s evidence to suggest that untainted representatives later 
become involved in criminal activities. 19The incidence of criminalisation of politics is thus 
pervasive making its remediation an urgent need.  
C. THE ROLE OF POLITICAL PARTIES 
 
Political parties are a  central institution of our democracy; “ the life blood of the entire 
constitutional scheme.” 20Political parties act as a conduit through which interests and 
issues of the people get represented in Parliament. Since political parties play a central role 
                                                           
13 Association for Democratic Reforms, ‘National Level Analysis of Lok Sabha 2009 Elections’ (2009) 
<http://adrindia.org/sites/default/files/0.9%20final%20report%20_%20lok%20sabha%202009.pdf> accessed 13 
January, 2014. 
14 ADR,(n.11). 
15 Association for Democratic Reforms, ‘Press Release – Analysis of Criminal, Financial and other details on 
Newly Elected MLAs of the Uttar Pradesh Assembly Elections, 2012’, (2012) < 
http://adrindia.org/download/file/fid/2668> accessed 13 January, 2014 
16Id 
17Vaishnav, (n.7), 10 
18Sastry(n.12), 3 
19 Christophe Jaffrelot, ‘Indian Democracy: The Rule of Law on Trial’(2002) 1(1) India Review 77 
20Subhash Chandra Agarwal  v. Indian National Congress and Others , [2013] CIC 8047 
<http://www.rti.india.gov.in/cic_decisions/CIC_SM_C_2011_000838_M_111223.pdf>  accessed on February 4, 
2014 

17 
 
in t he interface between private citizens and public life, they have also been chiefly 
responsible for the growing criminalisation of politics.  
Several observers offer explanations of why parties may choose candidates with a tainted 
background. As discussed a bove, studies show that candidates with criminal records have 
fared better in elections and that criminals seem to have an electoral advantage. 21 Since 
electoral politics is a combination of several factors, often issues like ethnicity or other 
markers of t he candidate may o vercome the reputational loss he suffers from the criminal 
records.  
Further, electoral politics is largely dependent on the money and the funding that it 
receives. Several studies by economists estimate that candidates and parties in the 2009 
general elections alone spent roughly $3 billion on campaign expenditures. 22 Huge election 
expenses have also resulted into large -scale pervasiveness of so -called ‘black money’. 23 
The Law Commission has earlier also expressed the concern of election exp enses being far 
greater than legal limits. 24 Therefore, campaign funding is one of the most important 
concerns for political parties. Since candidates with criminal records often possess greater 
wealth, the negative effect of the stigma of criminal charges can be overcome by greater 
campaigning resources. 25 Thus, even if a candidate has any criminal record, he may fare 
well in elections due to the positive effect of the other markers. Thus, overall a candidate 
with a criminal record can prove beneficial to po litical parties in several ways. Not only 
does he ensure greater inflow in money, labour and other advantages that may help a party 
in successful campaign, but also possess greater ‘winnability’. 26 Many studies have 
consequently highlighted the direct relat ionship between the membership of local 
criminals and inflow of money intothe coffers of political parties. 27This is dealt with in 
detail later in the report.  
Further, candidate selection procedure is another factor for parties declaring candidates 
with cr iminal records. Since political parties in India largely lack intra -party democracy 
and the decisions on candidature are largely taken by the elite leadership of the party, the 
politicians with criminal records often escape the scrutiny by local workers an d 
organisation of the party. 28 
                                                           
21B. Dutta & P. Gupta, ‘ How Do Indian Voters Respond to Candidates with Criminal Charges: Evidence from the 
2009 Lok Sabha Election’ (MPRA Paper Series 38417, 2012) 
22 Timmons, Heather and Hari Kumar, ‘India’s National Election Spreads Billions Around’, THE NEW YORK 
TIMES (May 14, 2009). 
23Background Report on Electoral Reforms, Ministry of Law and Justice (2010). 
24Background Report (n.23)  
25 Dutta & Gupta, (n.21).  
26Dutta & Gupta, (n.21). 
27Vaishnav, (n.7).  
28Vaishnav, (n.7).  

18 
 
Thus, the crime -politics nexus demands a range of solutions much broader than 
disqualification or any other sanctions on elected representatives. It requires careful legal 
insight into the functioning of the political parties and regulating the internal affairs of 
parties. This report will also suggest the reforms for regulating the organisational posts of 
political parties.  
The Law Commission of India, in its 170 th report quoted in Subhash Chandra 
Agarwal ,29by the Central Info rmation Commission (“CIC”) has made certain observations 
which are very pertinent to describing the position of political parties in our democracy:  
“It is the Political Parties that form the Government, man the Parliament and run 
the governance of the cou ntry. It is therefore, necessary to introduce internal 
democracy, financial transparency and accountability in the working of the 
Political Parties. A political party which does not respect democratic principles in 
its internal working cannot be expected t o respect those principles in the 
governance of the country. It cannot be dictatorship internally and democratic in 
its functioning outside”. 30 
Additionally, under Section 29A(5) of the Representation of People Act, 1951, which 
currently regulates the funct ioning of political parties, the political parties are required to 
bear “true faith” and “allegiance to the Constitution” of India as by law established. 31 
Further, in order to reach to the conclusion that political parties are public authorities, the 
CIC a lso referred to several constitutional provisions which accord rights and obligations 
to political parties. 32 Thus, political parties are not merely any other organisation, but 
important institutions having constitutional rights and obligations.  
The NCRWC highlighted similar concerns on the functioning of political parties and 
recommended a separate law for regulating some of the internal affairs of political parties 
in order to deal with the crime -politics nexus. 33 It also opined that in case of conviction on 
a criminal charge, apart from disqualification of the representative, a political party should 
be held responsible and be sanctioned in some way, for example, by de -recognition of the 
party. 
Though the RPA disqualifies a sitting legislator or a candidat e on certain grounds, there is 
nothing regulating the appointments to offices within the organisation  of the party. 
Political parties play a central role in Indian democracy. Therefore, a politician may be 
disqualified from being a legislator, but may cont inue to hold high positions within his 
                                                           
29Subhash Chandra Agarwal (n. 20).  
30 “Reform of Electoral Laws”, 170thReport of the Law Commission of India, 1999.   
31Sec. 29A(5), The Representation of People Act, 1951. 
32Schedule X, The Constitution of India, 1951. 
33Chapter 4, Vol. I, ‘National Commission to Review the Working of the Indian Constitution’ at 
<http://lawmin.nic.in/ncrwc/finalreport/volume1.htm> accessed February, 4, 2014.  

19 
 
party, thus also continuing to play an important public role which he has been deemed 
unfit for by the law. Convicted politicians may continue to influence law -making by 
controlling the party and fielding proxy candid ates in legislature. In a democracy 
essentially based on parties being controlled by a high -command, the process of breaking 
crime-politics nexus extends muc h beyond purity of legislators and encompasses purity of 
political parties  as well.     
Thus any re form proposal must include relevant recommendations for political parties 
since the need for reform is crucial in this context as well. It is suggested  that political 
parties should refrain from appointing or allowing a person to continue holding any offic e 
within the party organisation if the person has been deemed to lack the qualities necessary 
to be a public official. Therefore, the legal disqualifications that prevent a person from 
holding office outside a party should operate within the party as well.  For holistic reform, 
this recommendation must be taken into account. This is to be dealt with in a detailed 
manner in the report to be submitted to the Government of India on all issues relating to 
the Consultation Paper.  
D. EXISTING LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
Legally, the prevention of the entry of criminals into politics is accomplished by prescribing 
certain disqualifications that will prevent a person from contesting elections or occupying a seat 
in Parliament or an Assembly. Qualifications of members of Parliament are listed in Article 84 
of the Constitution, while disqualifications can be found under Art icle 102. Corresponding 
provisions for members of State Legislative Assemblies are found in Articles 173 and 191. 
Article 102 states that a person shall be disquali fied from being chosen, and from being a 
member of either House of Parliament if he holds an office of profit, if he is of unsound mind 
and so declared by a competent court, if he is an undischarged insolvent, if he is not a citizen of 
India and if he is disqualified by any other law made by Parliament. 
Parliament through the RPA has prescribed further qualifications and disqualifications for 
membership to Parliament or to a Legislative Assembly. Section 8 of the Act lists certain 
offences which, if a person is convicted of any of them, disqualifies him from being elected, or 
continuing as, a Member of Parliament or Legislative Assembly. Specifically, Section 8(1) lists 
a number of offences, convictions under which disqualify the candidate irrespective of th e 
quantum of sentence or fine – these include certain electoral offences, offences under the 
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, the N arcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 
Act, 1985 the Prevention of Corruption Act,  1988 etc. Section 8(2) lists oth er offences, 
convictions under which would only result in disqualification if imprisonment is for six months 
or more. Section 8(3) is a residuary provision under which if a candidate is convicted of any 

20 
 
offence and imprisoned for two years or more, he is d isqualified.34 Disqualification operates 
from the date of conviction and continues for a further period of six years from the date of 
release. 
The scheme of disqualification upon conviction laid down by the RPA clearly upholds the 
principle that a person wh o has conducted criminal activities of a certain nature is unfit to be a 
representative of the people. The criminal activities that result in disqualification irrespective of 
punishment under S. 8(1) are either related to public office, such as electoral o ffences or 
insulting the national flag, or are of grave nature, such as offences under terrorism laws. S. 8(3), 
on the other hand, envisages that any offence for which the minimum punishment is two years 
is of a character serious enough to merit disqualifi cation. In either case, it is clear that the RPA 
lays down that the commission of serious criminal offences renders a person ineligible to stand 
for elections or continue as a representative of the people. Such a restriction, it was envisaged, 
would provid e the statutory deterrent necessary to prevent criminal elements from holding 
public office, thereby preserving the probity of representative government.  
However, it is clear from the above account of the spread of criminalisation in politics that the 
purpose behind S. 8 of the RPA is not being served. The consequences of such criminalisation 
and the possible reform measures that may be considered shall be discussed in the following 
chapters. 
With respect to the filing of affidavits by candidates, a candid ate to any National or State 
Assembly elections is required to furnish an affidavit, in the shape of Form 26 appended to the 
Conduct of Election Rules, 1961, containing information regarding their assets, liabilities, 
educational qualifications, criminal c onvictions against them that have not resulted in 
disqualification, and cases in which criminal charges are framed against them for any offence 
punishable with two years or more.  
Failure to furnish this information, concealment of information or giving of  false information is 
an offence under S. 125A of the RPA. However, the sentence under S. 125A is only  
imprisonment for a period of  6 months, and the offence is not listed under S. 8(1) or (2) of the 
RPA. Therefore, conviction under S. 125A does not result  in disqualification of the candidate. 
Neither is the offence of false disclosure listed as a corrupt practice which would be a ground 
for setting aside an election under Section 100.  
Therefore, there is currently little consequence for the offence of fil ing a false affidavit, as a 
result of which the practice is rampant.  
                                                           
34Section 8(4), which existed previously, was struck down by the Supreme Court in Lily Thomas v. Union of India, 
(2013) 7 SCC 653. 

21 
 
E. SUPREME COURT JUDGMENTS INTERPRETING THIS 
FRAMEWORK 
The judiciary has sought to curb this menace of criminalisation of politics through several 
seminal judgments and attendant directions  to the government and the Election Commission 
primarily based on the aforesaid provisions. Specifically, orders of the Supreme Court seeking 
to engender a cleaner polity can be classified into three types: first, decisions that introduce 
transparency into  the electoral process; second, those that foster greater accountability for 
holders of public office; third, judgments that seek to stamp out corruption in public life. The 
discussion below is not meant to be an exhaustive account; it merely illustrates t he trends in 
Supreme Court jurisprudence relating to the question of de-criminalisation of politics.  
In Union of India v. Association for Democratic Reforms 35(hereinafter ‘ADR’)the Supreme 
Court directed the Election Commission to call for certain informa tion on affidavit of each 
candidate contesting for Parliamentary or State elections. Particularly relevant to the question 
of criminalisation, it mandated that such information includes whether the candidate is 
convicted/acquitted/discharged of any crimina l offence in the past, and if convicted, the 
quantum of punishment; and whether prior to six months of filing of nomination, the candidate 
is accused in any pending case, of any offence punishable with imprisonment for two years or 
more, and in which charg e is framed or cognizance is taken by a court. The constitutional 
justification for such a direction was the fundamental right of electors to know the antecedents 
of the candidates who are contesting for public office. Such right to know, the Court held is  a 
salient facet, and the foundation for the meaningful exercise of the freedom of speech and 
expression guaranteed to all citizens under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.  
Again in People’s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India 36(hereinafter ‘PUCL’) the 
Supreme Court struck down Section 33B of the Representation of People (Third Amendment) 
Act, 2002 which sought to limit the ambit of operation of the earlier Supreme Court order in the 
ADR case. Specifically it provided that only the information th at was required to be disclosed 
under the Amendment Act would have to be furnished by candidates and not pursuant to any 
other order or direction. This meant, in practical terms, that the assets and liabilities, 
educational qualifications and the cases in which he is acquitted or discharged of criminal 
offences would not have to be disclosed. Striking this down, the Court held that the provision 
nullified the previous order of the Court, infringed the right of electors’ to know, a constituent 
of the fundame ntal right to free speech and expression and hindered free and fair elections 
which is part of the basic structure of the Constitution. It is pursuant to these two orders that 
criminal antecedents of all candidates in elections are a matter of public recor d, allowing voters 
to make an informed choice. 
                                                           
35 (2002) 5 SCC 294. 
36(2003) 2 SCC 549. 

22 
 
At the same time, the Supreme Court has also sought to foster greater accountability for those 
holding elected office. In Lily Thomas v. Union of India 37 the Court held that Section 8(4) of 
the RPA, which allow s MPs and MLAs who are convicted while serving as members to 
continue in office till an appeal against such conviction is disposed of, is unconstitutional. Two 
justifications were offered — first, Parliament does not have the competence to provide 
different grounds for disqualification of applicants for membership and sitting members; 
second, deferring the date from which disqualification commences is unconstitutional in light 
of Articles 101(3) and 190(3) of our Constitution, which mandate that the seat of a member will 
become vacant automatically on disqualification. 
Again in People’s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India 38(hereinafter ‘NOTA’), the court 
held that the provisions of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961, which require mandatory 
disclosure of a person’s identity in case he intends to register a no -vote, is unconstitutional for 
being violative of his freedom of ex pression, which includes his  right to freely choose a 
candidate or reject all candidates, arbitrary given that no analogous requi rement of disclosure 
exists when a positive vote is registered, and illegal given its patent violation of the need for 
secrecy in elections provided in the RPA and widely recognised as crucial for free and fair 
elections. Thus by allowing voters to express  their dissatisfaction with candidates from their 
constituency for any reason whatsoever, the Supreme Court order has a significant impact in 
fostering greater accountability for incumbent office -holders. When its impact is combined 
with the decision in Lily Thomas, it is clear that the net effect of these judgments is to make it 
more onerous for criminal elements entrenched in Parliament from continuing in their 
positions.  
Third, the Supreme Court has taken several steps for institutional reform to sever the 
connection between crime and politics. In VineetNarain v. Union of India 39 a case concerning 
the inertia of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in investigating matters arising out of 
certain seized documents known as the ‘Jain diaries’ which disc losed a nexus between 
politicians, bureaucrats and criminals, who were recipients of money from unlawful sources, 
the Supreme Court used the power of continuing mandamus to direct large -scale institutional 
reform in the vigilance and investigation apparatu s in the country. It directed the Government 
of India to grant statutory status to the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), laid down the 
conditions necessary for the independent functioning of the CBI, specified a selection process 
for the Director, Enforc ement Directorate (ED), called for the creation of an independent 
prosecuting agency and a high -powered nodal agency to co -ordinate action in cases where a 
politico-bureaucrat-criminal nexus became apparent. These steps thus mandated a complete 
overhaul of  the investigation and prosecution of criminal cases involving holders of public 
office.  
                                                           
37 (2013) 7 SCC 653. 
38(2013) 10 SCC 1.  
39 (1998) 1 SCC 226.  

23 
 
Addressing the problem of delays in obtaining sanctions for prosecuting public servants in 
corruption cases, VineetNarainalso set down a time limit of three months fo r grant of such 
sanction. This directive was endorsed by the Supreme Court in SubramaniumSwamyv. 
Manmohan Singh, 40where the Court went on to suggest the restructuring of Section 19 of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act such that sanction for prosecution will be deemed to have been 
granted by the concerned authority at the expiry of the extended time limit of four months. In 
these and other cases, 41 the Supreme Court has attempted to facilitate the prosecution of 
criminal activity, specifically corruption, in the sphere of governance. 
The Supreme Court, through its interpretation of statutory provisions connected with elections 
as well as creative use of its power to enforce fundamental rights, has made great strides 
towards ensuring a cleaner polity, setting up significant barriers to entry to public office for 
criminal elements as well as instituting workable mechanisms to remove them from office if 
they are already in power. The Commission appreciates that these decisions demonstrate the 
need for the law itself  to be reformed on a dynamic basis taking cognizance of latest 
developments. The same view is echoed by the several committees and commissions in the past 
which have recommended fundamental changes to laws governing electoral practices and 
disqualifications. A brief survey of such reports is undertaken in the section below.  
F. PREVIOUS REPORTS RECOMMENDING REFORMS 
The issue of electoral reforms has been the concern of several Commissions and Committees 
previously. This part surveys the key findings and recomm endations of these bodies with a 
view to incorporating relevant suggestions in this Report.  
In the year 1999, Law Commission in its 170 th report recommended the addition of Section 8B 
in the RPA. This section included certain offences (electoral offences,  offences having a 
bearing upon the elections viz. S. 153A, 505 of IPC and serious offences punishable by death or 
life imprisonment), framing of charges  with respect thereto was sufficient to disqualify a 
person from contesting elections. The proposed pro vision further stipulated the disqualification 
to last for a period of five years from the framing of charges or till acquittal whichever event 
happens earlier. It also recommended mandatory disclosure of such (and other) information 
with the nomination pa per under Section 4A in the RPA. This suggestion has already been 
incorporated by inserting Section 33A in RPA with effect from 24 August 2002. 
The National Commission to Review of the Working of the Constitution (2002) also 
maintained the yardstick for di squalification as framing of charges  for certain offences 
(punishable with maximum imprisonment of five years or more). There were however certain 
modifications in its recommendations. First, the Commission proposed that this disqualification 
                                                           
40(2012) 3 SCC 65.  
41See, for example, V.S. Achuthanandan v. R. Balakrishna Pillai, (2011) 3 SCC 317 on the issue of delay in trial of 
corruption cases involving public servants. 

24 
 
would apply f rom one year after the date of framing of charges and if not cleared within that 
period, continue till the conclusion of trial. Secondly, in case the person is convicted of any 
offence by a court of law and sentenced to imprisonment of six months or more, the period of 
disqualification would apply during the period of sentence and continue for six years thereafter. 
Thirdly, in case a person is convicted of heinous offences, it recommended a permanent bar 
from contesting any political office. Fourthly, it recommended that Special Courts be set up at 
the level of the High Courts (with direct appeal to the Supreme Court) to assess the legality of 
charges framed against potential candidates and dispose of the cases in a strict time frame. 
Finally, it recommended  de-registration and de -recognition of political parties, which 
knowingly fielded candidates with criminal antecedents. 
The Election Commission of India has also made several recommendations from time to time 
to reform election law. In August, 1997, it mandated filing of affidavits disclosing conviction in 
cases covered under Section 8 of the RPA. In September 1997, the Commission in a letter 
addressed to the Prime Minister recommended amendment to Section 8 of RPA, to disqualify 
any person who is convicted  and sentenced to imprisonment for six months or more, from 
contesting elections for a period totalling the sentence imposed plus an additional six years. In 
1998, the Commission reiterated its above suggestion besides recommending that any person 
against whom charges are framed for an offence punishable by imprisonment of five years or 
more should be disqualified. The Commission admitted that in the eyes of law a person is 
presumed to be innocent unless proved guilty; nevertheless it submitted that the Par liament and 
State Legislatures are apex law -making bodies and must be composed of persons of integrity 
and probity who enjoy high reputation in the eyes of general public, which a person who is 
accused of a serious offence does not. Further, on the question of disqualification on the ground 
of corrupt practice, the Commission supported the continuation of its power to decide the term 
of disqualification of every accused person as uniform criteria cannot be applied to myriad 
cases of corruption- ranging from petty to grand corruption.  
Further, taking note of the inordinate delays involved in deciding questions of disqualification 
on the ground of corrupt practice, the Commission recommended that the Election Commission 
should hold a judicial hearing in this regard immediately after the receipt of the judgment from 
the High Court and tender its opinion to the President instead of following the circuitous route 
as prevalent then. Recommendations to curb criminalisation of politics were made again in the 
year 2004. It reiterated its earlier view of disqualifying persons from contesting elections on 
framing of charges with respect to offences punishable by imprisonment for five years or more. 
Such charges, however, must have been framed six months prior to the ele ctions. It also 
suggested that persons found guilty by a Commission of Enquiry should also stand disqualified 
from contesting elections. Further, the Commission suggested streamlining of all the 
information to be furnished by way of affidavits in one form by amending Form 26 of the 
Conduct of Election Rules, 1961. It also recommended the addition of a column for furnishing 
the annual detailed income of the candidate for tax purpose and his profession in the said form. 

25 
 
To tackle the menace of wilful concealm ent of information or furnishing of false information 
and to protect the right to information of the electors, the Commission recommended that the 
punishment under Section 125A of RPA must be made more stringent by providing for 
imprisonment of a minimum t erm of two years and by doing away with the alternative clause 
for fine. Additionally, conviction under Section 125A RPA should be made a par t of Section 
8(1)(i) of the Representation of People Act, 1950. 
The Second Administrative Reforms Commission in its  fourth report on Ethics in Governance 
(2008) deliberated upon the fallouts of disqualifying candidates on various grounds. It 
recommended that Section 8 of RPA needed to be amended to disqualify all persons facing 
charges related to grave and heinous offe nces (viz. murder, abduction, rape, dacoity, waging 
war against India, organised crime, and narcotics offences) and corruption, where charges have 
been framed six months before the election. It also supported the proposal of including filing of 
false affidavits as an electoral offence under Section 31 of Representation of the People Act, 
1950 as recommended by the Election Commission in the year 1998. 
Recently the Justice J.S. Verma Committee Report on Amendments to Criminal Law 
(2013) proposed insertion of  a Schedule 1 to the Representation  of People Act, 1951 
enumerating offences under IPC befitting the category of 'heinous' offences. It  recommended 
that Section 8(1) of the RP Act  be amended to  cover inter alia  the offences listed in the 
proposed Schedule 1. It would then provide that a person in respect of whose acts or omissions 
a court of competent jurisdiction has taken cognizance under section 190(1)(a),(b) or (c) of the 
CrPC or who has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction with respect t o the 
offences specified in the proposed expanded list of offences under Section 8(1) shall be 
disqualified from the date of taking cognizance or conviction as the case may be. It further 
proposed that disqualification in case of conviction  shall continue for a further period of six 
years from the date of release upon conviction and in case of acquittal, the disqualification shall 
operate from the date of taking cognizance till the date of acquittal.  
The Committee further recommended that the Election Comm ission must impose a duty 
forthwith on all candidates against whom charges are pending, to give progress reports in their 
criminal cases every three months. Further it recommended that in case of conviction under 
Section 125A of the RPA, disqualification m ust ensue to render the seat vacant. Moreover, the 
Commission suggested amendment to the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 to allow a  deeper investigation of assets and liabilities 
declared at the time o f filing a nomination paper or, as soon as may be practical thereafter. It 
recommended the scrutiny of assets and liabilities of each s uccessful candidate, if not all  
contesting the elections to the Parliament and State Legislature by the CAG.  
The elaborately researched and clearly articulated reports of the committees and commissions 
in the past have greatly informed our recommendations made in this report. Primarily, the 
reports are testimony to the need for a change in the law, a need which was felt as early as 

26 
 
1999. This, when seen in the context of the data demonstrating the growing prevalence of 
criminalisation of politics, Supreme Court judgments responding to this growth, the 
recalcitrance of political parties to take decisive action to prevent it a nd compared to the 
overarching democratic and constitutional need for free and fair elections, makes reform of the 
law not only imperative but an urgent necessity. The contours of such reform relating to the two 
questions referred to the Law Commission by the Supreme Court are dealt with in turn below.  
 
 
  

27 
 
V. DISQUALIFICATION AT THE STAGE OF FRAMING OF CHARGES 
A. RATIONALE 
At the outset, the question that needs to be considered is whether disqualification should 
continue to be triggered only at the stage of c onviction as is currently the case under Section 8 
of the RPA. As detailed below, the current law suffers from three main problems: the rate of 
convictions among sitting MPs and MLAs is extremely low, trials of such persons are subject 
to long delays, and the law does not provide adequate deterrence to political parties granting 
tickets to persons of criminal backgrounds. This has resulted in a massive increase in the 
presence of criminal elements in politics, which affects our democracy in very evident ways. 
(i) Low Rates of Conviction 
The proportion of sitting MPs and MLAs facing some form of criminal proceedings is at 
around 30% - 1,460 out of 4,807 legislators face some kind of criminal charge. By contrast, 
only 24 out of the 4,807 or 0.5% have been convicte d at some point of criminal charges in a 
court of law.42 
Among all candidates, the percentage is even lower, at 0.3% having declared that they have 
faced convictions in a court of law. 155 out of 47,389 candidates have faced convictions, 
although 8,041 candidates have criminal cases pending. 
Even taking into account the suppression of data by candidates, it is clear that there is an 
extremely wide gap between legislators with trials pending and those whose trials have actually 
resulted in convictions. Furthe r, while 24 legislators have declared convictions, the number 
disqualified as a result of convictions is even lower, as not all convictions result in 
disqualification. Following the Lily Thomas judgment43 only 3 legislators were disqualified as a 
result of convictions. In contrast with the number of pending cases against legislators, the 
number of convicted MPs and MLAs continues to be an extremely low figure, indicating a need 
for a change in the law. 
(ii) Delays in trials 
The problem of delays in the judicial s ystem in India has been extensively studied and 
discussed from a number of perspectives. While in the case of criminal trials the chief concern 
is mainly for under -trial prisoners, delays in trials of politically influential persons like MPs 
and MLAs pose a different set of challenges. In such cases, with delay, there is an ever -
increasing chance that the accused will be in a position to compromise the trial process, distort 
                                                           
42 This number represents convictions that does not result in disqualification under Section 8 of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1951. Association for Dem ocratic Reforms, ‘Comparison of pending cases and convictions 
declared by elected representatives’, (2013) http://adrindia.org/content/comparison -pending-cases-and-
convictions-declared-elected-representatives accessed on February 4, 2014.  
43Lily Thomas v. Union of India, (2013) 7 SCC 653. 

28 
 
evidence, and delay proceedings further. Delays are also caused by prolonged absenc e from 
court proceedings by influential persons, where the police do not enforce their presence.44 
The issue of delays in trials of influential public personalities have been recognized and tackled 
by the Law Commission in its 239 th report submitted to the Supreme Court in the case of 
Virender Kumar Ohriv. Union of India45. The Supreme Court has also remarked on this issue in 
Ganesh Narayan v. Bangarappa46, saying “the slow motion becomes much slower motion when 
politically powerful or high and influential per sons figure as accused ”. Due to such tactics, 
delays are thought to be directly related to low rates of convictions in the country. 
Ample evidence of this may be gathered from a perusal of affidavits submitted by candidates 
during elections – a sample of t wenty affidavits from the 2009 Lok Sabha elections where 
criminal charges were pending revealed that over half of these had charges pending for more 
than six years, some pending for over two decades.47 
As a result, the safeguard provided in the RPA against convicted criminals acting as 
representatives does not operate effectively, due to the low numbers of convictions and the high 
levels of delay. 
(iii) Lack of adequate deterrence 
Given the low levels of convictions of MPs and MLAs, and the lack of consequences for 
pending criminal charges, political parties are not deterred from continuing to hand out party 
tickets to persons with criminal backgrounds. In fact, as pointed out earlier, data suggests that a 
criminal background, rather than being a disadvantage for a political career, seems to operate as 
a benefit. One researcher, having analysed available affidavit data, has come to the conclusion 
that candidates charged with a crime have a 2:1 chance of winning the election over candidates 
with no criminal backgroun ds.48 This means that political parties liberally and repeatedly hand 
out tickets to criminally charged candidates - 74% of candidates with criminal background 
have re -contested elections in the last ten years. 49 
The explanation for the success of criminally  tainted candidates in elections lies in their 
financial assets as discussed earlier in Chapter IV . To briefly recapitulate, there is a strong 
positive correlation between a candidate’s criminal status and his level of wealth. 50 While 
an average legislator’ s wealth stands at Rs. 3.83 crores, it rises to Rs. 4.30 crores for 
                                                           
44 Law Commission of India, Expeditious Investigation and Trial of Criminal Cases Against Influential Public 
Personalities, Report No.239 (2012) < http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/reports/report239.pdf> accessed 
February 2nd, 2014.  
45Writ Petition (Civil) No. 341 of 2004.  
46 (1995) 4 SCC 41. 
47 Law Commission of India, Links to Candidate Affidavits, <http://eci.nic.in/eci_main1/LinktoAffidavits.aspx> 
accessed February 19th, 2014 
48 Milan Vaishnav, (n.7). 
49 Association for Democratic Reforms (n.11). 
50 Milan Vaishnav, (n.7). 

29 
 
candidates with criminal backgrounds and to Rs. 4.38 crores for candidates with serious 
criminal backgrounds. 51 Wealthier candidates, particularly those able to raise more assets, 
can fund their own elections and raise further capital for the political party in question. 
Candidates with criminal backgrounds fit well into this profile, as they can raise funds 
through various illegal means that are then funnelled into politics and elections. I t thus 
appears that the soaring cost of elections, opaque processes of candidate selection, and the 
ability of criminal elements to raise and provide funding are the major reasons for the 
widespread and persistent connections between crime and politics.  
It is clear from this data that, the way the law currently operates poses little threat to 
political parties wishing to give tickets to tainted persons . On the contrary, the current 
situation actually incentivizes political parties to increase among their ra nks persons with 
criminal backgrounds, because of their financial muscle. Therefore, a reduction in the 
prevalence of crime in politics will not take place unless the law is changed such that 
political parties face a disincentive when they foster persons o f criminal backgrounds 
within the party.  
(iv) Negative effects on democracy 
The increasing presence of persons with criminal backgrounds has several negative effects 
on the quality of democracy in the country. First, enormous amounts of illegal money are 
pumped into the electoral process due to extensive links with the criminal underworld. 
Along with the money, candidates with criminal backgrounds employ illegal tactics such 
as voter intimidation. Together, this distorts electoral outcomes and consequently 
compromises the very basis of our democracy. It also initiates a vicious cycle whereby 
viable candidates are required to spend increasing amounts of money in order to compete, 
intensifying connections with criminal elements.   
Secondly, one of the reasons for the entrance of criminals into politics is a desire to avoid 
or subvert judicial proceedings through political patronage. Criminalisation  of politics thus 
also has the consequence of obstructing the process of justice and causing further delays in 
trials.  
The law in its present form is incapable of curbing the growing cancer of criminalisation  
of politics. Long delays in trials coupled with rare convictions ensure that politicians face 
little or no consequences when engaging in criminal activity. The law n eeds to evolve to 
meet this threat to our democracy, and to effectively curb the steady flow of criminals into 
the political process. The reformed law must meet two challenges - the limited deterrence 
posed by disqualification upon conviction, and the issu e of delays in trials of influential 
persons that result in a subversion of the process of justice.  
                                                           
51 Association for Democratic Reforms, (n.11). 

30 
 
B. REFORM PROPOSAL 
(i) Explanation of the charging process 
The purpose of a charge in a criminal trial is to give precise information to the accused 
about the acc usation against him. A charge serves as notice to the accused, drawn up in 
precise and unambiguous legal language, of the nature of the accusation the accused has to 
answer to in trial. 52The charges should contain all particular details with respect to the manner, 
time, place, and persons against whom it was committed etc.53 
The procedure leading up to the framing of charges is as follows. After the investigation of 
a case, the police may file either a charge -sheet or a closure report with the Magistrate. 
Upon the filing of the charge -sheet, a Magistrate may take cognizance of the offences in 
the charge -sheet and summon the accused. Charges are framed thereafter in accordance 
with S ection  228 of the CrPC. The framing of charges requires the court to look into the 
evidence presented by the Prosecution and apply its mind to the question of what offences, 
if any, the accused should be charged with. The framing of charges signifies the 
commencement of a trial. Alternatively, the Judge may hear arguments on charge a nd find 
that no prima facie case against the accused is made out, upon which the accused is 
discharged.  
(ii) Why disqualification may not be made operative at the stage of filing of charge-sheet 
Before examining the proposal to introduce disqualification at the stage of framing charges, it is 
worthwhile to consider other points during criminal prosecution where such a step may be 
introduced. It has been suggested that the stage of filing of charge -sheet by the police under 
Section 173 of the CrPC is one such st age which may result in disqualification of the accused. 
This section will evaluate this suggestion in more detail. 
When filing a charge -sheet, the Police is simply forwarding the material collected during 
investigation to a competent Court of law for the Court to consider what provisions the accused 
should be charged under. At this stage, there is not even a remote or primafacie determination 
of guilt of the accused by a Court of law. At the stage of filing  or forwarding the charge-sheet 
to the Court, the material which is made a part of the charge -sheet has not even tested by a 
competent Court of law and the Judge has clearly not applied his mind to the said material. 
Courts have repeatedly held that a charge -sheet does not constitute a substantive piece o f 
evidence as it not yet tested on the anvil of cross-examination.54No rights of hearing are granted 
to the accused at this stage. At the stage of filing of charge -sheet, before summons are issued, 
the accused does not even have a copy of the charge -sheet o r any connected material. 
                                                           
52  VC Shukla v. State through CBI, 1980 Cri LJ 690, 732. 
53 Sections211, 212, and 213, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
54RajnikantaMeheta v. State of Orissa , 1976 Cr.L.J. 1674 (Ori -DB); Jagdamba Prasad Tewari  v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh, 1991 Cr.L.J. 1883.  

31 
 
Disqualifying a person therefore, simply on the basis of something which he has had no 
opportunity to look into, or no knowledge of, would be against the principles of natural justice. 
Disqualifying a person at this stage would me an that a person is penalized without proceedings 
being initiated against him. This would be tantamount to granting the judicial determination of 
the question of disqualification to the police, who are a prosecuting authority. At the National 
Consultation it was agreed by consensus that this was an inappropriate stage for disqualification 
of candidates for elected office.  
It is also worthwhile to consider whether the stage of taking of cognizance by the Court would 
be an appropriate stage to introduce disq ualifications. The taking of cognizance simply means 
taking judicial notice of an offence with a view to initiate proceedings in respect of such 
offence said to have been committed by someone. It is an entirely different matter from 
initiation of proceedin gs against someone; rather, it is a precondition to the initiation of 
proceedings.55 While taking cognizance, the Court has to consider only the material put forward 
in the charge -sheet. It is not open for the Court at this stage to sift or appreciate the e vidence 
and come to a conclusion that no prima facie case is made out for proceeding further in the 
matter.56 
An accused does not have the right to approach the Court till cognizance is taken and summons 
are issued. At the stage of taking cognizance, the ac cused has no right to present any evidence 
or make any submissions. Although the accused may provide exculpatory evidence to the 
Police, the latter are under no obligation to include such evidence as part of the charge-sheet.  
Due to the absence of an oppo rtunity to the accused to be heard at the stage of filing of charge -
sheet or taking of cognizance, and due to the lack of application of judicial mind at this stage, it 
is not an appropriate stage to introduce electoral disqualifications. Further, in a cas e supposed 
to be tried by the Sessions Court, it is still the Magistrate who takes cognizance. Introduction of 
disqualifications at this stage would mean that a Magistrate who has been deemed not 
competent to try the case still determines whether a person should be disqualified due to the 
charges filed.  
Because of these reasons, it is our view that the filing of the police report under Section 173 
CrPC or taking of cognizance is not an appropriate stage to introduce electoral 
disqualifications. A closer look will now be taken at the stage of framing of charges.  
                                                           
55S.K. Sinha, Chief Enforcement Officer v. Videocon International Ltd., (2008) 2 SCC 492; State of West Bengal v. 
Mohammed Khalid, (1995) 1 SCC 684. 
56Rashmi Kumar v. Mahesh Kumar Bhada, (1997) 2 SCC 397. 

32 
 
(iii) Cases on framing of charges 
a. Provisions Dealing with Discharge 
There are three sets of provisions dealing with the framing of charge and discharge of an 
accused, depending on the type of case and the  court in question — Sections 227 and 228 for 
trials before the Court of Session; Sections 239 and 240 in warrants cases tried by Magistrates 
where a police report has been filed but evidence has not been led; Sections 245 and 246 in 
warrants cases tried by  Magistrates where no police report is filed but after the recording of 
evidence. This note deals primarily with the first category since most offences that are relevant 
for the purpose of disqualification are matters that fall within the remit of Sections  227 and 
228.57 
Section 227 deals with discharge of an accused at the stage when hearing is fixed to frame 
charges. It reads: 
“227.Discharge- If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents 
submitted therewith, and after hearing the submi ssions of the accused and the 
prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for 
proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his 
reasons for so doing.” 
This section is part of Chapter XVII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC.).This part 
deals with “charges” and  requires precise framing of charges as evidenced by several 
provisions under this chapter. Framing of charges “is equivalent to a statement that every legal 
condition requir ed by law to constitute the offence charged was fulfilled in the particular 
case.”58Further, the words describing a charge should be interpreted “in the sense attached to 
them respectively by the law under which such offence is punishable.” 59 Further, the ch arges 
should also contain all particular details with respect to the manner, time, place, persons against 
whom it was committed etc. 60 Therefore, the sections construed together prove that the 
“framing of charges” is a an important judicial step.  
The requi rement of precision in framing of charges is further strengthened by the Supreme 
Court judgements on the purposes and the role of charging stage in criminal process. The 
“charge” serves the purpose of “notice or intimation to the accused, drawn up accordin g to 
specific language of law, giving clear and unambiguous or precise notice of the nature of 
accusation”.61Additionally, the Supreme Court has also recognized that since framing of the 
                                                           
57For a distinction between the procedures for framing of charges and discha rge of an accused under each of these 
categories, see R S Nayakv.A R Antulay, (1986) 1 SCC 716.  
58Sec. 211 (5), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
59Sec. 214, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  
60 Sec. 211, 212, 213, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
61VC Shukla v. State Through CBI, 1980 Cri LJ 690.  

33 
 
charges gravely impacts a person’s liberty, the material on record sho uld be properly 
considered by the court.62 
b. Nature of Enquiry under Sec. 227: Interpretation of “not sufficient ground for 
proceeding against the accused” 
In A.R. Antulay 63the Supreme Court distinguished discharge under Section 239 and Section 
227. In order to discharge the accused under Section 239, it has to be proved that the charge is 
“groundless”. However, under Section 227, mere presence of a “ground” is not enough; the 
“sufficiency” of the ground also has to be proved. Thus, if the charge does not conta in any 
“sufficient ground”, the accused can be discharged under Section 227. Since Section 227 
requires higher level of judicial scrutiny, it provides greater protection to the accused.64 
The words “not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused” show that the Judge is 
not a mere “post office” 65 or “recording machine” 66 to frame the charge at the behest of the 
prosecution, but has to apply his judicial mind to the facts of the case in order to determine 
whether a case for trial has been made out by the prosecution.67 
The level of judicial scrutiny at charging stage need not be the same as expected at the trial 
level adjudication. However, the judge cannot simply accept the prosecution’s story while 
framing the charges:  
“[The] Judge has to sift the evi dence in order to find out whether or not there is 
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The sufficiency of ground 
would take within its fold the nature of the evidence recorded by the police or the 
documents produced before the court which  ex facie disclose that there are 
suspicious circumstances against the accused so as to frame a charge against 
him.”68 
c. The Burden on Prosecution at the charging stage 
The Supreme Court, in DebendraNathPadhi69, overruling Satish Mehra 70 , held that the 
accused cannot lead any evidence at charging stage. Thus, the decision of the judge has to be 
based solely on the record of the case , i.e. the investigation report and documents submitted by 
the prosecution. Though the determination of framing of charges is based  on the record of the 
                                                           
62State of Maharashtra v. SomNathThapa, (1996) 4 SCC 659.  
63R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay, (1986) 1 SCC 716. 
64R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay, (1986) 1 SCC 716. 
65Union of India v.Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3 SCC 4. 
66Almohan Das v. State of West Bengal, (1969) 2 SCR 520. 
67K.P. Raghavan  v. M.H. Abbas AIR 1967 SC 740; Union of India  v.Prafulla Kumar Samal , (1979) 3 SCC 4 ; 
Almohan Das v. State of West Bengal, (1969) 2 SCR 520. 
68Union of India v.Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3 SCC 4, 8 para 8. 
69State of Orissa v. DebendraNathPadhi(2005) 1 SCC 568. 
70Satish Mehrav.Delhi Administration(1996) 9 SCC 766. 

34 
 
case, the Supreme Court jurisprudence on Section 227 also imposes certain burdens to be 
discharged by the prosecution:  
“If the evidence which the Prosecutor proposes to adduce to prove the guilt of the 
accused even if fully accepted before it is challenged in cross -examination or 
rebutted by the defence evidence; if any, cannot show that the accused committed 
the offence  then there will be no sufficient ground for proceeding with the 
trial”.71(emphasis added) 
Additionally, the burden o n the prosecution at charging level also involves proving a prima 
facie case. A prima facie case is said to be in existence “if there is ground for presuming that 
the accused has committed the offence.” 72This also provides a certain degree of protection for  
the accused.  
Finally, in order to establish a prime facie case, the evidence on record should raise not merely 
some suspicion with regard to the possibility of conviction, but a “grave” suspicion73:  
“If two views are possible  and the Judge is satisfied t hat the evidence produced 
before him while giving rise to some suspicion but not grave suspicion  against the 
accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge the accused. ”74 (emphasis 
added) 
Since the stage of framing of charges is based on substanti al level of judicial scrutiny, a totally 
frivolous charge will not stand this scrutiny. Therefore, given the concern of criminalisation of 
politics in India, disqualification at the stage of charging is justified having substantial 
attendant legal safeguards to prevent misuse.  
(iv) Justifications to enlarge scope of disqualification to include those against whom charges 
framed 
As explained above, the Supreme Court has made it clear that the framing of charges under 
Section 228 of the CrPC requires an application of judicial mind to determine whether there are 
sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused. 75 Further, the burden of proof at this 
stage is on the prosecution who must establish a prima facie case where the evidence on record 
raises ‘grave susp icion’.76 Together, these tests offer protection against false charges being 
imposed.  
                                                           
71State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh, (1977) 4 SCC 39, 42 para 4.  
72State of Maharashtra v. SomNathThapa(1996) 4 SCC 659. 
73DilawarBaluKurane v. State of Maharashtra ,(2002) 2 SCC 135; Sajjan Kumar  v. Central Bureau of 
Investigation, (2010) 9 SCC 368. 
74Prafulla Kumar Samal, (n 65), 9, para 10.  
75K.P. Raghavan v. M.H. AbbasAIR 1967 SC 740. 
76State of Orissa v. DebendraNathPadhi(2005) 1 SCC 568. 

35 
 
In addition to the safeguards built in at the stage of framing of charges, an additional option is 
available in the shape of Section 311 of the Code of Criminal Procedure . Section 311 grants 
power to the Court to summon or examine any person at any stage of the trial if his evidence 
appears essential to the just decision of the case. Although this section is not very widely used, 
and the Supreme Court has cautioned against  the arbitrary exercise of this power, 77 it grants 
wide discretion to the court which may even be exercised suomotu. This section may be used 
by the Court to examine additional evidence before framing charges where the consequence of 
such framing may disqualify the candidate. 
The framing of charges is therefore not an automatic step in the trial process, but one that 
requires a preliminary level of judicial scrutiny. The provisions in the CrPC require adequate 
consideration of the merits of a criminal charge  before charges are framed by the Court. The 
level of scrutiny required before charges are framed is sufficient to prevent misuse of any 
provision resulting in disqualification from contesting elections.  
Moreover enlarging the scope of disqualifications t o include the stage of framing of charges in 
certain offences does not infringe upon any Fundamental or Constitutional right of the 
candidate. RPA creates and regulates the right to contest and be elected as a Member of 
Parliament or a State Legislature. From the early years of our democracy, it has been repeatedly 
stressed by the Supreme Court that the right to be elected is neither a fundamental nor a 
common law right.78 It is a special right created by the statute and can only be exercised on the 
conditions laid down by the statute. 79Therefore, it is not subject to the Fundamental Rights 
chapter of the constitution.80 
(i) Rebutting counter-arguments 
The last section demonstrated why disqualification of contesting candidates at the stage of 
framing of charges is justified, both in principle and practice. In the context of the excessive 
criminalisation of politics in India today, such a step has considerable potential to exclude 
criminal elements from the electoral fray, restoring the dignity and high status that t he 
Parliament and State Legislative Assemblies are constitutionally expected to possess. At the 
same time, it is imperative to take cognizance of the possibility of misuse of such a provision. 
In an effort to keep criminal elements out of legislatures, one  must not create disabilities for 
honest candidates who find themselves foisted with false criminal charges. An optimal balance 
must be found, maximising the former and minimising the latter.  
                                                           
77Natasha Singh v. CBI Crl, Appeal No. 709 of 2013 Supreme Court of India 
78N.P. Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency, 1952 SCR.   
218: (AIR 1952 SC 64); JaganNath v. Jaswant Singh, AIR 1954 SC 210; Dr. N. B. Khare v. Election Commission 
of India, AIR 1958 SC 139.  
79Jumuna Prasad Mukhariya v. Lachhi Ram AIR 1954 SC 686.  
80Jagdev Singh Sidhanti v.Pratap Singh Daulta, AIR 1965 SC 183; Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi  v. Shri Raj Narain, 
AIR 1975 SC 2299; EbrahimSulaimanSait v. M. C. Muhammad, AIR 1980 SC 354, (1980) 1 SCR 1148.  
 

36 
 
At the National Consultation, several representatives of politi cal parties expressed a fear that 
such a disqualification would be used as a tool for political vendetta. Many believed the fear of 
misuse was so large that it warranted a rejection of the proposal itself. At the same, a consistent 
stream of Supreme Court decisions have held that the framing of charges is done by the Court 
on the basis of the police report and other documents led by the prosecution; neither does the 
accused have a right to cross -examine witnesses nor lead any documents at that stage. The 
implication thus is that if there is misuse of the provision and false charges are framed in order 
to disqualify candidates, the accused would have very little legal remedy. Thirdly, it must be 
frankly admitted that enlarging the scope of disqualification by  making it attendant on the 
framing of charge rather than conviction is a diversion from strict principles of criminal 
jurisprudence. As Mr.TA Andhyarujina, pointed out at the Consultation, a man is still 
technically innocent, till proven guilty and convic ted by a competent court of law. 
Disqualifying him at the stage of framing of charge would thus be premature with considerable 
jurisprudential difficulties. 
These three concerns —misuse, lack of remedy for the accused and the sanctity of criminal 
jurisprudence—all have some merit. However none of them possess sufficient argumentative 
weight to displace the arguments in the previous section. While misuse is certainly a 
possibility, that does not render a proposal to reform the law flawed in limine. The Supreme 
Court has repeatedly pointed out in the context of statutory power vested in an authority that 
the possibility of misuse of power is not a reason to not confer the power or strike down such 
provision.81 Similarly a potential fear of misuse cannot provide justification for not reforming 
the law per se. It does point to the requirement of instituting certain safeguards, circumscribing 
the conditions under which such disqualification will operate. This matter is dealt with below. 
Though there is a view that t he accused has limited rights at the stage of framing of charge, the 
legal options available to him are fairly substantial. As the previous section shows, the stage of 
framing of charges involves considerable application of judicial mind, gives the accused  an 
opportunity to be heard, places the burden of proof on the prosecution to demonstrate a prima 
facie case and will lead to discharge unless the grounds pleaded are sufficient for the matter to 
proceed to trial. Thus it is not as if the accused has no re medy till charges are framed —on the 
contrary, he has several legal options available to him prior to this stage.  
Finally, though criminal jurisprudence presumes a man innocent till proven otherwise, 
disqualifying a person from contesting elections at the stage of framing of charges does not fall 
foul of this proposition. Such a provision has no bearing on whether indeed the person 
concerned is guilty of the alleged offence or not. On the contrary, it represents a distinct legal 
determination of the types o f persons who are suitable for holding representative public office 
in India. Given the proliferation of criminal elements in Parliament and State Assemblies , it is 
indicative of a public resolve to correct this situation . Further, the existing provisions which 
                                                           
81Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Narain, 1975 Supp SCC 1.  

37 
 
disqualify persons on conviction alone have been unable to achieve this task. Thus it is now 
strongly felt that it is essential to disqualify those persons who have had criminal charges 
framed against them by a court of competent jurisdiction, subjec t to certain safeguards, from 
contesting in elections. Such a determination of suitability for representative office has no 
bearing on his guilt or innocence which can, and will, only be judged at the criminal trial. To 
conflate the two and thereby argue t hat the suggested reform is jurisprudentially flawed would 
be to make a category mistake.  
The question that remains thus pertains to the safeguards which are necessary in order to 
prevent misuse of this provision leading to false charges being framed. Sin ce the purpose of 
such safeguards is to ensure that the possibility of false charges being framed is minimized, a 
three-pronged approach  is adopted. First, the type of offence in relation to which charge is 
framed is circumscribed to include only those off ences which represent serious and heinous 
crimes. This has a twofold justification —preventing the routine filing of charges in petty 
offences which are easier to fabricate; emphasizing that such disqualification only operates in 
limited circumstances when the offences in question are of a nature that those charged with 
having committed them are entirely unsuitable to be elected representatives of the people. 
Second, a cut-off period before the election is provided for, charges framed during which time 
will not attract this disqualification. The rationale for such a protected window is to obviate the 
impact of false charges being framed very close to the elections with the sole intention of 
getting a political rival disqualified. Third, the disqualification w ill only last for a specified 
period of time. An appropriately designed cap on disqualification of this nature will underline 
that the impact of a charge -based disqualification is optimally structured . At the same time it 
will checkany incentive that a person may have to file false charges. Each of these is discussed 
below in the section on safeguards built-in to the law. 
C. SAFEGUARDS 
(i) Offences in relation to which this disqualification applies 
Some previous reports have made various recommendations with respe ct to the range of 
offences. For example, the Election Commission Proposal of 2004 recommended that a person 
charged with any offence punishable with imprisonment for a maximum term of five years or 
more should be subject to disqualification. The ARC in its report “Ethics and Governance” and 
Ministry of Law and Justice in “Background Paper on Electoral Reforms, 2010” also concurred 
with the 5 year punishment threshold.  
On the basis of the survey of recommendations above, it is clear that limiting the offen ces to 
which this disqualification applies has two clear reasons, i.e. those offences which are of such 
nature that those charged with them are deemed unsuitable to be people’s representatives in 
Parliament or State Legislatures are included and the list i s circumscribed optimally to prevent 

38 
 
misuse to the maximum extent possible. The determination of what these offences are differ 
depending on the report in question— their fundamental underpinning however is the same.  
If these two principled considerations are taken into account, we believe that all offences which 
have a maximum punishment of five years or more ought to be included within the remit of this 
provision. Three justifications support this proposal: first, all offences widely recognised as 
serious are covered by this provision. This includes provisions for murder, rape, kidnapping, 
dacoity, corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act and other crimes of a nature that 
justify those charged with them being disqualified from holding public offi ce. Second, the data 
extracted above demonstrate s that a large portion of offences for which MPs, MLAs and 
contesting candidates face criminal prosecutions relate to such provisions. Thus the reformed 
provision will ensure that such candidates are disquali fied thereby creating a significant 
systemic impact. Third, it has the benefit of simplicity —by prescribing a standard five-year 
period, the provision is uniform and not contingent on specific offences which may run the risk 
of arbitrariness. The uniform five-year period thus makes a reasonable classification— between 
serious and non-serious offences and has a rational nexus with its object —preventing the entry 
of significantly criminal elements into Parliament and State Legislature.  
(ii) Cut-off period 
An apprehension was raised that introducing such a disqualification will lead to a spate of false 
cases in which charges might be framed immediately prior to an election with the sole intention 
of disqualifying a candidate. This is sought to be offset by a cut -off period before the date of 
scrutiny of nomination for an election, charges filed during which period, will not attract 
disqualification. The basis for this distinction is clear — to prevent false cases being filed 
against political candidates. The question that arises is with regard to the duration of this cut-off 
period. 
NCRWC recommended that disqualification should commence on the expiry of one year from 
the date of framing of charges. Election Commission Proposal of 2004 and Second 
Administrative Review  Commission Report (Ethics in Governance) of 2008 called for 
disqualification in those cases which were filed prior to six months before an election.  
Further at the Consultation, a seeming consensus emerged that the cut -off period should be one 
year from the date of scrutiny of the nomination, i.e. charges filed during the one year period 
will not lead to disqualification. We feel that one year is an appropriate time -frame. It is long 
enough so that false charges which may be filed specifically to disquali fy candidates will not 
lead to such disqualification; at the same time it is not excessively long which would have 
made such disqualification redundant. It thus allows every contesting candidate at minimum a 
one year period to get discharged. It thus strik es an appropriate balance between enlarging the 
scope of disqualification while at the same time seeks to disincentivise the filing of false cases 
solely with the view to engineer disqualification.  

39 
 
(iii) Period of applicability 
The present scheme of disqualification in Section 8(1) prescribes a time period for the duration 
of which the said disqualification applies. For convictions under Section 8(1) a person is 
disqualified for six years from conviction in case he is punished only with a fine or for the 
duration of the imprisonment in addition to six years starting from his date of release. For 
convictions under Section 8(2) and 8(3) he is disqualified simply for the duration of his 
imprisonment and six years starting from the date of release. Given that disquali fications on 
conviction have a time period specified, it would be anomalous if disqualification on the 
framing of charges omitted to do so and applied indefinitely. It is thus essential that atime 
period be specified.  
There have been various suggestions w ith respect to the time period for which the 
disqualification should remain effective. According to the JS Verma Committee and the 
NCRWC, disqualification should continue till acquittal. However, the 170 th Report of Law 
Commission suggested that the applic ability of disqualification should extend to 5 years from 
the date of framing of charge or acquittal, whichever is earlier.  
In this regard, having earnestly considered many views presented, we would be inclined to 
make a minor modification in the proposal  contained in the report of the 170 th Law 
Commission under the Chairmanship of Justice B P Jeevan Reddy. In this report the specified 
period of disqualification was suggested to be five years from the date of framing of charge, or 
acquittal, whichever is e arlier. We find great merit in this proposal. However it must be noted 
that the report did not recommend a cut -off period before the election, a charge framed during 
which would not lead to disqualification. Thus the rationale behind the five -year period w as 
that the charged person would at least be disqualified from contesting in one election. 
This however will not be the case if a one -year cut off period is created. This is because if a 
person has a charged framed against him six months before an election , then he will not 
disqualified from this election because it is within the protected window. At the same time, 
assuming that the next election is five years later (which is a standard assumption) then he will 
not be disqualified from the second election as well because five years from the date of framing 
of charge will have lapsed by then. To take into account the effect of this cut -off period, it is 
thus recommended that the period of disqualification is increased to six years from the date of 
framing of charge or acquittal whichever is earlier.  
The rationale for this recommendation is clear: if a person is acquitted, needless to say the 
disqualification is lifted from that date. If he is not, and the trial is continuing, then the six -year 
period is appropriate for two reasons— first, it is long enough to ensure that the enlarged scope 
of disqualification has enough deterrent effect. A six -year period would at least ensure that a 
person will be disqualified from one election cycle thereby serving as a real  safeguard against 
criminals entering politics. At the same time it is the same as the period prescribed when a 

40 
 
person is disqualified on conviction for certain offences, which such provision is comparable 
to. It thus has the added merit of uniformity. For  these reasons, it is recommended that in the 
event of a charge being framed in respect of the enumerated offences against a person, he will 
be disqualified from contesting in elections for a period of six years from the date of framing of 
charge or till acquittal whichever is earlier, provided that the charge has not been framed within 
the protected window before an election. 
 
D. CHARGES FRAMED AGAINST SITTING MPs/MLAs 
The proposal above thereby makes charges framed at a certain point of time a ground for 
disqualification under the RPA.Thus only if a person has charges framed against him more than 
one year and less than six years before an election in relation to offences which have maximum 
punishment of five years or more then the said person is disqualified. A mere framing of charge 
simpliciterwithout reference to this time period is not sufficient to disqualify him.The rationale 
for this proposal is clear —if someone has charges in the protected window (cut -off period), 
then the law protects them cognizant of the possibility of misuse before an election; if someone 
has charges pending for more than six years then the law makes a determination that the period 
ofdisqualification on this ground cannot exceed the period of disqualification that is occasioned 
by conviction.Thus a person is disqualified on the basis of the time at which charges have been 
framed against him. 
This however does mean that in certain situations sitting MPs/ MLAs may have charges framed 
against them while holding office. This may happen wh en a charge is framed against him 
during the protected window (cut -off period) before an election and he wins the election and 
when a charge is framed against him more than six years before the date of scrutiny of 
nominations for an election, i.e. the char ge has lapsed. In addition, a charge may be framed 
against such an MP/ MLA while he is in office. It is essential that in law these three situations 
are treated similarly.  
In the first two situations, the law, for reasons clearly delineated aforesaid, all ows the candidate 
to contest elections. Thus it is clear that in these situations sucha person who has charges 
framed against him but is nonetheless allowed to contest cannot be disqualified merely because 
he has won the election. That would render the pro tection that the law gives him illusory. To 
provide uniformity, it is thus necessary that an MP/ MLA has charges framed against him while 
in office is also not disqualified immediately at the moment charges are framed. However at the 
same time it is anomalous to the very idea of keeping Parliament free from criminal elements if 
such persons are allowed to continue functioning in their incumbent offices without any 
attendant sanctions. This is especially true in light of the data above which demonstrates 
particularly acute delays in trials involving political candidates and office -holders. Thus for 
sitting MPs/ MLAs who are in office with charges framed against them,certain provisions are 
necessary in order to ensure that the probity of public office is maintained. 

41 
 
We believe two steps are necessary: 
1. Expediting trials—It is recommended that in the case of sitting MPs/ MLAs who have 
relevant charges framed  against them (in the three situations above)  the trial is 
concluded speedily. However given the data on de lays in trials, especially involving 
powerful persons, this is unlikely to happen as a matter of course. Thus we suggest 
that the Supreme Court be pleased to order that in all cases when a sitting MP/ 
MLA has charges framed against him,the relevant court w here he is being tried 
conducts the trial on a day -to-day basis with an outer limit of completing the trial 
in one year. In the first two cases  above, this time period would begin to run from the 
date on which the person takes oath as a member; in the third case it would run from the 
date on which charges are framed against him. This would expedite the trial to the 
extent possible and thereby ensure that he is either convicted , and disqualified , or 
acquitted in a reasonable period.   
2. If the trial cannot be completed within the said time period or the charge is not quashed 
in the said period, the trial judge shall give reasons in writing to the relevant High Court 
in whose jurisdiction it is based, as to why the trial could not be completed. In 
formulating its reasons, it can follow the guidelines of the Supreme Court laid down in 
RS Nayak v. AR Antulay.82Once the said period expires, two consequences may ensue: 
a. The person may be automatically disqualified at the end of the said time period OR 
b. The right to vote , remuneration and perquisites of office shall be suspended at the 
end of the said period up to the expiry of the House.  
Both these alternatives, in our opinion, provide sufficient disincentives for political parties to 
field candidates with criminal char ges against them. While the former has the benefit of 
uniformity with how contesting candidates who have charges framed against them and 
consequently disqualified are dealt with, the latter takes away significant facets of a person’s 
membership of the Hous e. Both these options, disqualification in the first case and severe 
disabilities in the second, will operate till the dissolution of the House. The Supreme Court 
might be pleased to direct the implementation of one of the aforesaid options, which in its 
wisdom, it believes is more appropriate.  
In conclusion to this part, it must be reiterated that we recommend that disqualification must 
ensue on the framing of charges in relation to specific offences when framed at a particular 
time. This balanced provisi on is recommended as an optimal harmonisation between the need 
to keep criminal elements out of politics while at the same time not creating an over -inclusive 
provision that disqualifies honest candidates from being disqualified owing to false cases 
against them. This will keep a majority of criminals charged with serious offences out of the 
electoral fray. At the same time for the residue who are the beneficiaries of the safeguards in 
the law, a strict provision dealing with sitting MPs and MLAs is also pr ovided for. Such a 
                                                           
82(1992) 1 SCC 279.  

42 
 
combination of provisions, it is hoped, will deter political parties from handing out tickets to 
tainted candidates. Such candidates, will either not be able to take part in elections, or even if 
they are, will be subject to an expedited  trial of their case along with a taking away of key 
benefits of their membership or disqualification as last resort measures. We thus believe that 
this reform has the potential to significantly cleanse Indian elections and politics of criminal 
elements.  
E. RETROACTIVE APPLICATION 
As discussed in Section V -A, the trials of legislators are subject to inordinate delays. Some 
criminal trials of sitting MPs and MLAs have been pending for over two decades. 83 While 
ordinarily the above reform proposal on disqualific ation on framing of charges would apply 
only with prospective effect, we believe that due to the current extent of criminalisation of 
politics and the quantum of delay in pending trials, the reform proposal will only be effective if 
applied retroactively. That is, on the date of these amendments coming into effect, all persons 
with criminal charges (punishable by more than five years) pending on that date are liable to be 
disqualified subject to certain safeguards.  
However, the following situations must be considered before disqualification is effected: 
i. Charges have been framed at the time of the law coming into effect, but less than a year 
before the date of scrutiny of nominations before elections – in this case, the cut -off 
period would apply as explained in Section V-C(ii) will apply and the person will not be 
disqualified.  
ii. Charges have been framed at the time of the law coming into effect, but more than six 
years before the date of scrutiny of nominations– in this case, we believe that the person 
should be disqualified, since the disability of disqualification has not operated against 
him prior to the amendments coming into force. Since the person has not suffered from 
any disability as a consequence of charges being framed against him, it is appropriat e 
that he be disqualified once the Act comes into effect. 
iii. Charges are pending, but the person is a sitting MP or MLA on the date of enactment of 
this law – in such cases, we believe that the administrative burden of expediting more 
than two thousand trials of sittings MPs and MLAs will be too great. Therefore the law 
should apply against a person only when he contests elections for the first time after the 
enactment of this provision, but not against a person who holds office on the date of 
enactment. 
Unless the law is applied retroactively in this manner, it will not have a significant deterrent 
effect on the criminalisation of politics in the country. 
  
                                                           
83 Candidate affidavits sourced from the Election Commission Website 

43 
 
VI. CONSEQUENCES UPON FILING OF FALSE AFFIDAVITS 
 
A. RATIONALE 
A candidate to any National or State Assembl y elections is required to furnish an affidavit, in 
the shape of Form 26 appended to the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961, containing certain 
information regarding their assets, liabilities, and criminal proceedings against them, if any. 
Specifically, the f ollowing information is required under Form 26 read with Rule 4A of the 
Conduct of Election Rules: 
i. In case the candidate is accused of any offence punishable with two years or more, and 
charges have been framed by the Court, information such as the FIR No. , Case No. and 
the date of framing of charges; 
ii. Details of conviction in any case not included in Section 8 of the RPA, where the 
sentence was for one year or more; 
iii. PAN Number and status of filing of Income Tax Return for the candidate, spouse and 
dependents; 
iv. Details of movable and immovable assets the candidate, spouse and all dependents; 
v. Details of liabilities of the candidate to public financial institutions or to the government ; 
and 
vi. Details of profession or occupation and of educational qualifications. 
(i) Legislative history on the requirement of disclosures 
The 170th Law Commission Report on Electoral Reforms, 1999 was the first to suggest that a 
new Section 4A be added to the Representation of the People Act, 1951 ( RPA), mandating that 
a person shall be in eligible to contest elections unless he files an affidavit declaring assets 
possessed by him, his spouse, and dependent relatives. Also required was a declaration whether 
charges had been framed against him in respect of any of certain specified offences b y a 
criminal court.84 
In 2002, the Association of Democratic Reforms petitioned the Court to have the above 
recommendation implemented, among others. 85 The Supreme Court directed the Election 
Commission to require details on assets and liabilities, pendi ng and convicted criminal cases 
and educational qualifications to be filed on affidavit along with the nomination papers of all 
candidates. 
Pursuant to this judgment, the Election Commission issued directives to the effect that failure 
to file an affidavit  containing the above details would result in the nomination paper being 
deemed incomplete within the meaning of S. 33(1) of the RPA, apart from inviting penal 
                                                           
84 Law Commission of India, ‘One Hundred Seventieth Report on Reform of the Electoral Laws’, (1999).  
85Union of India v. Association of Democratic Reforms, (2002) 5 SCC 294.  

44 
 
consequences under the Indian Penal Code. The Returning Officer would conduct a summary 
inquiry at the time of scrutiny of nomination papers, and only defects of a substantial character 
shall be considered grounds for rejection.86 
Later that same year, the RPA was amended to add Sections 33A and 33B. Section 33A said 
that information shall be filed al ong with nomination papers about any charges framed by a 
court against the candidate for an offence punishable by more than two years imprisonment, 
and any conviction which did not disqualify him, but resulted in imprisonment of 1 year or 
more. Section 33B  said that notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order by the Election 
Commission, no candidate shall be liable to disclose any information other than that mandated 
by the RPA or rules made thereunder. Therefore, directions of the Supreme Court regarding  
further disclosure of assets and educational qualifications stood reversed by this amendment. 
Section 33B was challenged in PUCL v. Union of India.87The Supreme Court held that Section 
33B nullified the directives issued by the Election Commission pursuant  to the judgment in 
Association of Democratic Reforms. The plain effect of the embargo contained in Section 33B 
is to nullify substantially the directives issued by the Election Commission pursuant to the 
judgment of this Court.  
The Judges gave three sepa rate opinions in this case. The effect of the judgment was to render 
Section 33B unconstitutional, as it imposed a blanket ban on the dissemination of information, 
irrespective of the need of the hour. The legislature could deviate from the directives of t he 
court, but not substantially disregard them, as it had done with the introduction of Section 33B. 
Further, the Association of Democratic Reforms had recognized and enforced a fundamental 
right of the act of voting as freedom of expression, and Section 3 3B could not take away the 
same.  
(ii) Current law on disclosure of candidate information 
As a result of this series of events, candidates are now required to furnish the following 
information: 
Under Section 33A of the RPA, read with Rule 4A of Conduct of Elect ion Rules, 1961, an 
affidavit in Form 26 appended to the Conduct of Election Rules, giving information on  
i. Cases in which the candidate has been accused of any offence punishable with 
imprisonment for two years or more in a pending case in which charges ha ve been 
framed by the court. 
                                                           
86 Election Commission of India, Order dated 28 th June, 2002, No. 3/ER/2002/JS-II/Vol-III, 
<http://eci.nic.in/archive/press/current/PN_28062002.htm> accessed January 29th, 2014.  
87(2003) 4 SCC 399. 

45 
 
ii. Cases of conviction for an offence other than any of the offences mentioned in Section 8 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and sentenced to imprisonment for one 
year or more.  
Also, in pursuance of the PUCL judgment, the candidate has to furnish information relating to 
all pending cases in which cognizance has been taken by a Court, his assets and liabilities, and 
educational qualifications.88 In 2012, the format of Form 26 was revised to include both sets on 
information.89 
(iii) Current legal consequences on false disclosure 
While the PUCL judgment clarified the obligations of a candidate with respect to the furnishing 
of information, it was less clear on the consequences if the information provided happened to 
be false. It held that a Returning Officer could not reject nomination papers on the ground that 
candidate information was false. Neither was verification of assets by the Returning Officer 
through a summary inquiry justified, as it did not give a fair hearing to the candidate.  
As a result of this finding, the Election Commission ordered its earlier directive on the rejection 
of nomination papers non -enforceable. It instead directed that if a complaint is submitted 
regarding furnishing of false information, supported by documentary evidence, the Returning 
Officer should initiate action to prosecute the candidate under Section 125A of the RPA which 
provides penalty for filing false affidavits. 90 A candidate who fails to furnish the required 
information, gives false infor mation or conceals any information, may be punished with 
imprisonment for a term up to six months or with fine or with both.  
There is no readily available data on the count of candidates prosecuted for filing false 
information, though there seem to be no reported conviction on this crime. 
However, Section 125A of the RPA has not been included in the list of offences under Section 
8 of the RPA. This means that a conviction under Section 125A does not lead to 
disqualification of the candidate for the duratio n of imprisonment and a further period of 6 
years.  
Therefore, filing of false information, even if proved under Section 125A, is not a ground for 
setting aside the election, or for further disqualification. This matter was in question in the 2007 
Bombay H igh Court decision of ArunDattaraySawantv. Kishan Shankar Rathore 91in an 
Election Petition involving false declaration regarding assets in a candidate affidavit. The 
                                                           
88 Election Commission Of India- Proposed Electoral Reforms (2004). 
89 Election Commission of Ind ia, Instruction Dated 24 th August, 2012, 
http://eci.nic.in/eci_main/CurrentElections/ECI_Instructions/AFFI29082012.pdf  accessed January 27th, 2014.  
90 Election Commission's letter No. 3/ER/2004-JS-II, dated 02.06.2004. 
91 El. Pet 10/2004, (Bom. HC) (16th Aug, 2007) (Unreported). See also KuldeepPednekar v. AjitGogate, 2006 (4) 
Bom CR 392. 
 

46 
 
Election Judge said that the Returning Officer, in accordance with PUCL,could not reject th e 
nomination paper on the ground that information in the affidavit was false. Nevertheless since 
the candidate’s nomination paper suffered from defects, it amounted to a case of improper 
acceptance of nomination paper under Section 100(1)(d)(i)  and the ele ction was set aside on 
this ground . Further, it was also clear that the election was materially affected by the false 
nomination since the improper acceptance was of the returned candidate’s papers. 
The Judge went on to say that “ The solemnity of affidavit cannot be allowed to be ridiculed  by 
the candidates by offering incomplete information or suppressing material information, 
resulting in disinformation or misinformation to the voters.”92 He recommended that Parliament 
consider enacting a provision stipula ting disqualification of a candidate whose election is 
invalidated by the Court on the finding that he had filed false and incomplete affidavit whose 
defect was of a substantial character. 
This matter was also in question in the Delhi High Court decision o f Nand Ram Bagri  v. Jai 
Kishan. Here, the court said that conviction under Section 125A was a ground for setting aside 
the election, as the election would then be rendered ‘impure’. 93 However, this may be taken as 
obiter, since the main finding in the case was that the respondent was not guilty of 
misrepresentation on his affidavit. 
A similar approach has been taken by other High Courts as well. In Krishnamoorthyv. Siva 
Kumar94the Court, in a case involving Panchayat elections, held that failure to disclose 
complete information may amount to undue influence, and that incorrect or false information 
interferes with the free exercise of the electoral right of the voter. 
Further, in Resurgence India v. Election Commission of India 95 decided by the Supreme Court 
in 2013, the problems faced by the Election Commission due to the fact that nomination papers 
could not be rejected for incomplete affidavits, was addressed. The court said that if an affidavit 
is filed with blank particulars, it renders the entire exercise o f filing affidavits futile, and 
infringes the fundamental right of citizens under Article 19(1)(a). Therefore the Returning 
Officer should remind the candidate to fill the blanks, and if such reminder is ignored, the 
nomination is fit to be rejected.  
The court rejected the argument that the PUCL judgment barred such a holding, and explained 
that PUCL merely pointed out that the candidate lacked the ability to make a reply at the time 
of scrutiny, but did not intend to bar the Returning Officer from rejecting nomination papers.  
                                                           
92 Per Khanwilkar J. (as he then was), Para 138, ArunDattaraySawant v. Kishan Shankar Rathore, El. Pet 10/2004, 
(Bom. HC) (16th Aug, 2007) (Unreported). 
93(2013) 200 DLT 402. 
94(2009) 3 CTC 446. 
95 WP No. 121 of 2008, (SC) (13th September, 2013) (Unreported).  

47 
 
Certain High Courts including the Kerala High Court, however, seem to have taken a contrary 
view on the question of disqualification for filing of false affidavits. They have based their 
stance on the ground that filing of false affi davits has not been stated in the statute as either a 
ground for disqualification under Section 8, a ground for rejection of nomination papers or a 
ground for setting aside elections under Section 100 of the RPA. 96 It was further held by the 
Kerala High Cou rt that non -compliance of the Election Commission's order cannot be treated 
as non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution, to set aside an election under sub -
Section 1(d)(iv) of Section 100 of the Act. 
Therefore, from the decisions above, one c an conclude that if details are omitted in the 
nomination papers, it is fit to be rejected. If information is believed to be false, prosecution 
under Section 125A is possible, however the consequences upon conviction are unclear. While 
the Bombay High Cour t in ArunDattaraySawant maintains that filing of false affidavit is a 
ground for setting aside the election, o ther High Courts have taken a contrary view. The filing 
of false affidavits can therefore at most lead to six months imprisonment and fine, withou t 
altering the election verdict or the candidate’s ability to contest future elections.  
This greatly undermines the very basic value of candidate disclosures – due to the lack of 
consequences, candidates have little incentive to provide accurate informati on. This in turns 
affects the fundamental right of the citizen under Article 19(1)(a) to know the antecedents of a 
candidate, as recognized in the Association for Democratic Reforms judgment.  
B. REFORM PROPOSAL 
It has been noted by the Election Commission th at candidates have repeatedly failed to furnish 
information, or grossly undervalued information such as the quantum of their assets.97 
The reform suggestion is three -fold, first, that the punishment for filing false affidavits under 
Section 125A be increased to a minimum of two years, and that the alternate clause for fine be 
removed. Second, conviction under Section 125A should be made a ground for disqualification 
under Section 8(1) of the RPA. 98 These penalties should not apply for trivial errors or 
inconsistencies, or for inadvertent omissions. Third, the filing of false affidavits should be 
made a corrupt practice under Section 123 of the RPA.  
Further, the ECI has suggested that any complaint regarding false statement in the affidavit be 
submitted to the  Returning Officer concerned within a period of 30 days from the date of 
declaration of the election. The Returning Officer shall then initiate action to prosecute the 
impugned candidate under Section 125A. It has also been established that the Returning Officer 
                                                           
96Mani C. Kappan v K.M. Mani, 2007 (1) KLT 228; Narayan GunajiSawant v. Deepak VasantKesarkar, 2011 (3) 
Bom CR 754. 
97 Election Commission of India – Proposed Electoral Reforms (2004). 
98Id. 

48 
 
is not the only route to initiate prosecution in this regard. Alternatively, a complaint by any 
member of the public can lie directly to the Magistrate’s Court.99 
Thus, disqualification under Section 8 for the filing of a false affidavit follows conviction under 
Section 125A. As discussed previously, trials against influential persons, especially trials where 
conviction can result in disqualification, are subject to inordinate delays. Therefore, the 
Supreme Court may be pleased to order that all cases  being tried under Section 125A of the 
RPA be tried by the relevant court on a day-to-day basis.  
The process for scrutiny of nominations should also be strengthened in order to curb the 
rampant filing of false affidavits. To this end, a gap of one week sh ould be introduced between 
the last date of filing of nominations by the returning officer and the date of scrutiny, to allow 
adequate time for the filing of objections which the returning officer shall consider under 
Section 36 of the RPA. 
(i) The reform proposal: an assessment 
The lack of any serious consequence s for making false disclosures has certainly contributed to 
the widespread flouting of the Supreme Court and the Election Commission’s directives on this 
matter. Such misrepresentation affects the vote rs’ ability to freely exercise their vote. 
Therefore, there is an urgent need to: 
i. Introduce enhanced sentence of a minimum of two years under Section 125A. 
ii. Include conviction under Section 125A as a ground of disqualification under Section 
8(1) of the RPA. 
iii. Set-up an independent method of verification of winners’ affidavits to check the 
incidence of false disclosures in a speedy fashion. 
iv. Include the offence of filing false affidavit as a corrupt practice under S. 123 of the 
RPA. 
This set of suggestions is by  the way of abundant caution. Increasing minimum punishment to 
two years would result in Section 125A being included in the ambit of Section 8(3), under 
which conviction for offences punishable by at least two years results in disqualification. To 
further eliminate any possible loopholes, such as if a judge happens to prescribe a lower 
sentence, the Election Commission suggests that Section 125A also be brought under the 
offences listed in Section 8(1), which results in disqualification irrespective of the quantum of 
punishment. 
Corrupt practices under Section 123, when committed by a candidate or his election agent, are 
grounds for setting aside an election under Section 100(1)(b). Inclusion of the offence of filing 
                                                           
99 Election Commission of India, ‘Important Electoral Reforms proposed by the Election Commission’ 
<http://eci.nic.in/eci_main/electoral_ref.pdf> accessed February 3rd, 2014. 

49 
 
false affidavit under Section 123 results  in the option of filing an election petition becoming 
available to an elector or candidate who want to challenge a particular election. 
This reform suggestion by the Election Commission has ample basis in the current law. Section 
8(1) already carries the penalty of disqualification for a number of other electoral offences – 
Section 8(1)(i) disqualifies upon conviction for promoting enmity between classes, removal of 
ballot papers, booth capturing and fraudulently defacing or destroying any nomination paper . 
Even though the quantum of punishment in some of these offences is low, ranging from six 
months to a year, they result in disqualification because the offence is directly connected to the 
conduct of elections. False disclosures in nomination papers falls  within the scheme of such 
offences, and should therefore be included under Section 8(1)(i). 
  

50 
 
VII. RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED SECTIONS 
 
A. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
In light of the above discussions, the Law Commission makes the following recommendations 
on the two issues considered in this report in accordance with the directions of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in its order dated 16 th December, 2013 in Public Interest Foundation & Ors. V. 
Union of India and Anr, (W/P Civil No. 536 of 2011): 
I. Whether disqualification should be triggered upon conviction as it exists today or upon 
framing of charges by the court or upon the presentation of the report by the 
Investigating Officer under Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure? [Issue No. 
3.1(ii) of the Consultation Paper] 
1. Disqualification upon conviction has proved to be incapable of curbing the 
growing criminalisation of politics, owing to long delays in trials and rare 
convictions. The law needs to evolve to pose an effective deterrence, and to 
prevent subver sion of the process of justice.   
2. The filing of the police report under Section 173 Cr.PC is not an appropriate stage to 
introduce electoral disqualifications owing to the lack of sufficient application of 
judicial mind at this stage. 
3. The stage of framing of charges is based on adequate levels of judicial scrutiny, and 
disqualification at the stage of charging, if accompanied by substantial attendant 
legal safeguards to prevent misuse, has significant potential in curbing the spread of 
criminalisation of politics.  
4. The following safeguards must be incorporated into the disqualification for framing 
of charges owing to potential for misuse, concern of lack of remedy for the accused 
and the sanctity of criminal jurisprudence: 
i. Only offences which have a maximum punishment of five years or above 
ought to be included within the remit of this provision. 
ii. Charges filed up to one year before the date of scrutiny of nominations for 
an election will not lead to disqualification. 
iii. The disqualification will operate till an acquittal by the trial court, or for a 
period of six years, whichever is earlier. 
iv. For charges framed against sitting MPs/ MLAs, the trials must be expedited 
so that they are conducted on a day -to-day basis and concluded within a 1 -
year period. If trial not concluded within a one year period  then one of the 
following consequences ought to ensue: 
- The MP/ MLA may be disqualifiedat the expiry of the one -year 
period;OR 

51 
 
- The MP/ MLA’sright to vote in the House as a member, 
remuneration and other perquisites attach ing to their office shall be 
suspended at the expiry of the one-year period. 
5. Disqualification in the above manner must apply retroactively as well. Persons with 
charges pending (punishable by 5 years or more) on the date of the law coming into 
effect must be disqualified from contesting future elections, unless such charges are 
framed less than one year before the date of scrutiny of nomination papers for 
elections or the person is a sitting MP/MLA at the time of enactment of the Act. 
Such disqualification must take place irrespective of when the charge was framed. 
 
II. Whether filing of false affidavits under Section 125A of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951 should be a ground for disqualification? And if yes, what mode and 
mechanism needs to be provided for adjudication on the veracity of the affidavit? [Issue 
No. 3.5 of the Consultation Paper]” 
1. There is large -scale violation of the laws on candidate affidavits owing to lack of 
sufficient legal consequences. As a result, the following changes should be  made to 
the RPA: 
i. Introduce enhanced sentence of a minimum of two years under Section 125A 
of the RPA Act on offence of filing false affidavits  
ii. Include conviction under Section 125A as a ground of disqualification under 
Section 8(1) of the RPA. 
iii. Include the offence of filing false affidavit as a corrupt practice under S. 123 
of the RPA. 
2. Since conviction under Section 125A is necessary for disqualification under Section 
8 to be triggered, the Supreme Court may be pleased to order that in all trials under 
Section 125A, the relevant court conducts the trial on a day-to-day basis  
3. A gap of one week should be introduced between the last date for filing nomination 
papers and the date of scrutiny, to give adequate time for the filing of objections to 
nomination papers.  
B. PROPOSED SECTIONS 
In order to implement the aforesaid recommendations, the following legislative reforms are 
suggested: 
(i) Amendments on disqualification upon framing of charges 
The Law Commission proposes that a new section (Section 8B) be inserted in the RPA after 
Section 8A. It should read: 

52 
 
“8B. Disqualification on framing of charge for certain offences. - (1) A person against 
whom a charge has been framed by a competent court for an offence punishable by at least five 
years imprisonment shall be disqualified from the date of framing the charge for a period of six 
years, or till the date of quashing of charge or acquittal, whichever is earlier. 
  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, nothing in sub -section (1) shall apply to a 
person: 
(i) Who holds office as a Member of Parliament, State Legislative Assembly or Legislative 
Council at the date of enactment of this provision, or 
(ii) Against whom a charge has been framed for an offence punishable by at least five years 
imprisonment; 
(a)    Less than one year before the date of scrutiny of nominations for an election under 
Section 36, in relation to that election; 
(b)   At a time when such person holds office as a Member of Parliament, State Legislative 
Assembly or Legislative Council, and has been elected to such office after the enactment of 
these provisions; 
  
  
(3) For Members of Parliament, State Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council covered by 
clause (ii) of sub -section (2), they shall be disqualified at the expiry of one year from the date 
of framing of charge or date of election, whichever is later, unless they have been acquitted in 
the said period or the relevant charge against them has been quashed. 
  
OR 
  
(3) For Members of Parliament, State Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council covered by 
clause (ii) of sub -section (2), their right to vote in the House as a member, remuneration and 
other perquisites attaching to their office, shall be suspended at the expiry of one year from the 
date of framing of charge or date of electi on, whichever is later, unless they have been 
acquitted in the said period or the relevant charge against them has been quashed. 
  
(4) Any disqualification/ suspension under sub -section (3) shall operate till the dissolution of 
the House, or for Members of  the Rajya Sabha or State Legislative Council, up to the end of 
their present term as Member. 
 
[Clause 3 is to be read with the direction to be issued by the Supreme Court to all courts that 
trial of Members of Parliament, State Legislative Assembly or Leg islative Council against 
whom charges have been framed for an offence punishable by at least five years imprisonment  
shall be expedited and heard on a day -to-day basis with a view to completing the trial in one 
year from the date of framing of charge or date of election whichever is later.] 
 
  
“8C. Transitory provision 
A person against whom a charge has been framed by a competent court for an offence 
punishable by at least five years, before the enactment of this provision irrespective of when the 
charge was framed, shall, unless exempted under sub -section (2) of Section 8B, be disqualified 

53 
 
for a period of six years from the date of enactment of this provision or till the date of quashing 
of charge or acquittal, whichever is earlier.” 
 
(ii) Amendments on false disclosures 
The Law Commission recommends that the following changes be made to the law on false 
disclosure on affidavits 
i. Section 125A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 should be amended by 
substituting the words “may extend to six months, or wit h fine, or with both” with the words 
“shall not be less than two years, and shall also be liable to fine”. The amended Section 
125A would read as follows: 
“125A. Penalty for filing false affidavit, etc .—A candidate who himself or through his 
proposer, with intent to be elected in an election,— 
(i) fails to furnish information relating to sub-section (1) of section 33A; or  
(ii) give false information which he knows or has reason to believe to be false; or  
(iii) conceals any information,  
in his nomination paper delivered under sub-section (1) of section 33 or in his affidavit which is 
required to be delivered under sub -section (2) of section 33A, as the case may be, shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, be p unishable 
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years, and shall also be liable to 
fine.” 
[Section 125A is to be read with the direction to be issued by the Supreme Court to all courts 
that trial under Section 125A shall be expedited and heard on a day-to-day basis] 
ii. Section 8(1)(i) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 be amended by inserting the 
words “or section 125A (penalty for filing false affidavit, etc.)” after the words “section 125 
(offence of promoting enmity betwee n classes in connection with the election)”. The 
amended Section 8(1)(i) would read as follows: 
“8. Disqualification on conviction for certain offences . —(1) A person convicted of an 
offence punishable under— 
(a)… 
* 

54 
 
* 
* 
(i) section 125 (offence of promotin g enmity between classes in connection with the election) 
or section 125A (penalty for filing false affidavit, etc.) or section 135 (offence of removal of 
ballot papers from polling stations) or section 135A (offence of booth capturing) of clause (a) 
of sub-section (2) of section 136 (offence of fraudulently defacing or fraudulently destroying 
any nomination paper) of this Act; 
* 
* 
*” 
iii. Section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 be amended by inserting clause 
4A after clause 4 as follows: 
“123. Corrupt practices .—The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the 
purposes of this Act: 
(1)… 
* 
* 
* 
(4A) failure by a candidate to furnish information relating to sub -section (1) of section 33A, or 
giving of false information which he knows or has reason to believe to the false, or 
concealment of any information in the nomination paper delivered under subsection (1) of 
section 33 or in the affidavit delivered under sub-section (2) of section 33A”. 
 
