 
  
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
LAW COMMISSION 
OF  
INDIA 
 
Report No. 245 
 
Arrears and Backlog: Creating Additional Judicial (wo)manpower 
 
July,  2014 
 
 

ii 
 
The 20th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three years from 1st 
September, 2012 by Order No. A-45012/1/2012-Admn.III (LA) dated the 8th 
October, 2012 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Law and 
Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi. 
 
The Law Commission consists of a full time Chairman, four full -time 
Members (including Member -Secretary), two Ex -officio Members and five 
part-time Members.  
  
 
 
 
Chairman  
Hon’ble Justice A.P. Shah  
 
 
Full-time Members  
Justice (Mr.) S.N. Kapoor  
Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma  
Justice (Ms.) Usha Mehra  
Mr. N.L. Meena, Member-Secretary  
 
 
Ex-officio Member  
Mr. P.K. Malhotra, Secretary (Department of Legal Affairs and  
Legislative Department)  
 
 
Part-time Members  
Prof. (Dr.) G. Mohan Gopal  
Mr.  R. Venkataramani  
Prof. (Dr.) Yogesh Tyagi  
Dr. Bijai Narain Mani  
Prof.(Dr.) Gurjeet Singh 
 
 
 

iii 
 
The Law Commission is located in  
14th  Floor, Hindustan Times House,  
K.G. Marg,  
New Delhi-110 001  
 
 
 
Member Secretary  
Mr. N.L. Meena  
 
 
Research Staff  
Dr. (Smt.) Pawan Sharma    : Joint Secretary & Law Officer  
Shri A.K. Upadhyay   : Additional Law Officer  
Shri S.C. Mishra     : Deputy Law Officer  
Dr. V.K. Singh     : Deputy Legal Adviser  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The text of this Report is available on the Internet at :  
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in  
 
 
 
 
 
© Government of India  
   Law Commission of India  
 
  

iv 
 
 


v 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
 The Commission deeply appreciates valuable inputs received from the 
Group it had constituted in finalising the report on “Imtiyaz Ahmad v. State 
of Uttar Pradesh and Ors (Criminal Appeal No.s254 -262 of 2012)” to the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and the present report.  The group that 
initially comprised :   Prof. Theodore Eisenberg, Henry Allen Mark Professor 
of law, Adjunct Professor of Statistical Sciences at Cornell University;  Prof. 
Sital Kalantry, Clinical Professor of Law and Director, International Human 
Rights Clinic, University of Chicago Law School;   Prof. Sri Krishna Deva 
Rao, Registrar, National Law University, Delhi (as representative of NLU 
Delhi); and Mr. Nicholas Robinson, Fellow at Centre of Policy Research  was 
expanded when Dr. Aparna Chandra and Mr. Ut karsh Saxena, Consultant to 
Law Commission of India joined it.   Mr. Madhav Mallya and Ms. Vrinda 
Bhandari, Research Associates, National Law University and Mr. Saral 
Minocha and Ms. Sonal Sarda, students of National Law University also 
helped in analysing and compiling the data.  Enthusiasm and dedication apart 
from research inputs of Dr. Aparna Chandra deserves special mention.  
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 iv a 

vi 
 
Arrears and Backlog: Creating Additional Judicial (wo)manpower 
*** 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
CHAPTERS   TITLE       PAGE 
I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. 1 
II. DEFINING KEY CONCEPTS: PENDENCY, DELAY, ARREARS, AND BACKLOG  ..... 3 
III: COMPUTING JUDGE STRENGTH .................................................................... 10 
A. OVER OF DATA AND ITS LIMITATIONS ......................................................... 10 
B. ANALYSIS OF DATA ................................................................................. 12 
C. METHODOLOGIES FOR COMPUTING ADEQUATE JUDGE STRENGTH ................... 19 
        1. JUDGE TO POPULATION RATIO & JUDGE TO FILING RATIO ................................ ........... 19 
        2. THE IDEAL CASE LOAD METHOD ................................ ................................ ............ 20 
        3. THE TIME BASED METHOD ................................ ................................ ................... 22 
        4. THE RATE OF DISPOSAL METHOD ................................ ................................ ........... 24 
IV. RECOMMENDATIONS .................................................................................... 53 
     ANNEXURE – I…………………………………………………………………………… …..57 
     ANNEXURE – II……………………………………………………………………………....60 
     ANNEXURE – III…………………………………………………………………………… …66 
     ANNEXURE – IV……………………………………………………………………………...71 
     ANNEXURE – V……………………………………………………………………………….78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
v 

1 
 
CHAPTER  I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Denial of ‘timely justice’ amounts to denial of ‘justice’ itself.  Two are integral to 
each other.  Timely disposal of cases is essential for maintaining the rule of law 
and providing access to justice which is a guaranteed fundamental right.  
However, as the present report indicates, the judicial system is unable to deliver 
timely justice because of huge backlog of cases for which the current judge 
strength is completely inadequate.  Further, in addition to the already backlogged 
cases, the system is not being able to keep pace with the new cases being 
instituted, and is not being able to dispose of a comparable number of cases.  The 
already severe problem of backlogs is, therefore, getting exacerbated by the day, 
leading to a dilution of the Constitutional guarantee of access to timely justice 
and erosion of the rule of law.  The present report is aimed at addressing this 
scenario that  demands a  multi-prong approach including more sensitive and 
rational judicial (wo)manpower planning. 
It may be acknowledged that the present report is largely driven  by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court when in the matter of Imtiyaz Ahmad1 it directed the Commission 
to undertake an inquiry and submit its recommendations in relation to the 
following: 
“I. Keeping in view that timely justice is an important facet to 
access to justice, the immediate measures that need to be taken 
by way of creation of additional Courts and other allied matters 
(including a rational and scientific definition of “arrears” and 
delay, of which continued notice needs to be taken), to help in 
elimination of delays, speedy clearance of arrears and reduction 
in costs. It is trite to add that the qualitative component of 
justice must not be lowered or compromised; and 
II. Specific recommendations whenever considered necessary on 
the above aspects in relation to each State be made as a product 
of consultative processes involving the High Courts and other 
stake holders, including the Bar.” 
For arriving at informed understanding of the problem at hand and for making 
any meaningful suggestion(s), to deal with it, the Commission requ ested all the 
High Courts to provide data on litigation in each district within their jurisdiction. 
To facilitate orderly organization and supply of data, the High Courts were sent a 
prescribed format (Annexure I).  Some very useful data was produced.  However, 
most High Courts due to variety of reasons, could not fully provide the data / 
information sought.   
Keeping in view insufficiency of the data received, after detailed in -house 
discussions and also involving experts that an additional questionnaire was sent 
to various High Courts.  In response, no doubt, some relevant data was received.  
However, lack of scientific collection, collation and analysis still remained a 
                                                           
1 See Imtiyaz Ahmad v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors., AIR SC 2012 642  

2 
 
serious constraint. Despite these constraints, reading and analyzing data 
received very closely, especially in the light of different methods of data analysis 
available that the Commission gave its response to queries and matter raised by 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court and the same has provided the basis of this report. 
While acknowledging that the problem of delay is not only enormous but complex, 
the Commission  in the present report has remained confined to developing more 
informed understanding of as to whether problem of delay and strength of judges 
is a related one in some ways and if so how?  In the report, an attempt has been 
made to suggest number of judges as are required to reduce delays.  In a way, 
the report provides a roadmap for judicial (wo)manpower planning. While 
agreeing that there exists no clear ‘time standard’ or a ‘reference’ to which a case 
can be classified as ‘delayed’. How one defines ‘timeliness’ (and, therefore, how 
many cases are delayed) is crucial to suggest any kind of  basis for computing 
how many additional judges are required to process cases in timely manner.  
Without arriving at some such definition, it is difficult to suggest any appropriate 
method for planning and computing additional resources required to contain 
problem of delay.  Similarly, the Commission is fully aware as thus undermined 
in the report that terms, such as ‘arrears’, ‘pendency’ and ‘backlog’ which are so 
oftenly used in almost all kinds of discourse on working of justice administration 
system in India are used very vagu ely and beg clear and precise definition.  The 
report is an attempt to reflect and throw more light on some of these terms, and 
it is hoped that the policy makers and other stakeholders in the system may find 
these reflections and attempt to introduce some clarity by the present work of 
some use during their course of deliberations on judicial reforms.   
As the pivotal issue for the report is to suggest some basis for computing as to 
how many additional judges are required to process cases in ‘timely’ manner to 
large extent, answer to this questio n depends on how one defines ‘timeliness’ 
(and, therefore, how many cases are delayed).  As already mentioned in the 
foregoing paragraphs, it may be emphasized at the cost of sounding repetitive 
that w ithout arriving at some such definition, it is difficul t to suggest any 
appropriate method for planning and computing additional resources required to 
contain the delay.  A significant portion of the report right at the start , after 
critical examination of various approaches to defining terms like ‘arrears’, 
‘pendency’ and ‘delay’ as floating around in the literature on the subject 
incorporates Commission’s own reflections.  These reflections, while may provide 
little more clarity to assigning meaning to above referred terms which have been 
generally understood so ambiguously, the Commission still views that it may not 
be possible to devise any perfectly scientific and uniform definition of these 
concepts.  Acknowledging such definitional limitation and of inadequacy of data 
received, present report culminates in making some suggestions on the additional 
resources required to dispose of the current pendency, and to prevent the backlog 
in future. 
 
 

3 
 
CHAPTER II 
DEFINING KEY CONCEPTS: PENDENCY, DELAY, 
ARREARS, AND BACKLOG 
 
There is no single or clear understanding of when a case should be counted as 
delayed. Often, terms like “delay,” “pendency,” “arrears,” and “backlog” are used 
interchangeably. This leads to confusion.   To avoid this confusion and for the 
sake of clarity, these terms may be understood as follows: 
 
a. Pendency: All cases instituted but not disposed of, regardless of when the 
case was instituted. 
b. Delay: A case that has been in the Court/judicial system for longer than 
the normal time that it should take for a case of that type to be disposed 
of.  
c. Arrears: Some delayed cases might be in the system for longer than the 
normal time, for valid reasons. Those cases that show unwarranted delay 
will be referred to as arrears.  
d. Backlog: When the institution of new cases  in any given time period is 
higher than the disposal of cases in that time period, the difference between 
institution and disposal is the backlog. This figure represents the 
accumulation of cases in the system due to the system’s inability to dispose 
of as many cases as are being filed.   
 
Therefore, as is evident, defining terms like delay and arrears require computing 
“normal” case processing time standards. How should the normal time frame be 
determined? It may be noted that since the Supreme Court had directed the Law 
Commission to recommend a “rational and scientific definition of “arrears” and 
delay,” the Commission clarified to the Hon’ble Court  at the outset that there 
exists no single “objective” standard or mathematical formula by reference to 
which “normal” case processing time and hence delay can be defined or 
calculated. However, Commission is of the view that various methods, drawing 
on statistics, social science research techniques and experiential inputs can help 
make “rational” determinati on of “normal” case disposal times, and hence of 
delay. Based on a survey of various jurisdictions and previous reform efforts in 
India it is revealed that two approaches, and combinations thereof, are generally 
used in computing rational timeliness requirements.    
 
The first approach, which can be called the Practice Assessment Approach , 
involves studying the patterns of current filing, disposal, case -length and 
pendency. A comparative analysis of these patterns inter se and between 
jurisdictions, can help policy makers determine whether a particular Court takes 

4 
 
more or less time compared to either a system-wide average, or the median case 
in the system. This analysis does not tell the policy maker whether a particular 
Court or type of case is delayed. However, it does allow for a relative assessment 
of which Courts are taking longer than others, such that they may require 
targeted intervention in terms of greater allocation of resources, etc. 2 When a 
Court is a complete outlier in terms of its case processing time, the policy maker 
(or superior Court) may be able to draw an inference that cases in that Court are 
unacceptably delayed and are , therefore, in arrear. 3  Further, while current 
practice assessments are inadequate for defining delay, they can reveal when and 
where (in which Court and in which types of cases) backlog is being created, so 
that targeted intervention is possible to address the issue. In the absence of other 
measures, this is the approach that the Commission has adopted in examining 
the question of adequate judicial strength for the Subordinate Judiciary. 
 
Another approach, which may be called the Normative Assessment Approach, 
is to fix time standards for the disposal of cases. Cases that are disposed of within 
such time are not delayed; cases beyond such time are delayed; cases which 
exhibit unwarranted delay are in arrears. One of the means by which such 
standard setting can take place in a rigorous and rational manner is to begin by 
studying the current patterns of filing, disposal, pendency, length, etc. Based on 
this study, the policy maker can determine the average or median time taken for 
processing various types of cases. Studies based on interviews with stakeholders, 
examination of the life cycle of sample cases, etc, can then be undertaken to 
understand whether these time frames reflect an optimal standard for timely 
disposal. A committee of experts, drawn from persons with extensive experiential 
knowledge of the system, can then review the current patterns to determine 
optimality, keeping in mind resource constraints, Court cultures, system goals 
and constitutional and statutory requirements. 4  The Normative Approach , 
                                                           
2 See, e.g., JUSTICE M. J. RAO COMMITTEE REPORT, JUDICIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT IN INDIA, vol. 2, p. 46 
(2008) (comparing Delhi and Australian disposal rates). Advocating a comparative approach based on current 
patterns of filing an disposal, the Approach Paper attached as Annexure I to the Committee’s Report 
suggested that, “[b]ased on data for the previous couple  of years there should be a data base of disposal rate 
[per judge] for every case type. It should be monitored that every judge is within a band of 10 % of this 
median value within his/her case type. If found otherwise, the reasons behind less disposal rat e should be 
probed and if the reasons are unsatisfactory, then remedial measures needs to be designed. Moreover, if the 
clearance index for any particular judge falls below 0.90 for three consecutive months or is cumulatively 
below 0.90 compared to the pre vious quarter, then the disposal rate should be checked, and whether it 
conforms to the band of 10% should be verified.” See, id. at p. 52-53. 
3 This relative assessment approach was followed by the Canadian Supreme Court in making a determination 
that an Ontario criminal Court was unacceptably delayed, such that the right to speedy trial of criminal 
defendants was being violated. See R. v. Askov, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1199 (Canada Sup. Ct).  
4 This approach is often followed in other jurisdictions. See, e.g., NATIONAL CENTER FOR STATE COURTS, 
MODEL TIME STANDARDS FOR STATE TRIAL COURTS (USA, 2011); TRIAL WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME: A 

5 
 
therefore, relies on an amalgam of past and current statistics, social science 
research techniques and experiential inputs to make a “rational” determination 
of “normal” case disposal times, and hence of delay.       
One method of defining delay through the Normative Assessment Approach is by 
determining the normal time frame within which cases of a particular type should 
be processed through a Court. If a case takes longer than this time frame, then 
the case is delayed. Time frames can be in the nature of mandatory time limits, 
or they can provide general guidelines that are normally to be followed, but can 
be departed from in exceptional circumstances.  
Countries like the US have limited mandatory time frames, for example under 
the US Speedy Trial Act, 1974. 5 However, India does not have general statutory 
time limits comparable to the US Speedy Trial Act. While the Civil Procedure 
Code, and the Criminal Procedure Code, have time frames for completing certain 
stages of the case, these statutes generally do not prescribe time limits within 
which the overall case should be completed, or each step in the trial should be 
concluded.6  
On the judicial side, setting of mandatory time limits was attempted by the 
Supreme Court in a series of cases.7 However, in 2002 a seven judge bench of the 
Court in P. Ramchandra Rao v. State of Karnataka 8 held that mandatory time 
limits could not be prescribed by the Court.9 Though the Court was not in favour 
                                                           
WORKING PAPER PREPARED FOR THE LAW REFORM COMMISSION OF CANADA,  (Department of Justice, 
Canada, 1994). 
5 The U.S. Speedy Trial Act, 1974 provides for time limits which, subject to certain exceptions ( e.g., 18 
U.S.C. § 3161(h)(7)(A) & (B)) and exclusions ( e.g., 18 U.S.C. § 3161(h)(1) –(8)) have to be followed. Any 
deviation can result in the imposition of prescribed sanctions and consequ ences. See e.g., 18 U.S.C. § 3162. 
For example, indictment (corresponding to framing of charges under the Indian CrPC) must take place within 
30 days (extendable in certain cases to 60 days) of arrest or service of summons. 18 U.S.C. § 3161(b). Trial 
should commence within 70 days after either (a) indictment, or (b) the date of the defendant’s initial 
appearance before the Court, whichever is later. 18 U.S.C. § 3161(c). The trial of a defendant held in pretrial 
detention must also commence within ninety days of arrest. 18 U.S.C. § 3164(b). 
6 Examples of instances where time frames are prescribed include Order VIII, Rule 1, Civil Procedure Code, 
which prescribes a maximum time limit of 90 days from service of summons for filing of written statements. 
Similarly, Section 167 of the CrPC provides that the chargesheet should be filed within 60 or 90 days 
(depending on the type of case) of arrest of the accused. Section 309 Cr.PC. provides a general guidance that 
hearings should be conducted as expeditiously as pos sible and once examination of witnesses has 
commenced, hearings should be conducted on a day to day basis. However, no time frames have been set for 
the overall conduct of the trial, except in cases covered under Sections 376 to 376D, which should, as far as 
possible, be completed within 2 month from the date of commencement of examination of witnesses.   
7 Common Cause v. Union of India (1996) 4 SCC 33; Common Cause (II), (1996) 6 SCC 775; Raj Deo 
Sharma v. State of Bihar, (1998) 7 SCC 507; Raj Deo Sharma (II), (1999) 7 SCC 604. 
8 (2002) 4 SCC 578. 
9 Ibid. As per the Court,  

6 
 
of mandatory time limits, it did not find problematic the use of time frames as 
guidelines for the Court. The prescription of such non -binding, directory 
guidelines has been a common means of defining normal time frames and 
evaluating delay, both in India and abroad.10 In India, previous Law Commissions 
and various  Governmental Committees have suggested various directory time  
frames both as guidelines to Courts for the timely disposal of cases, and as 
standards by which delay in the system can be measured. 11 However, all these 
suggestions are based on ad-hoc prescriptions rather than grounded in empirical 
analysis and observation. And thus the concern raised by the Hon’ble Supreme 
                                                           
It is neither advisable, nor feasible, nor judicially permissible to draw or prescribe an outer 
limit for conclusion of all criminal proceedings. The time -limits or bars of limitation 
prescribed in the several directions made in Common Cause (I), Raj Deo Sharma (I) and 
Raj Deo Sharma (II) could not have been so prescribed or drawn and are not good law. The 
criminal Courts are not obliged to terminate trial or criminal proceedings merely on account 
of lapse of time, as prescribed by the directions made in Common Cause Case (I), Raj Deo 
Sharma case (I) and (II). At the most the periods of time prescribed in those decisions can 
be taken by the Courts seized of the trial or proceedings to act as reminders when they may 
be persuaded to apply their judicial mind to the facts and circumstances of the case before 
them and determine by taking into consideration the several relevant factors as pointed out 
in A.R. Antulay’s case and decide whether th e trial or proceedings have become so 
inordinately delayed as to be called oppressive and unwarranted. Such time -limits cannot 
and will not by themselves be treated by any Court as a bar to further continuance of the 
trial or proceedings and as mandatorily obliging the Court to terminate the same and acquit 
or discharge the accused. 
10 See e.g., NATIONAL CENTRE FOR STATE COURTS, MODEL TIME STANDARDS FOR STATE TRIAL COURT 3 
(2011). These Model Standards for US State Trial Courts were approved in August 2011 by the (US) 
Conference of State Court Administrators (COSCA); (US) Conference of Chief Justices; American Bar 
Association House of Delegates (ABA); and, The (US) National Association for Court Management. 
11 As far back as 1958, the 14 th Report of Law Commission of India recognized that time lags between 
institution and disposal are necessary to complete the various stages of a Court based dispute resolution 
process, and that “[t]he time so taken will depend on several factors, such as, the nature of the suit, the number 
of parties and witnesses, the competence of the pressing officers and so forth.  We must not forget that 
however similar the facts of two cases may be, every case is entitled to individual attention for its satisfactory 
disposal and any “mass production methods” or “assembly line techniques” in the disposal of cases would 
be utterly incompatible with a sound administration of justice.” However, the Commission also rec ognized 
that even with these caveats it would still be possible to determine “limits of time within which judicial 
proceedings of various classes should…be normally brought to a conclusion in the Courts in which they are 
instituted.” Based on this reasoning, the Commission provided a listing of time frames for different types of 
cases. LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA, 14TH REPORT: REFORM OF JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION, vol. 1, p. 130 
(1958). 
This method was reiterated by the Law Commission in its 77 th, 79th, and 230 th Reports in 1979, 1979 and 
2009, respectively. See LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA, 77TH REPORT ON DELAY AND ARREARS IN TRIAL 
COURTS  (1979); LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA, 79TH REPORT ON DELAY AND ARREARS IN HIGH COURTS AND 
OTHER APPELLATE COURTS 9-10 (1979); LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA, 230TH REPORT ON REFORMS IN 
JUDICIARY SOME SUGGESTIONS  1.61 (2009).  
More recently, the Malimath Committee recommended the use of a 2 year time frame as the norm by which 
delay and arrears in the system should be measured. MINISTRY OF LAW, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, COMMITTEE 
ON REFORMS OF THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM (MALIMATH COMMITTEE p. 164 ¶ 13.3 (2003). 

7 
 
Court in Imtiyaz Ahmad, viz., of providing “a rationale and scientific definition of 
‘arrears’ and ‘delay’ demands deeper study and rigorosity in terms of data. 
 
Time frames serve as performance benchmarks and provide guidance to Courts 
as well as other stakeholders on what constitutes the timely disposal of a case, 
and enable them to determine both whether an individual case is being processed 
in a timely manner; and whether a Court or system as a whole is providing timely 
justice. Where time frames are not mandatory, they can be departed from, but 
only in limited circumstances, and often with the requirement of justification for 
why such departure from the time frame is necessary. This provides the flexibility 
needed to individualize case processing, while at the same time, taking care of 
the systemic concerns over timeliness. 
 
Though general time frames of this type serve a useful benchmarking purpose, 
and are well suited as a time template for the run of the mill or average case, they 
require further fine tuning for cases which require less or more time. A 
standardized time frame is likely to be both over and under inclusive in 
determining the requirements of timely justice. The intention behind 
benchmarking performance is not to have all cases processed at the same time. 
Each case is different and might have different requirements. Therefore, apart 
from general guidance there is a requirement f or case-specific determination of 
what would amount to a timely disposal of the case. Case-specific time tables 
are generally adopted to meet this object of individualized timely justice. Such 
time tables are fixed by the judge hearing a particular dispute , generally at a 
scheduling hearing held towards the start of proceedings, so that all parties know 
who has to perform what activity, and by when. Setting individualized time-tables 
allows the judge to mould the general time frame to suit the requirements of the 
individual case, while at the same time keeping in mind the needs of the overall 
case-load before the judge. The time table set at the beginning of the case 
proceedings then becomes the benchmark by which the timeliness of the 
proceedings is measured. Unforeseen events may de-rail the time-table, but the 
case, though delayed, would not be counted as an arrear, if the delay was 
warranted.  
   
Case specific time -tables are used as timeliness standards, delay reduction 
methods, and yardsticks for measuring delays in the system in various 

8 
 
jurisdictions around the world, including  U.S.,12 U.K.,13 and Canada.14 In India 
the Supreme Court has also r ecently advocated the use of case -specific time 
tables for the timely disposal of cases, in the case of  Ramrameshwari Devi v. 
Nirmala Devi.15  
 
As a staple part of systematic case management strategies, such timetables 
provide clear time  frames for dispute resolution, define litigant expectations of 
timeliness, and thus impact the litigant experience of delay. They allow the judge 
flexibility to take into account the specific aspects of an individual case in framing 
a time schedule for that case. When accomp anied by general time  frame 
guidelines, the possibility of abuse of the power by setting long time  frames can 
be avoided.  
 
When case-specific targets cannot be met because of systemic delays the system 
needs to take responsibility for allocating proper re sources. Where the delay is 
because of the conduct of parties, the judge can provide sanctions for such 
behavior, including, dismissing the application, imposing costs, etc. 
 
The Normative Assessment Approach requires state level studies to determine 
optimal time frames. High Courts are best placed to take into account state level 
concerns and circumstances in determining adequate time standards. Within the 
frame work of these time standards, individual Subordinate Court Judges can 
set time frames for individual cases. For this system to work, a strong monitoring 
frame work would be required, whereby the timeliness of the caseload of 
individual judges can be supervised by High Courts. Annual reporting of disposal 
                                                           
12 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 16; AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION, STANDARDS RELATING TO TRIAL 
COURTS (1992), ¶ 2.51 (“Case Management”),  
13 Part 3 of the UK Criminal Procedure Rules, 2012 requires case specific management and scheduling by 
the judge in non -binding consultation with the parties. See also WOOLF COMMITTEE REPORT ON CIVIL 
JUSTICE REFORM (on requiring judges to establish and adhere to case specific timetables at the beginning of 
case proceedings).   
14 See, e.g., Rule 77, Rules of Civil Procedure (Ontario). See generally LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA, 
CONSULTATION PAPER ON CASE MANAGEMENT, http: //lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/adr_conf/ 
casemgmt%20draft% 20rules.pdf  
15 (2011) 8 SCC 249. As per the Court,  
At the time of filing of the plaint, the trial Court should prepare complete schedule and fix 
dates for all the stages of the suit, right from fil ing of the written statement till 
pronouncement of judgment and the Courts should strictly adhere to the said dates and the 
said time table as far as possible. If any interlocutory application is filed then the same 
[can] be disposed of in between the said dates of hearings fixed in the said suit itself so that 
the date fixed for the main suit may not be disturbed. 
 

9 
 
and timeliness data will also ensure pub lic scrutiny and add another layer of 
accountability towards timeliness goals and standards.    
As a beginning however, the Normative Assessment Approach requires extensive 
and sustained study over a period of time in order to provide a rational and 
scientific definition of delays and arrears. In the meantime, in the absence of such 
time frames, and for the purposes of the study of adequat e judicial strength in 
India’s S ubordinate J udiciary, the Commission has  examined the current 
patterns of institution, d isposal and pendency, to address the question of 
whether more judicial resources are required (and where they should be targeted) 
in order to clear the current pendency and prevent the accumulation of backlog 
in the future. 
  

10 
 
Chapter III 
COMPUTING JUDGE STRENGTH 
A. Overview of Data and its Limitations  
Lack of complete data was a great handicap in making critical analysis and more 
meaningful suggestions as responses to questionnaires received from many High 
Courts16 were incomplete. However, data supplied by High Courts of Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab & Haryana, Sikkim, and Uttarakhand  
proved very useful in furnishing the basis for the present work . The analysis in 
this report is based on the data received from these High Courts.      
High Courts have provided data for the period 2002 to 2012. All the data received 
has been computed on an annual basis. Therefore, for example, each High Court 
has provided data as on 31 st December of each year, under the categories of 
institution, disposal, pendency, etc.  
Some High Courts provided data that was disaggregated into two categories: 
Higher Judicial Service and Subordinate Judicial Service. Other High Courts 
provided data disaggregated by cadre, i.e., Higher Judicial Service, Civil Judge 
(Senior) Division, and Civil Judge (Junior) Division. For uniformity of analysis, all 
the data has been analysed in the two broad categories of Higher Judicial Service 
and Subordinate Judicial Service.  
It is important to note that the data on institution, disposal and pendency does 
not indicate the actual number of cases in the system. High Courts count data in 
various ways. Some High Courts such as those of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Orissa and Sikkim count interlocutory applications before Subordinate 
Courts as separate institutions, disposals and pendencies. Kerala even counts 
committal proceedings as separate for purposes of institution, disposal and 
pendency. Therefore, a single case may be counted multiple times in some High 
Courts. Thus, the number of cases pending, instituted or disposed of by the 
Courts is significantly smaller than the overall pendency, institution or disposal 
figures would suggest.   
Further, the multiplicity of approaches in tabulating data make a cross -
comparison between different High Courts problematic. For example, in the High 
Courts of Delhi, Andhra Pradesh, Bombay, Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh, 
                                                           
16 See Annexure I and II. 

11 
 
interlocutory applications are not  counted separately. In Punjab and Haryana, 
Jharkhand and West Bengal, the practice of counting or not counting differs from 
district to district. Similarly, while Karnataka does not count traffic and police 
challans as part of the institution, disposal an d pendency figures, most other 
High Courts do. Given this variance, in the Commission ’s view a cross -
comparison of States for making pan-India recommendations especially in view 
of the data currently available may not be very appropriate .  
Besides gaining access to appropriate data from all High Courts, a major 
challenge was  determining its accuracy. Potential errors could be seen upon 
close scrutiny of the data. For example, data received from the Delhi High Court 
indicates that in 2010, -40054 Negotiable Instrument A ct, matters were 
instituted in the Delhi Subordinate Courts and 111517 were disposed of. Since a 
negative number of institutions is patently impossible, this number appears to 
have been inserted to balance the backlog tally and  make up for a previous 
mistake in the number of pending negotiable instrument act matters. 17 It is not 
known how many other errors like this have not occurred. Also, such adjusting 
of the statistics to get a correct backlog tally then misrepresents the num ber of 
institutions in a given year, distorting the overall institution rate.  
Similarly, the data on institution, disposal and pendency for many High Courts 
did not tally from year to year. 18 There were also inconsistencies between data 
sources. In some cases, the data received in response to the first Questionnaire 
(Annexure I) and the second Questionnaire (Annexure II) did not match. However, 
given these errors and unexplained inconsistencies, the Commission approached 
these data with caution used only fo r a broad trends analysis, in order to 
understand general and approximate patterns.  
However, in the absence of any uniformity in data collection presently and certain 
lack of quality of data of various High Courts, the Commission strongly 
recommends that urgent steps be taken to evolve uniform data collection and 
data management methods .  Such steps, if taken in earnest, would ensure 
transparency and more importantly facilitate policy prescriptions for the judicial 
system.  At this stage, a caveat may be added, that so far as the present work is 
concerned, it relies largely on the latest information supplied by the High Courts.  
 
                                                           
17 At the end of 2009 there were 416700 pending, while at the end of 2010 there were 265129.  
18 For example, the Pendency (P N) in any given year (N) should be equal to Pendency in the Previous Year 
(PN-1) + Institution in N (I N) – Disposal in N (D N). This formula can be represented as: (P N) = (P N-1) + I N - 
DN.  

12 
 
B. Analysis of Data 
Annexure III provides the data on institution, disposal, pendency and judge 
strength for the period 2002 -2012 for the higher judicial service category. The 
data shows that overall, institution, disposal and pendency have all been on the 
rise in this category in the last decade. The following chart illustrates this trend: 
  
Figure 1: Institution, Disposal, Pendency in the Higher Judicial Service, 
2002-2012. 
Annexure IV provides data on institution, disposal, pendency and judge strength 
for the period 2002-2012 for the Subordinate Judicial Service category. The data 
shows that while the annual rate of institution, disposal and pendency has 
increased overall in the 2002 -2012 period, in the last few years, pendency has 
been on a decline whereas institution and disposal are largely constant. The 
following chart maps this data: 
500000
700000
900000
1100000
1300000
1500000
1700000
1900000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Institution
Disposal
Pendency

13 
 
 
Figure 2: Institution, Disposal, Pendency in the Subordinate Judicial 
Service, 2002-2012. 
The data for the Higher Judicial Service also indicates that in the 2002 -2012 
period, by and large, more cases have been instituted than have been disposed 
of in any given year. As a result, a backlog is being created in the system.  
 
The following figures 3 and 4 show the Backlog Creation Rate for the period 2002-
12. Backlog Creation Rate is the ratio of institution to disposal in any given year. 
If the ratio is greater than 1, this implies that more cases are being instituted 
than are being disposed of. If the ratio is less than one, then more cases are being 
disposed of, than are being instituted. A number less than 1, therefore, indicates 
that the judicial system is being able to handle new institutions. 
4000000
6000000
8000000
10000000
12000000
14000000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Institution
Disposal
Pendency

14 
 
 
Figure 3: Backlog Creation Rate (Institution/Disposal) for the Higher 
Judicial Service, 2002-2012. 
 
Figure 4: Backlog Creation Rate (Institution/Disposal) for the Subordinate 
Judicial Service, 2002-2012. 
0.9
1
1.1
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Backlog Creation Rate
Backlog Creation Rate
0.8
1
1.2
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Backlog Creation Rate
Backlog Creation Rate

15 
 
As the figures above indicate, the Higher Judicia l Service is disposing of fewer 
cases than are being instituted. As such, it is adding to the backlog of cases in 
the system. On the other hand, in the Subordinate Judicial Service, the disposal 
rate is higher than the institution, implying that the backlog is being reduced. It 
should be pointed out here that the backlog creation analysis does not indicate 
whether the same cases that were filed in a given year were disposed of in that 
year. Rather, it takes a systemic perspective and looks at how many new c ases 
are coming in, in relation to how many cases are going out. A low backlog creation 
rate, therefore, indicates that the system as a whole is incapable of dealing with 
the recurring annual demand for Judicial S ervices, and is, therefore, in need of 
additional resources.  
As mentioned realier, the Backlog Creation Rate focuses on the number of cases 
going in and out of the system in a given year and does not take into account the 
already backlogged cases that carry forward from year to year.  
To understand how well Courts are handling the already backlogged cases, the 
Pendency Clearance Time is useful. This figure is arrived at by dividing the 
pendency at the end of the year by the disposal that year, and indicates the 
amount of time it would take to dispose of all pending cases if no new cases were 
filed. The following figures indicate the annual pendency clearance time i n the 
2002-2012 period for the Higher Judicial Service and the Subordinate Judiciary, 
respectively. 
    
Figure 5: Pendency Clearance Time for the Higher Judicial Service, 2002-
2012. 
1
1.5
2
2.5
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Pendency Clearance Time (In Years)
Pendency Clearance
Time (In Years)

16 
 
 
Figure 6: Pendency Clearance Time for the Subordinate Judicial Service, 
2002-2012. 
Figures 5 and 6 indicate that overall, for both the Higher Judicial Service and the 
Subordinate Judicial S ervice, the time it would take to clear pendency has 
declined in the 2002 -2012 period. This implies that overall, the system is 
processing cases faster at the end of 2012 than it was in 2002. While these figures 
do not indicate the types of cases that are being processed through the system, 
the figures do provide an overall picture of the system and indicate the broad 
trajectory of the system in the past decade.  
The data also indicates that in the High Courts under consideration, in the last 
three years 38 .7% of institutions and 37.4% o f all pending cases before the 
Subordinate Judicial S ervices were traffic and police challans. 19 An additional 
6.5% and 7.8% cases account for institution and pendency respectively of Section 
138 Negotiable Instruments Act , matters.20 Annexure V provides the numerical 
data and the following figures provide State-wise breakup of institution and 
                                                           
19 See Annexure 5. It is to be noted that Karnataka does not include traffic and police challan figures in their 
overall data on institution, disposal and pendency.  
20 Id. Bombay High Court did not provide information on the number of Negotiable Instruments Act matters 
pending before the subord inate Courts of that High Court. In addition, Kerala High Court provided 
Negotiable Instrument Act figures only for the cadre of Civil Judge Junior Division. Therefore, the percentage 
institution and pendency of Negotiable Instrument Act matters has been c alculated on the overall institution 
and pendency figures for the civil judge junior division cadre.  
1
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Pendency Clearance Time (in Years)
Pendency Clearance Time
(in Years)

17 
 
pendency including data on traffic/police challans and Negotiable Instrument Act 
matters. 
 
Figure 7: Percentage of traffic/police challans and Negotiable Instrument 
Act matters in State-wise institution figures for the Subordinate Judicial 
Service, 2010-2012. 
0.0
25.0
50.0
75.0
100.0
Bombay
Gujarat
Karnataka
Chandigarh
Haryana
Punjab
Jharkhand
Himachal Pradesh
J&K
Sikkim
Bihar
Andhra Pradesh
Uttarakhand
Kerala*
Overall
Others
NI Act
TC/PC

18 
 
 
Figure 8: Percentage of traffic/police challans and Negotiable Instrument 
Act matters in State-wise pendency figures for the Subordinate Judicial 
Service, end-2012. 
Cases of traffic and police challans generally do not require much judicial 
involvement. However, given the high volume of such cases, they cumulatively 
take up a significant amount of judicial time. The bulk of the se cases deal with 
the payment of fines and are usually uncontested by parties. For such cases, 
automation of the system through the ability to pay fines online or at a designated 
counter in the Court complex, can significantly free up valuable Court time. For 
the remainder, the Commission considers that the creation of separate Special 
Traffic Courts, over and above the regular Courts, may significantly reduce the 
burden on regular Courts. These Special Courts can sit in two shifts (morning 
and evening). Since most such cases are not contested and do not involve lawyers, 
the shift system is not likely to inconvenience other stakeholders. In fact, the 
evening Court shift is likely to assist parties to come to Court after work hours 
and pay their fines. Recent law graduates can be recruited on a temporary basis 
0.0
25.0
50.0
75.0
100.0
Bombay
Gujarat
Karnataka
Chandigarh
Haryana
Punjab
Jharkhand
Himachal Pradesh
J&K
Sikkim
Bihar
Andhra Pradesh
Uttarakhand
Kerala*
Overall
Others
NI Act
TC/PC

19 
 
(e.g., for 3 year periods) to preside over these Courts.21 However, cases in which 
there is a possibility of imprisonment, should be tried by regular Courts.      
Thus, a simple analysis of data supplied shows that there is a large amount of 
double counting of institution, disposal and pendency figures in the Subordinate 
Judiciary, such that the total volume of cases being processed through the 
system is significantly less than the figures supplied by the High Courts. Tit is 
also evident from the data that a high proportion of cases before the Subordinate 
Judicial Service comprises of petty matters like traffic and police challans. As 
already suggested, it is reitera ted that these petty matters can better be dealt 
with by special morning and evening Courts over and above the regular Courts. 
The burden on the regular Courts will be significantly reduced as a result.  
C. Methodologies for Computing Adequate Judge Strength 
Most oftenly referred methods in most discussions for computing adequate judge 
strength are: the judge-population ratio, the judge-filing ratio, the ideal case load 
method, time based methods, and the rate of Disposal Method. Briefly analyzing 
these methods and looking into their pros and cons the report finds greater favour 
with the rate of Disposal Method. 
1. Judge to Population Ratio & Judge to Filing Ratio 
One method commonly advocated for determining how many judges are required 
in the judicial system is the judge to population ratio, i.e., the number of judges 
per million persons in the population.22 The Commission finds this method very 
wanting because there is no objective number by reference to which we can 
determine whether the judge to popul ation ratio of any State is adequate. It is 
known that filings per capita vary substantially across geographic units. Filings 
                                                           
21 An additional benefit of hiring recent law graduates for these posts is that presiding over the traffic Court 
will give these law graduates experience and insight into the working of the judicial system are is likely to 
be a valuable stepping stone for careers in litigation or the judicial services.  
22 All India Judges’ Association v. Union of India, (2002) 4 SCC 247 (“Apart from the steps which may be 
necessary for increasing the efficiency of the judicial officers, we are of the opinion that time has now come 
for protecting one of the pillars of the Constitution, namely, the judicial system, by directing increase, in the 
first instance, in the Judge strength from the existing ratio of 10.5 or 13 per 10 lakh people to 50 Judges per 
10 lakh people); P. Ramc handra Rao v. State of Karnataka, (2002) 4 SCC 578(“The root cause for delay in 
dispensation of justice in our country is poor judge population ratio”); More Judges Needed, states should 
take initiative, Manmohan Singh says , TIMES OF INDIA, April 7, 2013 
http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2013-04-07/india/38345513_1_three-crore-cases-india-altamas-
kabir-judicial-reforms (Prime Minister Manmohan Singh terming the current judge -to-population rate 
“grossly inadequate”); Law Commission of India, One Hundred Twentieth Report on Manpower Planning in 
Judiciary: A Blueprint (1987) (recommending a five -fold increase in the population -to-judge ratio and that 
India should have the same judge-to-population ratio by 2000 as the United States had in 1981).  

20 
 
per capita are associated with economic and social conditio ns and can vary 
across India’s States by as much as a factor of 50.23 The justice needs of different 
societies thus vary, and no universal standard can be prescribed in this regard. 
Therefore, while population might be the appropriate metric to measure the 
availability of other essential services like health care and nutrition , it is not an 
appropriate standard for measuring the requirement for Judicial Services.  
Another similar method oftenly referred to on various discussions is to look at 
the Judge to Institution R atio.24 This would tell how many judges a S tate has 
relative to the existing pattern of demand for judicial services within that state. 
Here, again, however, there is no ideal number of judges per 1000 instituted 
cases, by reference to which one can determine whether or not a State needs 
more judges and by how much. Further, institution figures often vary depending 
upon the issue area and the social identity of those instituting cases. Socially 
marginalized groups are likely to have lower institution rates for reasons of lack 
of access to Courts.25 Institution figures  may also vary depending upon the 
geography. Far-flung areas, where physical access to Courts is a problem, may 
have low institution figures compared to the population. No doubt, while these 
are not by themselves reasons to discard the judge to institution  ratio method 
but they do caution that merely meeting some ideal ratio will not necessarily fulfill 
the justice needs of a society.  
2. The Ideal Case Load Method  
Another method sometimes advocated for fixing the appropriate judge strength is 
the ideal ca se load method. This method requires a determination of the ideal 
number of cases that a judge should have on his/her docket. The total caseload 
(existing pendency plus new institutions) can then be divided by the ideal case 
load to estimate the number of judges required by the system. Where the number 
                                                           
23 See Theodore Eisenberg, Sital Kalantry, and Nick Robinson, Litigation as a Measure of Well-Being, 62(2) 
DEPAUL LAW REVIEW 247 (2013) (describing the relative civil filing rate for different Indian states and 
showing that the civil filing rate was higher in st ates with higher GDP per capita and a higher score on the 
Human Development Index). 
24 See, e.g., Flango, Ostram & Flango, How Do States Determine the Need for Judges? , 17 STATE COURT 
JOURNAL 3 (1993) (explaining various methods, including the judge to inst itution/filing ratio as a method 
that is used in some states in the United States for calculating how many judges need to be appointed in a 
particular Court).    
25 Id. 

21 
 
of cases per judge is disproportionately higher than the ideal case load, additional 
judges are required to be recruited.26  
The ideal case load method  seems difficult to implement in practice. One is 
absence of any exhaustive study, one does not find any fixed criteria for 
determining what the ideal case load should be. Generally, ideal case loads are 
fixed on an ad hoc basis. To give one illustration, the Law Commission vide letter 
no. 6(3)/224/2012-LC(LS) dated 28.05.2012 had asked High Courts to provide 
“reasonable workloads that each category of Courts (DJ, Sr. Civil Judge, Jr. Civil 
Judge/Magistrate) can bear in order to establish better and speedy access to 
justice.” However, the information received from  various High Courts revealed 
that measurements of ideal case load for each cadre of judge varies widely across 
states. Thus for instance, the reasonable workload for the Higher Judicial Service 
was suggested to be 120 in Madhya Pradesh, 500 in Andhra Prad esh, 750 in 
Jammu and Kashmir and 1000 in Orissa. This wide variation across states is a 
result, in part, of the lack of a rational basis for determining the ideal case load.27  
Second, different types of cases require different amounts of judicial time. A 
murder trial is generally likely to consume much more time, for example, than a 
summary trial in a petty offence. An ideal case load approach that looks only at 
the number of files before the judge, will treat both cases as equal even though a 
judge with 5 00 murder cases is likely to be over -stretched and one with 500 
summary trials, under-utilized. To be fruitful, the ideal case load method requires 
some analysis of the types of cases likely to come up before a judge. Also, there 
is need to analyze as to the amount of time each type of case normally takes. 
Such analysis may probably give an idea of what should constitute ‘ideal case 
load’ before a judge.  However, there is need to be cautious because the existing 
case mix can change fairly quickly, for instance, through the emergence of new 
laws and increased rights awareness. For example, The present section 138 of 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, was a result of an amendment in 2002 vide the 
Negotiable Instruments  (Amendment and Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 2002 (55 of 2002). This provision has been wide used and has 
drastically changed the number and type of ca ses in the c ase mix before the 
Subordinate Judiciary.  
                                                           
26 See, e.g., National Court Management Systems: Policy and Action Plan 34(September 2012 ), at ¶ 5.3; 
Resolutions of the Chief Justices’ Conference, 2004 (proposing a norm of 500 cases per year for senior judges 
and 600 cases for junior civil judges and Metropolitan Magistrates).  
27 In another example, the Chief Justices’ Conference 2004proposed a  norm of 500 cases per year for senior 
judges and 600 cases for junior civil judges and Metropolitan Magistrates. These figures have been critiqued 
for not being based on any detailed analytical and empirical assessment. See India Development Foundation, 
Judicial Impact Assessment: An Approach Paper  72 (2008) available at 
<http://lawmin.nic.in/doj/justice/judicialimpactassessmentreportvol2.pdf >. 

22 
 
Finally, if we were to do the study into the case mix and case times required to 
operationalize the ideal case load method, this information can be directly used 
to determine the appropriate number of judges required by the system. The via 
media of ideal case load would not be required. The method to determine the 
appropriate number of judges  by using case mix and case times is discussed 
below.  
3. The Time Based Method 
Another model often used, as for example in the US, for determining the number 
of judges required by the judicial system is the Time Based Method. 28 Broadly 
speaking, this method determines the time required to clear the existing judicial 
caseload. It then determines the time available per judge for judicial work. 
Dividing the first number by the second provides the number of judges required 
to deal with the existing caseload.  
In more detail, the time based method involves determining the ideal or actual 
time taken by judges in deciding a particular type of case on average. Then it 
requires determining the average number of cases of that type being instituted 
and pending in the Courts. Multiplying the number of cases with the time 
required per case, gives the number of judicial hours required to deal with cases 
of that type. Dividing this by the number of judicial hours available per year gives 
the number of judges required to dea l with cases of that type. Adding this 
information for all types of cases that a particular category of judges deals with 
gives the number of judges required for disposing of the caseload.  
In the United States where this approach is followed, the National Centre for State 
Courts (“NCSC”) conducts studies to determine the number of minutes it takes 
judges to resolve certain cases. Judges are interviewed and are often required to 
keep time sheets in order to determine the time value of each type of case.29 
The Time -Based Method, as followed by the NCSC computes the number of 
judges using four pieces of data: 
1) The number of cases instituted by Court, district, and type of case 
                                                           
28 A good overview of this approach as undertaken in the U.S. federal Courts can be found in FEDERAL 
JUDICIAL CENTER, 2003-2004 DISTRICT COURT CASE-WEIGHTING: FINAL REPORT TO THE SUBCOMMITTEE 
ON JUDICIAL STATISTICS OF THE COMMITTEE ON JUDICIAL RESOURCES OF THE JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE 
UNITED STATES (2005) 
29 See National Center for State Courts, “The California Judicial Workload Assessment,” 2007; National 
Center for State Courts, “Minnesota Judicial Workload Assessment,” 2002; and National Center for State 
Courts, “North Carolina Superior Court Judicial Workload Assessment,” 2001.  

23 
 
2) The average bench and non -bench time a judge requires to resolve each 
type of case within the Court 
3) The amount of time a judge has available to complete case -related work 
per year 
4) The number of active judges by Court and district 
 
All the information required to run this model for Indian Courts is not available.  
In India, the system  does not have any information about the time required by 
judges to resolve each type of case. This lack of information points to a larger 
systemic problem. Any effort at delay reduction has to first determine how many 
cases in the system are delayed. This requires determining what the normal time 
frame for a particular type of case should be, such that anything beyond this time 
frame is considered delayed. The judicial system has no such benchmark and , 
therefore, has no data on how many cases are delayed (as opposed to pending). 
One proxy for time could be units. Since judges are required to complete a certain 
number of units per month, and one know s the time available per judge for 
judicial work per month, and can calculate the time value of each unit. One can 
then determine the time value of each type of case by looking at the number of 
units allotted to that type of case. This would give the data required in point 2 
above. However, two problems arise: 
1. Units are not a good proxy for time. Units serve as perform ance 
benchmarks for judges. As such they are used for different purposes. Often 
units are used to incentivize the quick disposal of certain types of cases, 
for example, cases pending for a certain number of years. Second, they are 
used to incentivize great er productivity. Therefore, for the same type of 
case, more units per case is sometimes awarded if a judge completes a 
certain number of such cases. Therefore, the allocation of units is not 
based solely on time.  
2. The data about institution, disposal and p endency that High Courts 
record, often do not map well against the information available on units. 
For example, while it is known that the number of Section 302, IPC cases 
instituted and pending before the Sessions Courts of Delhi, it is not clear 
how many witnesses are required to be deposed in each case. Units though 
are awarded, inter alia , on the basis of the number of witnesses in a 
particular case. Hence, even if one knew the time value of each unit, one 
would not know the unit value of each murder case instituted or pending 
before the Court. 
 
For these reasons, the Commission feels that any approach that uses “unit as a 
proxy for time” may not be a sound approach. There is no other proxies for time 

24 
 
and further no scientific data in this regard is available.  The time Based Method 
as practiced elsewhere may not be applicable or feasible in Indian context. 
4. The Rate of Disposal Method 
In the present scenario, especially in the absence of complete and scientific 
approach to data collection that the commission finds the use of the Rate of 
Disposal Method to calculate the number of additional judges required to clear 
the backlog of cases as well as to ensure that new backlog is not created as more 
pragmatic and useful. This method generally speaking addresses two important 
concerns: (a) a large existing backlog of cases and (b) new being instituted daily 
which are adding to the backlog.  
To address both these concerns, the Rate of Disposal Method can be applied to 
provide for two sets of judges: (a)  Number. of judges required to dispose of t he 
existing backlog and (b) Number of judges required for ensuring that new filings 
are disposed of in a manner such that further backlog is not created.  
It may not be out of context to briefly explain what constitutes “Rate of Disposal 
Method”.  Under the Rate of Disposal Method, one first looks at the current rate 
at which judges dispose of cases. Next one determines how many additional 
judges working at a similar level of efficiency would be required so that th e 
number of disposals equals the number of institutions in any one year time 
frame. As long as the institution and disposal levels remain as they currently are, 
the Courts would need these many additional judges to keep pace with new filings 
in order to ensure that newly instituted cases do not add to the backlog.  
Second, working with the current rate of disposal of cases per judge  one is also 
required to look at how many judges would be required to dispose of the current 
backlog. Backlog, for the present, has been defined as those cases which have 
been pending in the system for more than a year.30  
It has to be noted that in the past the Law Commission and other Committees 
have suggested that since the judges required to dispose of the backlog are 
needed only till the backlog is cleared, therefore, short-term ad hoc appointments 
be made from amongst retired judges, for the purpose of clearing backlog.31 Most 
                                                           
30 Though the analysis in this r eport uses 1 year as the time frame for determining whether a case is 
backlogged or not, this time period can be modified to suit the needs of different High Courts. The formula 
for analysis would remain the same.    
31 See e.g., LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA, 77TH REPORT ON DELAY AND ARREARS IN TRIAL COURTS 35 (1978), 
at ¶9.13. A similar method has been recommended by in Annexure I of the Justice M J Rao Committee on 
Judicial Impact Assessment, for calculating the adequate Judge strength. Justice  M.J. Rao Report,  vol.2, 
(http://doj.gov.in/?q=node/121) Report of the Task Force on Judicial Impact Assessment, p. 49 -52. The 

25 
 
recently, the National Vision Statement and Action Plan presented by the Law 
Minister in October 2009,  also recommended that retired judges and eminent 
lawyers may be appointed as ad hoc judges for a period of one year for dealing 
with arrears.32 However, as previous experiences with appointing ad hoc judges 
has shown, there are serious concerns about such appointments, especially the 
lack of accountability in the functioning and performance of ad-hoc judges, since 
these are short term appointments.  
Further, even if ad hoc judges were to be appointed, additional infrastructure for 
these Courts would have to  be created. Though the National Vision Statement 
recommended adopting a shift system to overcome the infrastructure problem,33 
this proposal has been resisted by members of the Bar since it significantly 
increases their working hours.34  
Significantly, the Central Government, the Conference of Chief Justices and Chief 
Ministers, and the Advisory Council of the National Mission for Justice Delivery 
and Legal Reforms, have all proposed the doubling of the current judge 
strength.35 As per the information supplied by the Department of Justice to the 
                                                           
Justice Malimath Committee recommended the bifurcation of additional judicial strength into permanent 
judges required to dispose of current filing s, and additional ad -hoc judges to deal with arrears. Malimath 
Committee Report, p. 164. See also Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affair, 85th Report on 
Law’s Delays: Arrears in Courts ¶ 45 (2001) (advocating appointing ad hoc Judges to clear pendency within 
a three year time frame). See further 14th Law Commission Report, p. 148 (engaging in a similar analysis, 
the Law Commission recommended the creation of temporary additional Courts for dealing with cases over 
a year old, and augmenting the stre ngth of the permanent judiciary so that disposals and  institutions break 
even, and there is no new creation of arrears). 
32 ¶ 3.2 and ¶ 6.1 (i) Vision Statement  presented by the Law Minister to the Chief Justice of India at the 
National Consultation for St rengthening the Judiciary towards Reducing Pendency and Delays, October 
2009.  
33 ¶ 6.1, id. 
34 See Minutes of the Meeting of the Law/Home Secretaries and Finance Secretaries of States and Registrar 
Generals of High Courts on May 31, 2013 
35 A resolution on doubling the judge strength was passed at the Second Meeting of the Advisory Council of 
the National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms, chaired by the Union Law Minister, on May 
15, 2012. The resolution stated that, “The numbe r of Judges/Courts may be increased to double the present 
number. But this may be done gradually in a period of 5 years.”  
At the Chief Justices’ and Chief Ministers’ Conference, held on Aril 5 -6, 2013, it was resolved that, “[i]n 
order to narrow down judge-population ratio, the Chief Justices will take requisite steps for creation of new 
posts of Judicial Officers at all levels with support staff and requisite infrastructure in terms of the judgments 
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of All India J udges' Associations case (2002) 4 S.C.C. 247], Brij 
Mohan Lai vs. Union of India(2012) 6 S.C.C. 502 and letter dated 21st February, 2013, written by Hon'ble 
the Chief Justice of India to Hon'ble the Prime Minister of India, in order to provide effective, e fficient and 
efficacious dispensation of justice.” The decision to double the judge -population ratio was supported by the 
Prime Minister and the Law Minister in their speeches at the conference. Both assured that the Central 
Government would assist in securing additional funding for this purpose. See Speech by Prime Minister Dr. 
Manmohan Singh, at the Conference of Chief Justices and Chief Ministers, at 

26 
 
Law Commission indicate that consultations are currently underway between the 
Central Government, the State Governments, and the High Courts, on 
formulating memoranda to be presented to the 14th Finance Commissi on 
regarding funds required for doubling the judge strength. The Commission 
recommends that since this decision to double judge strength has already been 
taken, the judges required for disposing of the backlog can be drawn from the 
new recruitment itself. Once backlog is cleared, these judges can be deployed for 
disposing of freshly instituted cases, which will also increase over time.  
Given the vast resources required to double the existing judge strength, the time 
that it will take to complete selection and training processes, and the funds and 
time required to create adequate infrastructure, the Commission is of the opinion 
that the Rate of Disposal Method should be used to indicate how many judges 
should be appointed on a priority basis for the interim period. Tables I- XII below, 
provide data for how many judges need to be hired to dispose of the backlog in 
one, two, or three years.36 
The Rate of Disposal Method  provides an approximation - a rough and ready 
calculation- based on current efficiency levels of the Subordinate Judiciary, of the 
adequate judge strength required to address the problem of backlog in the judicial 
system. The formula as proposed below has been evolved largely based on the 
data that the Commission could gather . With more precise dat a, the formula 
indicated below can be fine -tuned to provide a more exact estimation of the 
additional judges required. Keeping in view concerns expressed about other 
methods and other analysis as carried out here, the Commission is of the view that 
the method proposed here could provide a reasoned basis (as opposed to ad -hoc) 
for determining adequate judge strength.    
The method is as below: 
                                                           
http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=94523; Speech by Law Minister Dr. Ashwini Kumar, at the 
Conference of Chief Justices and Chief Ministers, April 7, 2013, at 
http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=51882  
At a meeting of the Law/Home Secretaries and Finance Secretaries of States and Registrar Generals of High 
Courts on May 31, 2013 Shri Anil Gulati, Joint Secretary and Mission Director, Department of Justice, stated 
that the resolution of the Advisory Council of the National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms, 
had been endorsed by the Advisory Committee of the National Court Management Systems, and by the Chief 
Justice of India in his letter addressed to the Chief Justices of High Courts in February, 2013. The 
representatives of the State Governments and High Courts were asked to draw up proposals regarding the 
financial implications of the resolution so that the same could be presented to the 14 th Finance Commission 
for provision of adequate funds.  
36 It is pertinent to note that in R. L. Gupta v. Union of India , AIR 1988 SC 968, the Supreme Court had 
directed that all arrears in the Delhi Subordinate Judiciary should be disposed of within a period of 2 years.  

27 
 
1. The method aims at calculating  the number of ju dges required in each 
cadre of S ubordinate Court Judges, i.e., Higher  Judicial Service, Civil 
Judge Senior Division and Civil Judge Junior Division.   For evolving the 
method, a separate analysis of figures for institution, disposal and the 
working strength of judges in each of these three cadres from 2010 to end 
2012 was carried out.   
2. Disposals for one cadre of judges (e.g., Higher Judicial Service) is divided 
by the working strength of judges in that cadre. Working strength refers 
to sanctioned strength minus vacancies and deputations. This division 
gave the annual Rate of Disposal per judge in a cadre for each year from 
2010 to 2012. T he average of these annual rate  of disposal figures gave 
the Average Rate of Disposal per judge in that cadre. 
3. An average of the annual institutions before each cadre of judge for the 
years 2 010-12 was taken.37 The average institution was divided by the 
                                                           
37 The use of the average annual institution in the last three years as the basis for analyzing future demand 
for judicial resources bears explanation. Some High Courts provided us with data on institution, disposal and 
pendency for the last 10 years, i.e., from 2002 -2012. However, we have decided to look at institutions only 
for the last three years. Given that the demand for judicial resources keeps changing depending on new laws 
being promulgated, changes in awareness of the law, changes in socio -economic conditions of society, etc, 
the recent data is a better predictor of what is likely to be the demand for judicial resources in the next plan 
period, than past data. For example, looking at the Higher Judicial Services in Jharkhand, the 10 year average 
annual institution from 2002 -11 would suggest that we could expect 21452 fresh institutions in 2012. The 
actual institution was 26665. The difference between the actual institut ion and the predicted institution was 
therefore 5213 cases. On the other hand the average institution for the time period 2009-11 for the same cadre 
was 26996 as against the actual institution of 26665 for 2012. The difference was only 331 cases. The change 
occurs because the annual institution of cases before the Higher Judicial Services has risen in recent times. 
A 10 year average data pulls down the average because of the lower institution rates from 10 years ago. The 
vast changes in the normative field and social context mean that institution rates are not stable over long 
periods. The use of relatively old data thus becomes an unreliable measure for future forecast. Of course, 
even with the more recent data, the past demand is no guarantee of the future demand. However, other factors 
remaining constant, the past demand can be a useful tool for planning for the near future. If other factors 
change, as for example, new laws are introduced or the pecuniary jurisdiction of a Court changes, additional 
resources would be required.  
It is relevant to note that the data shows wide fluctuations in filing figures from one year to another such that 
no clear trend is discernable. For example, in the Delhi Higher Judicial Service, the institution of new cases 
increased by 18.4% from 2009 to 2010, by 4.3% from 2010 to 2011 and by 11.3 % from 2011 to 2012. In the 
Delhi Judicial Service the institution of new cases 4.8% from 2009 to 2010, 17% from 2010 to 2011, but fell 
by 25.2% in 2012. Another example of such fluctuations is seen in the data from Himachal Pradesh. Here in 
the cadre of Civil Judge Junior Division, the institution of new cases increased by 22.5% in 2010, 1.2% in 
2011 and 35% in 2012. Such examples of wide fluctuations in the year on year data are present in almost all 
High Courts. (See Tables I to X below) For this reason any kind of trend analysis is difficult. Other methods 
for forecasting the demand for judicial resources like regression analysis have been forgone because the 
independent variables that a ffect the number of filings, like new laws coming into force, increase in 
awareness about laws and the social and economic context are difficult to predict, measure and define.  
The average institution is an approximate measure of the likely institution in next few years. It should not be 
treated as the only yardstick, but should be constantly monitored to ensure that increases in annual institutions 
culminate in additional recruitment of judges. We have used figures for the last 3 years, i.e., 2010-12 because 
we have the most comprehensive dataset for this period for the highest number of Courts.  

28 
 
Average Rate of Disposal per judge for that cadre to give the number of 
judges required to keep pace with the current filings, and ensure that no 
new backlog is created. This figure has been described as : The Break Even 
Number. 
4. Subtracting the current number of judges from the Break Even Number 
gives us the Additional Number of J udges required to ensure that the 
number of disposals would equal the number of institutions.  
5. The backlog for a particular cadre of judges (defined as all cases pending 
before that cadre of judges for more than a year) was  then divided by the 
rate of disposal for that type of judge. This gave the number of judges 
required to clear the backlog within a year. Dividing this number by 2 gives 
the number of judges required to clear the backlog in 2 years, and so forth. 
Therefore, the formula for determining the Additional Number of Judges for 
Breakeven is represented as follows:   
 
 
 
Where, 
BEJ= Additional No. of Judges required to Break Even.  
AI= Average Institution 
ARD= Average Rate of Disposal 
D2010, D2011, D2012 =Annual Disposal for that year  
J2010, J2011, J2012 =Annual Working Strength of Judges for that year 
J= Current Working Strength of Judges 
The formula for determining the Number of Judges for disposing of Backlog  
required to dispose of pending cases within a given time period is: 
 
 
 
ARD = [(D2010/J2010)+(D2011/J2011)+ 
(D2012/J2012)]/3 
BEJ= (AI/ARD)-J 
 
AJBk= (B/ARD)/t 
 

29 
 
Where, 
AJBk= No. of Judges for disposing of Backlog 
B= Backlog, defined as the number of cases pending for more than a year. 
t= The time frame, in number of years, within which the backlog needs to be 
cleared. 
Based on application of these formulae, the following tables were generated.  
These tables indicate the additional number of S ubordinate Court Judges 
required to breakeven, and the number of Subordinate Court Judges required to 
clear the existing backlog for the High Courts of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Punjab & Haryana, Sikkim, and Uttarakhand.  
Illustration: 
The method can easily be illustrated with an example. Table I shows the rate of 
disposal analysis for the Andhra Pradesh Subordinate Courts. As this data 
shows, in 2010 Andhra Pradesh had 129 judges of the Higher Judicial Service 
who disposed of 109085 cases, at an average of 109085/129 = 845.6 cases per 
judge. Similarly, in 2011, 139 judges disposed of 111892 cases at an average of 
111892/139 = 805 cases per judge; and in 2012, 136 judges disposed of 106997 
cases at an average of 106997/136 = 786.7 cases per judge.  On average , 
therefore, judges of the Higher Judicial Service disposed of (845.6+805+786.7)/3 
= 812.4 cases per judge per year in this time period. This is the Average Rate of 
disposal per judge.  
Now the average institution per year from 2010 -2012 in the Higher Judicial 
Service cadre is (112209+112710+113250)/3=112723. If each judge is disposing 
of on average 812.4 cases per year, then the number of judge required to dispose 
of 112723 cases is 112723/812.4 = 138.7. This is the breakeven number, which 
implies that if there were 138.7 Higher Judicial Service judges then in any given 
time period, all new institutions would be disposed of without adding to the 
backlog. Since currently there are 136 judges of this cadre, there the need is 
138.7- 136=3 (rounding off to the higher number) additional judges to reach the 
breakeven number. The breakeven number deals with the current institutions.  
There is also a huge backlog of cases. In the case of the Higher Judicial Service, 
98072 matters are pending for more than a year, as on 31.12.2012. If one judge 
disposes of 812.4 cases per year on average, then system would need 

30 
 
98072/812.4 = 121 judges to dispose of all pending matters in one year, or 
121/2=61 (after rounding off), or 121/3=41 (after rounding off) for disposing of 
all pending cases in 2 and 3 years respectively.  

31 
 
 
The following tables apply the rate of Disposal Method to data on institutions, disposals and pendency supplied by 12 
High Courts. 
TABLE I: ANDHRA PRADESH SUBORDINATE COURTS 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution  
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required 
to 
Breakeven 
No. of 
cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges 
required for clearing 
backlog in  
1 year 
2 
years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE  
Institution 112137 112636 113167 
112646.7 811.7 138.8 3 98072 121 61 41 
Disposal 108972 111791 106924 
No. of 
judges 129 139 136 
RoD 844.7 804.3 786.2 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 345210 340657 338610 
341492.3 592.1 576.7 -20 472656 799 400 267 
Disposal 355249 357403 356698 
No. of 
judges 600 609 597 
RoD 592.1 586.9 597.5 
  

32 
 
 
 
TABLE II: BIHAR SUBORDINATE COURTS 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution  
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges 
required for clearing 
backlog in  
1 
year 
2 
years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE  
Institution 67839 63367 71569 
67591.7 199.2 339.3 50 184746 928 464 310 Disposal 73613 60378 59961 
No. of 
judges 356 328 290 
RoD 206.8 184.1 206.8 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 158113 158498 183773 
166794.7 213.2 782.2 164 1038598 4871 2436 1624 Disposal 137583 125927 133575 
No. of 
judges 624 619 619 
RoD 220.5 203.4 215.8 

33 
 
TABLE III: DELHI SUBORDINATE COURTS 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution  
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges 
required for 
clearing backlog in  
1 
year 
2 
years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE  
Institution 69631 72609 73883 
72041.0 446.8 161.2 -10 45669 103 52 35 Disposal 77850 71949 71073 
No. of 
judges 165 158 172 
RoD 471.8 455.4 413.2 
DELHI JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 133655 129171 161981 
141602.3 1115.9 126.9 -130 231452 208 104 70 Disposal 273922 301447 271171 
No. of 
judges 226 279 257 
RoD 1212.0 1080.5 1055.1 
 

34 
 
TABLE IV: GUJARAT SUBORDINATE COURTS 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution  
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per 
Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges 
required for clearing 
backlog in  
1 
year 
2 
years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICES  
Institution 152663 149947 152041 
151550.3 1053.1 143.9 -31 267853 255 1282 85 
Disposal 161848 155290 169598 
No. of 
judges 141 149 175 
RoD 1147.9 1042.2 969.1 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 530434 367726 366585 
421581.7 609.1 692.1 -166 1122354 1843 922 615 
Disposal 541640 385527 384200 
No. of 
judges 671 673 859 
RoD 807.2 572.8 447.3 
  

35 
 
 
TABLE V: HIMACHAL PRADESH SUBORDINATE COURTS 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution 
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required 
to 
Breakeven 
No. of 
cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges 
required for 
clearing backlog 
in  
1 
year 
2 
years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 30789 30591 32912 
31430.7 1291.6 24.3 0 11477 9 5 3 Disposal 29913 29829 31815 
No. of 
judges 24 22 25 
RoD 1246.4 1355.9 1272.6 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 92379 99456 171699 
121178.0 1339.0 90.5 16 85307 64 32 22 
Disposal 84246 95473 125235 
No. of 
judges 75 78 75 
RoD 1123.3 1224.0 1669.8 

36 
 
TABLE VI: JAMMU AND KASHMIR JUDICIAL SERVICE 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution  
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per 
Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges 
required for 
clearing backlog in  
1 
year 
2 
years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 38675 53642 25327 
39214.7 757.9 51.7 2 25152 34 17 12 Disposal  36275 49275 25994 
Judges 45 52 50 
RoD 806.1 947.6 519.9 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 130290 150082 160276 
146882.7 1246.9 117.8 -4 83431 67 34 23 Disposal  123008 137873 167278 
No. of 
judges 100 121 122 
RoD 1230.1 1139.4 1371.1 
 

37 
 
 
TABLE VII: JHARKHAND SUBORDINATE COURTS 
 2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution 
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges 
required for 
clearing backlog in  
1 
year 
2 
years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE  
Institution 24372 29416 26363 
26717.0 211.0 126.7 17 40603 193 97 65 Disposal 17755 17740 18072 
No. of 
judges 63 95 110 
RoD 281.8 186.7 164.3 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 88001 85485 90166 
87884.0 328.2 267.8 7 187939 573 287 191 Disposal 75682 92130 101473 
No. of 
judges 266 296 261 
RoD 284.5 311.3 388.8 

38 
 
 
TABLE VIII: KARNATAKA SUBORDINATE COURTS 
 2010 2011 
 
2012 
Average 
Institution 
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  no. 
of  Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges required 
for clearing backlog in 
1 year 2 years 3 years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE  
Institution 139780 141359 142910 
141349.7 669.7 211.1 22 98970 148 74 50 Disposal 140325 143195 136334 
No. of judges 217 222 190 
RoD 646.7 645.0 717.5 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 513755 528117 593277 
545049.7 998.8 545.7 30 657058 658 329 220 Disposal 500509 489463 562940 
No. of judges 522 517 516 
RoD 958.8 946.7 1091.0 
  
 

39 
 
TABLE IX: KERALA SUBORDINATE COURTS 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution 
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges 
required for 
clearing backlog in  
1 
year 
2 
years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE  
Institution 136551 149246 156335 
147377.3 1215.0 121.3 -6 152175 126 63 42 Disposal 138189 140916 145905 
No. of 
judges 114 109 128 
RoD 1212.2 1292.8 1139.9 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 774244 678137 842578 
764986.3 2696.0 283.7 25 459911 171 86 57 Disposal 786216 648392 695006 
No. of 
judges 271 259 259 
RoD 2901.2 2503.4 2683.4 
 

40 
 
TABLE X: PUNJAB SUBORDINATE COURTS 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution 
Average 
rate of 
disposal 
per 
Judge 
Breake
ven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of 
cases 
pending 
>1 yr. on 
31.12.201
2 
No. of Judges required for 
clearing backlog in  
1 year 2 years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 70232 82091 124820 
92381.0 937.4 98.6 6 43769 47 24 16 Disposal 62651 82398 117148 
No. of judges 87 99 93 
RoD 720.1 832.3 1259.7 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 228420 314076 281114 
274536.7 1097.9 250.1 -71 252973 231 116 77 Disposal 236408 337256 303011 
No. of judges 217 267 322 
RoD 1089.4 1263.1 941.0 
HARYANA SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE  
Institution 98499 117315 94335 
103383.0 964.2 107.2 -2 54041 56 28 19 Disposal 86136 102806 85270 
No. of judges 98 83 110 
RoD 878.9 1238.6 775.2 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 182591 241851 393333 
272591.7 1179.1 231.2 -56 252736 215 108 72 Disposal 193941 258395 396988 
No. of judges 173 249 288 
RoD 1121.0 1037.7 1378.4 
 
 

41 
 
TABLE XI: SIKKIM SUBORDINATE COURTS 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution 
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per Judge 
Breakeven 
No. 
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges 
required for 
clearing backlog in  
1 
year 
2 
years 
3 
years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 1643 1670 1459 
1590.7 304.8 5.2 2 243 1 1 1 Disposal 1551 1565 1580 
No. of 
judges 6 6 4 
RoD 258.5 260.8 395.0 
 
CHANDIGARH  SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE  
Institution 5162 6131 6569 
5954.0 992.1 6.0 1 4646 5 3 2 Disposal 4363 6293 7202 
No. of judges 6 6 6 
RoD 727.2 1048.8 1200.3 
 SUBORIDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 21027 67805 39220 
42684.0 3952.0 10.8 -3 23923 7 3 2 Disposal 32482 86792 46710 
No. of judges 14 14 14 
RoD 2320.1 6199.4 3336.4 

42 
 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 1583 1832 1867 
1760.7 475.1 3.7 -2 216 1 1 1 Disposal 1540 1808 1855 
No. of 
judges 3 3 6 
RoD 513.3 602.7 309.2 
 

43 
 
 
TABLE XII: UTTARAKHAND SUBORDINATE COURTS 
  2010 2011 
  
2012 
Average 
Institution 
Average 
Rate of 
Disposal 
per Judge 
Breakeven 
No.  
Additional  
no. of  
Judges 
required to 
Breakeven 
No. of 
cases 
pending >1 
yr. on 
31.12.2012 
No. of Judges required 
for clearing backlog in  
1 year 2 years 3 years 
HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 26416 22755 23949 
24373.3 675.1 36.1 -5 14061 21 11 7 Disposal 28422 24843 23444 
No. of 
judges 33 41 42 
RoD 861.3 605.9 558.2 
SUBORDINATE JUDICIAL SERVICE 
Institution 150241 103904 115272 
123139.0 1118.8 110.1 3 87419 79 40 26 Disposal 109115 107590 113439 
No. of 
judges 96 92 108 
RoD 1136.6 1169.5 1050.4 

44 
 
 In light of foregoing, the number of Additional Subordinate Court Judges to be 
appointed by these High Courts is as follows: 
TABLE XIII: ADDITIONAL NUMBER OF JUDGES REQUIRED 
 Additiona
l  no. of 
Judges 
for 
Breakeve
n 
No. of judges to 
clear backlog in: 
Vacancie
s 
(Dec.’12) 
Sanctione
d Strength 
(Dec.’12) 
Total Number of 
judges required 
1 yr 2 yrs 3 yrs 
ANDHRA PRADESH SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
3 121 61 41 43 179 
Need for an additional 
44 to 124 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 247 to 779 judges 
in the subordinate 
judicial service.   
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-20 799 400 267 64 661 
BIHAR SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
50 928 464 310 201 503 
Need for an additional 
360 to 978 judges in 
the higher judicial 
service and 1788 to 
5035 judges in the 
subordinate judicial 
service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIARY  164 487
1 2436 162
4 356 984 
DELHI SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-10 103 52 35 31 226 
Need for an additional 
25 to 93 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 0 to 78 judges in 
the subordinate 
judicial service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIARY  -130 208 104 70 115 382 
GUJARAT SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-31 255 1282 85 137 312 
Need for an additional 
54 to 224 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 449 to 1677 
judges in the 
subordinate judicial 
service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIARY  -166 184
3 922 615 492 1351 
HIMACHAL PRADESH SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
0 9 5 3 3 43 
Need for an additional 
3 to 9 judges in the 
higher judicial service 

45 
 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIARY  16 64 32 22 11 89 
and 38 to 80 judges in 
the subordinate 
judicial service. 
JAMMU AND KASHMIR SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE  
2 34 17 12 11 67 
Need for an additional 
14 to 36 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 19 to 63 judges in 
the subordinate 
judicial service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIARY  -4 67 34 23 11 139 
JHARKHAND SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
17 193 97 65 47 174 
Need for an additional 
82 to 210 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 198 to 580 judges 
in the subordinate 
judicial service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
7 573 287 191 58 329 
KARNATAKA SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
22 148 74 50 119 332 
Need for an additional 
72 to 170 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 250 to 688 judges 
in the subordinate 
judicial service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
30 658 329 220 220 754 
KERALA SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-6 126 63 42 6 134 
Need for an additional 
36 to 120 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 82 to 196 judges 
in the subordinate 
judicial service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
25 171 86 57 22 281 
PUNJAB SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICES  
6 47 24 16 28 128 
Need for an additional 
22 to 53 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 6 to 160 judges in 
the subordinate 
judicial service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-71 231 116 77 57 403 
HARYANA PRADESH SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-2 56 28 19 21 153 
Need for an additional 
17 to 54 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 16 to 159 judges 
in the subordinate 
judicial service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-56 215 108 72 70 375 
        

46 
 
CHANDIGARH SUBORDINATE COURTS 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
1 5 3 2 0 6 
Need for an additional 
3 to 6 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 0 to 4 judges in 
the subordinate 
judicial service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-3 7 3 2 0 14 
SIKKIM SUBORDINATE JUDICIARY 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
2 1 1 1 5 9 
Need for an additional 
3judges in the higher 
judicial service and 0 
judges in the 
subordinate judicial 
service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-2 1 1 1 2 8 
UTTARAKHAND SUBORDINATE JUDICIARY 
HIGHER 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
-5 21 11 7 9 51 
Need for an additional 
2 to 16 judges in the 
higher judicial service 
and 29 to 82 judges in 
the subordinate 
judicial service. 
SUBORDINATE 
JUDICIAL 
SERVICE 
3 79 40 26 62 170 
 
  

47 
 
 
A closer look at the foregoing analysis of the data and evaluating 
various methods as discussed the Commission considers it important 
to emphasize the following: 
 
1. Appointment of judges on a priority basis: As this data indicates, the situation 
is indeed grim, and is getting worse by the moment. In all states, there is a 
significant backlog of cases which requires a massive influx of judicial resources 
even if one takes a 3 year time  frame for clearing back log. Bihar, for example, 
requires an additional 1624 judges to clear backlog in three years. The problem 
of backlogs is compounded by the fact that in some states, Courts are unable to 
even keep pace with the new filings, thus adding to the already huge backlog. As 
the data shows, even where the Courts are breaking even, the system is severely 
backlogged and requires urgent intervention.38 Given the large number of judges 
required to clear backlog and the time it will take to complete selection and 
training processes, the Law Commission recommends that the recruitment of 
new judges should , therefore, focus, as a matter of priority, on the number of 
judges required to breakeven, and to dispose of the backlog in a 3 year time 
frame. This has to be dealt with on a priority basis, otherwise the already severe 
problem of backlogs will only get worse.   
2.  
2. Special Traffic Courts: The figures for institution and disposal do not include traffic 
challans/police challans . As mentioned in Part III A above, the Law Commission 
recommends that these cases be dealt with by Special Courts, over and above the 
regular Courts. The Special Courts can function in morning and evening shifts. Much 
of the work of these Courts is likely to require very little judicial involvement. Therefore, 
recent law graduates can be appointed for short durations, e.g., 3 years, to preside over 
these Courts. Providing online facilities for the payment of fines, or separate counter 
facilities in Court precincts for this purpose, can ease the work load of these Courts 
considerably. In order to ensure fair process, Special Traffic Courts should deal only 
with cases which involve fines. Where imprisonment is a likely consequence, the matter 
should be heard by a regular Court. Staffing such Courts with recent law graduates will 
also have the added benefit of providing such graduates with a meaningful stepping 
stone for careers in litigation or the judicial services.  
                                                           
38 Where the additional number of judges required to breakeven is in the negative, this implies that disposal is higher 
than institution in such Courts. In these cas es, the number of judges over and above the breakeven number, can be 
deployed for disposing of the backlog. The number of additional judges required to dispose of the backlog should be 
proportionately reduced.  

48 
 
It is to be noted that the Backlog figures  do not exclude traffic challans. Data on what 
proportion of pending traffic/police challans were more than a year old  were not 
available. However, given that these cases generally do not require much judicial 
involvement, most of these cases are not likely to be backlogged.  
 
4. Periodic Needs Assessment for the Judiciary : The present work is based on 
analysis of institution, disposal and pendency data for the time period 2010 -12. 
Institution and disposal trends can and will change over time. New laws, gre ater 
awareness of rights, changing social circumstances, and even the reduction of judicial 
delay are likely to lead to an increase in the number of cases being instituted. At the 
same time, better infrastructure, more support staff, access to time -saving technology 
and better training are likely to increase the efficiency levels (and hence, rate of disposal) 
of judges. S ince the method of calculating A dditional number of J udges depends on 
these figures, the Law Commission recommends that the trend of insti tutions and 
disposals should be constantly monitored by the High Courts, in order to meet the 
evolving needs of the judiciary. Using the formula provided above, judge strength should 
be increased periodically, particularly when institution rates start climbing over disposal 
rates. The Commission also recommends that in order to engage in this analysis, High 
Courts should put in place reliable and regular data collection and management 
systems.   
5. Efficient Deployment of Judicial Resources : The Commission recognizes that 
apart from increasing the judge strength, there is also need for efficient deployment of 
the additional judicial resources. While the rate of Disposal Method indicates how many 
additional judges are required it does not indicate how these a dditional judicial 
resources should be allocated (e.g., which Courts, which districts, what types of cases) 
to best meet the goal of delay reduction. Further, the Commission also recognizes that 
the most efficient allocation of resources will depend upon v arious local factors and 
micro level analyses, for which pan -India recommendations may be inappropriate. 
Therefore, the Law Commission recommends that once appointments are made, High 
Courts should make appropriate allocation of judicial work, keeping in m ind the 
following factors: 
 
a. In this report, all cases pending for less than a year have been treated as current 
cases. All cases pending for more than a year have been categorized as backlogged 
cases. The Commission recognizes that this division is ad hoc.  However, as 
elaborated earlier in this report , we do not have any established metric for 
determining when a case can be considered delayed for purpose of counting only 
delayed cases in the backlogged category. In the absence of this information, a time 
frame of one year has been taken as the period for considering a case as current or 
backlogged. It is possible that a Court with high pendency of backlogged cases might 
have many recently filed pending cases whereas ano ther Court with a relatively 
lower backlog may have a high proportion of very old pending cases. High Courts 

49 
 
should, therefore, allocate more resources for Courts with more old pending matters 
than those with relatively new case loads.  
b. It is also important to note that not every case requires the same amount of 
judicial time or resources. A petty case may be considered delayed if it takes more 
than 3 months whereas a murder case may be considered disposed of well in time 
if it takes 6 months for disposal. However, the rate of Disposal Method does not take 
this complexity into account. The Commission has taken one, two and three years 
as the time frames within which pending cases should be disposed of. However, one 
year might be too much time for some cases, and too little for others. A benchmark 
to determine delay and the requisite age wise break up of cases by subject area, can 
help to determine what percentage of cases are delayed and hence require targeted 
intervention. On the general principle of first in, first out for each type of case, High 
Courts should allocate more resources for Courts with more delayed pending cases.  
c. Similarly, even if a Court has a relatively high rate of disposal, some cases in that 
Court might be very o ld and moving at a very slow pace, compared to the bulk of 
the case load, which may be simpler and moving at a much faster rate. Since the 
overall rate of disposal averages out the rate of disposal of specific types of cases, a 
high overall rate of disposal may mask the fact that some cases such are stagnating 
for long periods within such a Court. Therefore, even if some Courts have a very 
high rate of disposal, the High Court should not re -allocate judicial resources in 
those Courts, without first determining how current their case loads are.     
d. Relatedly, even though the general picture that emerges lets system know how 
much extra judicial time is required to clear up the backlog and prevent the system 
from getting backlogged in the near future, the Ra te of Disposal Method does not 
tell anything about how judicial time and effort should be spent so as to cater to the 
needs of the socially and legally marginalized who are often likely to need more 
judicial resources in order to meet their basic legal nee ds. The method does not 
provide a way to tailor judicial resource allocation based on the different needs of 
different groups. It treats all cases as similar from the point of view of delay 
reduction regardless of the nature of the right being asserted or the person making 
the assertion. Therefore, High Courts should provide guidelines to Subordinate 
Courts to ensure that older or more complex or more priority cases (for example, 
those relating to sexual violence) do not stagnate in the system. 
e. Finally, even if judges of a particular category are disposing of cases at a high 
rate, this indicates nothing about the quality of decision -making of such judges. 
The focus of the method is on the quantitative output without compromising the 
current qualitative standard. However, there might be trade -offs involved between 
the quantity and the quality of decision -making that the model does not take into 
account. If some judges are actually compromising on the quality of decision -
making and are thus being able to dispose of more cases, the model will recommend 
a lesser number of additional judges, compared to the additional judges that would 
be required to dispose of the same number of cases in a more qualitatively sound 

50 
 
manner.39 The Commission, therefore, recommends that in allocating the additional 
judicial resources, High Courts should pay heed to the quality of decision making 
in the Courts concerned.  
In sum, therefore, the rate of Disposal Method described in this report should be seen 
as giving an approximation of required judicial strength that can then be adjusted and 
allocated on the basis of other considerations, which can include, but are not limited to: 
(1) adjustments made for inaccuracies in available data; (2) a particularly large number 
of cases that have been pending for an excessive period of time which may indicate a 
need for more judicial resources  and  (3) relevant feedback about pendency and judicial 
functioning in the State and particular districts from stakeholders. 
6. Timely filling of vacancies; increa se in age of retirement of the S ubordinate 
Judiciary: As Table XIII indicates, most High Courts have a high vacancy in 
Subordinate Courts. Additionally, every year many vacancies are created through 
retirement. It takes time to select and train new judges to replace the retiring ones. In 
the meantime, the backlog piles up. To deal with this concern, the Commission 
recommends that in addition to recruiting new judges, the age of ret irement of 
subordinate judges be raised to 62 in order to meet the need for a large number of 
adequately trained judicial officers. The benefit of increase in the retirement age can be 
made available to judicial officers in terms of the directions of the Supreme Court in All 
India Judges’ Association v. Union of India. 40 Further, the directions of the Supreme 
                                                           
39 It is pertinent to note that in its order d ated February 1, 2012, in the present case, the Supreme Court noted that 
“access to justice must not be understood in a purely quantitative dimension. Access to justice in an egalitarian 
democracy must be understood to mean qualitative access to justice as well. Access to justice is, therefore, much more 
than improving an individual’s access to Courts, or guaranteeing representation. It must be defined in terms of ensuring 
that legal and judicial outcomes are just and equitable.” 
40 In All India Judges’ Association v. Union of India, decided on November 13, 1991, AIR 1992 SC 165, the Supreme 
Court had directed that the age of superannuation be for subordinate Court Judges be raised to 60 years. Modifying 
this direction in an order dated August 24, 1993, the Court held that  
The benefit of the increase of the retirement age to 60 years, shall not be available automatically to 
all judicial officers irrespective of their past record of service and evidence of their continued utility 
to the judicial system. Th e benefit will be available to those who, in the opinion of the respective 
High Courts, have a potential for continued useful service. It is not intended as a windfall for the 
indolent, the infirm and those of doubtful integrity, reputation and utility. The potential for continued 
utility shall be assessed and evaluated by appropriate Committees of Judges of the respective High 
Courts constituted and headed by the Chief Justices of the  High Courts and the evaluation shall be 
made on the basis of the judicial officers' past record of service, character rolls, quality of judgments 
and other relevant matters. 
The High Court should undertake and complete the exercise in case of officers about to attain the 
age of 58 years well within time by following the procedure for compulsory retirement as laid down 
in the respective Service Rules applicable to the judicial officers. Those who will not be found fit 
and eligible by this standard should not be given the benefit of the higher retirement age and should 
be compulsorily retired at the age of 58 by following the said procedure for compulsory retirement. 

51 
 
Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan v. U.P. Public Service Commission ,41 regarding the time 
bound filling of vacancies, needs to be strictly adhered to.  
7. Need for system wide judicial reforms : From a litigant’s point of view, what 
matters is not just the timely disposal of his/her case at the trial Court level, but at all 
levels of the judiciary. Therefore, judicial reform targeted at delay reduction is required 
not only in the trial Court, but throughout the judicial system. In particular,  
a. If the number of judges in the trial Courts increases significantly the number of 
cases being disposed of by the trial Courts will rise sharply. The total number of cases 
being appealed to the High Courts will also increase. The case load of High Courts will, 
therefore, increase. If a corresponding increase is not made in the judge strength at the 
High Court level, the system as a whole is likely to remain backlogged.  
Data obtained from the Supreme Court publication Court News shows that High 
Courts are already backlogged and are not being able to keep pace with new filings. The 
recent annual data from Court News is for the time period 01.10.2011 to 30.9.2012. In 
this time period, though 1909543 fresh institutions were made in High Courts, only 
1764607 matters were disposed of. The backlog , therefore, increased by 144936. On 
average, in this time period, High Court judges disposed of 2821.07 cases per judge. As 
of 30.9.2012, 4407861 matters were pending before all the High Courts. At the current 
rate of disposal, High Courts require an additional 56 judges  to breakeven and an 
additional 942 judges to clear the backlog. It is relevant to note here that the sanctioned 
strength of the High Courts is 895. As on 31.12.2012, 31.4% of these positions were 
vacant. Therefore, there is already a massive shortage of judges in the High Courts. The 
increase of judge str ength in the Lower J udiciary is likely to further exacerbate the 
problem.        
b. Without adequate infrastructure or support staff, an increase in judge strength will 
not be effective as a delay reduction strategy. A systemic perspective, encompassing all 
levels of the judicial hierarchy, is, therefore, needed for meaningful judicial reform.  
c. Other approaches like encouraging Alternative Dispute Resolution methods, where 
appropriate, can divert cases outside the Court system and lead to an overall reduction 
                                                           
The Commission’s recommendation in this report is along the same lines, with the exception that we recommend that 
the service of judges who are about to retire be ext ended till such time as the vacancy caused by their retirement is 
filled, subject to a maximum period up to which such extension is possible.  
41 (2008) 17 SCC 703. 

52 
 
in pendency in the judicial system.42 Therefore, a piecemeal approach to delay reduction 
should be eschewed in favour of a systemic perspective.       
  
                                                           
42 The Law Commission is examining this issue separately and intends to come out with a repor t on Alternative 
Dispute Resolution Mechanisms.  

53 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
In conclusion, it would not be wrong to say that at general level and in nutshell, the 
present report in a way deals with the issue of arrears and delay and problem of judicial 
(wo)manpower planning - a problem that for quite many years remained ignored.   
Undermining this, the Law Commission, in its 120 th Report: “Manpower Pla nning in 
Judiciary: A Blue Print” had observed, “The Commission was of the view that the question 
of judicial manpower planning had generally been ignored in India’s planned 
development.  The developing science of manpower planning has not attracted the 
attention of policy opinion makers in the field of administration of justice in India.  All 
reorganization proposals are basically patch work, ad-hoc, unsystematic solutions to the 
problem”.    Importantly, the report, while confessing its limitations and in ability said: 
“Commission itself is in no position, given the fact of its present structure, to provide this 
kind of technical analysis only on which sound programme of change can be envisaged.  
Of course, the Commission has done the next best thing and elicited extensive opinion of 
those knowledgeable in the field and the general public.  But we must admit that, all said 
and done, this is a very poor substitute for sound scientific analysis.”  The Commission, 
thus, while being expressly conscious of limitations inherent in suggesting any scientific 
method to deal with problem of arrears and delay relied on the judge population ratio 
method as a way for judicial manpower planning.  In making such suggestion, the 
Commission was inspired by prevalence of such method in few other countries. The 
Commission in its report recommended that there was strong justification to increase 
the then existing ratio from 10.5 judges per million to at least 50 judges per million of 
Indian population.  Thus, it is primarily beca use of non -availability of data and their 
scientific analysis, that the Commission simply adopted the simple approach of Judge-
Population Ratio.  In fact, the report had no occasion to analyse strengths, weaknesses 
and relevance of adopting Judge-Population Ratio method in Indian context especially 
the context that has its own peculiarities different in many r espects from the systems 
where Judge-Population Ratio method prevail.  
No doubt, in recent years, the issue of arrears and delay and pr oblem of Judicial 
(wo)man power planning has attracted attention of almost all major stakeholders 
including the judiciary, executive, media, policy makers, and public in general.  
However, despite this spurt of rising attention, it is largely due to the de arth of any 
uniform and scientific approach to data collection and its analysis that arriving at more 
scientific and futuristic suggestions with regard to judicial (wo)manpower planning to 
deal with issue of arrears and delay still remains a challenge. 
However, the present report, while fully realises the frustration expressed by the 
Commission and consequent failure in making deeper analysis of the problem when 
submitting 120 th Report, is an attempt to deal with the problem somewhat more 
analytically and s cientifically.  As the Commission, in the process of preparing the 

54 
 
present report and response submitted to the Hon’ble Supreme Court adopted every 
possible venue and opportunity that could be thought of for collecting data including 
through questionnaires  and personal interviews and subjecting information th us 
collected to rigorous analysi s adopting various tools of data analysis available in the 
domain of research methodology. 
Analysis of data and information thus made was then examined in light of variou s 
methods of judicial (wo)manpower planning practised in many other systems while 
keeping in view peculiarities of Indian judicial and profession’s culture.  Adopting this 
approach, the Commission has finally arrived at making following suggestions and 
recommendations: 
Rate of Disposal Method 
1. That, given the existing availability of data, the Rate of Disposal Method and formulae 
be followed for calculating adequate judge strength for Subordinate Courts, instead of 
Judge-Population or Judge-Institution Ratio, Ideal Case Load Method or the Time Based 
Method.  
 
Number of judges to be appointed on a priority basis 
2. That, data obtained from High Courts indicates that the judicial system is severely 
backlogged, and is also not being able to keep pace with current filings, thus 
exacerbating the problem of backlogs. The system requires a massive influx of judicial 
resources in order to dispose of the backlog and keep pace with current filings. The data 
indicates the need for taking urgent measures for increasing judge strength in order to 
ensure timely justice and facilitate access to justice for all sections of society.  
 
That, as per the resolution of the  Advisory Council of the National Mission for Justice 
Delivery and Legal Reforms, the resolution of the Chief Justices and Chief Ministers 
Conference, 2013, and public addresses of the Prime Minister and the Law Minister, the 
current judge strength is being doubled over the next five years. Given the large number 
of judges required to clear backlog and the time that it will take to complete selection 
and training processes and to create adequate infrastructure, the Law Commission 
recommends that the recruitment of new judges should focus, as a matter of priority, 
on the number of judges required to breakeven and to dispose of the backlog, in a 3 
year time frame.43  
Increasing the age of retirement of Subordinate Court Judges 
3. That, in order to meet the need for a large number of appropriately trained Subordinate 
Court Judges, the age of retirement of Subordinate judges be raised to 62 The benefit of 
increase in the retirement age be made available to judicial officers in terms of the 
directions of the Supreme Court in All India Judges’ Association v. Union of India.44  
 
Creation of Special Courts for Traffic/Police Challan Cases 
4. That special morning and evening Courts be set up for dealing with Traffic/Police 
Challan cases which constituted 38.7% of institutions and 37.4% of all pending cases 
                                                           
43 See Table XIII above. 
44 In All India Judges’ Association v. Union of India, Supreme Court of India, order dated August 24, 1993.  

55 
 
in the last three years, before the Subordinate Judicial S ervices. These Courts should 
be in addition to the regular Courts so that they can reduce the case load of the regular 
Courts. In addition, facil ities be made available for online payment of fines as well as 
the payment of fines at designated counters in the Court complex. This measure will 
further reduce pendency before such S pecial Courts. Recent law graduates may be 
appointed for short durations, e.g., 3 years, to preside over these special traffic Courts. 
These special Courts should only deal with cases involving fines. Cases which may 
involve imprisonment should be tried before regular Courts in order to ensure fair 
process.  
 
That, if Special Traffic/Police Challan Courts are not created, the number of judges 
required in the regular cadres should be further increased to take into account traffic 
and police challan cases.  
 
Provision for Staff and Infrastructure 
5. That, adequate provisions be made for staff and infrastructure required for the working 
of additional Courts.45 
 
Periodic Needs Assessment by High Courts 
6. That the present work is based on analysis of institution, disposal and pendency figures 
upto 2012. Needless to say, over time these figures are likely to change, affecting the 
requirement for additional Courts to keep pace with filings and disposals. The Law 
Commission does not have sufficient information to predict by how much institution is 
likely to vary in the coming years.46 Therefore, the High Courts may be required to carry 
out Periodic Judicial Needs Assessment to monitor the rate of institution and disposal 
and revise the judge strength periodically, based on institutions, disposals, pendency 
and vacancy, using the formula given above.  
 
7. That, in the light of revelation before the Commission about the lack of uniformity in 
data collection and concerns with the quality of data recorded and provided by High 
Courts,47 the Commission strongly recommends that High Courts be directed to evolve 
uniform data collection and data management methods in order to ensure transparency 
and to facilitate data based policy prescriptions for the judicial system. 
 
Need for system-wide Reform 
8. That a systemic perspective, encompassing all levels of the judicial hierarchy, is needed 
for meaningful judicial reform. Taking measures  for the timely disposal of cases at all 
levels of the judicial system, including by monitoring and increasing judge strength 
throughout the system; encouraging Alternative Dispute Resolution M ethods, where 
appropriate and more efficient allocation and utilization of resources is required to fulfill 
the goal of providing timely justice to litigants. In particular, the Commission 
                                                           
45 See All India Judges Association v UOI, (2002) 4 SCC 247 (“We are conscio us of the fact that overnight these 
vacancies cannot be filled. In order to have Additional Judges, not only the post will have to be created but 
infrastructure required in the form of Additional Court rooms, buildings, staff, etc., would also have to be m ade 
available”). 
46 See discussion in footnote 38 above. 
47 See Section III. A above. 

56 
 
emphasizes the urgent need to increase judge strength in High Courts to ensure that 
appeals/revisions from additional cases di sposed of by the newly created S ubordinate 
Courts, are dealt with in a timely manner, and that the already heavy backlog in the 
High Courts is adequately addressed. Therefore , a piecemeal approach to delay 
reduction should be eschewed in favour of a systemic perspective. 
 
9. That, as the Supreme Court recognized in its order in Imtiyaz Ahmad dated February 1, 
2012, the creation of additional Courts is one amongst various measures required to 
ensure timely justice and facilitate access to justice. The Commission recognizes that 
apart from increasing judge strength, many other measures have to be undertaken for 
reducing delays, including the application of good judicial management practices such 
as putting into place timeliness and performance benchmarks . As discussed earlier in 
this report, the Commission emphasizes the need for establishing, based on rational 
criteria, non -mandatory time frames for t he resolution of different types of cases. 48 
Unless judges and litigants have clear expectations of how soon their cases are likely to 
resolved, there will be little accountability for delays, and systemic problems are likely 
to increase. Therefore, the Commission seeks to highlight an urgent need to fix rational, 
non-mandatory time frames for different types of cases, and use such time frames as a 
basis for setting judge performance standards, litigant expectations, and making more 
robust policy recommendations for the judiciary.  
 
 
 
 
(Justice A.P. Shah) 
Chairman 
 
 
 
(Justice S.N. Kapoor)          (Prof. (Dr.) Moolchand Sharma)                 (Justice Usha Mehra) 
Member    Member     Member 
 
 
 
 
 
                         (N.L. Meena)            (P.K. Malhotra)   
                    Member-Secretary                     Ex-officio Member  
 
  
                                                           
48 The Commission does not recommend mandatory time -frames for the disposal of cases. The Supreme Court has 
categorically stated in a seven judge bench decision in P. Ramchandra Rao v. State of Karnataka, (2002) 4 SCC 578, 
that “[i]t is neither advisable, nor feasible, nor judicially permissible to draw or prescribe an outer limit for conclusion 
of all criminal proceedings…. At the most the periods of time prescribed … can be taken by the Courts seized of the 
trial or proceedings to act as reminders when they may be persuaded to apply their judicial mind to the facts and 
circumstances of the case before them and determine by taking into consideration the several relevant  factors as 
pointed out in A.R. Antulay’s case and decide whether the trial or proceedings have become so inordinately delayed 
as to be called oppressive and unwarranted. Such time -limits cannot and will not by themselves be treated by any 
Court as a bar to further continuance of the trial or proceedings and as mandatorily obliging the Court to terminate the 
same and acquit or discharge the accused.” 

57 
 
 


58 
 
Re: Addl. Court Project 
Data as on 31-12-2011 may please be furnished 
 
1. Number of Subordinate Courts of various categories in the State presently functioning 
(cadre-wise and District-wise) and the sanctioned strength; 
a) Courts of DJs/ADJs/CMMs – regular and Fast-track, Special Courts (for e.g. PC Act 
cases) Tribunals (Industrial/Labour, Sales-tax etc.), Family Courts. 
b) Senior Civil Judges 
c) Junior Civil Judges/Judl. Magistrates of I class (those undergoing training and 
awaiting posting may be separately given); 
d) Spl. Judl. Magistrates (including Fast-track under the recent Central Scheme). 
 
2. Number of Districts &how many are heavy filing/pendency Districts. 
Population of each District. 
 
3. Whether recruitment to Jr. Civil Judges is done by PSC or by High Court? 
When was the last recruitment? 
Any particular reason for vacancies & any bottlenecks in recruitment? 
 
4. a) Statement showing the pendency of Civil (including EPs) and Criminal cases in each 
category of Courts specified above – District-wise. 
b) Classification of such pending cases, for instance, 
(i) Civil : Money suits, other types of suits, civil appeals, motor accident 
compensation cases, land compensation cases, matrimonial disputes, industrial and 
labour disputes, Execution petitions, others 
(ii) a) Whether I-As (interlocutory applications) are counted against pending matters 
(as shown in SC Court News)? 
 b) Number of I-As for interim relief pending and disposed of during the year may 
also be furnished. 
c) Criminal : Number of: 
  
 Sessions cases in the Courts of Sessions Judges and Asst. Sessions Judges  
 
 Cases relating to IPC offences in Magistrates’ Courts (offences against women 
and children including domestic violence cases be separately given). 
 
 Cases relating to offences under special enactments, viz., offences under S, 138 
N.I-Act, S.Cs & S.Ts (PA Act), Corruption cases, Economic offences, NDPS-S, 
125 Cr. P.C. matters 
 
 Crl. Appeals & Revisions. 
 
 Summary trial cases. 
 
5. Statement showing institution and disposal of Civil and Criminal cases during the 
preceding three years (i.e. 2009, 2010 and 2011) in each category of Courts (Dt. Judges, 
Sr. Civil Judges, Jr. Civil Judges/Magistrates, Spl. Courts and Fast-track Courts). 
 
P.N: Break-up of the types of cases (as mentioned in Col.3(b)(i) & 3(c) instituted in and 
disposed of by each category of Courts may be furnished. 
 

59 
 
6. Contested and uncontested cases (including settled) disposed of in each District by eac h 
category of Courts during 2010 and 2011 (broad classification of the nature of cases in 
contested/settled matters may be given if possible). 
 
7. Civil and Crl. cases pending for more than (i) 3 years (ii) 5 years as on 31-12-2011. 
 
8. a) What is the average ra te of disposal of Civil cases (all put together) per Judge in the 
State during the last 2 years.  In the alternative, the average rate of disposal in at least 
three districts (heavy, medium, light pendency District) may be given. 
 
b) The same information a s regards the criminal cases (all categories put together) may 
be furnished (1) after excluding very petty cases, viz., traffic challans etc. and (2) after 
including such petty cases. 
 
9. Trend of filing of Civil/Crl. cases in the District?  What accounts for the bulk of litigation 
in the District? 
 
10. a) The method adopted by the High Court to assess the performance of judicial officers.  
b) The minimum target fixed for a judicial officer cadre-wise in respect of disposal of civil 
and criminal cases of different categories – (in terms of units or grades) and for achieving 
the next higher grade (more than the minimum) 
 
11. Number of working days prescribed for judicial work in a year and duration of working 
time per day. 
 
12. How many Fast -track special Magistrates Courts (morning/evening Courts) and Gram 
Nyayalayas are functioning? How many cases are transferred to them? 
 
13. What is the reasonable workload that each category of Courts (DJ, Sr. Civil Judge, Jr. 
Civil Judge/Magistrate) can bear in order to establish better and speedy access to justice? 
 
14. (a) Are there exclusive Courts for dealing with S, 138 N.I-Act cases?  How many? 
 
(b) Should all I-As (pre-trial) and bail petitions be allocated to one or two Courts located 
in cities where a cluster of Courts function? 
 
15. a) Should there be exclusive Courts for old cases? 
b) Any specific measures taken to prioritize disposal of old cases? 
c) What should be the age of a case (Civil/Criminal) to be treated as ‘old’ and to fall within 
the description of ‘arrears’? 
 
16. (a) Has there been upward revision of the strength of ministerial staff (including process 
service staff, record-keepers, typists/stenos) in the recent past? 
(b) Is there a need to increase the sanctioned strength of such ministerial staff?  If so, 
what percentage? 
 
P.S.: If the Registry of High Court is not in a position to furnish the data/informations at 
one stretch, it may be sent in two installments. 
 
………… 

60 
 
 
ANNEXURE II 
  


61 
 
 
QUESTIONNAIRE 
Information Required 
1. Statement showing institution and disposal figures of all cases (civil and criminal) in 2012 
(1.1.2012 to 31.12.2012) for each of the three cadre of Courts:  
(a) Higher Judicial Services cadre 
(b)  Civil Judge (Senior Division) cadre 
(c) Civil Judge (Junior Division) cadre 
 
2. Total pendency of cases (civil and criminal) as on 31.12.2012 for each cadre:  
(a) Higher Judicial Services cadre 
(b)  Civil Judge (Senior Division) cadre 
(c) Civil Judge (Junior Division) cadre 
 
3. Of the total pendency mentioned in respon se to question 2, the total number of cases 
before each cadre which have been pending for more than one year as on 31.12.2012.  
 
4. Sanctioned strength of judges working in the S ubordinate Courts in the following three 
cadres as on 31.12.2012:  
(a) Higher Judicial Services cadre 
(b)  Civil Judge (Senior Division) cadre 
(c) Civil Judge (Junior Division) cadre 
 
5. Working strength of judges and the number of vacancies in the cadres of (a) Higher 
Judicial Services (b) Civil Judge (Senior Division) and (c) Civil Judge (Junior Division) as 
on 31.12.2012. While calculating the working strength, please exclude those judges who 
are on deputation to posts where they are not working as Courts. 
 
Please provide the above information (questions 1-5) in the following format: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
 
 
Cadre Institutions 
from 1.1. 
2012 to 
31.12.2012  
Disposals 
from 
1.1.2012 
to 
31.12.2012 
Total 
Pendency 
as on 
31.12.2012 
Number of 
cases 
pending for 
more than 
one year as 
on 
31.12.2012 
Sanctioned 
Strength as 
on 
31.12.2012 
Working 
Strength as on 
31.12.2012 
(excluding 
deputations) 
Vacancies 
as on 
31.12.2012 
Higher 
Judicial 
Services  
       
Civil 
Judge 
(Senior 
Div 
       
Civil 
Judge 
(Junior 
Div)  
       
 
6. Whether time frames have been fixed for the trial of cases of different types such as 
murder, kidnapping, money suits etc?  
a. If so, please provide a detailed breakup of the time frame for each kind of case.  
b. On what basis are these time frames fixed? Please provide a copy of the 
appropriate regulation or order pursuant to which the time frames for each type 
of case have been set. 
 
7. Whether interim/interlocutory applications (IAs) in civil and criminal cases, bail 
applications, and committal proceedings before a Magistrate, are counted against 
institutions, disposals, and pendency figures in the data provided in response to question 
nos. 1 and 2? 
 
8. Whether traffic and police challans are counted against institutions, disposals and 
pendency figures in the data provided in response to question nos. 1 and 2? 
 

63 
 
9. Is the practice of counting or not counting IAs, bail applications, committal proceedings 
and traffic and police challans against institutions, disposals and pendency uniform 
across all districts?  
 
10. Statement showing institution and disposal figures for all civil and criminal cases  for 
each year of the last ten years (from 2002 to 2012) in each of the three cadre of Courts:  
(a) Higher Judicial Services cadre 
(b)  Civil Judge (Senior Division) cadre 
(c) Civil Judge (Junior Division) cadre 
 
11. Total pendency of cases for all civil and criminal cases  as on the last day of each year 
from 2002-2012 broken down cadre wise as  
(a) Higher Judicial Services cadre 
(b)  Civil Judge (Senior Division) cadre  
(c) Civil Judge (Junior Division) cadre 
 
12. Sanctioned strength of judges working in the S ubordinate Courts in the following three 
cadres for each year from 2002-2012 (as on the last day of each year) :  
(a) Higher Judicial Services cadre 
(b)  Civil Judge (Senior Division) cadre 
(c) Civil Judge (Junior Division) cadre 
 
13. Working strength of judges and the number of vacancies in the cadres of (a) Higher 
Judicial Services (b) Civil Judge (Senior Division) and (c) Civil Judge (Junior Division) for 
each year from 2002-2012 (as on the last day of each year). While calculating the working 
strength, please exclude those judges who are on deputation to posts where they are not 
working as Courts. 
 
Please provide the above information (questions 10 -13) in the following format for each 
year from 2002-2012: 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
Year Cadre Institutions  Dispos
als 
Total 
Pendency 
as on 
31.12.20-
- 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
as on 
31.12.20-- 
Working Strength 
as on 31.12.20-- 
(excluding 
deputations) 
Vacanci
es as on 
31.12.2
0-- 
 Higher 
Judicial 
Services  
      
Civil 
Judge (Sr 
Div) 
      
Civil 
Judge 
(Junior 
Div)  
      
 
14. If the institution, disposal, and pendency figures provided in response to question 
numbers 10 and 11 include interim/interlocutory/bail applications and committal 
proceedings, please separately provide the institution, disposal and pendency figures for 
such interim/interlocutory/bail applications and committal proceedings, for the last ten 
years for each of the three cadres in the following format: 
 
Year Cadre Institutions of IAs etc Disposals of 
IAs etc 
Total Pendency of 
IAs etc as on 
31.12.20-- 
 Higher Judicial 
Services  
   
Civil Judge (Sr Div)    
Civil Judge (Junior 
Div)  
   
 
15. (A) Are traffic and police challans  included in the institution, disposal, and pendency 
figures provided for 2002-2012 in response to question no. 10 and 11? 
 
(B) Number of traffic and police challans which were instituted, disposed of, and pending 
for each year from 2002-2012 in each of the three cadres of Courts.  

65 
 
(a) Higher Judicial Services cadre 
(b)  Civil Judge (Senior Division) cadre  
(c) Civil Judge (Junior Division) cadre 
 
Please provide the data in the format below: 
  
Information for Challans 
Year Cadre Institutions  Disposals Pendency as 
on 31.12.20-- 
 Higher Judicial Service    
Civil Judge (Senior Div)    
Civil Judge (Junior Div)    
 
 
16. Statement showing institution, disposal, and pendency figures for s. 138 Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1882 matters for each of the last ten years (from 2002 to 2012) provided 
in the following format: 
  
Information for s. 138 Negotiable Instruments Act, 1882 
Year Cadre Institutions  Disposals Pendency as 
on 31.12.20-- 
 Higher Judicial Service    
Civil Judge (Senior Div)    
Civil Judge (Junior Div)    
 
  

66 
 
ANNEXURE III: INSTITUTION, DISPOSAL, PENDENCY, AND 
SANCTIONED STRENGTH IN THE HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE 
 
High Court Year Institution Disposal Pendency 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
Bombay 
2002 168768 176399 321772 345 307 
2003 171774 172186 321360 356 284 
2004 198562 205823 314099 545 409 
2005 187018 200292 300825 547 406 
2006 206184 210261 296748 550 369 
2007 221350 211654 306444 556 361 
2008 233978 228837 311585 556 364 
2009 237697 206209 343073 560 357 
2010 243740 228270 358543 564 369 
2011 244960 243361 360142 478 400 
2012 285048 224198 420992 480 361 
HP 
2002 22132 21420 18806 30 17 
2003 23711 24544 17973 39 27 
2004 26642 26217 18398 40 27 
2005 26457 27136 17719 41 23 
2006 24205 23064 18860 43 26 
2007 26717 26263 19314 43 27 
2008 29189 26783 21720 43 24 
2009 27979 26097 23602 43 26 
2010 31612 30618 24596 43 24 
2011 31235 30510 25321 43 22 
2012 33765 32524 26562 43 25 
Haryana 
2002 44161 45972 70821 105 89 
2003 45298 45049 71070 105 84 
2004 46160 43364 73866 105 83 
2005 47782 46267 75381 109 80 
2006 70089 69625 75845 109 72 
2007 73853 73556 76142 125 73 
2008 83650 85270 74522 133 103 

67 
 
High Court Year Institution Disposal Pendency 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
2009 91484 92667 73339 133 105 
2010 98869 86518 85690 134 98 
2011 117668 103096 100262 135 83 
2012 94647 85485 109424 153 110 
Chandigarh 
2002 2530 2956 5935 5 5 
2003 3380 2729 6586 5 5 
2004 2655 2674 6567 5 4 
2005 3800 3294 7073 6 6 
2006 3882 2968 7987 6 6 
2007 5036 5469 7554 6 6 
2008 4201 4423 7332 6 6 
2009 4488 4191 7629 6 6 
2010 5162 4363 8428 6 6 
2011 6131 6293 8266 6 6 
2012 6569 7202 7633 6 6 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
2002 95731 87434 151471 124 115 
2003 98824 102606 147689 125 123 
2004 96093 94684 149098 125 123 
2005 71965 77935 143128 130 124 
2006 91540 96932 137736 139 118 
2007 101748 104141 135343 145 125 
2008 100496 90565 145274 163 124 
2009 111841 106482 150633 165 146 
2010 112209 109085 153757 165 129 
2011 112710 111892 154575 174 139 
2012 113250 106997 161488 179 136 
Uttarakhand 
2002 18568 14523 14481 45 34 
2003 11916 11665 16072 45 36 
2004 19230 22770 14988 46 34 
2005 13879 14546 15794 46 35 
2006 25473 25105 16228 50 36 
2007 16180 18051 17187 59 33 
2008 18551 17360 18765 72 33 
2009 16779 15640 20016 72 26 

68 
 
High Court Year Institution Disposal Pendency 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
2010 26451 28451 20538 72 33 
2011 22780 24869 20084 74 41 
2012 23974 23462 20548 51 42 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
2002 21107 21230 9432 53 44 
2003 17335 13795 12972 53 44 
2004 21910 19697 15185 53 44 
2005 26288 19623 21850 53 40 
2006 48145 49341 20654 53 39 
2007 36884 31209 26330 54 42 
2008 33795 29327 30798 66 55 
2009 36501 35366 31933 66 50 
2010 38675 6275 34333 66 45 
2011 53642 49275 38700 68 52 
2012 25327 25994 38033 67 50 
Bihar 
2002 52909 49989 251749 394 176 
2003 58056 49647 218584 396 187 
2004 64354 61036 221897 410 185 
2005 64699 50767 230405 412 245 
2006 64402 51292 243929 428 242 
2007 60915 56923 249935 426 294 
2008 67743 66256 250835 428 286 
2009 68884 69014 249392 428 379 
2010 67839 73613 243456 446 356 
2011 63367 60378 246328 470 328 
2012 71569 59961 257797 503 290 
Punjab & 
Haryana 
2002 35735 40987 58997 88 85 
2003 38379 40170 57206 88 76 
2004 40092 49823 47475 88 64 
2005 57732 46932 58275 89 62 
2006 55148 44793 68630 89 56 
2007 72913 64202 77341 107 56 
2008 92718 92799 77260 107 87 
2009 71855 71623 77492 107 91 
2010 71118 63154 85456 125 87 
2011 82838 83135 85159 127 99 

69 
 
High Court Year Institution Disposal Pendency 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
2012 125894 117967 93086 128 93 
Karnataka 
2002 91520 80233 138417 153 114 
2003 86221 86251 138387 207 153 
2004 99392 96553 141226 262 187 
2005 117979 119727 139478 265 167 
2006 129518 119064 149932 271 151 
2007 119167 117248 151851 273 145 
2008 112183 113267 150767 275 140 
2009 146300 136451 160616 281 234 
2010 139780 140325 160071 292 217 
2011 141359 143195 158235 292 222 
2012 142910 136334 164811 332 190 
Delhi 
2002 91244 53634 120158 169 118 
2003 45828 51749 106037 169 135 
2004 43836 47202 74235 174 119 
2005 48816 48316 74735 174 111 
2006 52364 48073 79667 174 126 
2007 56459 52572 86622 175 126 
2008 60103 55279 91446 191 158 
2009 71998 62419 101025 203 153 
2010 69631 77850 92806 206 165 
2011 72609 71949 92115 221 158 
2012 73883 71073 94864 226 172 
Kerala 
2002 121430 107366 217648 100 100 
2003 128351 127210 218789 107 107 
2004 134261 123887 248586 110 107 
2005 165330 152400 261008 127 127 
2006 145771 148588 258191 129 125 
2007 133451 150005 241637 129 121 
2008 137048 146959 231726 129 107 
2009 132604 138548 225782 129 115 
2010 136551 138189 224144 129 114 
2011 149246 140916 232474 132 109 
2012 156335 145905 242904 134 128 
Sikkim 2002 1054 1045 255 7 6 

70 
 
High Court Year Institution Disposal Pendency 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
2003 941 936 190 7 6 
2004 1017 864 343 7 6 
2005 902 812 428 7 5 
2006 876 834 470 7 4 
2007 777 716 531 7 4 
2008 840 785 586 7 5 
2009 1032 970 648 7 5 
2010 1643 1551 740 7 6 
2011 1670 1565 845 7 6 
2012 1459 1580 724 9 4 
Gujarat 
2002 132766 127295 409006 265 143 
2003 116774 102181 423599 335 163 
2004 116544 133780 420530 337 240 
2005 121135 130468 411197 265 200 
2006 185536 212431 386482 269 174 
2007 149335 157742 378075 300 155 
2008 175290 169923 388540 310 173 
2009 148877 166190 371227 323 153 
2010 157403 166264 369043 351 141 
2011 154737 160756 363024 312 149 
2012 156922 174407 345539 312 175 
Overall 
2002 899655 830483 1788948 1883 1353 
2003 846788 830718 1756514 2037 1430 
2004 910748 928374 1746493 2307 1392 
2005 953782 938515 1757296 2271 1631 
2006 1103133 1102371 1761359 2317 1544 
2007 1074785 1069751 1774306 2405 1568 
2008 1149785 1127833 1801156 2486 1665 
2009 1168319 1131867 1836407 2523 1846 
2010 1200683 1154526 1861601 2606 1790 
2011 1254952 1231190 1885530 2539 1814 
2012 1311552 1213089 1984405 2623 1782 
 

71 
 
ANNEXURE IV: Institution, Disposal, Pendency, and Judge Strength 
of Subordinate Judicial Services 
High Court Year Institution Disposal Pendency 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
Bombay 
2002 1858778 1682028 2626644 1048 889 
2003 1767268 1550666 2843246 1053 863 
2004 2003912 1480635 3366523 1058 969 
2005 2523274 1974953 3914844 1061 972 
2006 1976029 2039602 3851271 1161 1135 
2007 1430549 1542482 3739338 1341 1159 
2008 1635798 1547955 3827181 1342 1275 
2009 1519784 1531580 3815385 1497 1452 
2010 1895070 2164393 3546062 1525 1499 
2011 1751317 2381567 2915812 1538 1437 
2012 1464559 1824057 2556314 1546 1394 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2002 140699 135087 130448 88 59 
2003 136709 129385 137772 88 68 
2004 158985 149590 147167 88 70 
2005 166729 154199 159697 76 74 
2006 162789 188529 133957 81 74 
2007 129584 139945 123596 83 71 
2008 126184 124834 124946 83 72 
2009 156464 145046 136364 83 73 
2010 187331 172145 151550 88 75 
2011 194830 182152 164228 89 78 
2012 247301 213528 198001 89 75 
Haryana 2002 423340 370009 539894 198 120 

72 
 
2003 316309 323406 532797 198 119 
2004 213447 233370 512874 198 129 
2005 233946 315353 431467 198 124 
2006 268942 251279 449130 198 150 
2007 308042 331287 480292 264 151 
2008 358493 362896 475889 264 176 
2009 318733 307818 486804 273 179 
2010 337077 346630 477251 276 173 
2011 484297 472998 488550 341 249 
2012 614417 648106 454861 375 288 
Chandigarh 
2002 40038 37174 51488 14 12 
2003 41015 34694 57809 14 11 
2004 51820 46005 63624 14 12 
2005 60212 50915 72921 14 12 
2006 62537 50358 85100 14 13 
2007 65436 55480 95056 14 13 
2008 109796 112273 92579 14 13 
2009 99830 104886 87523 14 13 
2010 103210 118796 71937 14 14 
2011 135405 155492 51850 14 14 
2012 121828 131356 42322 14 14 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
2002 492477 464648 731227 563 493 
2003 511811 454374 788664 564 484 
2004 498792 470948 816508 569 545 
2005 465612 464831 817289 570 499 
2006 494559 501153 810695 580 534 

73 
 
2007 546465 540849 816311 653 489 
2008 561129 563280 814160 656 491 
2009 519170 524953 808377 657 630 
2010 478351 477295 809433 657 600 
2011 474233 492504 791162 660 609 
2012 476045 503752 763455 661 597 
Uttarakhand 
2002 63471 60685 98761 100 57 
2003 84094 75421 106094 105 67 
2004 125150 110953 117835 109 66 
2005 81566 80485 117443 109 60 
2006 130455 133291 114541 109 58 
2007 115015 102868 123858 107 58 
2008 158277 130079 151669 159 80 
2009 136623 119476 168704 159 89 
2010 197015 228142 135055 159 96 
2011 167138 174908 125650 160 92 
2012 173196 154947 143947 170 108 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
2002 107927 103444 105252 149 138 
2003 121061 113981 112332 149 129 
2004 60277 125781 116758 149 132 
2005 138964 125633 130089 149 128 
2006 223656 226049 128566 149 136 
2007 200788 189435 139048 149 120 
2008 153970 145034 147984 141 99 
2009 200021 197751 150254 141 100 
2010 204034 199601 154687 141 100 

74 
 
2011 238839 225918 167608 139 121 
2012 250609 265106 153111 139 122 
Bihar 
2002 241112 184295 891689 930 785 
2003 248430 194065 946054 930 764 
2004 250115 176547 1019622 930 745 
2005 271572 201072 1006926 934 615 
2006 283471 224219 1065759 934 597 
2007 263979 195989 1205011 934 543 
2008 269699 208856 1182508 935 836 
2009 292312 296060 1241441 939 670 
2010 299184 242890 1269602 977 624 
2011 292951 227256 1360978 977 619 
2012 345838 244822 1453583 984 619 
Punjab 
2002 536029 491104 440067 213 132 
2003 545074 517127 468014 213 131 
2004 426638 395929 498723 213 176 
2005 532490 529032 502181 239 170 
2006 508928 513275 497834 239 202 
2007 500368 483458 514744 239 185 
2008 424989 445770 493963 239 222 
2009 370892 368029 496826 239 206 
2010 414131 427068 483889 301 217 
2011 579696 595542 468043 366 267 
2012 616895 640960 443978 403 322 
Karnataka 
2002 512990 439741 775525 535 426 
2003 462217 449815 787927 551 400 

75 
 
2004 477312 442256 822983 561 450 
2005 507070 477151 852902 562 464 
2006 509084 492151 869835 583 458 
2007 548609 534226 884218 595 449 
2008 552894 553754 883358 622 455 
2009 578134 696561 764931 632 534 
2010 513755 500509 778177 649 522 
2011 528117 489463 816831 652 517 
2012 593277 562940 847168 754 516 
Delhi 
2002 989702 773338 675871 218 112 
2003 1047124 1101240 619742 218 175 
2004 1687322 1686266 649234 218 151 
2005 1675281 1603152 721363 218 151 
2006 1769093 1708806 782277 218 134 
2007 2162412 1964834 993749 220 157 
2008 1284097 1220549 1057297 382 164 
2009 1465462 1365512 962177 382 253 
2010 823204 932738 812422 382 226 
2011 943021 1087596 666363 382 279 
2012 742909 847426 562323 382 257 
Kerala 
2002 816701 776841 632589 275 275 
2003 810292 828365 614516 276 276 
2004 794539 795859 613196 277 276 
2005 830136 823423 646852 278 254 
2006 746292 738019 655125 278 277 
2007 814731 766086 703770 278 268 

76 
 
2008 908403 865924 746249 278 256 
2009 967278 943806 769721 278 276 
2010 994807 1008250 756278 278 271 
2011 922762 851458 827582 278 259 
2012 1136115 966437 997260 281 259 
Sikkim 
2002 1156 1135 198 6 4 
2003 1157 1211 125 6 4 
2004 1410 1294 207 6 2 
2005 2345 2115 392 6 5 
2006 2111 2025 392 6 5 
2007 2374 2238 441 6 4 
2008 2414 2147 630 6 3 
2009 2025 1871 686 6 4 
2010 2051 2011 596 6 3 
2011 2229 2195 539 6 3 
2012 2483 2477 483 8 6 
Gujarat 
2002 873442 731898 2915996 492 413 
2003 1112521 867435 3161082 500 419 
2004 1148122 855368 3565198 498 425 
2005 1124536 1168284 3521450 592 547 
2006 1515065 2551017 2654339 611 549 
2007 1146807 1601336 2199810 591 539 
2008 1050073 1268947 1980936 656 621 
2009 1050618 1125988 1905566 670 569 
2010 1137288 1114884 1927970 749 671 
2011 918316 923731 1922555 1351 673 

77 
 
2012 927658 922324 1927889 1351 859 
Overall 
2002 7097862 6251427 10615649 4829 3915 
2003 7205082 6641185 11176174 4865 3910 
2004 7897841 6970801 12310452 4888 4148 
2005 8613733 7970598 12895816 5006 4075 
2006 8653011 9619773 12098821 5161 4322 
2007 8235159 8450513 12019242 5474 4206 
2008 7596216 7552298 11979349 5777 4763 
2009 7677346 7729337 11794759 5970 5048 
2010 7586508 7935352 11374909 6202 5091 
2011 7633151 8262780 10767751 6953 5217 
2012 7713130 7928238 10544695 7157 5436 

78 
 
ANNEXURE V: Average Institution, Disposal and Pendency of Traffic and Police Challans in 2010-12 
as a percentage of Average Total Institution, Disposal and Pendency in 2010-12. 
 
High Court 
Total Statistics 
Traffic Challans/Police Challans 
(TC/PC) NI Act TC/PC as % of Total NI Act as % of Total 
Institution Disposal Pendency Institution Disposal Pendency 
Instituti
on Disposal 
Pendenc
y 
Instit
ution 
Dispo
sal 
Pende
ncy 
Insti
tutio
n 
Dispo
sal 
Pende
ncy 
Bombay 1703648.7 2123339 2556314 785504 1021681 1131571 0 0 0 46.1 48.1 44.2 0 0 0 
Gujarat 994420.7 986979.7 1927889 572839 549857.3 834906 129298 99473.3 291432 57.9 56 43.3 12.4 10.0 15.1 
Karnataka 545049.7 517637.3 847168 0 0 0 120815.3 132916.7 180917 0 0 0 22.6 26.0 21.4 
Chandigarh 120147.7 135214.7 42322 77463.7 79886.7 13733 8668 21904 9037 65.8 60.4 32.4 7.5 16.2 21.4 
Haryana 478597 489244.7 454861 206005.3 206136.7 92084 34541.7 36098.7 57924 44 42.7 20.2 7.8 7.9 12.7 
Punjab 536907.3 554523.3 443978 262370.7 262298.3 87712 35409 46448.7 47928 48.4 46.9 19.8 7 8.9 10.8 
Jharkhand 92309.7 93836.7 238897 4425.7 4075 6552 4324.3 2962.7 12522 4.8 4.4 2.7 4.7 3.2 5.2 
Himachal 
Pradesh 209820.7 189275 198001 88642.7 87623.7 36774 7984.3 6449.3 12994 43.4 46.7 18.6 3.9 3.5 6.6 
J&K 231160.7 230208.3 153111 84278 87488.7 35265 1947.3 1442 5523 36.5 38.1 23.0 0.8 0.6 3.6 
Sikkim 2254.3 2227.7 483 493.66667 493.3 0 23 15 66 21.8 22.1 0 1 0.7 13.7 
Bihar 312657.7 238322.7 1453583 145863 105961 754408 1361.7 447.7 6553 46.6 44.5 51. 9 0.4 0.2 0.5 
Andhra 
Pradesh 476209.7 491183.7 763455 134717.3 134733.7 273189 46361.3 49479 77183 28.3 27.4 35.8 9.7 10.0 10.1 
Uttarakhan
d 179116.3 185999 143947 55977.3 75951 51585 5870.3 5863.3 14241 31.7 39.2 35.8 3.4 3.3 9.9 
Kerala* 1017894.7 942048.3 997260 252908.3 232177 134268 54338.7 61695.3 7291 24.8 24.7 13.5 5.8 7.0 0.8 
Total 6900194.7 7180040 9224009 2671488.7 2848363 3452047 450943 465195.7 723611 38.7 39.7 37.4 6.5 6.5 7.8 