  
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
LAW COMMISSION 
OF  
INDIA 
 
Report No. 246 
 
Amendments to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 
 
August, 2014 
 
 

ii 
 
The 20 th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three years from 1 st 
September, 2012 by Order No. A -45012/1/2012-Admn.III (LA) dated the 8 th 
October, 2012 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, 
Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi. 
 
The Law Commission consists of a full time Chairman, four full -time Members 
(including Member -Secretary), two Ex -officio Members and five part -time 
Members.  
  
 
 
 
Chairman  
Hon’ble Justice A.P. Shah  
 
 
Full-time Members  
Justice Mr. S.N. Kapoor  
Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma  
Justice Ms. Usha Mehra  
Mr. N.L. Meena, Member-Secretary  
 
 
Ex-officio Member  
Mr. P.K. Malhotra, Secretary (Department of Legal Affairs and  
Legislative Department)  
 
 
Part-time Members  
Mr.  R. Venkataramani  
Prof. (Dr.) Yogesh Tyagi  
Dr. Bijai Narain Mani  
Prof.(Dr.) Gurjeet Singh 
 
 
 

iii 
 
The Law Commission is located in  
14th  Floor, Hindustan Times House,  
K.G. Marg,  
New Delhi-110 001  
 
 
 
Member Secretary  
Mr. N.L. Meena  
 
 
Research Staff  
Dr. (Smt.) Pawan Sharma    : Joint Secretary & Law Officer  
Shri A.K. Upadhyay   : Additional Law Officer  
Shri S.C. Mishra     : Deputy Law Officer  
Dr. V.K. Singh     : Deputy Legal Adviser  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The text of this Report is available on the Internet at :  
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in  
 
 
 
 
 
© Government of India  
   Law Commission of India  

iv 
 
 
D.O. No.6(3)238/2012-LC(LS)               5 August 2014 
Dear Mr. Ravi Shankar Prasad ji, 
 I am enclosing herewith the 246 th Report of the Commission on 
‘Amendment to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act , 1996 ’. The 
Commission was entrusted with the task of reviewing the provisions of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (‘the Act’) in view of the several 
inadequacies observed in the functioning of the Act.  
 The Commission had earlier recommended various amendments to 
the Act under its 176 th Report on the ‘ Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Bill, 2001’. After considering the recommendations of the 176 th 
Report, the Government decided to accept almost all such recommendations 
and accordingly, introduced the ‘ Arbitration and Conciliation (Am endment) 
Bill, 2003’ in the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2003. Subsequently, in the 
wake of the report of the Justice Saraf Committee the Bill was referred to the 
Department Related Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice for a further analysis.  
 The Departmental Related Standing Committee was eventually of the 
view that many provisions in the Bill were insufficient and contentious and, 
therefore, the Bill in its present form should be withdrawn and be 
reintroduced after consid ering its recommendations. Accordingly, the Bill 
was withdrawn from the Rajya Sabha. 
 In order to re -look into the provisions of the Act, the Ministry of Law 
and Justice issued a consultation paper on 08 th April, 2010 inviting 
suggestions from eminent lawyers, judges, industry members, institutions 
and various other stakeholders. After receiving various responses to the 
Paper, the Ministry held several National Conferences across the country 
during July/August, 2010 inviting suggestions from lawyers, judges, 
industry, arbitration institutions and public at large. On the basis of such 

v 
 
comments and suggestions received at the National Conferences, the 
Ministry prepared draft proposals and a Draft Note was prepared for the 
Cabinet. 
 Thereafter, the Ministry ask ed the Commission to undertake a study 
of the amendments proposed to the Act in the ‘ Draft Note for the Cabinet ’. 
Accordingly, the Commission set up an expert Committee comprising of 
several eminent persons from the field of law to study the proposed 
amendments and make suggestions accordingly. Written responses were 
also received from various institutions like FICCI, CII and ASSOCHAM. 
 After extensive deliberations and study, the Commission has now 
prepared the present Report. 
 Chapter III of the present R eport contains the proposed amendments. 
Also Annexure to the Report contains the proposed amendments in track 
changes made in the present Act along with notes. 
 With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
  
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
Mr. Ravi Shankar Prasad 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi - 110115 

vi 
 
Amendments to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
 
Table of Contents 
Ch. No. Title Pages 
I Background to the Report 1 
 History of Arbitration Law in India 1 
 Scheme of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 3 
 176th Report of the Law Commission 4 
 Justice B.P. Saraf Committee 5 
 Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on 
Personnel Public Grievances and Law & Justice 
5 
 The Present Report by the 20th Law Commission  6 
II Introduction to the Proposed Amendments 8 
 Institutional Arbitration in India 9 
 Fees of Arbitrators 10 
 Conduct of Arbitral Proceedings 12 
 Judiciary and Arbitration 13 
 Delays in Courts, Before the Tribunal and Investment Treaty 
Risk 
15 
 Scope and Nature of Pre-Arbitral Judicial Intervention 18 
 Setting Aside of Domestic Awards and Recognition / 
Enforcement of Foreign Awards 
21 
 Judicial Interventions in Foreign seated arbitrations 23 
 Automatic Stay of Enforcement of the Award upon Admission 
of Challenge 
25 
 Powers of Tribunal to Order Interim Measures 26 
 Arbitrability of Fraud and Complicated Issues of Fact 27 
 Neutrality of Arbitrators 30 
 Definition of “Party” 31 
 Interest on Sums Awarded 33 
 Costs 34 
 Other Amendments 35 
 Transitory Provision 36 
III Proposed Amendments to the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 
37 
 Amendment to the Preamble 37 
 Amendment to Section 2 37 
 Insertion of Section 6A 40 
 Amendment to Section 7 42 

vii 
 
 Amendment to Section 8 42 
 Amendment to Section 9 44 
 Amendment to Section 11 45 
 Amendment to Section 12 48 
 Amendment to Section 14 49 
 Amendment to Section 16 50 
 Amendment to Section 17 50 
 Amendment to Section 20 52 
 Amendment to Section 23 52 
 Amendment to Section 24 52 
 Amendment to Section 25 53 
 Amendment to Section 28 53 
 Amendment to Section 31 53 
 Amendment to Section 34 54 
 Amendment to Section 36 56 
 Amendment to Section 37 56 
 Amendment to Section 47 57 
 Amendment to Section 48 57 
 Insertion of Section 85A 58 
 Amendment to Schedules  59 
 Annexure: The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
showing the proposed amendments in track changes 
along with notes. 
 
i - xlv 
 
 
 

1 
 
Chapter I 
BACKGROUND TO THE REPORT 
 
1. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (he reinafter the “ 1996 Act”), is an 
Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic arbitration, 
international commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign arbitral 
awards, and to define the law relating to conciliation and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
 
HISTORY OF ARBITRATION LAW IN INDIA 
 
2. Regulation of the conduct of arbitration has a long history in India. The first 
direct law on the subject of arbitration was the Indian Arbitration Act, 1899;  
but, its application wa s limited to the Presidency towns of Calcutta, Bombay 
and Madras. This was followed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 where 
the Second Schedule was completely devoted to arbitration.  
3. The first major consolidated legislation to govern the conduct of arb itrations 
across the country was the Arbitration Act, 1940 which was based on the 
(English) Arbitration Act, 1934. The Act repealed the Arbitration Act, 1899 and 
the relevant provisions in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, including the 
Second Schedule th ereof. The 1940 Act however , did not deal with 
enforcement of foreign awards, and for which purpose, the legislature had 
passed the Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937 to deal  with 
Geneva Convention Awards and the Foreign Awards (Recognition an d 
Enforcement) Act, 1961 to deal with New York Convention Awards. The 
working of the 1940 Act, which dealt with domestic arbitrations, was far from 
satisfactory. The arbitral regime at that point of time was premised largely on 
a mistrust of the arbitral p rocess, and the same was the subject of much 
adverse comment by the courts.  
4. The Supreme Court in F.C.I. v. Joginderpal Mohinderpal , (1989) 2 SCC 347, 
at para 7 observed –  

2 
 
“We should make the law of arbitration simple, less technical and more 
responsible to the actual realities of the situation, but must be 
responsive to the canons of justice and fair play and make the 
arbitrator adhere to such process and norms which will create 
confidence, not only by doing justice between the parties, but by 
creating a sense that justice appears to have been done.” 
 
5. Several other cases adversely commented upon the working of the 1940 Act. 
The anguish of the Supreme Court is evident from the observations of D.A. 
Desai J. in Guru Nanak Foundation v Rattan Singh, (1981) 4 SCC 634: 
“Interminable, time consuming, complex and expensive Court 
procedures impelled jurists to search for an alternative Forum, less 
formal, more effective and speedy for resolution of disputes, avoiding 
procedural claptrap and this led them to Arbitrat ion Act, 1940 (“Act” for 
short). However, the way in which the proceedings under the Act are 
conducted and without exception challenged in Courts, has made 
Lawyers laugh and legal philosophers weep. Experience shows and 
law reports bear ample testimony tha t the proceedings under that Act 
have become highly technical accompanied by unending prolixity, at 
every stage providing a legal trap to the unwary. Informal Forum 
chosen by the parties for expeditious disposal of their disputes has by 
the decisions of the Court been clothed with 'legalese' of unforeseeable 
complexity.” 
  
6. The working of the 1940 Act was also the subject of the 210th Report of the 
Public Accounts Committee of the Fifth Lok Sabha. The Law Commission of 
India also examined the working of the 1940 Act in its 76th Report.   
7. The problem became more acute and pronounced after the liberalisation of 
the economy in 1991. Foreign investors required a stable business 
environment and a strong commitment to the rule of law, based on a 
predictable and eff icient system of resolution of disputes . Thus,  alternative 
systems like arbitration, were seen as a prerequisite to attract and sustain 
foreign investment.  
8. In order to address these problems, the earlier regime was sought to be 
replaced by the Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1995 which was introduced in 
Parliament. Since the requisite legislative sanction could not be accorded to 
the 1995 Bill, the President of India promulgated the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Ordinance, 1996 on the same lines as the 1995 Bill.  Interestingly, 
the Ordinance had to be promulgated twice because Parliament could not 

3 
 
enact the law in the required time period. Finally, Parliament passed the Bill in 
terms of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter “the Act”) 
which received the assent of the President of India on 16.08.1996 and came 
into force on 22.08.1996 . However, it was made applicable to cases where 
the arbitral proceedings commenced as of 25.01.1996. The 1996 Act is based 
on the UNCITRAL Model Law on Inter national Commercial Arbitration, 1985 
and the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules, 1980. The 1996 Act repealed all three 
earlier laws (the 1937 Act, the 1940 Act and the 1967 Act as set out above) 
and applied to (i) domestic arbitrations; (ii) enforcement of foreign awards; 
and (iii) conciliations. Although the UNCITRAL Model Law was intended to 
provide a model law to deal with international commercial arbitration s; in the 
1996 Act, the UNCITRAL Model Law provisions, with some minor 
modifications, are made applicab le to both domestic and international 
commercial arbitrations.  
9. The Act is based on the UNCITRAL Model Law (a set of 36 Articles) which 
was drafted to govern all international arbitrations by a working group of the 
United Nations and finally adopted by the  U.N. Commission on International 
Trade Law (UNCITRAL) on June 21 st, 1985. The Resolution of the UN 
General Assembly envisages that all countries should give due consideration 
to the Model Law, in view of the desirability of uniformity of the law on arbitr al 
procedures and the specific needs of international commercial practice. This 
is also duly reflected in the Preamble of the Act of 1996 saying that: “ it is 
expedient to make law respecting arbitration and conciliation, taking into 
account the aforesaid Model Law…”.  
SCHEME OF THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996 
10. While drafting the 1996 Act, one of the major considerations was the need to 
curtail delays in the arbitral process. Another objective was to bring in its fold, 
international commercial arbi trations; in contrast the 1940 Act only dealt with 
domestic arbitrations. Some of t hese objectives are clearly reflected in the 
Objects and Reasons of the Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 1995 as stated 
herein below: 

4 
 
(a) To comprehensively cover internationa l commercial arbitration 
and conciliation as also domestic arbitration and conciliation; 
(b) To minimise the supervisory role of courts in the arbitral 
process; 
(c) To provide that every final arbitral award is enforced in the same 
manner as if it was a decree of court. 
 
11. The 1996 Act covers both international and domestic arbitration, i.e., where at 
least one party is not an Indian national and where both parties are Indian 
nationals respectively.  
12. Part I of the 1996 Act titled ‘Arbitration’ is general in nature an d contains ten 
chapters. Part II deals with ‘Enforcement of Certain Foreign Awards’. Chapter 
I of Part II deals with New York Convention Awards and Chapter II deals with 
Geneva Convention Awards. Part III of the 1996 Act deals with Conciliation 
which does not have any bearing on the present Report. Part IV of the 1996 
Act deals with supplementary provisions.  
13. The 1996 Act also contains three Schedules. The First Schedule refers to the 
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitration 
Awards (also covered under Section 44 of the 1996 Act). The Second 
Schedule refers to Protocol on Arbitration Clauses (also covered under 
Section 53 of the 1996 Act). The Third Schedule refers to the Convention on 
the Execution of Foreign Arbitration Awards.  
176TH REPORT OF THE LAW COMMISSION 
14. In the year 2001, the Government made a reference to this Commission to 
undertake a comprehensive review of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 in view of the various shortcomings observed in its working and also 
various representations received by the Government in this regard.  
15. The Commission considered such representations which pointed out that the 
UNCITRAL Model (on the basis of which the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 was enacted) was mainly intended to enable various countries to have a 
common model for ‘International Commercial Arbitration’ but the 1996 Act had 
made provisions of such a Model Law applicable also to cases of purely 

5 
 
domestic arbitration between Indian nationals. Therefore, this was givi ng rise 
to some difficulties in the implementation of the Act.  
16. In addition, there were also several conflicting judgments of various High 
Courts with regard to the interpretation of the provision s of the 1996 Act. 
Several other aspects about the difficulties in the working of the Act were also 
brought to the notice of the Commission.  
17. After an in -depth study of the law on the subject, the Commission made its 
recommendations for bringing amendments in the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 in the form of its 176th Report.  
JUSTICE B.P. SARAF COMMITTEE 
18. The Government considered the recommendations of the 176 th Report and 
after consulting the State Governments and various institutions, decided to 
accept almost all the recommendations. Accordingly, the Arbi tration and 
Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 
December 22, 2003. 
19. Subsequently, on July 22 , 2004, the Government constituted a Committee 
known as the “Justice Saraf Committee on Arbitration” under the 
Chairmanship of D r. Justice B.P. Saraf to make an in -depth study of the 
analysis of the recommendations of the 176 th Report of the Law Commission 
and all aspects of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2003. 
The Justice Saraf Committee thereafter gave a detai led report on January 29, 
2005. 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENTAL RELATED STANDING COMMITTEE ON PERSONNEL, 
PUBLIC GRIEVANCES, LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
20. In light of the Justice Saraf Committee Report, the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 was then referr ed to the Departmental Related 
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice for 
study and analysis. Several eminent lawyers, representatives from the trade 
and industry, Public Sector Undertakings  and representatives of the 
concerned Departments appeared before the said Committee and expressed 

6 
 
their views in detail. The Committee thereafter submitted its report to the 
Parliament on August 4, 2005. 
21. The Committee was of the view that the provisions of the Bill gave room for 
substantial intervention by court in the arbitration process. The Committee 
stressed upon the need for popularizing institutional arbitration in India and 
called for establishment of an institution in our country in this regard which 
would be along international standards.  
22. The Committee further expressed the view that many provisions were not only 
insufficient, but also contentious .  T herefore, the said Bill ought to be 
withdrawn and a fresh Bill be brought after considering the recommendations 
of the Committee. 
23. In vi ew of the various amendments recommended by the Committee, the 
above Bill was withdrawn from the Rajya Sabha. At that time, it was decided 
that a new Bill must be introduced in the Parliament after undertaking an in -
depth study of the various recommendations of the Committee. 
THE PRESENT REPORT BY THE 20TH LAW COMMISSION 
24. In order to undertake a study for suggesting amendments to the 1996 Act, the 
Ministry of Law and Justice also issued a Consultation Paper on April 08, 
2010 inviting suggestions/comments fro m eminent lawyers, judges, industry 
members, institutions and various other sections of the government and other 
stakeholders.  
25. Many written responses were received by the Ministry which were collated 
and studied in detail. The Ministry of Law and Justice thereafter held National 
Conferences in New Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore during July/August 2010 , 
inviting suggestions on the Consultation Paper from various significant 
quarters including lawyers, judges, industry, arbitration institutions and the 
public at large.  
26. Taking into account the comments and suggestions received in writing and 
expressed orally in the National Conferences and discussions held thereafter, 
the Ministry prepared draft proposals. On the basis of the draft proposals, the 
Ministry prepar ed a ‘Draft Note for the Cabinet’. Thereafter, vide F. No. A -
60011/48/2010-Admn.III(LA), the Ministry of Law and Justice requested the 

7 
 
Law Commission to undertake a study of the amendment proposed to the Act 
in the ‘Draft Note for the Cabinet’. Accordingly  the present reference came to 
this Commission in the aforesaid terms. 
27. Pursuant to this Reference, the Law Commission set up an expert committee 
to study the proposed amendments and make suggestion s accordingly. The 
Committee comprised of several eminent p ersons from the legal field such as 
Justice Rohinton Nariman (then Senior Counsel), Mr. Arvind Datar, Mr. 
Shishir Dholakia, Mr. Darius Khambatta, Mr. Dushyant Dave, Mr. Ciccu 
Mukhopadhyay, Ms. Zia Mody, Mr. N.L. Rajah, Mr. Ajay Thomas, Mr. Suhaan 
Mukherjee, Mr. Anirudh Krishnan , Mr. Anirudh Wadhwa , Mr. Giriraj 
Subramanium and Mr. Ashutosh Ray. 
28. Written notes and suggestions were thereafter circulated to the Commission 
by Justice Rohinton Nariman, Mr. Arvind Datar, Mr. Darius Khambatta, Mr. 
Shishir Dholakia, Mr. Dushyant Dave and Mr. N.L. Rajah. A written note was 
also given separately by Mr. Gourab Banerji (then Additional Solicitor General 
of India).  
29. Written responses were also given by various ins titutions like FICCI, 
Assocham and CII. Mr. Lalit Bhasin, Sr. Advocate, Mrs. Pallavi Shroff and Mr. 
Tejas Karia , Advocates on behalf of CII, and Mr. D. Sengupta on behalf of 
FICCI made valuable suggestions.  
30. The Commission also held various rounds of discussions with Justice 
Jagannath Rao, former Chairman of the Law Commission and author of the 
earlier Report (176th Report) on the subject. The Commission also considered 
the views of Justice V. Ramasubarmaniam of the Madras High Court.  
31. The Commission also separately held a series of discussions with Mr. Anirudh 
Wadhwa and Mr. Anirudh Krishnan, whose inputs were incisive, vital and 
require special appreciation.  
32. Thereafter, upon extensive deliberations, discussions and in -depth study, the 
Commission has given shape to the present Report. 

8 
 
CHAPTER II 
INTRODUCTION TO THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS 
1. Litigating in courts in India is a time-consuming and expensive exercise , and 
justice usually eludes both parties to an action . The injustice is particularly 
egregious in commercial disputes, where cases remain pending for years. It is 
in this context that one must examine “arbitration” as a method of dispute 
resolution that aims to provide an effective and efficient alternative to 
traditional dispute resolution through Court.  
2. In India, as in most developed legal systems, commercial contracts, whether 
with private persons or with the State, usually contain an arbitration clause 
where parties agree to settle any prospective dispute through arbitration 
instead of going to court. Arbitration has thus emerged as a commercially 
significant method of dispute resolution; and its importance has only grown 
since liberalisation in 1991.  
3. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996  (hereinafter “the Act”)  is based on 
the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration , 1985 and 
the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules, 1980 . The Act has now been in force for 
almost two decades, and in this period of time, although arbitration has fast 
emerged as a frequently chosen  alternative to litigation, it has come to be 
afflicted with various problems including those of high costs and delays , 
making it no better than either the earlier regime which it was intended to 
replace; or to litigation, to which it intends to provide an alternative. Delays are 
inherent in the arbitration process, and costs of arbitrati on can be 
tremendous. Even though courts play a pivotal role in giving finality to certain 
issues which arise before, after and even during an arbitration, there exists a 
serious threat of arbitration related litigation getting caught up in the huge list 
of pending cases before the courts.  After the award, a challenge under 
section 34 makes the award inexecutable and such petitions remain pending 
for several years.  The object of quick alternative disputes resolution 
frequently stands frustrated.    
4. There is, therefore, an urgent need to revise certain provisions of the Act to 
deal with these problems that frequently arise in the arbitral process .The 

9 
 
purpose of this Chapter is to lay down the foundation for the changes 
suggested in the report of the Commiss ion. The suggested amendments 
address a variety of issues  that plague the present regime of arbitration in 
India and, therefore, before setting out the amendments, it would be useful to 
identify the problems that the suggested amendments are intended to re medy 
and the context in which the said problems arise and hence the context in 
which their solutions must be seen.  
INSTITUTIONAL ARBITRATION IN INDIA 
5. Arbitration may be conducted ad hoc  or under institutional procedures and 
rules. When parties choose to p roceed with ad hoc  arbitration, the parties 
have the choice of drafting their own rules and procedures which fit the needs 
of their dispute. Institutional arbitration, on the other hand, is one in which a 
specialized institution with a permanent character intervenes and assumes 
the functions of aiding and administering the arbitral process, as provided by 
the rules of such institution. Essentially, the contours and the procedure s of 
the arbitral proceedings are determined by the institution designated by th e 
parties. Such institutions may also provide qualified arbitrators empanelled 
with the institution. Further, assistance is also usually available from the 
secretariat and professional staff of the institution. As a result of the structured 
procedure and a dministrative support provided by institutional arbitration, it 
provides distinct advantages, which are unavailable to parties opting for ad 
hoc arbitration.  
6. The spread of institutional arbitration however, is minimal in India  and has 
unfortunately not re ally kick -started. In this context, t he Act is institutional 
arbitration agnostic – meaning thereby, it neither promotes nor discourages 
parties to consider institutional arbitration. The changes suggested by the 
Commission however, attempt to encourage th e culture of institutional 
arbitration in India , which the Commission feels will go a long way to redress 
the institutional and systemic malaise that has seriously affected the growth of 
arbitration.  
7. The Commission has , therefore, recommended the addition  of Explanation 2 
to section 11(6A) of the Act with the hope that High Courts and the Supreme 

10 
 
Court, while acting in the exerci se of their jurisdiction under section  11 of the 
Act will take steps to encourage the parties to refer their disputes to 
institutionalised arbitration . Similarly, the Commission seeks to accord 
legislative sanction to rules of institutional arbitration which recognise the 
concept of an “emergency arbitrator” – and the same has been done by 
broadening the definition of an “arbitral tribunal” under section 2(d).  
8. In this context, the Commission notes the establishment and working of the 
Delhi High Court International Arbitration Centre which started in 2009 and is 
now fairly established and is providing good service to its users. The Punjab & 
Haryana High Court has also started an Arbitration Centre in 2014  with its 
own set of rules. The Commission further notes the working of the Indian 
Council of Arbitration (ICA), which is associated with FICCI and which is one 
of the earliest arbitr al institutions in the country. The Commission further 
commends the working of the Nani Palkhivala Arbitration Centre in Chennai 
which similarly has its own set rules, governing body and staff, and is well 
established in the southern India.  
9. In order to fu rther encourage and establish the culture of institutional 
arbitration in India, the Commission believes it is important for trade bodies 
and commerce chambers to start new arbitration centers with their own rules, 
which can be modeled on the rules of the more established centers. The 
Government can also help by providing land and funds for establishment of 
new arbitration centers. It is important to start a dialogue between the legal 
community which is involved in the practice of arbitration, and the busin ess 
community which comprise of the users of arbitration, in order that institutional 
arbitration takes wing. The Government may also consider formation of a 
specialised body, like an Arbitral Commission of India, which has 
representation from all the stak eholders of arbitration and which could be 
entrusted with the task of, inter alia , encouraging the spread of institutional 
arbitration in the country.  
FEES OF ARBITRATORS 
10. One of the main complaints against arbitration  in India , especially ad hoc  
arbitration, is the high costs associated with the same – including the 

11 
 
arbitrary, unilateral and disproportionate fixation of fees by several arbitrators. 
The Commission believes that if arbitration is really to become a cost effective 
solution for dispute resolut ion in the domestic context , there should be some 
mechanism to rationalise the fee structure for arbitrations. The subject of fees 
of arbitrators has been the subject of the lament of the Supreme Court in 
Union of India v. Singh Builders Syndicate , (2009) 4 SCC 523 where it was 
observed:  
“[T]he cost of arbitration can be high if the arbitral tribunal consists of 
retired Judges… There is no doubt a prevalent opinion that the cost of 
arbitration becomes very high in many cases where retired Judges are 
arbitrators. The large number of sittings and charging of very high fees 
per sitting, with several add -ons, without any ceiling, have many a time 
resulted in the cost of arbitration approaching or even exceeding the 
amount involved in the dispute or the amount o f the award. When an 
arbitrator is appointed by a court without indicating fees, either both 
parties or at least one party is at a disadvantage. Firstly, the parties 
feel constrained to agree to whatever fees is suggested by the 
arbitrator, even if it is h igh or beyond their capacity. Secondly, if a high 
fee is claimed by the arbitrator and one party agrees to pay such fee, 
the other party, who is unable to afford such fee or reluctant to pay 
such high fee, is put to an embarrassing position. He will not be  in a 
position to express his reservation or objection to the high fee, owing to 
an apprehension that refusal by him to agree for the fee suggested by 
the arbitrator, may prejudice his case or create a bias in favour of the 
other party who readily agreed to pay the high fee.” 
11. In order to provide a workable solution to this problem, the Commission has 
recommended a model schedule of fees and has empowered the High Court 
to frame appropriate rules for fixation of fees for arbitrators and for which 
purpose it may take the said model schedule of fees into account. The model 
schedule of fees are based on the fee schedule set by the Delhi High Court 
International Arbitration Centre, which are over 5 years old , and which have 
been suitably revised . The schedule of fees would require regular updating, 

12 
 
and must be reviewed every 3 -4 years to ensure that they continue to stay  
realistic.  
12. The Commission notes that International Commercial arbit rations involve 
foreign parties  who might have different values and standards  for fees for 
arbitrators; similarly, institutional rules might have their own schedule of fees; 
and in both cases greater deference must be accorded to party autonomy . 
The Commission has, therefore, expressly restricted its recommendations in 
the context of purely domestic, ad hoc, arbitrations.  
 CONDUCT OF ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS  
13. The Commission notes that there are numerous provisions in the Act which 
deal with the conduct of arbitral proceedings, and these are set out in Chapter 
V of the Act. However, despite existing provisions in the Act which are aimed 
at ensuring proper conduct of arbitral proceedings, the Commission found that 
the experience of arbitrating in India has been largely unsatisfactory  for all 
stakeholders.  
14. Proceedings in arbitrations are becoming a replica of court proceedings, 
despite the specific provisions in Chapter V of the Act which provide adequate 
powers to the arbitral tribunal. The Commission hopes that arbitral tribunals 
would use the existing provisions in the Act, in order to reduce delays. 
15. In ad hoc  arbitrations, fees are charged "per sitting"  basis (with sometimes 
two/three sittings in a day in the same dispute and between the same parties), 
dates are usually spread out over a long period of time, and proceedings 
continue for years - which results in increase of costs, and denial of justice  to 
the aggrieved party . There is ingrained in the Indian system a culture of 
frequent adjournments where arbitration is treated as secondary by the 
lawyers, with priority being given to court matters.  
16. The Commission notes that this cultural revolution has to come from within  
the arbitration community . Arbitrators must eschew purely formal sittings, 
which are meant only for compliances. The Courts have already indicated that 
delay in passing  an award can lead to such an award getting set aside [see 
for instance the decisions of the Delhi High Court in Oil India Ltd v Essar Oil 
Ltd, OMP No 416/2004 dt 17.8.2012 at paras 30 -40; UOI v Niko Resources 

13 
 
Ltd, OMP No 192/2010 dt 2.7.2012 at paras 43 -51; Peak Chemical 
Corporation Inc v NALCO,  OMP 160/2005 No dt 7.2.2012 at para 29 ] – and 
the same should be a nudge to all arbitrators to hear and decide matters 
expeditiously, and within a reasonable period of time. Counsel for parties 
must similarly refra in from seeking frivolous adjournments or insisting upon 
frivolous hearings or leading long winded and irrelevant evidence. The 
Commission further notes that a conscious use of technology, like tele-
conferencing, video-conferencing etc., should also be enc ouraged and the 
same can easily replace the need for purely formal sittings  and thereby aid in 
a smoother and more efficient conduct of arbitral proceedings.  
17. In this context, the Commission h as proposed addition of the second proviso 
to section 24 (1 ) to the Act, which is intended to discourage the practice of 
frequent and baseless adjournments, and to ensure continuous sittings of the 
arbitral tribunal for the purposes of recording evidence and for arguments.  
18. In order to further demonstrate and re-affirm the Act’s focus on achieving the 
objectives of speed and economy in resolution of disputes, the Commission 
has also proposed an addition to the preamble of the Act. While this would not 
directly affect the defined substantive rights and liabilities of parties in terms of 
the Act, it would provide a basis for Arbitral Tribunals and Courts to interpret 
and work the provisions of the Act such that it ultimately achieves those 
objectives for the benefit of the ultimate users of arbitration.  
JUDICIARY AND ARBITRATION 
19. It is thought in some quarters that judicial intervention is anathema to 
arbitration, and this view is not alien to a section of the arbitration community 
even in India. The Commission however, does not subscribe to this view. The 
Commission recognizes that the judicial machinery provides essential su pport 
for the arbitral process. The paradox of arbitration, as noted by a leading 
academic on the subject, is that it seeks the co -operation of the very public 
authorities from which it wants to free itself.  
20. The obvious starting point for any discussion on the role of the judiciary in 
arbitration is section 5 of the Act, which itself is derived from Art 5 of the 
Model Law, which brings reduced judicial involvement in the arbitral process 

14 
 
and a consequen tial increase in the powers of the arbitral tribunal. The 
position is all the more stark in India, given the changed regime from the 1940 
Act which envisaged a much larger and more active role for the judiciary. 
However, notwithstanding the reduced role of  the Courts and the enhanced 
powers accorded to the arbitral tribunal in the Act, it is necessary to carefully 
calibrate the balance between judicial intervention and judicial restraint. In this 
context, one may refer to the words of LORD MUSTILL in the foreword to the 
book O.P. MALHOTRA, Law and Practice of Arbitration  (1st edn, 2002, 
LexisNexis) -  
“First, there is the central importance of a harmonious relation between 
the courts and the arbitral process. This has always involved a delicate 
balance, since the urge of any judge is to see justice done, and to put 
right injustice wherever he or she finds it; and if it is found in an 
arbitration, why then the judge feels the need to intervene. On the other 
side, those active in the world of arbitration stress  its voluntary nature, 
and urge that it is wrong in principle for the courts to concern 
themselves with disputes which the parties have formally chosen to 
withdraw from them, quite apart from the waste of time and expense 
caused by gratuitous judicial interference. To a degree both views were 
right, and remain so; the problem has been to give proper weight to 
each of them. It was an unhappy feature of discourse on arbitration in 
the century just past that the legitimate arguments which could be 
advanced in favour of one or another came to be expressed, in some 
instances at least, with quite unnecessary vigour.  
Fortunately, in recent years wiser counsels have prevailed, and it has, I 
believe, generally come to be recognised on both sides of the 
procedural di vide that the courts must be partners, not superiors or 
antagonists, in a process which is vital to commerce at home or 
abroad...  
Within a working lifetime, international arbitration has become a 
business, not a calling, often involving very large sums, a nd bringing in 
its train substantial monetary earnings for all concerned. Perhaps 
inevitably, there has been a concurrent decline in the standards of at 
least some – certainly not all – of those who take part. It is no good 
wringing hands about this, for i t is a fact to be faced, and part of facing 
them is to recognise that now the influence of peer pressure and 
indeed of simple honour has waned and some other means must be 
found of protecting this voluntary process from those who will not act 
as they have agreed. In the end, like it or not, only the courts can 
furnish this protection, and even the most enthusiastic proponents of 
party autonomy are bound to recognise that they must rely on the 
judicial arm of the state to ensure that the agreement to arbitra te is 
given at least some degree of effect. It is no good complaining that 
judges should keep right out of arbitration, for arbitration cannot flourish 

15 
 
unless they are ready and waiting at the door, if only rarely allowed into 
the room.  
It is however, equally important that the balance is maintained by a 
recognition by the courts that just as arbitration exists only to serve the 
interests of the community, so also their own powers are conferred only 
to support, not supplant, the extra -judicial process whic h the parties 
have chosen to adopt. Anyone who has been faced in a judicial 
capacity with a decision which seems wrong, can sympathise with the 
impulse to decide the issue again, this time correctly; yet in the field of 
arbitration it is an impulse which m ust, at all costs, be resisted, except 
in those circumstances where the legislature has explicitly created the 
right of appeal... 
Precisely the same considerations apply to procedures in the 
arbitration. The parties have chosen to arbitrate, not litigate. By doing 
so they have selected the procedures laid down by the relevant 
legislation or institutional rules. If there are none, then they have 
deliberately entrusted the choice of procedures to the arbitrator himself. 
This is another choice which the court must respect. The Judge may 
think, and think rightly, that the choice is unwise, that a different 
procedure would better have suited the dispute in hand. Or he may 
believe, again rightly, that what the arbitrator did was inefficient or even 
in a degree unj ust. But his or her task is not to re -try the case, but 
simply to ensure that the method of dispute resolution on which the 
parties agreed is what they have in the event received. Moreover, only 
where the departure from the agreed method is of a degree whi ch 
involves real injustice, is the court entitled to intervene, and even then 
the intervention must be so crafted as to cause the minimum 
interference with the forward momentum of the process.” 
 
21. In the course of the preparation of the Report, and as an und erlying theme 
behind the proposed amendments, the Commission has strived to adopt a 
middle path to find an appropriate balance between judicial intervention and 
judicial restraint.  
DELAYS IN COURTS, BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL AND INVESTMENT TREATY RISK 
22. Judicial intervention in arbitration proceedings adds significantly to the delays 
in the arbitration process  and ultimately negates the benefits of arbitration . 
Two reasons can be attributed to such delays. First, the judicial system is 
over-burdened with work and is not sufficiently efficient to dispose cases, 
especially commercial cases, with the speed and dispatch that is required. 
Second, the bar for judicial intervention (despite the existence of section 5 of 
the Act) has been consistently set at a low threshol d by the Indian judiciary, 

16 
 
which translates into many more admissions of cases in Court which arise out 
of or are related to the Act.  
23. Out of the two problems, the first is part of a wider and more pervasive 
problem that is endemic to the Indian judiciary, and the reforms for which form 
part of a separate study. However, a few suggestions may be noted. The 
Commission finds that in most Courts, arbitration matters are kept pending for 
years altogether, and one of the reasons is the lack of dedicated benches 
looking at arbitration cases. One may look to the experience in the Delhi High 
Court where there is a practice of having separate and dedicated benches for 
arbitration related cases . This has resulted not only in better and quicker 
decisions, but has also increased the confidence of the parties in choosing the 
jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court for dealing with arbitration related cases . 
The Government must consider this experience of the Delhi High Court, and 
request the Chief Justices to create speciali sed and dedicated arbitration 
benches. The Commission also believes that one of the methods to provide 
relief against frivolous and misconceived actions is to implement a regime for 
actual costs as is implemented in the UK and also other jurisdictions, and  
which finds its place in the proposed section 6A to the Act. 
24. Two further sets of amendments have been proposed in this context. First, it 
is observed that a lot of time is spent for appointment of arbitrators at the very 
threshold of arbitration proceedin gs as applications under section 11 are kept 
pending for many years. In this context, the Commission has proposed a few 
amendments. The Commission has proposed changing the existing scheme 
of the power of appointment being vested in the “Chief Justice” to the “High 
Court” and the “Supreme Court” and has expressly clarified that delegation of 
the power of “appointment” (as opposed to a finding regarding the 
existence/nullity of the arbitration agreement) shall not be regarded as a 
judicial act. This would rationalize the law and provide greater incentive for the 
High Court and/or Supreme Court to delegate the power of appointment 
(being a non -judicial act) to specialized, external persons or institutions . The 
Commission has further recommended an amendment to  section 11 (7) so 
that decisions of the High Court (regarding existence/nullity of the arbitration 
agreement) are final where an arbitrator has been appointed, and as such are 

17 
 
non-appealable. The Commission further proposes the addition of section 11 
(13) which requires the Court to make an endeavor to dispose of the matter 
within sixty days from the service of notice on the opposite party.  
25. Similarly, the Commission has found that challenges to arbitration awards 
under sections 34 and 48 are similarly kep t pending for many years. In this 
context, the Commission proposes the addition of sections 34 (5) and 48 (4) 
which would require that an application under those sections shall be 
disposed off expeditiously and in any event within a period of one year from  
the date of service of notice. In the case of applications under section 48 of 
the Act, the Commission has further provided a time limit under section 48 (3), 
which mirrors the time limits set out in section 34 (3), and is aimed at ensuring 
that parties t ake their remedies under this section seriously and approach a 
judicial forum expeditiously, and not by way of an afterthought. In addition, a 
new Explanation has been proposed to section 23 of the Act in order to 
ensure that counter claims and set off can  be adjudicated upon by an 
arbitrator without seeking a separate/new reference by the respondent, 
provided that the same falls within the scope of the arbitration agreement. The 
Commission has also recommended mandatory disclosures by the 
prospective arbit rators in relation to their ability to devote sufficient time to 
complete the arbitration and render the award expeditiously.  
26. It is recommended that  in the case of international commercial arbitrations, 
where there is a significant foreign element to the transaction and at least one 
of the parties is foreign, the relevant “Court” which is competent to entertain 
proceedings arising out of the arbitration agreement, should  be the High 
Court, even where such a High Court does not exercise ordinary original 
jurisdiction. It is expected that this would ensure that international commercial 
arbitrations, involving foreign parties, will be heard expeditiously and by 
commercially oriented judges at the High Court level. The amendments 
proposed to section 48 (as indicated above) are also intended to achieve the 
same object. This is important not just for providing confidence to foreign 
investors, but to mitigate the risk faced by the Government of India from 
claims by foreign investors under the relevant Investment T reaty negotiated 
by the Government of India with other countries. The award of the Arbitral 

18 
 
Tribunal in White Industries Australia Ltd. v the Republic of India, UNCITRAL, 
Final Award (November 30, 2011), serves as a reminder to the Government to 
urgently implement reforms to the judicial system in order to avoid substantial 
potential liabilities that might accrue from the delays presently inherent in the 
system.  
27. Another problem that is sought to be addressed in the relevant amendments 
proposed to the Act, is to increase the threshold of judicial intervention at the 
various stages of  the arbitral process – including the pre-arbitral (sections 8 
and 11) and post-award stage (section 34). These have been discussed at the 
appropriate places.  
SCOPE AND NATURE OF PRE-ARBITRAL JUDICIAL INTERVENTION 
28. The Act recognizes situations where the intervention of the Court is envisaged 
at the pre -arbitral stage, i.e. prior to the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, 
which includes sections 8, 9, 11 in the case of Part I a rbitrations and section 
45 in the case of Part II arbitrations. sections 8, 45 and also section 11 
relating to “reference to arbitration” and “appointment of the tribunal”, directly 
affect the constitution of the tribunal and functioning of the arbitral 
proceedings. Therefore, their operation has a direct and significant impact on 
the “conduct” of arbitrations. Section 9, being solely for the purpose of 
securing interim relief, although having the potential to affect the rights of 
parties, does not affect t he “conduct” of the arbitration in the same way as 
these other provisions. It is in this context the Commission has examined and 
deliberated the working of these provisions and proposed certain 
amendments.  
29. The Supreme Court has had occasion to deliberate upon the scope and 
nature of permissible pre-arbitral judicial intervention, especially in the context 
of section 11 of the Act. Unfortunately, however, the question before the 
Supreme Court was framed in terms of whether such a power is a “judicial” or 
an “administrative” power – which obfuscates the real issue underlying such 
nomenclature/description as to –  
- the scope of such powers – i.e. the scope of arguments which a Court 
(Chief Justice) will consider while deciding whether to appoint an arbitrator 

19 
 
or not – i.e. whether the arbitration agreement exists, whether it is null and 
void, whether it is voidable etc; and which of these it should leave for 
decision of the arbitral tribunal.  
- the nature of such intervention – i.e. would the Court (Chief Justice ) 
consider the issues upon a detailed trial and whether the same would be 
decided finally or be left for determination of the arbitral tribunal 
30. After a series of cases culminating in the decision in SBP v Patel Engineering, 
(2005) 8 SCC 618 , the Supreme Co urt held that the power to appoint an 
arbitrator under section 11 is a “judicial” power. The underlying issues in this 
judgment, relating to the scope of intervention, were subsequently clarified by 
RAVEENDRAN J in National Insurance Co. Ltd. v Boghara Pol yfab Pvt. Ltd. , 
(2009) 1 SCC 267, where the Supreme Court laid down as follows –  
“1. The issues (first category) which Chief Justice/his designate will have to 
decide are:  
(a) Whether the party making the application has approached the appropriate 
High Court? 
(b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and whether the party who has 
applied under section 11 of the Act, is a party to such an agreement? 
2. The issues (second category) which the Chief Justice/his designate may 
choose to decide are: 
(a) Whether the claim is a dead (long barred) claim or a live claim? 
(b) Whether the parties have concluded the contract/transaction by recording 
satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligation or by receiving the final 
payment without objection? 
3. The issues (third category)  which the Chief Justice/his designate should 
leave exclusively to the arbitral tribunal are: 
(a) Whether a claim falls within the arbitration clause (as for example, a 
matter which is reserved for final decision of a departmental authority and 
excepted or excluded from arbitration)? 
(b) Merits of any claim involved in the arbitration.” 
 

20 
 
31. The Commission is of the view that, in this context, the same test regarding 
scope and nature of judicial intervention, as applicable in the context of 
section 11, should also appl y to sections 8 and 45 of the Act  – since the 
scope and nature of judicial intervention should not change upon whether a 
party (intending to defeat the arbitration agreement) refuses to appoint an 
arbitrator in terms of the arbitration agreement, or moves a proceeding before 
a judicial authority in the face of such an arbitration agreement.  
32. In relation to the nature of intervention, the exposition of the law is to be found 
in the decision of the Supreme Court in Shin Etsu Chemicals Co. Ltd. v Aksh 
Optifibre, (2005) 7 SCC 234,  (in the context of section 45 of the Act), where 
the Supreme Court has ruled in favour of looking at the issues/controversy 
only prima facie.  
33. It is in this context, the Commission has recommended amendments to 
sections 8 and 11 of the  Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The scope of 
the judicial intervention is only restricted to situations where the Court/Judicial 
Authority finds that the arbitration agreement does not exist or is null and void. 
In so far as the nature of intervention is concerned, it is recommended that in 
the event the Court/Judicial Authority is prima facie  satisfied against the 
argument challenging the arbitration agreement, it shall appoint the arbitrator 
and/or refer the parties to arbitration, as the case ma y be. The amendment 
envisages that the judicial authority shall not refer the parties to arbitration 
only if it finds that there does not exist an arbitration agreement or that it is 
null and void. If the judicial authority is of the opinion that prima fac ie the 
arbitration agreement exists, then it shall refer the dispute to arbitration, and 
leave the existence of the arbitration agreement to be finally determined by 
the arbitral tribunal. However, if the judicial authority concludes that the 
agreement doe s not exist, then the co nclusion will be final and not prima 
facie. The amendment also envisages that there shall be a conclusive 
determination as to whether the arbitration agreement is null and void.  In the 
event that the judicial authority refers the dispute to arbitration and/or appoints 
an arbitrator, under sections 8 and 11 respectively, such a decision will be 
final and non-appealable. An appeal can be maintained under section 37 only 

21 
 
in the event of refusal to refer parties to arbitration , or refusal to appoint an 
arbitrator.  
SETTING ASIDE OF DOMESTIC AWARDS AND RECOGNITION/ENFORCEMENT OF 
FOREIGN AWARDS 
34. Once an arbitral award is made, an aggrieved party may apply for the setting 
aside of such award. Section 34 of the Act deals with setting aside a domestic 
award and a domestic award resulting from an international commercial 
arbitration whereas section 48 deals with conditions for enforcement of foreign 
awards. As the Act is currently drafted, the grounds for setting aside (under 
section 34) and cond itions for refusal of enforcement ( section 48) are in pari 
materia. The Act, as it is presently drafted, therefore , treats all three types of 
awards – purely domestic award (i.e. domestic award not resulting from an 
international commercial arbitration), d omestic award in an international 
commercial arbitration and a foreign award – as the same. The Commission 
believes that this has caused some problem s. The legitimacy of judicial 
intervention in the case of a purely domestic award is far more than in cases  
where a court is examining the correctness of a foreign award or a domestic 
award in an international commercial arbitration.  
35. It is for this reason that the Commission has  recommended the addition of 
section 34 (2A) to deal with purely domestic awards, w hich may also be set 
aside by the Court if the Court finds that such award is vitiated by “patent 
illegality appearing on the face of the award.” In order to provide a balance 
and to avoid excessive intervention, it is clarified in the proposed proviso to 
the proposed section 34 (2A)  that such “an award shall not be set aside 
merely on the ground of an erroneous application of the law or by re -
appreciating evidence.” The Commission believes that this will go a long way 
to assuage the fears of the judiciary as well as the other users of arbitration 
law who expect, and given the circumstances prevalent in our country, 
legitimately so, greater redress against purely domestic awards. This would 
also do away with the unintended consequences of the decision of the  
Supreme Court in ONGC vs. Saw Pipes Ltd , (2003) 5 SCC 705, which, 
although in the context of a purely domestic award, had the unfortunate effect 

22 
 
of being extended to apply equally to both awards arising out of international 
commercial arbitrations as well  as foreign awards, given the statutory 
language of the Act. The amendment to section 28(3) has similarly been 
proposed solely in order to remove the basis for the decision of the Supreme 
Court in ONGC vs. Saw Pipes Ltd , (2003) 5 SCC 705  – and in order that any 
contravention of a term of the contract by the tribunal should not ipso jure  
result in rendering the award becoming capable of being set aside . The 
Commission believes no similar amendment is necessary to section 28 (1) 
given the express restriction of the public policy ground (as set out below).  
36. Although the Supreme Court has held in Shri Lal Mahal  v Progetto Grano 
Spa, (2014) 2 SCC 433,  that the expansive construction accorded to the term 
“public policy” in Saw Pipes cannot apply to the use of the same term “public 
policy of India” in section 48(2)(b), the recommendations of the Commission 
go even further and are intended to ensure that the legitimacy of court 
intervention to address patent illegalities in purely domestic awards is directly 
recognised by the addition of section 34 (2A) and not indirectly by according 
an expansive definition to the phrase “public policy”.  
37. In this context, the Commission has further recommended the restriction of 
the scope of “public policy” in both sections 34 and 48 . This is to bring the 
definition in line with the definition propounded by the Supreme Court in 
Renusagar Power Plant Co Ltd v General Electric Co , AIR 1994 SC 860 
where the Supreme Court while construing the term “public policy” in section 
7(1)(b)(ii) of  Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961 held 
that an award would be contrary to public policy if such enforcement would be 
contrary to “(i) fundamental policy of Indian law; or (ii) the interests of India; or 
(iii) justice or morality”. The formulation proposed by the Commission is even 
tighter and does not include the reference to “interests of India”, which is 
vague and is capable of interpretational misuse, especially in the context of 
challenge to awards arising out of international comm ercial arbitrations (under 
S 34) or foreign awards (under S 48). Under the formulation of the 
Commission, an award can be set aside on public policy grounds only if it is 
opposed to the “fundamental policy of Indian law” or it is in conflict with “most 
basic notions of morality or justice”.  

23 
 
JUDICIAL INTERVENTIONS IN FOREIGN SEATED ARBITRATIONS 
38. Section 2(2) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (the “Act”), contained 
in Part I of the Act, states that “ This Part shall apply where the place of 
arbitration is in India. ” In comparison, Article 1(2) of the UNCITRAL Model 
Law provides: “ The provisions of this Law, except articles 8, 9, 35 and 36 , 
apply only if the place of arbitration is in the territory of this State." The central 
issue, therefore, that was before the two judge Bench of the Supreme Court in 
Bhatia International vs. Interbulk Trading SA , (2002) 4 SCC 105,  and before 
the five-judge Bench in Bharat Aluminum and C o. vs. Kaiser Aluminium and 
Co., (2012) 9 SCC 552  (hereinafter called “BALCO”)  was whether the 
exclusion of the word “only” from the Indian statute gave rise to the implication 
that Part I of the Act would apply even in some situations where the arbitration 
was conducted outside India.  
39. The Supre me Court in Bhatia, held that P art I man datorily applie d to all 
arbitrations held in India. In addition, Part I applie d to arbitrations conducted 
outside India unless it was expressly or impliedly excluded.  While Bhatia was 
a case arising out of section 9, the same principle was extended by the  
Supreme Court to sections 11 and 34 as well  (in Venture Global  v Satyam 
Computer, (2008) 4 SCC 190; Indtel Technical Services v W.S. Atkins, (2008) 
10 SCC 308 ; Citation Infowares Ltd v Equinox Corporation , (2009) 7 SCC 
220; Dozco India v Doosan Infrastruc ture, (2011) 6 SCC 179 ; Videocon 
Industries v Union of India , (2011) 6 SCC 161 ). As a result , Indian Courts 
were competent to provide interim relief pending arbitration, appoint 
arbitrators and set aside arbitral awards even if the arbitration was conducte d 
outside India. These powers existed unless Part I was expressly or impliedly 
excluded. Further, an implied exclusion was construed not on the basis of 
conflict of laws principles but in an ad hoc manner. This position now stands 
overruled following BALCO. 
40. The Supreme Court in BALCO decided that Parts I and II of the Act are 
mutually exclusive of each  other. The intention of Parliament that the Act is 
territorial in nature and sections 9 and 34 will apply only when the seat of 
arbitration is in India. The seat is the “centre of gravity” of arbitration , and  
even where two foreign parties arbitrate in India, Part I would apply and , by 

24 
 
virtue of section 2(7), the award would be a “domestic award”. The Supreme 
Court recognized the “seat” of arbit ration to be th e juridical seat ; however, in 
line with international practice, it was observed that the arbitral hearings may 
take place at a location other than the seat of arbitration. The distinction 
between “seat” and “venue” was , therefore, recognized. In such a sce nario, 
only if the seat is determined to be India, Part I would be applicable. If the 
seat was foreign, Part I would be inapplicable. Even if Part I was expressly 
included “it would only mean that the parties have contractually imported from 
the Arbitratio n Act, 1996, those provisions which are concerned with the 
internal conduct of their arbitration and which are not inconsistent with the 
mandatory provisions of the [foreign] Procedural Law/Curial Law.” The same 
cannot be used to confer ju risdiction on an Indian Court.  However, t he 
decision in BALCO was expressly given  prospective effect and applied to 
arbitration agreements executed after the date of the judgment. 
41. While the decision in BALCO is a step in the right direction and would 
drastically reduce ju dicial intervention in foreign arbitrations, the Commission 
feels that there are still a few areas that are likely to be problematic.  
(i) Where the assets of a party are located in India, and there is 
a likelihood that that party will dissipate its assets in the near future, the 
other party will lack an efficacious remedy if the seat of the arbitration 
is abroad. The latter party will have two possible remedies, but neither 
will be efficacious. First , the latter party can obtain an interim order 
from a for eign Court or the arbitral tribunal itself and file a civil suit to 
enforce the right created by the interim order. The interim order would 
not be enforceable directly by filing an execution petition as it would not 
qualify as a “judgment” or “decree” for the purposes of sections 13 and 
44A of the Code of Civil Procedure (which provide a mechanism for 
enforcing foreign judgments). Secondly, in the event that the former 
party does not adhere to the terms of the foreign Order, the latter party 
can initiate pr oceedings for contempt in the foreign Court and enforce 
the judgment of the foreign Court under sections 13 and 44A of the 
Code of Civil Procedure. Neither of these remedies is likely to provide a 

25 
 
practical remedy to the party seeking to enforce the interi m relief 
obtained by it.  
That being the case, it is a distinct possibility that a foreign party would 
obtain an arbitral award in its favour only to realize that the entity 
against which it has to enforce the award has been stripped of its 
assets and has been converted into a shell company.  
(ii) While the decision in BALCO was made prospective to 
ensure that hotly negotiated bargains are not overturned overnight, it 
results in a situation where Courts, despite knowing that the  decision in 
Bhatia is no lon ger good law, are forced to apply it whenever they are 
faced with a case arising from an arbitration agreement executed pre -
BALCO.  
 
42. The above issues have been addressed by way of proposed Amendments  to 
sections 2(2), 2(2A), 20, 28 and 31. 
AUTOMATIC STAY O F ENFORCEMENT OF THE  AWARD UPON ADMISSION  OF 
CHALLENGE     
43. Section 36 of the Act makes it clear that an arbitral award becomes 
enforceable as a decree only after the time for filing a petition under section 
34 has expired or after the section 34 petition h as been dismissed. In other 
words, the pendency of a section 34 petition renders an arbitral award 
unenforceable. The Supreme Court, in National Aluminum Co. Ltd. v. 
Pressteel & Fabrications, (2004) 1 SCC 540  held that by virtue of section 36, 
it was impermissible to pass an Order directing the losing party to deposit any 
part of the award into Court. While this decision was in relation to the powers 
of the Supreme Court to pass such an order under section 42, the Bombay 
High Court in Afcons Infrastructure Limited v. The Board of Trustees, Port of 
Mumbai 2014 (1) Arb LR 512 (Bom) applied the same principle to the powers 
of a Court under section 9 of the Act as well. Admission of a section 34 
petition, therefore, virtually paralyzes the process  for the winning party/award 
creditor.  
44. The Supreme Court, in National Aluminium , has criticized the present 
situation in the following words: 

26 
 
“However, we do notice that this automatic suspension of the execution 
of the award, the moment an application challenging the s aid award is 
filed under section 34 of the Act leaving no discretion in the court to put 
the parties on terms, in our opinion, defeats the very objective of the 
alternate dispute resolution system to which arbitration belongs. We do 
find that there is a re commendation made by the concerned Ministry to 
the Parliament to amend section 34 with a proposal to empower the 
civil court to pass suitable interim orders in such cases. In view of the 
urgency of such amendment, we sincerely hope that necessary steps 
would be taken by the authorities concerned at the earliest to bring 
about the required change in law.”  
 
45. In order to rectify this mischief, certain amendments have been suggested  by 
the Commission to section 36 of the Act, which provide that the award will not 
become unenforceable merely upon the making of an application under 
section 34.  
POWERS OF TRIBUNAL TO ORDER INTERIM MEASURES 
46. Under section 17, the arbitral tribunal has the power to order interim 
measures of protection, unless the parties have excluded such power by 
agreement. Section 17 is an important provision, which is crucial to the 
working of the arbitration system, since it ensures that even for the purposes 
of interim measures, the parties can approach the arbitral tribunal rather than 
await ord ers from a Court. The efficacy of section 17 is however, seriously 
compromised given the lack of any suitable statutory mechanism for the 
enforcement of such interim orders of the arbitral tribunal.  
47. In Sundaram Finance Ltd v. NEPC India Ltd. , (1999) 2 SCC  479, the 
Supreme Court observed that though section 17 gives the arbitral tribunal the 
power to pass orders, the same cannot be enforced as orders of a court and it 
is for this reason only that section 9 gives the court power to pass interim 
orders during  the arbitration proceedings.  Subsequently, in M.D. Army 
Welfare Housing Organisation v. Sumangal Services Pvt. Ltd. , (2004) 9 SCC 
619 the Court had held that under section 17 of the Act no power is conferred 
on the arbitral tribunal to enforce its order n or does it provide for judicial 
enforcement thereof. 
48. In the face of such categorical judicial opinion, the Delhi High Court attempted 
to find a suitable legislative basis for enforcing the orders of the arbitral 

27 
 
tribunal under section 17 in the case of Sri Krishan v. Anand, (2009) 3 Arb LR 
447 (Del)  (followed in Indiabulls Financial Services v. Jubilee Plots, OMP Nos 
452-453/2009 Order dated 18.08.2009) . The Delhi High Court held that any 
person failing to comply with the order of the arbitral tribunal under section 17 
would be deemed to be "making any other default" or "guilty of any contempt 
to the arbitral tribunal during the conduct of the proceedings"  under section 27 
(5) of Act. T he remedy of the aggrieved party would then be to apply to the 
arbitral tribunal for making a representation to the Court to mete out 
appropriate punishment. Once such a representation is received by the Court 
from the arbitral tribunal, the C ourt would be competent to deal with such 
party in default as if it is in contempt of an order of the Court, i.e., either under 
the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act or under the provisions of Order 
39 Rule 2A Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  
49. The Commission believes that while it is important to provide teeth to the 
interim orders of  the arbitral tribunal as well as to provide for their 
enforcement, the judgment of the Delhi High Court in Sri Krishan v. Anand is 
not a complete solution. The Commission has, therefore, recommended 
amendments to section 17 of the Act which would give tee th to the orders of 
the Arbitral Tribunal and the same would be statutorily enforceable in the 
same manner as the Order s of a Court. In this respect, the views of the 
Commission are consistent with (though do not go as far as) the 2006 
amendments to Article 17 of the UNCITRAL Model Law.  
ARBITRABILITY OF FRAUD AND COMPLICATED ISSUES OF FACT 
50. The issue of arbitrability of fraud has arisen on numerous occasions and there 
exist conflicting decisions of the Apex Court on this issue. While it has been 
held in Bharat Rasiklal v. Gautam Rasiklal, (2012) 2 SCC 144 that when fraud 
is of such a nature that it vitiates the arbitration agreement, it is for the Court 
to decide on the validity of the arbitration agreement by determining the issue 
of fraud, there exists two  parallel lines of judgments on the issue of whether 
an issue of fraud is arbitrable. In this context, a 2 judge bench of the Supreme 
Court, while adjudicating on an application under section 8 of the Act, in 
Radhakrishnan v. Maestro Engineers , 2010 1 SCC 72 held that an issue of 

28 
 
fraud is not arbitrable. This decision was ostensibly based on the decision of 
the three judge bench of the Supreme Court in Abdul Qadir v. Madhav 
Prabhakar, AIR 1962 SC 406 . However, the said 3 judge bench decision 
(which was based on the finding in Russel v. Russel [1880 14 Ch. 'D. 471] ) is 
only an authority for the proposition that a party against whom an allegation of 
fraud is made in a public forum, has a right to defend himself in that public 
forum. Yet, following Radhakrishnan, it appears that issues of fraud are not 
arbitrable.  
51. A distinction has also been made by certain High Courts between a serious 
issue of fraud and a mere allegation of fraud and the former has been held to 
be not arbitrable (See Ivory Properties and Hote ls Private Ltd v . Nusli Neville 
Wadia, 2011 (2) Arb LR 479 (Bom); CS Ravishankar v. CK Ravishankar, 2011 
(6) Kar LJ 417).  The Supreme Court in Meguin GMBH v. Nandan Petrochem 
Ltd., 2007 (5) R.A.J 239 (SC) , in the context of an application filed under 
section 11 has gone ahead and appointed an arbitrator even though issues of 
fraud were involved. Recently, the Supreme Court in its judgment in Swiss 
Timing Ltd v Organising Committee , Arb. Pet. No. 34/2013 dated 28.05.2014, 
in a similar case of exercising juri sdiction under section 11, held that the 
judgment in Radhakrishnan is per incuriam and, therefore, not good law.  
52. The Commission believes that it is important to set this entire controversy to a 
rest and make issues of fraud expressly arbitrable  and to thi s end has 
proposed amendments to section 16. 
NEUTRALITY OF ARBITRATORS 
53. It is universally accepted that any quasi -judicial process, including the 
arbitration process, must be in accordance with principles of natural justice . In 
the context of arbitration, n eutrality of arbitrators, viz. their independence and 
impartiality, is critical to the entire process.  
54. In the Act, the test for neutrality is set out in section 12(3) which provides –  
“An arbitrator may be  challenged only if (a) circumstances exist that give rise 
to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality…”  
 

29 
 
55. The Act does not lay down any other conditions to identify the “circumstances” 
which give rise to “justifiable doubts” , and it is clear that there can be many 
such circumstances and  situations. The test is not whether, given the 
circumstances, there is any actual bias for that is setting the bar too high; but, 
whether the circumstances in question give rise to any justifiable 
apprehensions of bias.  
56. The limits of this provision has been tested in the Indian Supreme Court in the 
context of contracts with State entities naming particular persons/designations 
(associated with that entity) as a potential  arbitrator. It appears to be settled 
by a series of decisions of the Supreme Court  (See Executive Engineer, 
Irrigation Division, Puri v. Gangaram Chhapolia, 1984 (3) SCC 627; Secretary 
to Government Transport Department, Madras v. Munusamy Mudaliar, 1988 
(Supp) SCC 651; International Authority of India v. K.D.Bali and Anr , 1988 (2) 
SCC 360; S.Rajan v. State of Kerala, 1992 (3) SCC 608; M/s. Indian Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals v. M/s. Indo -Swiss Synthetics Germ Manufacturing Co.Ltd. , 
1996 (1) SCC 54 ; Union of India v. M.P.Gupta , (2004) 10 SCC 504 ; Ace 
Pipeline Contract Pvt. Ltd. v. Bharat Petrole um Corporation Ltd. , 2007 (5) 
SCC 304) that arbitration agreements in government contracts which provide 
for arbitration by a serving  employee of the department, are valid and 
enforceable. While the Supreme Court, in Indian Oil Corp.  Ltd. v . Raja 
Transport (P) Ltd., 2009 8 SCC 520 carved out a minor exception in situations 
when the arbitrator “ was the controlling or dealing authority in regard to the 
subject contract or if he is a direct subordinate (as contrasted from an officer 
of an inferior rank in some  other department) to the officer whose decision is 
the subject matter of the dispute ”, and this exception was used by the 
Supreme Court in Denel Propreitory Ltd. v. Govt. of India, Ministry of Defence, 
AIR 2012 SC 817  and Bipromasz Bipron Trading SA v. Bharat Electronics 
Ltd., (2012) 6 SCC 384, to appoint an independent arbitrator under section 
11, this is not enough.  
57. The balance between procedural fairness and binding nature of these 
contracts, appears to have been tilted in favour of the latter by the S upreme 
Court, and the Commission believes the present position of law is far from 
satisfactory. Since the principles of impartiality and independence cannot be 

30 
 
discarded at any stage of the proceedings, specifically at the stage of 
constitution of the arbi tral tribunal, it would be incongruous to say that party 
autonomy can be exercised in complete disregard of these principles – even if 
the same has been agreed prior to the disputes having arisen between the 
parties. There are certain minimum levels of ind ependence and impartiality 
that should be required of the arbitral process regardless of the parties’ 
apparent agreement. A sensible law cannot, for instance, permit appointment 
of an arbitrator who is himself a party to the dispute, or who is employed by 
(or similarly dependent on) one party, even if this is what the parties agreed.  
The Commission hastens to add that Mr. PK Malhotra, the ex officio member 
of the Law Commission suggested having an exception for the State, and 
allow State parties to appoint employee arbitrators. The Commission is of the 
opinion that, on this issue, there cannot be any distinction between State and 
non-State parties. The concept of party autonomy cannot be stretched to a 
point where it negates the very basis of having impartia l and independent 
adjudicators for resolution of disputes. In fact, w hen the party appointing an 
adjudicator is the State, the duty to appoint an impartial and independent 
adjudicator is that much more onerous – and the right to natural justice cannot 
be said to have been waived only on the basis of a “prior” agreement between 
the parties at the time of the contract and before arising of the disputes.  
58. Large scale amendments have been suggested to address this fundamental 
issue of neutrality of arbitrators , which the Commission believes is critical to 
the functioning of the arbitration process in India . In particular, amendments 
have been proposed to sections 11, 12 and 14 of the Act.  
59. The Commission has proposed the requirement of having specific disclosure s 
by the arbitrator, at the stage of his possible appointment, regarding existence 
of any relationship or interest of any kind which is likely to give rise to 
justifiable doubts. The Commission has proposed the incorporation of the 
Fourth Schedule, which h as drawn from the Red and Orange lists of the IBA 
Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration, and which would 
be treated as a “guide” to determine whether circumstances exist which give 
rise to such justifiable doubts. On the other ha nd, in terms of the proposed 
section 12 (5) of the Act and t he Fifth Schedule which incorporates the 

31 
 
categories from the Red list of the IBA Guidelines (as above), the person 
proposed to be appointed as an arbitrator shall be ineligible to be so 
appointed, notwithstanding any prior agreement  to the contrary . In the event 
such an ineligible person is purported to be appointed as an arbitrator, he 
shall be de jure deemed to be unable to perform his functions, in terms of the 
proposed explanation to section 14. Therefore, while the disclosure is 
required with respect to a broader list of categories (as set out in the Fourth 
Schedule, and as based on the Red and Orange lists of the IBA Guidelines), 
the ineligibility to be appointed as an arbitrator (and the cons equent de jure 
inability to so act) follows from a smaller and more serious sub-set of 
situations (as set out in the Fifth Schedule, and as based on the Red list of the 
IBA Guidelines).  
60. The Commission, however, feels that real and genuine party autonomy m ust 
be respected, and , in certain situations, parties should be allowed to waive 
even the categories of ineligibility as set in the proposed Fifth Schedule. This 
could be in situations of family arbitrations or other arbitrations where a 
person commands th e blind faith and trust of the parties to the dispute, 
despite the existence of objective “justifiable doubts” regarding his 
independence and impartiality. To deal with such situations, the Commission 
has proposed the proviso to section 12 (5), where parties may, subsequent to 
disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability of the proposed 
section 12 (5) by an express agreement in writing. In all other cases, the 
general rule in the proposed section 12 (5) must be followed. In the event the 
High Court is approached in connection with appointment of an arbitrator, the 
Commission has proposed seeking the disclosure in terms of section 12 (1). 
and in which context the High Court or the designate is to have “due regard” 
to the contents of such disclosure in appointing the arbitrator.  
 
DEFINITION OF "PARTY" 
 
61. Arbitration is a consensual form of dispute resolution, with the arbitral tribunal 
deriving powers and authority on the basis of the “contract” or the “agreement” 
between the parties. This agreem ent has far reaching consequences – it 

32 
 
takes away the right of the party to the arbitration agreement to avail its 
remedies in a court of law for resolution of the disputes covered by the terms 
of the arbitration agreement; and makes the consequent award binding, with a 
limited right of recourse in terms of section 34 of the Act. It would thus be 
incongruous and incompatible with this “consensual” and “agreement based” 
status of arbitration as a method of dispute resolution, to hold persons who 
are not “parties” to the arbitration agreement to be bound by the same.  
62. However, a party does not necessarily mean only the “signatory” to the 
arbitration agreement. In appropriate contexts, a “party” means not just a 
signatory, but also persons “claiming through or under” such signatory – for 
instance, successors -of-interest of such parties, alter -ego’s of such parties 
etc. This is particularly true in the case of unincorporated entities, where the 
issue of “personality” is usually a difficult legal question and rais es a host of 
other issues.  This principle is recognized by the New York Convention, 1985 
which in article II (1) recognizes an agreement between parties “in respect of 
a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not.”  
63. The Arbitration and Concili ation Act, 1996 under section 7 borrows the 
definition of the “arbitration agreement” from the  corresponding provision at 
article 7 of the UNCITRAL Model Law which in turn borrows this from a rticle II 
of the New York Convention. However, the definition of the word “party” in 
section 2(1)(h) refers to a “party” to mean “a party to an arbitration 
agreement.” This cannot be read restrictively to imply a mere “signatory” to an 
arbitration agreement, since there are many situations and contexts where 
even a “non-signatory” can be said to be a “party” to an arbitration agreement. 
This was recognized by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Chloro Controls v. 
Severn Trent Water Purification , (2013) 1 SCC 641 , where the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court was dealing with the scope and in terpretation of section 45 of 
the Act and, in that context, discussed the scope of the relevant doctrines on 
the basis of which “non -signatories” could be said to be bound by the 
arbitration agreement, including in cases of inter -related contracts, group o f 
companies doctrine etc.  
64. This interpretation given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court follows from the 
wording of section 45 of the Act  which recognizes the right of a “person 

33 
 
claiming through or under [a party]” to apply to a judicial authority to refer the 
parties to arbitration. The same language is also to be found in section 54 of 
the Act. This language is however, absent in the corresponding provision of 
section 8 of the Act. It is similarly absent in the other relevant provisions, 
where the context would demand that a party includes also a “person claiming 
through or under such party”. To cure this anomaly, the Commission proposes 
an amendment to the definition of “party” under section 2 (h) of the Act. 
INTEREST ON SUMS AWARDED 
65. The issue on whether future  interest is payable not only on the principal sum 
but also on the interest accrued till the date of the award remains 
controversial notwithstanding the clear wording of section 31(7). Initially, the 
position under the 1940 Act was that there was an expres s bar on awarding 
compound interest. This was evident in reading section 3(3)(c) of the Interest 
Act, 1978, section 29 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 and section 34 of the CPC , 
1908.  
66. However, the Supreme Court in Renusagar Power Co Ltd v. General Electric , 
1994 Supp (1) SCC 644,   held that awarding compound interest was not a 
violation of public policy of India. It is pertinent to note that these observations 
were made in the context of a case where the arbitral tribunal had expressly 
pointed out that they w ere not concerned with a contract to pay compound 
interest but were awarding compound interest as a remedy for a breach of 
contract in order to put the injured party in the same economic position it 
would have been in if the contract had been duly performe d. This award was 
held to be in consonance with the public policy of India. Furthermore, as set 
out above, it was explicitly stated that compound interest can be awarded 
when it is permissible to do so under the statute.  
67. Under the 1996 Act, the words that  have been used are of far wider import 
and the scheme of the relevant provisions indicates that award of interest on 
interest is not only permitted but also the norm. Yet, a two judge bench of the 
Supreme Court, in State of Haryana v. L. Arora & Co., (2010) 3 SCC 690,  
held as follows “section 31(7) makes no reference to payment of compound 
interest or payment of interest upon interest. Nor does it require the interest 

34 
 
which accrues till the date of the award, to be treated as part of the principal 
from the  date of award for calculating the post -award interest .”  Apart from 
being contrary to the statutory scheme of the Act, the decision in Arora is also 
against the decision of (co-ordinate) two judge benches of the Supreme Court 
in ONGC v. M.C. Clelland Engi neers S.A ,  (1999) (4) SCC 327 and UP 
Cooperative Federation Ltd v. Three Circles, (2009) 10 SCC 374. 
68. Recognising this conflict of judicial opinion , the Supreme Court, in Hyder 
Consulting (U.K.) v. Governor of Orissa , (2013) 2 SCC 719 has referred this  
issue for determination to a three judge bench. 
69. It is in this context that the Commission has recommended amendments to 
section 31 to clarify the scope of powers of the arbitral tribunal to award 
compound interest, as well as to rationalize the rate at which default interest 
ought to be awarded  and move away from the existing rate of 18%  to a 
market based determination in line with commercial realities 
 
COSTS 
 
70. Arbitration, much like traditional adversarial dispute resolution, can be an 
expensive proposition. T he savings of a party in avoiding payment of court 
fee, is usually offset by the other costs of arbitration – which include 
arbitrator’s fees and expenses, institutional fees and expenses, fees and 
expenses in relation to lawyers, witnesses, venue, hearings etc. The potential 
for racking up significant costs justify a need for predictability and clarity in the 
rules relating to apportionment and recovery of such costs.  The Commission 
believes that, as a rule, it is just to allocate costs in a manner which r eflects 
the parties’ relative success and failure in the arbitration, unless special 
circumstances warrant an exception or the parties otherwise agree (only after 
the dispute has arisen between them).  
71. The loser-pays rule logically follows, as a matter of law, from the very basis of 
deciding the underlying dispute in a particular manner; and as a matter of 
economic policy, provides economically efficient deterrence against frivolous 
conduct and furthers compliance with contractual obligations.  

35 
 
72. The Commissi on has , therefore, sought comprehensive reforms to the 
prevailing costs regime applicable both to arbitrations as well as related 
litigation in Court  by proposing section 6-A to the Act, which expressly 
empowers arbitral tribunals and courts to award costs  based on rational and 
realistic criterion. This provision furthers the spirit of the decision of the 
Supreme Court in Salem Advocate Bar Association v Union of India, AIR 2005 
SC 3353, and it is hoped and expected that judges and arbitrators would take 
advantage of this robust provision, and explain the “rules of the game” to the 
parties early in the litigation so as to avoid frivolous and meritless 
litigation/arbitration.  
 
OTHER AMENDMENTS 
 
73. The Commission has also proposed some amendments  in order to cla rify 
certain other provisions in the Act. An amendment has been proposed to the 
definition of “international commercial arbitration”, in section 2 (f)(iii) by 
removing the reference to a “company”, which is already covered in section 
2(f)(ii). The intention behind the proposal is that the test for determining the 
residence of a company must be based on its place of incorporation and not 
the place of central management/control. This adds greater certainty to the 
law, and re -enforces the “place of incorporati on” principle laid down by the 
Supreme Court in TDM Infrastructure Pvt Ltd v UE Development Pvt Ltd , 
(2008) 14 SCC 271.  
74. Two sets of amendments have also been proposed to section 7. It is clarified 
that an arbitration agreement must concern “subject matter  capable of 
settlement by arbitration.” This gives statutory recognition to the doctrine of 
arbitrability. The proposed sections 7(3A) and 7(3B) is intended to bring the 
Indian law in conformity with the UNCITRAL Model law and clarifies that an 
arbitration agreement can be concluded by way of electronic communication 
as well. 
75. The Commission has also proposed  an amendment to section 25 (b) to 
clarify that where, on the default on the Respondent in communicating his 
statement of defence, the arbitral tribuna l shall also (in addition to having the 

36 
 
right to continue with the arbitration) have the discretion to treat the right of 
such Respondent to file a statement of defence as having been forfeited.  
 
TRANSITORY PROVISION 
 
76. The Commission has proposed to insert  the new section 85-A to the Act, to 
clarify the scope of operation of each of the amendments with respect to 
pending arbitrations/proceedings. As a general rule, the amendments will 
operate prospectively, except in certain cases as set out in section 85-A or 
otherwise set out in the amendment itself.  

37 
 
Chapter III 
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE 
ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996 
 
Amendment to the Preamble 
 
After the words aforesaid “Model Law and Rules” the following be inserted: 
And WHEREAS it is further required to improve the law relating to domestic 
arbitration, international commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign 
arbitral awards as also to define the law relating to conciliation, in order to provide 
a fair, expeditious and cost-effective means of dispute resolution; 
[NOTE: This amendment is proposed in order to further demonstrate and re -
affirm the Act’s focus on achieving the objectives of fairness, speed and economy 
in resolution of disputes through arbitration.] 
Amendment of Section 2  
1. In section 2 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred  
to as the principal Act),-  
(i) In sub -section (1), clause (d),  after the words “…panel of arbitrators” add 
“and, in the case of an arbitration conducted under the rules of an inst itution 
providing for appointment of an emergency arbitrator, includes such 
emergency arbitrator;” 
  [NOTE: This amendment is to ensure that institutional rules such as the 
SIAC Arbitration Rules which provide for an emergency arbitrator are given 
statutory recognition in India.] 
(ii) In sub -section (1), clause (e), after the words “Court means –” add sub -
section (i) beginning with the words “in the case of an arbitration other than 
international commercial arbitration,” before the words “the principal Civil 
Court of original jurisdiction” 
In sub-section (1), clause (e) replace sub-clause (ii) by following:  

38 
 
“(ii) in the case of an international commercial arbitration, the High Court 
exercising jurisdiction over the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a 
district, and includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject -
matter of the arbitration if the same had been the subject -matter of a suit, but 
does not include any Court of a grade inferior to such High Court, or in cases 
involving grant of interim measures in respect of arbitrations outside India, the 
High Court exercising jurisdiction over the court having jurisdiction to grant 
such measures as per the la ws of India, and includes the High Court in 
exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.” 
  [NOTE: This is to solve the problem of conflict of jurisdiction that would arise 
in cases where interim measures are sought in India in case of arbitration s 
seated outside India. This also ensures that in International Commercial 
Arbitrations, jurisdiction is exercised by the High Court, even if such High 
Court does not exercise ordinary original civil jurisdiction.]  
(iii) In sub-section (1), clause (f), sub-clause (iii), delete the words “a company or” 
before the words “an association or a body of individuals 
  [NOTE: The reference to “a company” In sub -section (iii) has been removed 
since the same is already covered under sub -section (ii). The intention is to 
determine the residence of a company based on its place of incorporation 
and not the place of central management/control. This further re -enforces 
the “place of incorporation” principle laid down by the Supreme Court in TDM 
Infrastructure Private Limited v. UE Development India Private Limited,  
(2008) 14 SCC 271, and adds greater certainty in case of companies having 
a different place of incorporation and place of exercise of central 
management and control]  
(iv) In sub-section (1), clause (h), add the words “or a ny person claiming through 
or under such party” after the words “party to an arbitration agreement” 
[NOTE: This is just to clarify that a “party” also includes a person who derives 
his interest from such party, and further re -enforces the decision of the 
Supreme Court in Chloro Controls (I) P. Ltd.v. Severn Trent Water Purification 
Inc. and Ors., (2013) 1 SCC 641] 

39 
 
(v) In sub-section (1), after clause (h), insert clause “(hh) “seat of the arbitration” 
means the juridical seat of the arbitration” 
 [NOTE: This definition of “seat of arbitration” is incorporated so as to make it 
clear that “seat of arbitration” is different from the venue of arbitration. 
Section 20 has also been appropriately modified.]  
(vi) In sub-section (2), add the word “only” after the words “shall  apply” and delete 
the word “place” and insert the word “seat” in its place.  
[NOTE: This amendment ensures that an Indian Court can only exercise 
jurisdiction under Part I where the seat of the arbitration is in India. To this 
extent, it over-rules Bhatia International v. Bulk Trading S.A. and Anr.,(2002) 4 
SCC 105, and re -enforces the “seat centricity” principle of Bharat Aluminium 
Company and Ors. etc. v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Service, Inc. and Ors. 
etc., (2012) 9 SCC 552] 
Also insert the following proviso “ Provided that , subject to an express 
agreement to the contrary, the provisions of sections 9, 27, 37 (1)(a) and 37 
(3) shall also apply to international commercial arbitration even if the seat of 
arbitration is outside India, if an award made, or that which might be made, in 
such place would be enforceable and recognized under Part II of this Act.” 
[NOTE: This proviso ensures that an Indian Court can exercise jurisdiction 
with respect to these provisions even where the seat of the arbitration is 
outside India.] 
(vii) After the proviso i n sub-section (2), insert sub -section “(2A) Notwithstanding 
any judgment/ decree to the contrary, the amendment to this sub -section (2) 
shall not apply to applications which are pending before any judicial authority 
on the date of such amendment, and which have arisen in relation to 
arbitrations where the date of the arbitration agreement is prior to 
06.09.2012.” 
[NOTE: This proviso is needed, since the proposed amendment to S 2 (2) 
does away with the prospective over -ruling of Bhatia International v. Bulk 
Trading S.A. and Anr. , (2002) 4 SCC 105 in Bharat Aluminium Company and 
Ors. etc. v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Service, Inc. and Ors. etc ., (2012) 9 

40 
 
SCC 552. However, applications that are already pending in an Indian cour t 
and which have been filed on the basis of the Bhatia rule, should be 
protected.] 
 
Insertion of Section 6A 
3. After section 6 of the Act, add section “6A. Regime for costs - (1) In relation 
to any arbitration proceeding or any proceeding under any of the prov isions of 
this Act pertaining to such an arbitration, the court/ arbitral tribunal, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908, has 
the discretion to determine: 
(a) whether costs are payable by one party to another; 
(b) the amount of those costs; and 
(c) when they are to be paid. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause ( a), “costs” means reasonable costs 
relating to— 
 (i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators/ courts and witnesses; 
 (ii) legal fees and expenses; 
 (iii) any administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration; and 
 (iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral/ court 
proceedings and the arbitral award. 
(2) If the court/ arbitral tribunal decides to make an order in payment of costs – 
(a)  the general rule is that the unsuccessful party will be ordered to pay the costs 
 of the successful party; but 
(b) the court/ arbitral tribunal may make a different order for reasons to be 
 recorded in writing. 
(3) In deciding what order , if any, to make about costs, the court/ arbitral tribunal will 
have regard to all the circumstances, including– 
(a) the conduct of all the parties; 

41 
 
(b) whether a party has succeeded on part of its case, even if that party has  
not been wholly successful; 
(c) whether the party had made a frivolous counter claim leading to delay in 
the disposal of the arbitral proceedings; and 
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle was made by a party  and 
unreasonably refused by the other party. 
(4) The orders which the court/ ar bitral tribunal may make under this provision 
include an order that a party must pay:  
(a) a proportion of another party’s costs; 
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party’s costs; 
(c) costs from or until a certain date only; 
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun; 
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings; 
(f) costs relating only to a distinct part of the proceedings; and 
(g) interest on costs from or until a certain date.  
(5) An agreement which has the effect that a party is to pay the whole or part of the 
costs of the arbitration in any event is only valid if made after the dispute in question 
has arisen.”  
[NOTE: The above principle ensures that the “costs follow the event” regime 
governs all arbitrations/ arbitrati on related court litigation. Such a regime would 
disincentivize frivolous proceedings and inequitable conduct. The basis of the 
above provisions is Rule 44 of the Civil Procedure Rules of England. 
The Explanation to sub -section (1) reflects the wording of the Explanation to 
section 31(8) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (which has now been 
deleted in the present draft). 
The main objective of including the “costs follow the event” regime is to 
disincentivize the filing of frivolous claims/ appli cations. These provisions also 
further the spirit of the ruling of the Supreme Court in Salem Advocate Bar 
Association v Union of India, AIR 2005 SC 3353]. 

42 
 
Amendment of Section 7 
4.  In section 7 of the Act,  
(i) In sub -section (1), after the words “contractual o r not” add “, concerning a 
subject matter capable of settlement by arbitration.”  
[NOTE: This amendment makes it abundantly clear that a dispute must be 
arbitrable in the first place.] 
(ii) after sub-section (3) and before sub-section (4), insert sub-sections 
“(3A) An arbitration agreement is in writing if its content is recorded in any 
form, whether or not the arbitration agreement or contract has been 
concluded orally, by conduct, or by other means. 
(3B) The requirement that an arbitration agreement be in writ ing is met by 
an electronic communication if the information contained therein is 
accessible so as to be useable for subsequent reference.  
Explanation: For the purpose of this Act, "electronic communication" 
means any communication that the parties make b y means of data 
messages; "data message" means information generated, sent, received 
or stored by electronic, magnetic, optical or similar means, including, but 
not limited to, electronic data interchange (EDI), electronic mail, telegram, 
telex and telecopy.” 
[NOTE: This amendment brings Indian law in conformity with the 
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration and 
clarifies that an arbitration agreement can be concluded by way of 
electronic communication as well.]  
Amendment of Section 8 
5. In section 8 of the Act,  
(i) In sub -section (1), after the words “substance of the dispute, refer” add “to 
arbitration, such of” and after the words “the parties to” add “the action 
who are parties to the” and after the word “arbitration” add the word 
“agreement”. 

43 
 
(ii) after sub-section (1), add “Provided that no such reference shall be made only 
in cases where –  
 (i)  the parties to the action who are not parties to the arbitration agreement, are 
necessary parties to the action; 
 (ii) the judicial authority finds  that the arbitration agreement does not exist or is 
null and void.  
  Explanation 1 : If the judicial authority is prima facie  satisfied about the 
existence of an arbitration agreement, it shall refer the parties to arbitration 
and leave the final determin ation of the existence of the arbitration 
agreement to the arbitral tribunal in accordance with section 16, which shall 
decide the same as a preliminary issue; 
  Explanation 2: Any pleading filed in relation to any interim application which 
has been filed before the judicial authority shall not be treated to be a 
statement on the substance of the dispute for the purpose of this section.” 
   
[NOTE: The words “such of the parties… to the arbitration agreement” and proviso 
(i) of the amendment have been propos ed in the context of the decision of the 
Supreme Court in Sukanya Holdings Pvt. Ltd. v. Jayesh H. Pandya and Anr. , (2003) 
5 SCC 531, – in cases where all the parties to the dispute are not parties to the 
arbitration agreement, the reference is to be reject ed only where such parties are 
necessary parties to the action – and not if they are only proper parties, or are 
otherwise legal strangers to the action and have been added only to circumvent the 
arbitration agreement. Proviso (ii) of the amendment contemp lates a two -step 
process to be adopted by a judicial authority when considering an application 
seeking the reference of a pending action to arbitration. The amendment envisages 
that the judicial authority shall not refer the parties to arbitration only if it finds that 
there does not exist an arbitration agreement or that it is null and void. If the judicial 
authority is of the opinion that prima facie  the arbitration agreement exists, then it 
shall refer the dispute to arbitration, and leave the existence of the arbitration 
agreement to be finally determined by the arbitral tribunal. However, if the judicial 
authority concludes that the agreement does not exist, then the conclusion will be 

44 
 
final and not  prima facie. The amendment also envisages that there shall be a 
conclusive determination as to whether the arbitration agreement is null and void.]” 
(iii) In sub-section (2), after the words “duly certified copy thereof” add “or a copy 
accompanied by an affidavit calling upon the other party to produce the 
original arbitration agreement or duly certified copy thereof in a 
circumstance where the original arbitration agreement or duly certified 
copy is retained only by the other party.” 
[NOTE: In many transactions involving Government bodies and smaller market 
players, the original/ duly certified copy of the arbitration agreement is only 
retained by the former. This amendment would ensure that the latter class is not 
prejudiced in any manner by virtue of the same.] 
 
Amendment of Section 9  
6. In section 9,  
(i) before the words “A party may, before” add sub-section “(1)” 
(ii) after the words “any proceedings before it” add sub-section “(2) Where, before 
the arbitral proceedings, a Court grants any interim measure of protection 
under sub-section (1), the arbitral proceedings shall  be commenced within 
60 days from the date of such grant or within such shorter or further  time 
as indicated by the Court, failing which the interim measure of protection 
shall cease to operate.  
[NOTE: This amendment is to ensure the timely initiation of arbitration 
proceedings by a party who is granted an interim measure of protection.] 
(iii) Add sub -section “(3) Once the Arbitral Tribunal has been constituted, the 
Court shall, ordinarily, not entertain an Application under this provision 
unless circumstances exist owing to which the remedy under section 17 is 
not efficacious.” 
[NOTE: This amendment seeks to reduce the role of the Court in relation to grant 
of interim measures once the Arbitral Tribunal has been constituted. After all, once 
the Tribunal is seize d of the matter it is most appropriate for the Tribunal to hear all 

45 
 
interim applications. This also appears to be the spirit of the UNCITRAL Model Law 
as amended in 2006. 
Accordingly, section 17 has been amended to provide the Arbitral Tribunal the same 
powers as a Court would have under section 9] 
Amendment of Section 11 
7. In section 11,  
(i) In sub -section (4), sub -clause (b), after the words “by the” delete “Chief 
Justice” and add words “High Court” and after the words “designated by” 
delete the word “him” and add the word “it”. 
(ii) In sub -section (5), after the words “by the” delete “Chief Justice” and add 
words “High Court” and after the words “designated by” delete the word 
“him” and add the word “it”. 
(iii) In sub -section (6), sub -clause (c), after the words “may req uest the” delete 
“Chief Justice” and add words “High Court” and after the words 
“designated by” delete the word “him” and add the word “it”. 
(iv) after sub -section (6), insert sub -section “(6A) An appointment by the High 
Court or the person or institution desig nated by it under sub -section (4) or 
sub-section (5) or sub -section (6) shall not be made only if the High Court 
finds that the arbitration agreement does not exist or is null and void, 
  Explanation 1 : If the High Court is prima facie  satisfied regarding the 
existence of an arbitration agreement, it shall refer the parties to arbitration 
and leave the final determination of the existence of the arbitration 
agreement to the arbitral tribunal in accordance with section 16, which shall 
decide the same as a preliminary issue. 
  Explanation 2: For the removal of any doubt, it is clarified that reference by 
the High Court to any person or institution designated by it shall not be 
regarded as a delegation of judicial power.  
    Explanation 3: The High Court may t ake steps to encourage the parties to 
refer the di sputes to institutionalised arbitration by a professional Indian or 
International Arbitral Institute.  

46 
 
  [NOTE: The proposed section  11 (6A) envisages the same process of 
determination as is reflected in th e proposed amendment to section 8. 
Explanation 2 envisages that reference by the High Court to any person or 
institution designated by it shall not be regarded as a delegation of judicial 
power. Explanation 3 has been inserted with the hope and expectation  that 
High Courts would encourage the parties to refer the disputes to 
institutionalize arbitration by a professional Indian or international arbitral 
institute.] 
(v) In sub-section (7), after the words “or sub -section (6)” add the words “or sub -
section (6A)” and after the words “to the” delete the words “Chief Justice or 
the” and add the words “High Court is final where an arbitral tribunal has 
been appointed or a” and after the words “person or institution” add the 
words “has been” and after the words “design ated by” delete the words 
“him is final” and insert the words “the High Court, and no appeal, 
including letters patent appeal, shall lie against such order.” 
[NOTE: This amendment ensures that  
a) an affirmative judicial finding regarding the existence of the  arbitration 
agreement; and (b) the administrative act of appointing the arbitrator are 
final and non-appealabe.] 
(vi)  In sub -section (8), delete the words “The Chief Justice or the person or 
institution designated by him, in appointing an arbitrator,” and add  the 
words “The High Court or the person or institution designate d by it, in 
appointing an arbitrator, shall seek a disclosure in writing from the 
prospective arbitrator in terms of section 12 sub-section (1) and ” 
(vii) In sub -section (8), sub -clause (b), add t he words “the contents of the 
disclosure and” 
(viii) In sub -section (9), delete the words “Chief Justice” and add the words 
“Supreme Court” before the words “of India” and after the words 
“designated by” delete the word “him” and add the word “it”. 
(ix) In sub-section (10), after the word “The” delete the words “Chief Justice” and 
add the words “High Court” and after the words “scheme as” delete the 

47 
 
word “he” and add the word “it” and after the words “sub -section (6) to” 
delete the word “him” and add the word “it”. 
(x) In sub-section (11), after the words “sub -section (6) to” delete the words “the 
Chief Justices of” and after the words “High Courts or” delete the word 
“their” and add the word “its” and after the words “designates, the”, delete 
the words “Chief Justice” and add words “High Court” and after the word 
“or” delete the word “his” and the word “its”. 
(xi) In sub -section (12), sub -clause (a) after the words “reference to” delete the 
words “”Chief Justice”” and add the words “”High Court”” and after the 
words “reference t o” delete the words “”Chief Justice” and add the words 
“”Supreme Court”. 
(xii) In sub-section (12), sub-clause (b) after the words “reference to” delete the 
words “Chief Justice” and add the words “High Court” and after the words 
“construed as a reference to, ” delete the words “the Chief Justice of” and 
after the words “in that clause, to” delete the words “the Chief Justice of”. 
(xiii) after sub -section (12), add sub -section “(13) An application made under 
this section for appointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators shall be disposed 
of by the Supreme Court or the High Court or their designate as the case 
may be, as expeditiously as possible and an endeavor shall be made to 
dispose of the matter within 60 days from the date of service of notice on 
the opposite party.” 
[NOTE: This amendment is to ensure speedy disposal of S 11 
applications.] 
(xiv) after sub-section (13), add sub-section “ (14) In determining the fees of the 
arbitral tribunal in the case of arbitrations other than international 
commercial arbitrations and the s chedule for its payment to the arbitral 
tribunal, the High Court is empowered to frame necessary rules, and for 
which purpose the High Court may look to the Sixth Schedule of the Act.  
Explanation: For the removal of doubt, it is hereby clarified that this  sub-
section (14) of section 11 shall not apply in case where parties have 
agreed for determination of fees as per the rules of an arbitral institution.” 

48 
 
[NOTE: There have been instances where arbitrators are known to charge 
excessive fees. An indicative f ee schedule is therefore provided in the 6 th 
Schedule. The High Courts are given liberty to frame their own rules in this 
regard.] 
Amendment of Section 12 
8. In section 12, 
(i)  In sub-section (1), after the words “writing any circumstances” add “ -” and 
delete th e words “likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his 
independence or impartiality”and insert sub-clause “ (a) such as the 
existence either direct or indirect, of any past or present relationship with 
or interest in any of the parties or in relation  to the subject matter in 
dispute, whether financial, business, professional or other kind, which is 
likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or 
impartiality; and” 
(ii)  In sub-section (1), after sub-clause (a), insert sub-clause “(b) which are 
likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to the arbitration and in 
particular his ability to finish the entire arbitration within 24 months and 
render an award within 3 months from such date;” 
(iii)  In sub-section (1), after sub -clause (b), add “ Explanation 1: The contents 
of the Fourth Schedule shall be treated as a guide in relation to 
determining whether circumstances exists which give rise to justifiable 
doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an arbitrator. 
Explanation 2: The disclosure shall be made by such person in the form 
set out in the Seventh Schedule of the Act.” 
[NOTE: This amendment is intended to further goals of independence and 
impartiality in arbitrations, and only gives legislative colour to the phrase 
“independence or impartiality” as it is used in the Act. The contents of the 
Fourth Schedule incorporate the Red and Orange lists of the International 
Bar Association Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International 
Arbitration. While Mr. Malhotra was of the vie w that the said provisions 
should not apply to the public sector, excluding the public sector will 

49 
 
render the provision su sceptible to a challenge under a rticle 19 of the 
Constitution of India.]  
(iv)  after sub -section (4), insert sub -section “ (5) Notwithstanding any prior 
agreement to the contrary, any person whose relationship with the parties, 
Counsel or the subject matter of the dispute falls under one of the 
categories set out in the Fifth Schedule shall be ineligible to be appointed 
as an arbitrator.” 
(v)  after sub -section, insert “ Provided that parties may, subsequent to 
disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability of this 
provision by an express agreement in writing;” 
(vi)  After the first proviso, add the second proviso as follows: 
“Provided fur ther that the instant sub -section shall not apply to cases 
where an arbitrator has already been appointed prior to the effective date 
of the instant amendment;” 
[NOTE: This amendment is in consonance with the principles of natural 
justice, that an interest ed person cannot be an adjudicator. The Fifth 
Schedule incorporates the provisions of the Waivable and Non -waivable 
Red List of the IBA Guidelines on Conflict of Interest. However, given that 
this clause would be applicable to arbitrations in all contexts (including in 
family settings), it is advisable to make this provision waivable, provided 
that parties specifically agree to do so after the disputes have arisen 
between them.] 
Amendment of Section 14 
9. In section 14,  
(i)  In sub-section (1) after the word “ter minate” delete the word “if” and add 
the words “and he shall be substituted by another arbitrator if” 
(ii)  In sub -section (1), after sub -clause (b), add “Explanation: Where an 
arbitrator whose relationship with the parties, Counsel or the subject 
matter of the  dispute falls under one of the categories set out in the Fifth 

50 
 
Schedule, such an arbitrator shall be deemed to be “ de jure  unable to 
perform his functions”.” 
[NOTE: this is in furtherance to the amendment to S 12] 
Amendment of Section 16 
10. In section 16,  
After sub-section (6), insert sub-section “(7) The arbitral tribunal shall have 
the power to make an award or give a ruling notwithstanding that the 
dispute before it involves a serious question of law, complicated questions 
of fact or allegations of fraud, corruption etc.” 
[NOTE: This amendment is proposed in the light of the Supreme Court 
decisions (e.g. N. Radhakrishnan v.Maestro Engineers, (2010) 1 SCC 72) 
which appear to denude an arbitral tribunal of the power to decide on 
issues of fraud etc.]  
Amendment of Section 17 
11. In section 17  
(i)  In sub -section (1), delete the words “Unless otherwise agreed by the 
parties,” and add words “A party may, during”, after the words  “the arbitral” 
delete the words  “tribunal may,” add the words “proceedings or”, after the 
word “at” delete the words  “the request of a party, order a party to take”, 
and after the word “any” add words “time after the making of the arbitral 
award but before it is enforced in accordance with section 36, apply to the 
arbitral tribunal for an” and after the words “interim measure of protection” 
delete the words  “as the arbitral tribunal may consider necessary” and 
after the words “in respect of” add the words “any of the following matters, 
namely:—” 
(ii)  In sub-section (1), insert sub -clause “(a)the pre servation, interim custody 
or sale of any goods which are the subject -matter of the arbitration 
agreement;” 
(iii)  In sub -section (1), after sub -clause “(a)”,  insert sub -clause “(b)securing 
the amount in dispute in the arbitration;” 

51 
 
(iv)  In sub-section (1), after sub-clause “(b)”,  insert sub-clause “(c) the 
detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the 
subject-matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question 
may arise therein and authorising for any of the aforesaid pu rposes any 
person to enter upon any land or building in the possession of any party or 
authorising any samples to be taken or any observation to be made, or 
experiment to be tried, which may be necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of obtaining full information or evidence;” 
(v)  In sub -section (1), after sub -clause “(c)”,  insert sub -clause “(d) interim 
injunction or the appointment of a receiver;” 
(vi)  In sub-section (1), after sub -clause “(d)”, insert sub -clause “(e) such other 
interim measure of protection as may appear to the Arbitral Tribunal to be 
just and convenient, and the arbitral tribunal shall have the same power for 
making orders as the Court has for the purpose of, and in relation to, any 
proceedings before it. ” 
[NOTE: This is to provide the arbitra l tribunal the same powers as a civil 
court in relation to grant of interim measures. When this provision is read 
in conjunction with section 9(2), parties will by default be forced to 
approach the Arbitral Tribunal for interim relief once the Tribunal has  been 
constituted. The Arbitral Tribunal would continue to have powers to grant 
interim relief post -award. This regime would decrease the burden on 
Courts. Further, this would also be in tune with the spirit of the UNCITRAL 
Model Law as amended in 2006.] 
(vii) delete words In sub -section (2) and add the words “(2) Subject to any 
orders passed in appeal under section 37, any order issued by the arbitral 
tribunal under this section shall be deemed to be an Order of the Court for 
all purposes and shall be enforceabl e under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 in the same manner as if it were an Order of the Court.” 
[NOTE: This is to ensure the effective enforcement of interim measures 
that may be ordered by an arbitral tribunal.] 
 

52 
 
Amendment of Section 20 
12. In section 20, delete the word “Place” and add the words “Seat and Venue” 
before the words “of arbitration”. 
(i) In sub-section (1), after the words ”agree on the” delete the word “place” and 
add words “seat and venue” 
(ii) In sub-section (3), after the words “meet at any” delete  the word “place” and 
add word “venue”. 
[NOTE: The departure from the existing phrase “place” of arbitration is 
proposed to make the wording of the Act consistent with the international 
usage of the concept of a “seat” of arbitration, to denote the legal h ome of the 
arbitration. The amendment further legislatively distinguishes between the 
“[legal] seat” from a “[mere] venue” of arbitration.] 
Amendment of Section 23 
13. In section 23, after sub -section (1) and before sub -section (2), add the words 
“Explanation: In his defence the respondent may also submit a counter claim 
or plead a set off, which shall be treated as being within the scope of 
reference and be adjudicated upon by the arbitral tribunal notwithstanding that 
it may not fall within the scope of the i nitial reference to arbitration, but 
provided it falls within the scope of the arbitration agreement.” 
[NOTE: This explanation is in order to ensure that counter claims and set off 
can be adjudicated upon by an arbitrator without seeking a separate/new 
reference by the respondent so long as it falls within the scope of the 
arbitration agreement, in order to ensure final settlement of disputes between 
parties and prevent multiplicity of litigation.] 
Amendment of Section 24 
14. After the proviso, add words “ Provided further that the arbitral tribunal shall, 
as far as possible, hold oral hearings for the presentation of evidence or for 
oral argument on continuous days, and not grant any adjournments unless 
sufficient cause is made out and may impose costs, includin g exemplary 
costs, on the party seeking the adjournment.”  

53 
 
 [NOTE: This amendment is to ensure expeditious hearings in the arbitration 
and to avoid unnecessary adjournments.] 
Amendment of Section 25 
15. In section 25, sub -clause (b), after the words “by the cl aimant” add the words 
“and shall have the discretion to treat the right of the respondent to file such 
statement of defence as having been forfeited;” 
Amendment of Section 28 
16. In section 28,  
(i)  In sub -section (1), after the words “Where the”, delete the word  “place” 
and add the word “seat” and after the words “of arbitration is” delete the 
word “ situate”  
[NOTE: This amendment is only clarificatory, and follows on from the 
amendment to S 20.] 
(ii)  In sub-section (3), after the words “tribunal shall decide” delet e the words 
“in accordance with” and add the words “having regard to” 
[Note: This amendment is intended to overrule the effect of ONGC Ltd. v. 
Saw Pipes Ltd.,  (2003) 5 SCC 705, where the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
held that any contravention of the terms of the  contract would result in the 
award falling foul of Section 28 and consequently being against public 
policy.]  
Amendment of Section 31 
17. In section 31 
(i)  In sub -section (4), after the words “its date and the” delete the word 
“place” and add the word “seat” 
(ii)  In sub-section (7),In sub-clause (b), after the words “carry interest at” add 
the words “2% per annum more than” and before the words “rate of” add 
the word “current” and after the words “rate of” delete the words “eighteen 
per centum per annum” and add the word “interest”. 
(iii)  In sub-section (7), after sub-clause (b), add the words “ Explanation 1: The 
expression “current rate of interest” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it under Clause (b) section 2 of the Interest Act, 1978. 

54 
 
Explanation 2 : The expre ssion “sum directed to be paid by an arbitral 
award” includes the interest awarded in accordance with section 31(7)(a).” 
[NOTE: Explanation 1 ensures that the default rate of interest is in line with 
prevailing commercial realities and not an arbitrary figure of 18%. 
Explanation 2 intends to legislatively overrule the decision of the Supreme 
Court in State of Haryana v. S.L. Arora , (2010) 3 SCC 690, the 
correctness of which has now been referred to a larger bench by virtue of 
the decision of the Supreme Cou rt in Hyder Consulting (U.K.) v. Governor 
of Orissa, (2013) 2 SCC 719.] 
(iv)  In sub-section (8), after the words “by the parties” delete “, —”  and delete 
the provision for sub -clause (a) before the words “the costs of” and after 
the words “fixed by the arbitra l tribunal” delete “;” and add the words “in 
accordance with section 6A of this Act.” 
(v)  Rest of the sub-section 8 be deleted. 
  
 
Amendment of Section 34 
18. In section 34, 
(i) In sub-section (1), after the words “sub -section (2)” add the words “, sub -
section (2A)”. 
(ii)  In sub -section (2), after the word “ Explanation.—“ delete the words 
“Without prejudice to the generality of sub -clause (ii), it is hereby declared, 
for” and add the word “For” and after the words “the avoidance of any 
doubt,” add the words “it is clarifi ed” and after the words “public policy of 
India” add the word “only” and after the word “if” delete the word “ -” and 
add the word “:” and add the sub-clause “(a)” before the words “the making 
of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or w as in 
violation of section 75 or section 81” and add the word “; or” after the 
words “violation of section 75 or section 81”  and add sub -clause “(b) it is 
in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or” and add 

55 
 
sub-clause “(c) it is in con flict with the most basic notions of morality or 
justice." 
[NOTE: The proposed Explanation II is required to bring the standard for 
setting aside an award in conformity with the decision of the Supreme 
Court in Renusagar Power Co. Ltd.v. General Electric Co., 1994 Supp (1) 
SCC 644 and Shri LalMahal Ltd. v. ProgettoGrano Spa, (2014) 2 SCC 
433,for awards in both domestic as well as international commercial 
arbitrations. Ground (c) reflects an internationally recognized formulation. 
Such a formulation further tightens the Renusagar test and ensures that 
“morality or justice” - terms used in Renusagar- cannot be used to widen 
the test.] 
(iii)  After the Explanation in sub-section (2), insert sub-section “(2A) An arbitral 
award arising out of arbitrations other than int ernational commercial 
arbitrations, may also be set aside by the Court if the Court finds that the 
award is vitiated by patent illegality appearing on the face of the award.  
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an 
erroneous application of the law or by re-appreciating evidence.” 
 [NOTE: The proposed S 34(2A) provides an additional, albeit carefully 
limited, ground for setting aside an award arising out of a domestic 
arbitration (and not an international commercial arbitrati on). The scope of 
review is based on the patent illegality standard set out by the Supreme 
Court in ONGC Ltd. v. Saw Pipes Ltd.,  (2003) 5 SCC 705. The proviso 
creates exceptions for erroneous application of the law and re-appreciation 
of evidence, which cannot be the basis for setting aside awards.] 
(iv)  In sub -section (3), after the words “An application” delete the word “for 
setting aside” and add the word “under the above sub-sections” 
(v)  re-number sub -section (4) to read as sub -section (6) and insert sub -
section “(4) An Application under this section shall be filed by a party only 
after issuing a prior Notice to the other party and such an Application shall 
be accompanied by an affidavit from the Applicant endorsing compliance 
with this requirement.” and sub -section “(5) An Application under this 

56 
 
section shall be disposed off expeditiously and in any event within a period 
of one year from the date on which the notice under Sub -section (4) is 
served.”. 
 
Amendment of Section 36 
19. In section 36, 
(i) add numbering as sub -section (1) before the words “Where the time” and 
after the words “Section 34 has expired,” delete the words “or such application 
having been made, it has been refused” and add the words “then subject to the 
provision of sub-section (2) hereof,” 
(ii) insert sub-section “(2) Where an application to set aside the arbitral award 
has been filed in the Court under section 34, the filing of such an application shall 
not by itself render the award unenforceable, unless upon a separate application 
made for that purpose , the Court grants stay of the operation of the award in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) hereof;” 
(iii) insert sub-section “(3) Upon filing of the separate application under sub -
section (2) for stay of the operation of the award, the court may,  subject to such 
conditions as it may deem fit, grant stay of the operation of the award for reasons 
to be recorded in writing.” 
(iv) insert proviso ”Provided that the Court shall while considering the grant of 
stay, in the case of an award for money shall have  due regard to the provisions 
for grant of stay of money decrees under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.” 
[NOTE: This amendment is to ensure that the mere filing of an application under 
section 34 does not operate as an automatic stay on the enforcement o f the 
award. The Supreme Court in National Aluminium Co. Ltd. v. Pressteel  & 
Fabrications (P) Ltd. and Anr, (2004) 1 SCC 540, recommends that such an 
amendment is the need of the hour.] 
 
Amendment of Section 37 
20. In section 37, 

57 
 
(i) In sub -section (1), renumber s ub-clause “(a)” as sub -clause “(b)” and 
insert sub -clause “(a)refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under 
section 8;” 
(ii) In sub -section (1), renumber sub -clause “(b)” as sub -clause “(d)” and 
insert sub-clause “(c) refusing to appoint an arbitrator or r efusing to refer 
such appointment to a person or institution designated by it under section 
11, in the case of an arbitration other than an international commercial 
arbitration”.  
[NOTE: Sub-sections (a) and (c) have been added to provide for appeal in 
cases of orders refusing to refer parties to arbitration under section 8 
(mirroring the existing provision in section 50) and to provide an appeal 
where the High Court refuses to appoint an arbitrator respectively.] 
(iii) In sub-section (3), after the words “No sec ond appeal” add the words “, 
including letters patent appeal,” 
[NOTE: This amendment is clarificatory and reduces the scope of the party 
to file an LPA.] 
Amendment of Section 47 
21. In section 47, in the “ Explanation” after sub -section (2), after the words “ 
“Court” means the” add the words “High Court exercising jurisdiction over the” 
and after the words “including any” delete the words “civil court” and add the 
word “Court” and after the words “inferior to such” delete the words  “principal 
Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes” and add the words “High Court.” 
[NOTE: See the Note to section 2(e)] 
Amendment of Section 48 
22. In section 48,  
(i) In sub -section (2), in the “ Explanation.—”, delete the words “Without 
prejudice to the generality of clause ( b), it is hereby declared, for” and add 
the word “For” and after the words “avoidance of any doubt,” add the 
words “it is clarified” and after the words “the public policy of India” add the 
word “only” and after the word “if” delete “ -” and “;” and insert sub -clause 

58 
 
“(a)” before the words “the making of the award” and delete “.” And add “;” 
after the words “by fraud or corruption” and add  sub-clauses “(b)it is in 
contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; (c) it is in conflict 
with India’s most basic notions of morality or justice.” 
(ii)  Re-number sub-section “(3)” as sub -section “(5)” and add sub -section “(3) 
An objection under the above sub -sections shall not be made after three 
months have elapsed from the date on which the party making such 
objections has re ceived notice of the application under section 47 of the 
Act: 
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the party raising the objection 
was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application within the 
said period of three months it may entertain  the application within a further 
period of thirty days, but not thereafter. 
(iii)  insert sub-section “(4) An objection under this section shall be disposed off 
expeditiously and in any event within a period of one year from the date on 
which the notice issued pursuant to an application under section 47 is 
served.” 
[NOTE: The above provisions have been incorporated to set a time frame 
for hearing an objection under section 48. The above time frame is in tune 
with the time frame set for hearing an application under section 34] 
(iv)  insert sub -section “(6) The costs regime set out in section 6A of the Act 
shall apply to a proceeding in relation to sections 47 and 48 of the Act.” 
[NOTE: This provision has been included to ensure that the “costs follow 
the event” regime also applies to proceeding under sections 47 and 48] 
 
Insertion of Section 85A 
 
 A new section section85A on transitory provisions has been incorporated. 
 
Transitory provisions . —(1) Unless otherwise provided in the Arbitration and 
Conciliation (Amending) Act, 2014, the provisions of the instant Act (as amended) 

59 
 
shall be prospe ctive in operation and shall apply only to fresh arbitrations and fresh 
applications, except in the following situations -  
 (a) the provisions of section 6-A shall apply to all pendi ng proceedings and 
arbitrations.  
  Explanation: It is clarified that where the issue of costs has already been 
decided by the court/tribunal, the same shall not be opened to that extent.  
 (b) the provisions of section 16 sub -section (7) shall apply to al l pending 
proceedings and arbitrations, except where the issue has been decided by 
the court/tribunal.  
 (c) the provisions of second proviso to section 24 shall apply to all pending 
arbitrations.  
 
(2) For the purposes of the instant section,— 
 (a) "fresh arbitrations" mean arbitrations where there has been no request for 
appointment of arbitral tribunal; or application for appointment of arbitral 
tribunal; or appointment of the arbitral tribunal, prior to the date of 
enforcement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amending) Act, 2014.  
 (b) "fresh applications" mean applications to a court or arbitral tribunal made 
subsequent to the date of enforcement of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amending) Act, 2014.  
[NOTE: This amendment is to clarify the scope  of operation of each of the 
proposed amendments with respect to pending arbitrations/proceedings.] 
Amendment to the Schedules 
After The Third Schedule, add the “THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 12) 
The following grounds give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or 
impartiality of arbitrators : 
 
 

60 
 
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel 
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or 
present business relationship with a party. 
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of 
one of the parties. 
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for 
one of the parties. 
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is represen ting one of the 
parties. 
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar 
controlling influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly 
involved in the matters in dispute in the arbitration. 
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case 
without the arbitrator being involved himself or herself. 
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with 
one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the 
appointing party even though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a 
significant financial income therefrom. 
9. The arbitrator has a cl ose family relationship with one of the parties and in the 
case of companies with the persons in the management and controlling the 
company.  
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in 
 one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
11. The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the 
 arbitration.  
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a 
 similar controlling influence in one of the parties. 

61 
 
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the 
 outcome of the case. 
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the 
 appointing party, and the arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant 
 financial income therefrom. 
 
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute 
 
15. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the 
 dispute to a party or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case. 
 
Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute 
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or 
 an affiliate of one of the parties that is privately held. 
18. A close family mem ber of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in 
 the outcome of the dispute. 
19. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close 
 relationship with a third party who may be liable to recourse on the part of the 
 unsuccessful party in the dispute. 
Previous services for one of the parties or other involvement in the case 
20. The arbitrator has within the past three years served as counsel for one of the 
parties or an affiliate of one of the parties or has previously advised  or been 
consulted by the party or an affiliate of the party making the appointment in an 
unrelated matter, but the arbitrator and the party or the affiliate of the party 
have no ongoing relationship. 
21. The arbitrator has within the past three years serv ed as counsel against one 
 of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties in an unrelated matter. 

62 
 
22. The arbitrator has within the past three years been appointed as arbitrator on 
 two or more occasions by one of the parties or an affiliate of one o f the 
 parties. 
23. The arbitrator’s law firm has within the past three years acted for one of the 
 parties or an affiliate of one of the parties in an unrelated matter without the 
 involvement of the arbitrator. 
24. The arbitrator currently serves, or has  served within the past three years, as 
 arbitrator in another arbitration on a related issue involving one of the parties 
 or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
Relationship between an arbitrator and another arbitrator or counsel. 
25. The arbitrator and another arbitrator are lawyers in the same law firm. 
26. The arbitrator was within the past three years a partner of, or otherwise 
 affiliated with, another arbitrator or any of the counsel in the same arbitration. 
27. A lawyer in the arbitrator’s law firm is an arbitrator in another dispute involving 
 the same party or parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
28. A close family member of the arbitrator is a partner or employee of the law 
 firm representing one of the parties, but is not assisting with the dispute. 
29. The arbitrator has within the past three years received more than three 
 appointments by the same counsel or the same law firm. 
Relationship between arbitrator and party and others involved in the 
arbitration 
30. The arbitrator’s law firm is currently acting adverse to one of the parties or an 
 affiliate of one of the parties. 
31. The arbitrator had been associated within the past three years with a party or 
 an affiliate of one of the parties in a professional capacity, such as a former 
 employee or partner. 
 
 
 

63 
 
Other circumstances 
32. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, which by reason of 
 number or denomination constitute a material holding in one of the parties or 
 an affiliate of one of the parties that is publicly listed. 
33. The arbitrator holds a position in an arbitration institution with appointing 
 authority over the dispute. 
34. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a 
 similar controlling influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties, where the 
 affiliate is not directly involved in the matters in dispute in the arbitration.   
Explanation: (1)The term ‘close family member’ refers to a spouse, sibling, child, 
parent or life partner.  
(2)  The term ‘affiliate’ encompasses all companies in one group of companies 
 including the parent company.  
(3)  It may be the practice in certain specific kinds of arbitration, such as maritime 
 or commodities arbitration, to draw arbitrators from a small, specialized pool. 
If in such field s it is the custom and practice for parties frequently to appoint 
the same arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to be taken into 
account while applying the rules set out above.” 
[NOTE: The above rules are taken and adapted from the Orange  list of the 
International Bar Associations Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International 
Arbitration.] 
 
After The Fourth Schedule, add the “THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 12) 
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel 
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or 
present business relationship with a party. 
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of 
one of the parties. 

64 
 
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for 
one of the parties. 
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the 
parties. 
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar 
controlling influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly 
involved in the matters in dispute in the arbitration. 
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case 
without the arbitrator being involved himself or herself. 
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with 
one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the 
appointing party ev en though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a 
significant financial income therefrom. 
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the 
case of companies with the persons in the management and controlling  the 
company.  
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in 
 one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
11. The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the 
 arbitration.  
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a 
 similar controlling influence in one of the parties. 
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the 
 outcome of the case. 
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the 
 appointing party, and the arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant 
 financial income therefrom. 
 

65 
 
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute 
 
15. The arbitrator has given legal adv ice or provided an expert opinion on the 
 dispute to a party or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case. 
 
Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute 
 
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or 
 an affiliate of one of the parties that is privately held. 
 
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in 
 the outcome of the dispute. 
 
19. The arbitrator or a close fam ily member of the arbitrator has a close 
 relationship with a third party who may be liable to recourse on the part of the 
 unsuccessful party in the dispute. 
 Explanation: (1)The term ‘close family member’ refers to a spouse, sibling, child, 
parent or life partner.  
 
(2) The term ‘affiliate’ encompasses all companies in one group of companies 
 including the parent company.  
 
(3) It may be the practice in certain specific kinds of arbitration, such as maritime 
 or commodities arbitration, to draw arbitrator s from a small, specialized pool. 
 If in such fields it is the custom and practice for parties frequently to appoint 
 the same arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to be taken into 
 account while applying the rules set out above.  

66 
 
 [NOTE: The above rules are taken and adapted from the Red list of the 
International Bar Associations Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in 
International Arbitration.]” 
 
After The Fifth Schedule, add the “THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 11 (14)) 
Sum in Dispute (Rs.) Model Fees (Indicative) 
Upto Rs. 5,00,000/- Rs. 45,000/- 
Above Rs. 5,00,000/ - and upto 
Rs. 20,00,000/- 
Rs. 45,000/ - + 3.5% of the claim amount over 
and above Rs. 5,00,000/- 
Above Rs. 20,00,000/ - and upto 
Rs. 1,00,00,000/- 
Rs. 97,500/- + 3% of the c laim amount over and 
above Rs. 20,00,000/- 
Above Rs. 1,00,00,000/ - and 
upto Rs. 10,00,00,000/- 
Rs. 3,37,500/ - + 1% of the claim amount over 
and above Rs. 1,00,00,000/- 
Above Rs. 10,00,00,000/ - and 
upto Rs. 20,00,00,000/- 
Rs. 12,37,500/ - + 0.75% of the cl aim amount 
over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000/- 
Above Rs. 20,00,00,000/-  Rs. 19,87,500/ - + 0. 5% of the claim amount 
over and above Rs. 20,00,00,000/- with a ceiling 
of Rs. 30,00,000/- 
* In the event, the arbitrator to be appointed is a Sole Arbitrator, he shall be entitled 
to an additional amount of 25% on the fee payable as per the table set out above. 
 
After The Sixth Schedule, add the “THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 12 (1)(b) Explanation 2) 
NAME:  
CONTACT DETAILS: 
PRIOR EXPERIENCE (INCLUDING EXPERIENCE WITH ARBITRATIONS): 
NUMBER OF ON-GOING ARBITRATIONS:  
CIRCUMSTANCES DISCLOSING ANY PAST OR PRESENT RELATIONSHIP 
WITH OR INTEREST IN ANY OF THE PARTIES OR IN RELATION TO THE 
SUBJECT MATTER IN DISPUTE, WHETHER FI -NANCIAL, BUSINESS, 
PROFESSIONAL OR OTHER KI ND, WHICH IS LIKELY TO GIVE RISE TO 

67 
 
JUSTIFIABLE DOUBTS AS TO YOUR INDEPENDENCE OR IMPARTIALITY (LIST 
OUT): 
 
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH ARE LIKELY TO AFFECT YOUR ABILITY TO DEVOTE 
SUFFICIENT TIME TO THE ARBITRATION AND IN PARTICULAR YOUR ABILITY 
TO FINISH THE ENTI RE ARBITRATION WITHIN 24 MONTHS AND RENDER AN 
AWARD WITHIN 3 MONTHS (LIST OUT):” 
 
 
(Justice A.P. Shah) 
Chairman 
 
 
 
(Justice S.N. Kapoor)          (Prof. (Dr.) Moolchand Sharma)                 (Justice Usha Mehra) 
Member    Member     Member 
 
 
 
 
 
                         (N.L. Meena)            (P.K. Malhotra)   
                    Member-Secretary                     Ex-officio Member  
 