 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
Report No. 247 
 
Sections 41 to 48 of the Indian Succession 
Act, 1925  –  Proposed Reforms 
 
 
September, 2014 
 
 
 

ii 
 
The 20 th Law Commission was constituted for a period of three years 
from 1 st September, 2012 by Order No. A -45012/1/2012-Admn.III (LA) 
dated the 8 th October, 2012 issued by the Government of India, 
Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, New Delhi. 
 
The Law Commission consists of a full time Chairman, four full -time 
Members (including Member-Secretary), two Ex -officio Members and 
four part-time Members.  
  
 
 
 
Chairman  
Hon’ble Justice A.P. Shah  
 
 
Full-time Members  
Justice S.N. Kapoor  
Prof. (Dr.) Moolchand Sharma  
Justice Usha Mehra  
Dr. S.S. Chahar, Member-Secretary  
 
 
Ex-officio Member  
Mr. P.K. Malhotra, Secretary (Department of Legal Affairs)  
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Secretary (Legislative Department) 
 
Part-time Members  
Shri R. Venkataramani  
Prof. (Dr.) Yogesh Tyagi  
Dr. Bijai Narain Mani  
Prof.(Dr.) Gurjeet Singh 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
The Law Commission is located in  
14th   Floor, Hindustan Times House,  
K.G. Marg,  
New Delhi-110 001  
 
 
 
Member Secretary  
Dr. S.S. Chahar 
 
 
Research Staff  
Dr. (Smt.) Pawan Sharma    : Joint Secretary & Law Officer  
Shri A.K. Upadhyay    : Additional Law Officer  
Dr. V.K. Singh     : Deputy Legal Adviser  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The text of this Report is available on the Internet at :  
http://www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in  
 
 
 
 
 
© Government of India  
   Law Commission of India  
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
 
 


v 
 
 
 
At a Glance 
 
Sl.No. Contents 
 
Page No. 
1. Introduction 1 
2. Developments leading to enactment of Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 
2 – 5 
3. Indian Succession Act, 1925 5 – 8 
4. Scheme of Sections 41 -48 – Unfair and unjust to 
Christian Mother 
8 – 10 
5. Suggestions & Recommendations 10 - 14 
6. Chart Epicting Changes/Amendments as 
Recommended 
15 – 21 
7. Conclusion 21–22 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
Sections 41 t o 48 o f the Indian Succession 
Act, 1925 –Proposed Reforms 
 
Introduction 
Christianity is the third most populous religion in 
India. Indian Christians, though united in the essence of 
their faith, are diverse in their practices, rites and religion 
across the country. Though uniformity among the Roman 
Catholic Church is more or less maintained, the 
indigenous influence has made Christianity in India 
unique and different from i ts form in many other 
countries across the World. Almost all varieties of 
Christianity are believed to reside  in India though the 
most common groups are from the Roman Catholic  
Church, Syro -Malabar Catholic Church, the Protestant 
Churches like the Church of South India, the Marthoma 
Syrian Church, the Presbyterian Church of India and so 
on. During early period Christianity was considered to be 
a foreign reception and imposition in Indi an context.  
However, with the passage of time Indian Christianity 
has become integral part of Indian culture itself and has 
come to be understood as an indigenous appropriation 
of Christian experience and not a foreign implant.1   
                                                           
1 Selva J Raj, Corrine Dempsey, POPULAR CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA: 
RITING BETWEEN THE LINES, 2002, p. 3. 

2 
 
 
Therefore, as result of  above t he family law 
governing Christians in India is varied. Synergetic 
influences have led to cultural variations that have 
gained legal recognition either statutorily or judicially. 
This has led to multiplicity in applicati on of laws whereas 
ambiguity most noticeable is in the laws of succession for 
Christians.  It is this multiplicity and ambiguity that led to 
enactment of the Indian Succession Act, 1865 and finally 
the Indian Succession Act, 1925.  
 
Developments leading to enactment of Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 
 
Succession laws in India had their origin in religion.  
Thus we find that in the late 19th century, succession was 
determined on the basis of customary practices and 
religious laws. There were, therefore, specific rules 
within the scheme of religious laws and texts for the 
devolution of proprietary rights for Hindus and Muslims. 
While these rul es were ambiguous due to conflicting 
interpretations of religious texts, regional variations in 
practice, and synergetic influences of cultural 
commixture, the fact still remained that there were 
specific criteria on the basis of which devolution and 
succession could be governed.  

3 
 
 
However, considerable uncertainty prevailed in 
the period before 1865 about the law applicable in case 
of persons belonging to communities other than Hindus 
and Muslims .  Before 1865, the Hindus and Muslims 
were governed by their  respective personal laws, in 
matters of inheritance and succession.  But the position 
was obscure in relation to other persons – for example, 
Anglo-Indians, Parsis, Jews, Armenian s, Christians, and 
others.  In general the English law was applied in the 
Presidency towns, but the position as regards the 
Moffusil was n ot very clear.  It is this prevalence of 
obscurity that was in fact, referred to by Sir Henry 
Maine, while introducing the Bill that led to the 
Succession Act of 1865.  The law defining the righ ts and 
obligations of non -Hindus and non -Muslims was thus in 
extremely confused position.  In the Presidency towns, 
the English Law was applied to members of just 
mentioned communities.   Outside the presidency towns, 
most of the courts in the Mofussil cam e to apply under 
the phrase “Justice, equity and good conscience” in all 
cases not provided for by the legislature, the substantive 
personal law of the particular person.  The First Law 
Commission in 1835, thus recommended that the English 
Law should be de clared to be the law applicable to such 
persons - a recommendation that was not accepted.  The 

4 
 
Second Law Commission  of 1853 did not favour 
introduction of English Law, but it viewed it desirable to 
assimilate law as was prevailing throughout the country.  
However, the Third Law Commission  submitted draft of 
the Indian Succession Act, 1865.  Finally, came the Act of 
1865.  The Act, dealt with succession, both testamentary 
and intestate.  The Act exempted Hindus and Muslims 
from its scope, but the utility of  the Act lay in the 
codification of law of succession as regards other 
persons.   
 
The Indian Succession Act, 1865 that was based on 
English law and was declared to constitute, subject to 
certain exceptions, the law of British India applicable to 
all class es of intestate and testamentary succession but 
the exceptions were so wide as to exclude all natives of 
India.  A very important change was made by the Hindu 
Wills Act, 1870 (Act 21 of 1870), which inter alia enacted 
that certain portions of Indian Succes sion Act should 
apply to all Wills and codicils made by any Hindu on or 
after 1 st day of September, 1870.  The Probate and 
Administration Act 5 of 1881 was applied to Hindus and 
Muhammadans.  [On the coming into force of the Hindu 
Succession Act, 1956, succession to property of a Hindu 
is governed by its provisions except to the extent  
excluded by Section 5 therein.  Clause(1) of Section 5 

5 
 
relates to succession to property of Hindus whose 
marriage is solemnised under the Special Marriage Act, 
1954, and to the property of the issue of such marriage.  
Clauses (ii) and (iii) of the Section relate to impartible 
property held by the persons specified therein.  
Succession to the properties of all such persons is 
regulated by the Indian Succession Act, 1925.]   The 
British Parliament felt that in the face of such vast 
scatteredness and multiplic ity as described above there 
was need for consolidation  of law .  And thus mainly 
responding to this need that the British legislatives  
enacted Indian Succession Act, 1925, -  primarily a 
consolidating Act. 
 
Indian Succession Act, 1925 
 
Today t he Indian Suc cession Act, 1925 is the principal 
legislative measure in India dealing with the substantive 
law of testamentary succession in regard to persons 
other than Muslims and intestate succession in regard to 
persons other than Hindus and Muslims.  It is also the  
principal legislative measure dealing with machinery  of 
succession in regard to the testamentary and intestate 
succession in respect of such persons.  In fact, it needs to 
be underscored that  the Act of 1925  as already 
mentioned is a consolidating Act.  I t is only an amending 

6 
 
Act and has only consolidated several pre -existing 
Central Acts passed between 1841 and 1903 without 
introducing any material changes.  In fact, the framers of 
the Act stated thus - “The subject of this bill is to 
consolidate the India n Law relating to succession; the 
separate existence on the statute book of a number of 
large and important enactments renders the present law 
difficult of ascertainment and there is , therefore, every 
justification for an attempt to consolidate it.  The bi ll has 
been prepared by the Statute Law Revision Committee as 
purely consolidating measure.  No inte ntional change of 
law has therefore been made." 2  The sweep of this Act is 
wide as it consolidates twelve Acts into one.  The Acts 
consolidated or repealed are:-   
 
i. The Succession (Property Protection) Act, 19 
of 1841 
ii. The Indian Succession Act, 10 of 1925 
iii. The Parsi Intestate Succession Act , 21 of 
1865 
iv. The Hindu Wills Act, 21 of 1870 
v. The Married Women’s Property Act, 3 of the 
1874,  Section 2 
vi. Probate and Administration Act , 5 of 1881;  
Act 6 of 1889;  Act 2 of 1890 and Act   8 of 
1903 
vii. The District Delegates Act, 6 of 1881 
viii. The Succession Certificate Act, 7 of 1889 
                                                           
2 Statement of objects and reasons vide Gazette of India (page 5), dated 4th 
August, 1923 

7 
 
ix. The Native Christian Administra tion of 
Estates Act, 7 of 1901 
 
Scheme of the Act  – The Succession Act broadly divides 
succession into intestate and testamentary succession.  
While the provisions of the Act relating to intestate 
succession are applicable to particular classes or 
communities of people leaving the personal law, 
statutory and otherwise of the two major communities in 
India, namely Hindus and Muslims, untouched .  T he 
provisions of the Act dealing with testamentary 
succession are generally made applicable to everyone in 
India except those exempted under the Act and a few 
others. 
 
 The Act has been divided into eleven parts and 
some of the parts have been sub -divided into chapters.  
Part-I relates to preliminary dealing with definitions and 
power of the State Government to exempt certain 
classes of persons from the operation of the Act.  Part -II 
lays down the law relating to domicile.  The concept is of 
importance, because the application of the Act to 
movable property of a person depends thereon.  
However, this part, does not apply if the deceased was a 
Hindu, Muhammadan, Budhis t, Sikh or Jaina.  Part -III 
states the effect of marriage on the rights of succession.  

8 
 
Part-IV treats of the concept of consanguinity – against a 
concept of importance for the purposes of intestate 
succession.  Part -V enacts the provisions relating to the  
intestate succession.  It deals with the order of intestate 
succession.  As the present work largely involves issues 
of intestate succession, Part-V  of the Act constitutes the 
main concern of the work that follows.  Part -VI, which is 
the longest part of the Act and comprises twenty -three 
chapters and deals with testamentary succession though, 
may constitute the most important portion of the Act, 
though not very relevant from the perspective of present 
study.  However, continuing about the general scheme of 
the Act, Part-VII deals with the protection of the property 
of the deceased and Part -VIII with representative title to 
the property of the deceased.   Part-IX relates to probate, 
letter of administration and admin istration of the assets 
of the deceased and Part -X regulates the grant of 
succession certificate.  
 
 To bring to focus the issue of the present study ; 
How Sections 41 to 48 (Sections 42 to 46 to be more 
specific) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 are unfair to 
the interest of Christian Women and what changes in 
this regard could be suggested ’ a closer look at the 
provisions of Part V is needed.  It is with this part of the 
Act begins the provisions actually dealing with the order 
Scheme of 
Sections 41-48  
- Unfair and 
Unjust to 
Christian 
Mother 

9 
 
of intestate succession.  Part -V does not apply to any 
intestacy occurring before the 1st January, 1866, or to the 
property of any Hindu, Mohammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or 
Jaina.   
 
 Chapter I (Sections 29 & 30) of this part of the Act 
is preliminary while  Chapter II ( Sections 31 to 49) deals 
with ‘Rules in cases of Intestates other than Parsis’ and 
Chapter III ( Sections 50-56) contains special rules for 
Parsis intestates.  
 
 It is Chapter II dealing with rules in  cases of 
intestate other than Parsis that forms the primary 
concern of the present report. Chapter II of part-V of the 
Act has been divided into three sub-parts.  Sections 31 to 
35 forming a sub -part provide rules in cases of intestate 
other than Parsis, while Sections 36 to 40 forming 
another sub -part deal with ‘rules regarding distribution 
where there are lineal descendants’ of the intestate.  
Another sub -part of this Chapter of the Act ‘running 
from Sections 41 to 49 provides rules regarding 
distribution where there ‘are no lineal descendants’ of 
the intestate.   
 
It is in context of provisions contained in Sections 
41 to 49 it has been contended that these provisions are 

10 
 
unfair towards Christian Women .  The concern has been 
raised by many inc luding number of Christian 
organizations.  A number of memorandum s and 
representations expressing their concerns were 
addressed to the G overnment and to the Union Law 
Minister at different times in the past few years.  In turn 
the Ministry of Law & Justice  referred these 
representations to the Law Commission for its 
suggestions.  The Commission thus undertook study on 
the subject sometime in the year  2012.  In this interim  
and recently one of former Consultant s formerly 
engaged by the Commission, Shri Kanda  Rao, Advocate, 
A.P. High Court  circulated a document on the subject 
with a copy marked to the Commission.  The Commission 
felt that keeping in view the background and importance 
of the subject it needs to give serious thought s to the 
subject and prepare a  short report.  Thus finally the 
present report is submitted to Ministry of Law & Justice, 
Government of India, for its consideration. 
 
The report has mainly focused around provisions 
contained in Sections 41 to 49 and examined as to 
whether these provisions are just and fair towards 
women or these are discriminatory against them ?  If 
discriminatory – what reforms could be suggested. 
 
Suggestions & 
Recommenda-
tions  

11 
 
 Section 41 provides that rules of distribution 
where the intestate has left no lineal descendants shall 
be contained in Sections 42 to 48, “after deducting the 
widow’s share if he has left a widow.”  A simple reading 
of provisions built in Sections 42 to 46 would reveal how  
the scheme envisioned therein is un fair and unjust.  
According to Section 42, where deceased intestate father 
is living and there are no lineal descendants, father 
succeeds to property and mother gets no share.  
Preferential approach is writ large.   
 
 Further, even in case where the deceased 
intestate’s father does not s urvive, provisions of Section 
43 require s mother to equally share with brothers or 
sisters of the intestate, rather being entitled to what her 
husband (i.e. deceased intestate’s father) was entitled to 
many calling such provisions ‘unfair’.   Unfairness runs 
through provisions of Sections 44 and 45 as well, and it is 
only when neither father, brother, sister or their children 
of the deceased intestate are living that the property 
goes to the mother under Section 46 – a situation to a 
great ex tent created by f orces o f divine circumstances.   
The Law Commission in its earlier report (110 th) - “Indian 
Succession Act, 1925” reflecting on these provisions have 
thus note d: “This is not in  conformity with the current 
thinking as to status of women.  T he law is in need of 

12 
 
reform on this point”.  With this background in view the 
Commission believes that the need to reform is not only 
timely but becomes more glaring when one looks around 
and finds that in many other jurisdictions the law on the 
point is m ore sensitive and egalitarian.  Say for example 
in England law is different.  There under provisions of 
Section 46 of the Administration of Estates Act, 1925 
even where brothers and sisters of the intestate are 
alive, the father and mother take the propert y.  And 
more relevant in our context is to note that they share 
equally, and if only one of them survives he or she takes 
the whole. 
 
 Foregoing leads us to conclude that the law 
envisioned under Sections 41 to 49 deserve change so as 
to protect interest of Christian women, especially in case 
of mother of deceased intestate.  It is suggested that 
provisions of Section 42 which weaves an archaic 
principle of giving superior status to man in access and 
owning property  needs to be revised.  One of the 
recommendations thus made in this report is to amend 
provisions of Section 42 so as to ensure that deceased 
intestate (leaving apart the half for the deceased’s 
widow if living) succeed the property in equal.  Such 
change would constitute a positive step in ensuring that 
the law is fair and just towards Christian women.  

13 
 
Accordingly this would lead to revisit ing provisions of 
Section 43 so as to ensu re that where either of the 
parents (father or mother) of the deceased intestate is 
living, he or she as the case may be, shall succeed the 
property even if dec eased’s brothers and si sters as  
envisioned in existing provisions of Section 43 are 
surviving.  (Position in this regard has further been 
clarified in the chart to follow that epicts both the 
existing provisions and amended ones).   Such change is 
in conformity with our rejectio n of the approach in 
existing provisions not only in Section 43 that does not 
treat mother of the deceased intestate as having status 
equal to the father but running all through provisions of 
Sections 44, 45 and 46 as well.  Accordingly, in our 
approach provisions incorporated in Sections 44, 45 and 
46 too have been revisited and revised, as could be seen 
from the chart given below.   Coming to Sections 47 and  
48 we reiterate what has earlier been recommended by 
the Law Commission in its 110 th report.  As re gards 
Section 47 it was noted there that provisions of this 
Section does not apply until there is at least one brother 
or sister alive and same be clarified by adding, after the 
words “nor mother” as appearing in the text of this 
Section, the words “but ha s left a brother or a sister”.  
The position clarifying this has been shown in the chart.  
Section 48 incorporates distribution per capita approach 

14 
 
where there are no brothers or sisters, but only children 
of brothers and sisters.  It has been rightly pointed out 
that distribution per capita may be satisfactory as a 
general rule, but even unjust in case of children of 
brothers and sisters and , therefore, it be amended  to 
provide that the succession should be per stirpes in such 
cases.  The accident of the death of one issue should not 
affect the share of his or her decedents . The revised 
position has been epicted in the chart. 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
THE INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925 
CHAPTER – II 
 
 
 Existing Sections Proposed Amendments 
 The Indian Succession Act 1925  
(Sections 41-49) 
The Indian Succession 
(Amendment) Act 2014 
Section 41 
 
Rules of distribution where 
intestate has left no lineal 
descendants- 
Where an intestate has left no 
lineal descendants, the rules for 
the distribution of his property 
(after deducting the widow’s 
share, if he has left a widow) 
shall be those contained in 
Sections 42 to 48. 
 
 
 
As it is 
Section 42  Where intestate’s father living- 
If the intestate’s father is living, 
he shall succeed to the property. 
Where intestate’s parents 
(father and mother) living- 
If the intestate’s parents (father 
and mother) are living, they 
shall succeed the property 
equally. 
 
Section 43 Where intestate’s father dead, 
but his mother, brothers and 
sisters living-  
If the intestate’s father is dead, 
but the intestate’s mother is 
living and there are also brothers 
or sisters of the intestate living, 
and there is no child living of any 
deceased brother or sister, the 
mother and each living brother 
or sister shall succeed to the 
property in equal shares. 
Illustration 
Where either of intestate’s 
parents is dead- 
If either of the intestate’s 
parents is dead, the other 
parent shall succeed to the 
property. 
Illustration 
A dies intestate, survived by 
either father or mother, the 
surviving parent as the case may 
be shall take the entire 
property.   
 
Chart Epicting 
Changes/ 
Amendments as 
Recommended 

16 
 
A dies intestate, survived by his 
mother and two brothers of the 
full blood, John and Henry, and a 
sister Mary, who is the daughter 
of his mother but not of his 
father. The mother takes one-
fourth, each brother takes one-
fourth and Mary, the sister of 
half blood, takes one-fourth. 
 
 
 
Section 44 Where intestate’s father dead 
and his mother, a brother or 
sister, and children of any 
deceased brother or sister living- 
If the intestate’s father is dead 
but the intestate’s mother is 
living, and if any brother or sister 
and the child or children of any 
brother or sister who may have 
died in the intestate's lifetime are 
also living, then the mother and 
each living brother or sister, and 
the living child or children of each 
deceased brother or sister, shall 
be entitled to the property in 
equal shares, such children (if 
more than one) taking in equal 
shares only the shares which 
their respective parents would 
have taken if living at the 
intestate’s death. 
Illustration 
A, the intestate, leaves his 
mother, his brothers, John and 
Henry, and also one child of a 
deceased sister, Mary, and two 
children of George, a deceased 
brother of the half blood who 
was the son of his father but not 
Where intestate’s father and 
mother are dead and his 
brother or sister, and children 
of any deceased brother or 
sister living- 
If the intestate’s father and 
mother are dead but if any of 
the intestate’s brother or sister 
and the child or childr en of any 
brother or sister who may have 
died in the intestate’s lifetime 
are also living, then each living 
brother or sister, and the living 
child or children of each 
deceased brother or sister,  shall 
be entitled to the property in 
equal shares, such chil dren (if 
more than one) taking in equal 
shares only the  shares which 
their respective parents would 
have taken if living at the 
intestate’s death. 
Illustration 
A, the intestate, leaves his 
brothers, John and Henry, and 
also one child of a deceased 
sister, Mary, and two children of 
George, a deceased brother of 
the half blood who was the son 

17 
 
of his mother. The mother takes 
one-fifth, John and Henry each 
takes one-fifth, the child of Mary 
takes one-fifth, and the two 
children of George divide the 
remaining one-fifth equally 
between them. 
 
 
of his father but not of his 
mother. John and Henry each 
takes one -fourth, the child of 
Mary takes one -fourth, and the 
two children of George divide 
the remaining one -fourth 
equally between them. 
 
Section 45 Where intestate’s father dead 
and his mother and children of 
any deceased brother or sister 
living- 
If the intestate’s father is dead, 
but the intestate’s mother is 
living, and the brothers and 
sisters are all dead, but all or any 
of them have left children who 
survived the intestate, the 
mother and the child or children 
of each deceased brother or 
sister shall be entitled to the 
property in equal shares, such 
children (if more than one) taking 
in equal shares only the shares 
which their respective parents 
would have taken if living at the 
intestate’s death. 
Illustration 
A, the intestate, leaves no 
brother or sister but leaves his 
mother and one child of 
deceased sister, Mary and two 
children of deceased brother 
George. The mother takes one-
third, the child of Mary takes 
one-third, and the children of 
George divide the remaining one-
third equally between them. 
Where intestate’s father and 
mother are dead and the 
children of any deceased 
brother or sister living- 
If the intestate’s father and 
mother are dead, and the 
brothers and sisters are all dead, 
but all or any of them have left 
children who survived the 
intestate, the child or children of 
each deceased brother or 
sister shall be entitled to the 
property in e qual shares, such 
children (if more than one) 
taking in equal shares only 
the shares which their 
respective parents would have 
taken if living at the intestate’s 
death. 
Illustration 
A, the intestate, leaves no 
brother or sister but one child of 
deceased si ster, Mary and two 
children of deceased brother 
George. The child of Mary takes 
one-half, and the  two children 
of George divide the remaining 
one-half equally between them. 
 

18 
 
 
 
Section 46 Where intestate’s father dead, 
but his mother living and no 
brother, sister, nephew or niece- 
If the intestate’s father is dead, 
but the intestate’s mother is 
living, and there is neither 
brother, nor sister, nor child of 
any brother or sister of the 
intestate, the property shall 
belong to the mother. 
 
May be omitted (as 
consequence of changed 
provisions of amended Section 
43) 
Section 47 Where intestate has left neither 
lineal descendant, nor father, 
nor mother- 
Where the intestate has left 
neither lineal descendant, nor 
father, nor mother, the property 
shall be divided equally between 
his brothers and sisters and the 
child or children of such of them 
as may have died before him, 
such children (if more than one) 
taking in equal shares only the 
shares which their respective 
parents would have taken if living 
at the intestate’s death. 
 
Where the intestate has left 
neither lineal descendant, nor 
father, nor mother, but has left 
a brother or a sister, the 
property shall be divided equally 
between his brothers and sisters 
and the child or children of such 
of them as may have di ed 
before them, such children (if 
more than one) taking in equal 
shares only the shares which 
their respective parents would 
have taken if living at the 
intestate’s death. 
 
 
Section 48 Where intestate has left neither 
lineal descendant, nor parent, 
nor brother, nor sister- 
Where the intestate has left 
neither lineal descendant, nor 
parent, nor brother, nor sister, 
his property shall be divided 
equally among those of his 
relatives who are in the nearest 
degree of kindred to him. 
Illustrations 
 
(i) A, the intestate, has left a 
grandfather, and a 
Where the intestate has left 
neither lineal descendant nor 
parents, nor brother, nor sister, 
his property shall be divided 
equally among those of his 
relatives who are in the nearest 
degree of kindred to him. 
 
Explanation – Where such 
relatives are children of brothers 
or sisters of the intestate, they 
shall take stirpes. 
Illustrations 
 

19 
 
grandmother and no other 
relative standing in the same 
or a nearer degree of 
kindred to him. They, being 
in the second degree, will be 
entitled to the property in 
equal shares, exclusive of 
any uncle or aunt of the 
intestate, uncles and aunts 
being only in the third 
degree. 
 
 
(ii) A, the intestate, has left a 
great-grandfather, or a 
great-grandmother, and 
uncles and aunts, and no 
other relative standing in the 
same or a nearer degree of 
kindred to him. All of these 
being in the third degree will 
take equal shares. 
 
(iii) A, the intestate, left a great-
grandfather, an uncle and a 
nephew, but no relative 
standing in a nearer degree 
of kindred to him. All of 
these being in the third 
degree will take equal 
shares. 
 
(iv) Ten children of one brother 
or sister of the intestate and 
one child of another brother 
or sister of the intestate, 
constitute the class of 
relatives of the nearest 
degree of kindred to him. 
They will each take one-
eleventh of the property. 
 
 
 
(i) A, the intestate, has left a 
grandfather, and a 
grandmother and no other 
relative standing in the 
same or a nearer degree of 
kindred to him. They, being 
in the second degree, will 
be entitled to the property 
in equal shares, exclusive 
of any uncle or aunt of the 
intestate, uncles and aunts 
being only in the third 
degree. 
 
 
 
 
(ii) A, the intestate, has left a 
great-grandfather, or a 
great-grandmother, and 
uncles and aunts, and no 
other relative standing in 
the same or a nearer 
degree of kindred to him. 
All of these being in the 
third degree will take equal 
shares. 
 
 
 
(iii) A, the intestate, left a 
great-grandfather, an 
uncle and a nephew, but 
no relative standing in a 
nearer degree of ki ndred 
to him. All of these being in 
the third degree will take 
equal shares. 
 
 
(iv) Two children of one 
brother or sister of the 
intestate and one child of 
another brother or sister 
of the intestate, 

20 
 
constitute the class of 
relatives of the nearest 
degree of hi ndered to 
him.  Half of the  property 
shall be shared by two  
children in equal share s 
and the remaining half 
shall go to one child of 
another brother or sister.  
To be more specific two  
children of one brother or 
sister of the intestate shall 
take one -fourth each 
while one child of another 
brother or sister of the 
intestate shall take half of 
the property. 
 
(No doubt it may sound at little 
at unease, but the accident of 
the death of one issue should 
not affect the share of his or 
her descendants.  Even in 
Section 47 where there are 
brothers or sisters and also 
children of brother and sisters 
the succession is per stirpes.  
There appears to be no 
justification for having a 
different rule under Section 48, 
at least where the persons 
entitled are children of brother 
and sisters). 
 
Section 49 Children’s advancements not 
brought into hotchpot- 
Where a distributive share in the 
property of a person who has 
died intestate is claimed by a 
child, or any descendant of a 
child, of such person, no money 
or other property which the 
intestate may, during his life, 
have paid, given or settled to, or 
for the advancement of, the child 
by whom or by whose 
descendant the claim is made 
shall be taken into account in 
 
 
As it is 
 

21 
 
estimating such distributive 
share. 
 
 
 The Commission believes above suggested 
changes if meet legislative approval would go a long wa y 
in bringing law in consonance with time and in 
addressing concerns of Christian community and those 
aired in various repre sentations and memorandums 
made to the Ministry of Law & Justice, Government of 
India and referred to it. 
 
 Institutions of ‘succession’, no doubt is primarily 
connected with property, but it equally serves ‘a variety’ 
of values cherished by a free society.  These include 
reinforcement of family ties and responsibilities 
economic and social pluralism.  As pointe d out by the 
Commission in its earlier report (110 th) that at more 
fundamental level the institution of succession is a 
proper response of the society to elemental motives 
ranging from concerns for one’s immediate family to a 
desire to extend one’s persona lity far beyond death and 
established patterns of inheritance may be the least 
objectionable means of deciding the ownership of 
property on a person’s death.  However, it be not 
overlooked that transfer of substantial wealth tend to 
conflict with basic soc ial values, including equality of 
Conclusion 
 

22 
 
opportunity, dispersal of economic power and avoidance 
of rigid class distinctions.  Tested on the last parameter 
as just identified the existing provisions in Sections 42 to 
46 of Indian Succession Act are archaic in natu re and 
foster an approach that solidify distinctions based on 
gender and thus prejudicial and unfair to status of 
women and Christian mother of deceased intestate in 
present context.  Changes suggested would make law 
more reflective of rising social awaren ess in Christian 
community and of needs of changing times. 
 
 
 
                                (Justice A.P. Shah) 
                                        Chairman 
 
 
 
  
 
(Justice S.N. Kapoor) 
Member 
(Prof. (Dr.) Moolchand Sharma) 
Member 
 
 
 
(Justice Usha Mehra) 
Member 
(Dr. S.S. Chahar) 
Member-Secretary 
(P.K. Malhotra) 
Ex-officio Member 
(Dr.Sanjay Singh) 
Ex-officio Member 
 
 