 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION 
OF 
INDIA 
 
 Report No. 248   
 
 
“Obsolete Laws : Warranting Immediate Repeal” 
(Interim Report) 
 
 
September, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
 
 D.O. No.6(3)211/2011-LC(LS)                   12th  September, 2014 
 
Dear Mr. Ravi Shankar Prasad ji, 
 
  
 A project “Identification of Obsolete Laws” was undertaken by the 
19th Law Commission suo moto.  No significant progress could be made 
as the term of the Commission ended.   
 
The 20 th Law Commission thus decided to continue with the 
project.  Various Ministries were approached seeking relevant 
informations.  In the meantime the Hon’ble Union Minister for Law and 
Justice wrote to the Commission (24 th June, 2014) asking its 
suggestions and recommendations on same subject.  Keeping above in 
view, the Commission decided to undertake a study “The Legal 
Enactments : Simplifications and Streamlining”.  As  the study would 
be completed in instalments, the first of such instalment : “Obsolete 
Laws : Warranting Immediate Repeal” – An Interim Report No. 248 
is being submitted to the Minister.   
 
Hope the suggestions and recommendations contained would 
constitute a major step in the direction of simplifying the legal 
structure. 
 
 With warm regards, 
 
Yours sincerely, 
  
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
 
Mr. Ravi Shankar Prasad 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi - 110115 
 
 


iii 
 
“Obsolete Laws : Warranting Immediate Repeal” 
(Interim Report) 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter Title 
 
Page  
1. Introduction and Background 1-3 
2. Methodology: Subject 
Categorisation and 
Classification 
4-5 
3. Findings, Conclusions and 
Recommendations 
6-9 
4. Laws Recommended for Repeal 10-49 
Appendices 
Appendix - I Categories of Central Laws 50-118 
Appendix – II List recommended for repeal by 
various Commissions but not 
repealed by Parliament 
119-137 
Appendix – III Repealed laws that are listed in 
the Law Ministry’s Chronological 
List of Central Acts 
138-140 
Appendix – IV List of laws passed by 
Parliament that are not listed on 
the Law Ministry’s 
chrolonological list of Central 
Acts 
141 
Appendix – V List of Statutes for further study 
with a view to assess suitability 
for repeal 
142-155 
 

1 
 
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION & BACKGROUND 
1.1 A project “Identifi cation of Obsolete Laws” 
was undertaken by the 19 th Law Commission.  
Ministries / Departments of the Government were 
approached (on 22.05.2012) seeking the list of 
such laws / Acts administratively concerned with 
them respect ively.  S ubsequently after the 
constitution of the 20th Law Commission, a 
reminder was sent to these Ministries / 
Departments.  Some responses th ough not very 
significant in number, were received.  In the 
meantime, a letter from the Hon’ble Minister for 
Law and Justice dated 24 June 2014 ask ing the 
Commission to give its suggestions and 
recommendations on the same subject was 
received. 
1.2 Keeping above in view , the Commission 
decided to pursue a study “The Legal Enactments 
: Simplification and Streamlining”  and a 
Committee for the purpose comprising Justice S N 
Kapoor, Member, Law Commission, Prof. Mool 
Chand Sharma, Member, Law Commission , Prof. 
Yogesh Tyagi, Member (Part Time), Law 
Commission, Mr. Arghya Sengupta and Ms. Srijoni 
Sen, Advocates from Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy 
has been appointed. 
1.3 The Study would be completed in instalments 
and accordingly a number of volumes of the reports 
will be submitted to the Government as the study 
proceeds. In a nutshell the Study will chart out a 
detailed roadmap and m ake suggestions for 
updating, simplifying, streamlining and 
rationalising, and amending  laws and legal 
structures. 

2 
 
1.4 In the Commission’s view a study like this has 
a holistic approach and long -term objectives to 
achieve including that of suggesting ways and  
steps for modernisation and reforms of laws and of 
legal structures . Such a study has to begin by 
identifying and recommending repealing of laws 
which are obsolete and have ceased to be relevant. 
More important. Such a study need s to identify 
laws which are inconsistent with modern and 
newer laws, with Supreme Court Judgements and 
international conventions signed and ratified by 
India.  Also such a study is required to focus its 
efforts to cull  out those law s that impose heavy 
burden and whose costs outweigh their benefits 
and are thus in need of simplification, 
amendments or repeal.  The study also need to 
attend to crucial and consequential requirement of 
identifying and suggesting laws which need 
amendments so as to be relevant and in tune with 
the changing needs of the time.   
 
1.5 As a first, and as  a foundational step for 
accomplishing larger objectives of the study the 
Commission is required to begin by identifying laws 
which have become obsolete and thus to be 
recommended for immediate repeal.  In making 
such a beginning of its study the Commission took 
special note of what was earlier observed in its 96th 
report : “Every legislature is expected to undertake 
what may be called the periodical spring -clearing 
of the corpus of its Statute Law, in order that dead 
wood may be removed and citizens may be spared 
of the inconvenience of taking notice of laws which 
have ceased to  bear any relevance to current 
conditions.  This process in itself, assumes still 
greater importance in modern times when Statue 

3 
 
Law is growing in bulk and magnitude....”.  One of 
the main reasons identified by the 96 th report 
calling for repealing obsolet e laws was the call of 
modern times.  It is important to note that the 96th 
report was presented way back in the year 1984 
and two decades since then have seen such fast 
changes which probably were never witnessed in 
the history so far.   Thus, the force of the call for 
repeal of obsolete laws and need for modernisation 
gets reinforced.   
1.6 In the course of the Commission’s research, 
unpublished work by the 100 Laws Repeal Project, 
a citizens’ coalition initiative comprising Centre for 
Civil Society, Macrofinance Group of NIPFP, 
amongst others was brought to our notice, together 
with several scholarly pieces and newspaper 
articles on this issue.  The Commission would like 
to acknowledge these contributions which 
benefited its  Report.  

4 
 
Chapter 2 
METHODOLOGY:    
SUBJECT-CATEGORISATION AND CLASSIFICATION 
 
2.1 Before proceeding on the identification of 
obsolete laws, it would be relevant to say few words 
about the methodology adopted and its significance 
in accomplishing the study.    It may be added here 
that the Commission was co nvinced that for any 
authentic and enduring approach to the study at 
hand devising a methodology that would help in 
collating, classifying and in grouping huge gamut 
of laws spread in vast corpus of enactments 
scientifically was crucial .  The approach thus 
devised was to draw classification of various laws 
into groups and locate them under an assigned 
subject-category to which  a class-group of laws 
ideally belongs.  Based on detailed discussions and 
deliberations these ‘subject-categories’ were drawn 
and ‘classification’ of all the central laws  into 
groups was done.   
2.2 For drawing subject -categories, available 
existing literature was examined, especially 
relating to the US approach where what is called 
the ‘title -method’ has been adopted to bring 
respective classes of laws under an assigned title.  
Apart from US approach what proved very relevant 
was a closer look in the subject -classification 
adopted in the VIIth Schedule of the Constitution 
for allocating different subjects in three lists, 
Union/State/Concurrent for the purpose of law 
making by the Union, or the State Legislature 
accordingly and in certain situations empowering 
both to draw upon the same subject for making 

5 
 
laws of course subject to certain defined limitations 
in such situations.  In addition to these two 
important sources, literature available in various 
journals too was reflected upon.  All these three 
sources proved to be of  great help in devising the 
methodology as described above. 
2.3 By taking recourse to methodology of drawing 
subject-categories and mapping out classification 
into groups existing corpus of statute s, it became 
easier to organize all existing Central laws 
numbering 1086  into 49  carefully demarcated 
‘subject-categories’.  (Please see Appendix – I) 
2.4 It may not be out of context of t he study 
undertaken that  such classification and subject -
categorisation would be of much help in developing 
an understanding as to how many laws in how 
many ways cut across or overlap or contradict 
amongst themselves or what can be described as 
suffering from problem of inconsistency  and / or 
overlapping.  Adoption of such methodology would 
make the task of the Commission easier in 
determining laws suffering from ‘irrelevancy’ or 
‘lacking nuances to meet the needs of times ’ thus 
demanding either amendments or introduction of 
new laws.  Of course, the later two issues would 
form the subject matter for further course that the 
study would adopt.   
  

6 
 
Chapter 3 
FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
3.1 In the past the Commission has submitted 
various reports identifying number of laws as 
obsolete which demanded repeal (see  Law 
Commission Report Nos 18, 81, 96, 148, 159).  
Commission’s 18th and 81st Reports recommended 
the repeal of particular colonial law .  The 18 th 
Report sought to repeal of ‘Converts Marriage 
Dissolution Act’ and the 81st Report recommended 
the repeal of ‘Hindu Widows Remarriage Act’.  The 
96th Report recommended repeal of the substantial 
number of obsolete laws.  Once again the 
Commission in its 148th Report suggested repeal of 
a number of laws . Following the same path in its 
159th Report submitted in the year 19 98 the 
Commission recommended a substantial number 
of laws for repeal.   Many of the laws identified as 
obsolete in these reports have been repealed.  The 
Government also in 19 98 appointed the P.C. Jain 
Commission which gave its  report in September 
1998 identifying a large body of laws for the 
purpose of repeal.   
3.2 The Commission found that 253 laws despite 
having been recommended for repeal in above 
mentioned reports still exist on the statute-books 
(for details about thes e 253  laws please see 
Appendix – II). The Commission has already 
notified these laws to the concerned Ministries for 
their observations as to why these laws still 
continue to exist.     
3.3 The Commission while pursuing the course of 
study also found that 34 laws which have already 
been repealed still figure on the Go vernment 
Website (for details about these 34 laws please refer 

7 
 
to Appendix - III).   The Commission recommends 
that these laws may be removed from the 
Government Website.  
3.4 Similarly, the Commission notes that certain 
laws passed by Parliament are not listed in the 
Chronological List of Central Acts  on the 
Government Website.  A list of these laws can be 
seen at Appendix – IV.  The C ommission 
recommends that t his oversight may also be 
corrected. 
3.5 During the course of its study the 
Commission found that a large number of 
Appropriation Acts passed during past several 
years have lost their  meaning but these are still 
shown on statue-books.  It is common knowledge 
that Appropriation Acts are intended to operate for 
a limited period of time -authorising expenditures 
for the duration of one financial year, or less, for 
example in the case of Vote on Account Bills.  
Though these Acts are not usually included in any 
list of Central Acts, either by the Ministry of Law 
and Justice, or elsewhere , these laws still 
technically remain on the books.   
3.6 It must be emphasised that repealing 
Appropriation Acts whose terms have ended will in 
no way cause any negative impact on actions that 
were vali dly taken under these Acts.  It will, 
however, serve the purpose of clearing the statute-
books and reducing the burden.  As a caution and 
not entertaining scope of any doubt it may be safe 
to recommend that only those Appropriation Acts 
that are older than certain date, say 10 years, may 
be repealed.  This itself would result in the repeal 
of more than 700 laws. 

8 
 
3.7 It may be relevant to note that mechanisms 
exist in many other countries to systematically 
remove Appropriation Acts that have served their 
purpose.  For example, in the United Kingdom 
(interestingly on whose Appropriation Acts we 
model our own), all Appropriation Acts usually 
contain a repealing provision which specifically 
repeals older Appropriation Acts.  In Australia the 
route followed is that of automatic repeal for 
Appropriation Acts.  Section 89 of Australian 
Legislation Act of 2001 mandates that certain Acts 
are automatically repealed and this include s 
“Appropriation Acts, on the last day of the 
Financial Year for which it makes appropriation” 
and thus in other words provisions in the nature of 
a sunset clause are read into every Appropriation 
Act by virtue of the Legislation of 2001. 
3.8 In India, however, no such mechanism is in 
place and Appropriation Acts continue to si t on 
statute-books.  The Law Commission recommends 
that a practice like the one of the United Kingdom 
to include a repeal clause in the Appropriation Act 
every year would serve a useful purpose, without 
necessitating major amendments or introduction of 
new laws.   
3.9 In the process of categorisation of Central 
statutes, the Law Commission had occasion to 
examine the contents of more than a thousand 
statutes. This greatly facilitated the next stage in 
the process, that is, the determination of statutes 
prima facie  identified as potential candidates for 
repeal.  
3.10 Thus, after completion of the categorisation, 
the Law Commission proceeded to exhaustively 
study the statutes in each of the 49 established 

9 
 
categories to determine which statutes were fit for 
repeal. The process was greatly aided by the fact 
that all the laws governing one subject area had 
already been grouped together. This clarified the 
instances when a later law clearly conflicted with 
an archaic one, when the purpose of the law had 
already been fulfilled, or when the subject matter 
of a statute was so archaic as to no longer require 
legislation. Based on these parameters, the Law 
Commission identified 2 61 statutes that prima 
facie require further study with a view to providing 
a firm r ecommendation for repeal of obsolete 
statutes and those inconsistent with modern times. 
This study has been completed for 72 statutes 
which are discussed hereinbelow . It is our view 
that these statutes ought to be repealed according 
to the recommendations p rovided in this interim 
report.  
3.11 The list of 261 statutes may be found in 
Appendix - V. Over the next month, the Law 
Commission intends to study the status and 
provisions of these statutes and arrive at 
recommendations on all relevant statutes that ar e 
fit for repeal. 
  

10 
 
Chapter 4 
Laws recommended for Repeal 
4.1 Of the 261 statutes identified in Appendix V 
for further study with a view to assess suitability 
for repeal, the following set of 72 statutes have 
been found by the Law Commission  to be fit for  
repeal. They have been recommended for repeal 
because they fall into one or more of the following 
categories – first, the subject matter of the law in 
question is outdated, and a law is no longer needed 
to govern that subject; second, the purpose of the 
law in question has been fulfilled and it is no longer 
needed and third, there is newer law or regulation 
governing the same subject matter.  
4.2 One related question has been considered 
with respect to each statute studied – Which is the 
appropriate legisl ating body for repeal of these 
laws? This question is particularly relevant for pre-
independence laws passed by the Governor -
General in Council, the subject matter of which 
now falls in the State list. The answer to this 
question has been determined with r eference to 
Article 372(1) of the Constitution which says that 
pre-independence laws continue to remain in force 
unless amended or repealed by a competent 
legislature. Competent legislature in the 
Constitutional scheme refers to the legislating body 
that has the power to make laws on a particular 
matter under Article 246 read with the Seventh 
Schedule. This has been explained in Kerala State 
Electricity Board v. The Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd.  
[AIR 1976 SC 1031], which stated: 
An  existing  law  continues  to  be  
valid  even  though  the  legislative  
power  with respect  to  the  

11 
 
subject-matter  of  the  existing  
law  might  be  in  a  different  list  
under  the Constitution  from  the  
list  under  which  it  would  have  
fallen  under  the  Government  of  
India  Act, 1935.  But  after  the  
Constitution  came  into  force  an  
existing  law  could  be  amended  
or  repealed only  by  the  
legislature  which  would  be  
competent  to  enact  that  law  
if  it  were  to  be  newly 
enacted.  
4.3 Similarly, in Kanwar Lal  v. IInd Additional 
Distt. Judg e, Nainital , [AIR 1995 SC 2078], the 
Supreme Court while considering amendments to 
the Government Grants Act, 1895, (a pre -
constitutional Central statute) held that the State 
Government was the competent legislat ure to 
amend or repeal this Act, since the subject matter 
of the Act fell into Entry 18 of List II.   
4.4 Based on this reading of Article 372(1), it is 
clear that if the subject -matter of a pre -
constitutional law falls into the State List, the State 
Government is the competent legislature to repeal 
that Act. As a result, where it is appropriate to refer 
a statute to the concerned State Government for 
repeal, the same has been indicated in the notes 
accompanying the statute recommended for repeal.  
4.5 A list of 72 statutes, with recommendations 
and notes on each, is given below: 
1. Bengal Districts Act, Act 21 of 1836  
Category: Laws Relating to Administration and 
Development of Local Areas  

12 
 
Recommendation: Recommend to State of West 
Bengal for repeal with suitable amendments. 
This Act gives power to the State Government in 
Bengal to create new districts by notification in the 
Official Gazette. It is one of two of the oldest laws 
in the statute books. While new districts are now 
formed by State Governments und er their 
respective Revenue Codes, Bengal is a special case 
where it is still being done under the Central Act. 
This law may be repealed if the power to create 
districts is instead included in the relevant West 
Bengal statute. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report in its Appendix A-5. 
2. Bengal Bonded Warehouse Association Act, 
Act 5 of 1838  
Category: Trade and Commerce  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to stipulate that only 
residents of the Presidency of Fo rt William in 
Bengal can be the directors of the Bengal Bonded 
Warehouse Association and that the Association 
can sell its property only to the East India 
Company. The East India Company is no longer in 
existence, and the Presidency of Fort William has 
also ceased to exist as an administrative unit. 
Consequently, the Act is now redundant. This Act 
has been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission in its Appendix A-5. 
3. Bengal Bonded Warehouse Association Act, 
Act 5 of  1854  
Category: Trade and Commerce  

13 
 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to amend the Bengal Bonded 
Warehouse Association Act, 1838. The reason for 
repeal for the 1838 Act applies to this Act as well.   
4. Forfeited Deposits Act, Act 25 of 1850  
Category: Land Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted for the forfeiture to the 
Government of deposits made on incomplete sales 
of land made under Regulation VIII, 1819 of the 
Bengal Code (the Bengal Patni Taluks Regulation, 
1819). Since tenure -holders or patnidars were 
taking fra udulent advantage of this Regulation, 
this Act was introduced to counter the situation. 
The Regulation allowed forfeited deposits at land 
sales to be applied as purchase -money. The Act 
instead provided that forfeited deposits were to be 
used towards the co st of sales, and the rest to be 
forfeited to Government. This Act is of no relevance 
after 1947.  
5. Sheriffs’ Fees Act, Act 8 of 1852  
Category: Administration of Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to remunerate Sheriffs of the 
presidency t owns of Bombay, Calcutta and 
Madras, at a time when Sheriffs executed legal 
processes issued by courts. Now, Sheriffs do not 
exercise judicial or executive functions. They 
perform an apolitical, non -executive role and 
preside over various city -related func tions and 
conferences. Sheriffs are now not paid by the 
Central Government.  

14 
 
Most provisions of this Act have been repealed. The 
only operative section is section 8, which deals with 
the liability of the Sheriffs in case persons taken for 
execution escape. This is no longer relevant since 
Sheriffs now enjoy only a ceremonial position in the 
administrative hierarchy.   
6. Sonthal Parganas Act, Act 37 of 1855  
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to remove, from the operation 
of the general laws and regulations, certain 
districts inhabited by persons belonging to the 
Sonthal tribe. The Preamble to the Act states that 
‘the general Regulations and Acts of Government 
now in force in the Presidency of Bengal  are not 
adapted to the uncivilized race of people called 
Sonthals’. The Act cites this as the reason for 
removing from the operation of such laws the 
district inhabited by this tribe. The Act employs 
language to describe the tribal population that has 
no place in the modern era. The language of the Act 
runs contrary to the spirit of the Constitution. 
Further, the Sonthal areas administration is now 
covered under the Fifth Schedule of the 
Constitution. Therefore, this Act should be 
repealed, as has also been recommended by the PC 
Jain Commission in its Appendix A-5.  
7.  Sonthal Parganas Act, Act 10 of 1857  
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 

15 
 
The Act amended the Sonthal Parganas Act, 1855 
and extended the applicatio n of the Act to certain 
other areas. The reason for repeal for the 1855 Act 
applies to this Act as well. This Act has been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission in its Appendix A-5.  
7. Oriental Gas Company Act,  Act 5 of 1857
  
Category: Energy Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal, in consultation with 
relevant state(s) 
This Act was enacted to confer certain powers on 
the Oriental Gas Company (OGC), such as the 
power to lay down pipes in Calcutta for the purpose 
of manufacturing, supplying and distributing fuel 
gas. OGC was originally an English Company, 
which has now ceased to exist. It was taken over 
by the State of West Bengal and merged with a 
larger public utility company. The original 1857 Act 
serves no purpose now. It was also recommended 
for repeal b oth by the PC Jain Commission in its 
Appendix A-1 and the 10 th Law Commission in its 
96th Report. 
9. Oriental Gas Company, Act 11 of 1867  
Category: Energy Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal, in consultation with 
relevant state(s)  
This Act was enacted to extend th e operations of 
the Oriental Gas Company Act, 1857 to certain 
provinces which lay beyond the town of Calcutta. 
The reason for repeal for the 1857 Act applies to 
this Act as well.  

16 
 
10. Madras Uncovenanted Officers’ Act, Act 7 
of 1857 
Category: Government Employees  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to provide for the more 
extensive employment of uncovenanted officers in 
the Revenue and Judicial Departments in the 
Presidency of Fort St. George. The distinction 
between ‘covenanted’ and ‘uncovenanted’ offi cers 
does not prevail within hierarchy of officers in the 
Indian Civil Services now. This was an old division 
of Indian officers between those who were 
appointed under a covenant with the British 
Government, and those who were not. This 
classification of officers came to an end as a result 
of the Public Service Commission of 1886. Also, 
there is no documented use of this Act. Hence, this 
Act is obsolete. This Act has been recommended for 
repeal by the PC Jain Commission in its Appendix 
A-5.    
11. Howrah Offences Act, Act 21 of 1857  
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to prescribe penalties for 
various offences committed within the limits of 
Howrah, a suburb of Calcutta where the iconic 
Howrah Station is located. However, the  Act lays 
down relatively insignificant sentences and fines 
while the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and other 
criminal laws have stricter penalties for the same 
offences. This Act has not been used in the recent 
past, with the last recorded case being in 1956. 
While this Act is redundant, concerns remain 

17 
 
about its use as a legal escape route to avoid more 
stringent penalties under the IPC (or some other 
law). This Act was recommended for repeal by the 
PC Jain Commission in its Appendix A-5.  
12. Calcutta Pilots Act, Act 12 of 1859 
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act envisages setting up a Court for the trial of 
pilots, who were employed in the Hooghly Pilot 
Service of the Port of Calcutta, and were accused of 
breach of duty. However, there is no evidence of 
Courts being set up or cases reported under this 
Act. The Hooghly Pilot Service has been 
amalgamated into the Calcutta Pilot Service, which 
has its own set of regulations. Therefore, this Act is 
redundant.  
13. Government Seal Act, Act 3 of 1862  
Category: Residuary Laws relating to 
Administration  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to remove all doubts about the 
use of seals for certification of certain documents. 
It allowed the Seal of the local government to be 
used in place of the Sea l of the East India 
Company. This Act was considered for repeal by 
the 148th Law Commission Report, 1993. The 
Report noted that documents and instruments 
sealed in accordance with this Act might have given 
rise to certain rights and liabilities which have been 
accepted and undertaken by the Government of 
India/State Government under Articles 294 and 
295 of the Constitution. While the Law Commission 

18 
 
did not recommend repeal of this Act, with a 
savings clause validating documents sealed under 
this Act, this Act may be validly repealed, since the 
situation of documents requiring seals of the East 
India Company can no longer arise. 
14. Waste-Lands (Claims) Act, Act 23 of 1863 
Category: Land Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal, in consultation with 
relevant state(s) 
The Act was enacted to establish the procedures for 
adjudication of claims made in relation to waste -
lands. At the time of enactment, all land not used 
for agriculture as waste -lands, and the colonial 
State asserted control over these lands.  
However, a majority of what was previously 
considered waste-land is now being administered 
under the Indian Forests Act, 1927 and The 
Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of  Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006. Waste-land is now considered to 
be the common  property of the village 
communities. The continuation of this Act would 
lead to perpetuation of the colonial mind -set 
surrounding management of waste-lands. This Act 
has also been recommended for repeal by the PC 
Jain Commission in its Appendix A-5. 
15. Oudh Sub-Settlement Act, Act 26 of 1866 
Category: Land Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
relevant state(s) 
The Act was enacted to give the force of law to the 
rules made by the Chief Commissioner of Oudh for 

19 
 
determining the claims of persons cla iming 
property titles in the province. The Act is 
redundant as Oudh has ceased to exist as an 
administrative unit. 
16. Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, Act 21 
of 1866  
Category: Personal Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act was enacted to allow the disso lution of 
marriages of converts from Hinduism to 
Christianity, on the grounds that they have been 
deserted or repudiated on religious grounds by 
spouse. It enables divorce proceedings to be 
initiated by the converted person, not his or her 
spouse. The scop e of the Act was first considered 
in the 18th Law Commission Report (1960) which 
recommended repeal of the Act because of its 
limited scope. The continuance of this Act should 
be considered in light of the fact that the Supreme 
Court in Sarla Mudgal v. Union of India [AIR 1995 
SC 1531] has said that allowing dissolution of 
marriage under the laws of the converted person is 
tantamount to destroying the existing rights of the 
other spouse who continues to belong to the same 
religion.   
17. Sarais Act, Act 22 of 1867  
Category: Trade and Commerce  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
state(s) 
The Act empowers the District Magistrate to 
regulate public sarais. It includes provisions 
related to registration, character certificate, and 

20 
 
written reports from the sarai keeper, among 
others. This Act is now redundant because hotels 
are already registered under relevant state 
legislations and regulations made thereunder. 
Further, it has been reported in the news that 
police and tourism officials have harassed hotel 
owners in the recent past for failure to comply with 
the provisions of the Sarais Act. Hence, this Act 
should now be repealed. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission in its Appendix A-5.   
18. Ganges Tolls Act, Act 1 of 1867  
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to authorise the levy of tolls 
for the improvement of the navigation of the 
Ganges. The Act uses antiquated language, 
inconsonant with modern times. More importantly, 
the Act b ecame redundant when The National 
Waterway (Allahabad-Haldia Stretch of the Ganga-
Bhagirathi Hooghly River) Act, 1982 was enacted, 
which covers the scope of this Act. The 1982 Act 
provides for the regulation and development of the 
Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River for purposes of 
shipping and navigation and authorises the levy of 
toll in the region as well. This Act has been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission in its Appendix A -1 and 148th Law 
Commission Report. 
19. Oudh Estates Act, Act 1 of 1869  
Category: Land Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
state(s) 

21 
 
This Act defines and regulates the succession 
rights of Taluqdars and other landholders in 
certain estates in Oudh. Both Oudh and the 
Taluqdari system no longer exist. Therefore, the 
provisions of this Act are redundant. 
20. Oudh Taluqdars’ Relief Act, Act 24 of 1870 
Category: Land Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
state(s) 
In Oudh, in colonial and pre -colonial India, many 
Taluqdars were indebted, and as a result, their 
immovable property was subject to mortgages and 
liens. This Act provided a procedure to settle the 
debts of these Taluqdars and relieve them. As 
mentioned in the entry above, neither the princely 
state of Oudh nor the Taluqdari system exists 
today. Therefore, the provisions of this Act are 
redundant.  
21. Dehra Dun Act, Act 21 of 1871  
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
state(s) 
The Act was enacted to give validity within 
Dehradun to the operation of ge neral Regulations 
and Acts in force in Saharanpur. This was done 
because the territory of Dehradun was on several 
occasions moved from one jurisdiction to another 
by various legislative enactments. The 148th Law 
Commission Report, 1993 considered but did n ot 
recommend repeal of this Act observing that 
territorial changes made in a particular year do not 

22 
 
render redundant all enactments passed earlier, in 
order to deal with the consequences of any 
territorial changes that may have raised legal 
issues. However, Dehradun is now the capital of 
the State of Uttarakhand and all laws enacted by 
the Uttarakhand Legislative Assembly would have 
application to Dehradun. Further, more than 140 
years have passed since the enactment of this 
Statute, for the resolution of l egal consequences. 
Hence, this Act can be repealed.   
 
22. Punjab Laws Act, Act 4 of 1872  
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act declares which of certain laws are to have 
effect in Punjab and Delhi. It has been amended in 
1956 to alter the applicability to the modern state 
of Punjab. Apart from extending laws, it also 
validates local customs, establishes local 
watchmen and grants the power to raise local taxes 
to pay the police. The powers conferred under the 
Act are archaic and newer laws exist that address 
the same matters. Hence, this Act can be repealed 
subject to factual verification that a law in force 
does not solely depend on this Act for its 
applicability. This Act has also been recommended 
for repeal by t he PC Jain Commission in its 
Appendix A-5. 
23. Foreign Recruiting Act, Act 4 of 1874  
Category: International Relations  
Recommendation: Consider for repeal 

23 
 
This Act empowered the Government to issue an 
order that prevented the recruitment of Indians by 
a foreign State. The Act confers a wide discretion 
on the Government to specify the conditions under 
which persons may be barred from being recruited 
by a foreign State. According to the Law 
Commission, in its 43rd Report on Offences against 
National Security (1 971), such wide discretion 
might potentially violate the constitutional 
guarantee to freedom of occupation under Article 
19. The 2nd Administrative Reforms Commission 
Report of 2006 has also observed that this Act is 
outdated. This Act has been recommended  for 
repeal by the PC Jain Commission  in its Appendix 
A-1.    
24. Laws Local Extent Act, Act 15 of 1874 
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
relevant state(s) 
The Act declares the territorial extent  of certain 
laws passed by the Legislative Council of India and 
the Council of the Governor General of India. There 
are five Schedules to this Act which enumerate the 
laws applicable to the whole of British India, to the 
Bombay, Madras, Bengal Presidencies , and to the 
North-Western Provinces of the Presidency of Fort 
William in Bengal. The territorial divisions dealt 
with in this Act existed prior to 1947, and have no 
relevance to the modern day demarcation of States. 
The territorial applicability of laws i s now 
determined under newer laws such as the State 
Reorganisation Acts. Hence, this Act can be 
repealed subject to factual verification that a law in 
force does not solely depend on this Act for its 

24 
 
applicability. This Act has also been recommended 
for re peal by the PC Jain Commission  in its 
Appendix A-1. 
25. Central Provinces Laws Act, Act 20 of 1875
  
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act deals with the extension of laws to the 
Central Provinces. Since the Central Provinces are 
no longer an administrative unit, this law may be 
repealed in the same manner as Item 21 above. 
Repeal was also recommended by the PC Jain 
Commission  in its Appendix A-1. 
26. Oudh Laws Act, Act 18 of 1876  
Category: State Reorganisation and  Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
relevant state(s) 
The Act was enacted to amend and declare the laws 
to be administered in the princely state of Oudh. 
These laws dealt with matters such as issues 
related to land revenue, and questions regarding 
adoption, guardianship, succession, and partition. 
Oudh is now a region in Uttar Pradesh called 
Awadh and ceases to exist as a separate 
administrative unit. Hence, this law is redundant. 
27. Dramatic Performances Act, Act 19 of 
1876  
Category: Criminal Justice 

25 
 
Recommendation: Consider for repeal 
The Act empowers the State Government to 
prohibit performances that are scandalous, 
defamatory or likely to excite feelings of 
disaffection. Disobeying such prohibitions attracts 
penalties. It was en acted during the colonial era 
and extensively used to curb nationalist 
sentiments propagated through dramatic 
performances. It has no place in a modern 
democratic society. States like Delhi and West 
Bengal have repealed it. In 2013, the Madras High 
Court in N. V. Sankaran alias Gnani v. The State Of 
Tamil Nadu [2013 (1) CTC 686] held that Sections 
2(1), 3, 4, 6 and 7 of the Tamil Nadu Dramatic 
Performance Act, 1954 and Rule 4 of the Tamil 
Nadu Dramatic Performances Rules, 1955 violate 
Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution. These 
provisions are substantially similar to the central 
legislation, which should be considered for repeal 
on these grounds.  
28. Elephants’ Preservation Act, Act 6 of 1879
  
Category: Environmental Law 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act makes it an offence to kill, injure or capture 
wild elephants except in cases of self-defence, or in 
accordance with a licence granted under the Act. 
However, the Act imposes only an insignificant fine 
of  Rs. 500 for its contravention, while a 
subsequent conviction attracts imprisonment for 6 
months along with the fine. The purpose of the Act 
is now subsumed by the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 
1972 which has similar provisions on the 
prohibition of killing wild animals and on 

26 
 
procedures for licensing. Elephants are  included 
within the ambit of the 1972 Act, which also has 
more stringent penalties. Therefore the 1879 Act is 
redundant.   
29. Dekkhan Agriculturists’ Relief Act, Act 17 
of 1879  
Category: Agriculture and Animal Husbandry 
Recommendation: Repeal in consultatio n with 
relevant state(s)  
The Act was enacted to provide succour to indebted 
agriculturists in certain parts of the Deccan. The 
relevant States in the area, namely Maharashtra, 
Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil 
Nadu all now have separate debt relief laws. Hence, 
the purpose of this Act has been subsumed by 
other laws. However, since the competent 
legislature for the subject of agricultural 
indebtedness is the State, repeal must proceed 
accordingly. For example, the erstwhile State of 
Bombay expressly repealed the 1879 Act. The Act 
may be recommended for repeal to the States to 
which it has been extended by notification.    
30. Raipur and Khattra Laws Act, Act 19 of 
1879  
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This law was enacted when Raipur and Khattra 
were transferred to the District of Bankura, to 
enforce the same laws in these places as was in 
force in the rest of Bankura. It is conceptually 

27 
 
similar to the Dehra Dun Act, 1871 and may be 
repealed for the same reasons.  
31. Fort William Act, Act 13 of 1881  
Category: Criminal Justice 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act provided for the better government of Fort 
William in Bengal and the Chief of Army Staff was 
given the power to make rules in relation to the 
matters specified in the Schedule appended to the 
Act (some of the matters being throwing dirt or 
rubbish, rash and negligent driving, disorderly 
behaviour in public). The Act imposes light 
penalties, as little as a fine for Rs. 50 or 
imprisonment for 4 days, for infringement of these 
rules. The Act was considered for repeal by the 
148th Law Commission Report, 1993 for being 
unconstitutional. It was observed that “the 
delegation to a Commissioned Officer in the Indian 
Army of the power to try and punish persons 
charged wi th the violation of the rules framed 
under the Act is contrary to the general scheme of 
the Constitution and is opposed to the directive 
principle of separation of the judiciary from the 
executive.” Even though the Law Commission did 
not recommend repeal o f this Act, the PC Jain 
Commission in its Appendix A-5 did.  
32. Agriculturists’ Loans Act, Act 12 of 1884
   
Category: Agriculture and Animal Husbandry   
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act was enacted to amend and provide for the 
extension to certain territories  of the Northern 

28 
 
India Takkavi Act, 1879. The 1879 Act was enacted 
to provide for the recovery of certain advances 
made to landholders in the territories administered 
by the Lieutenant-Governors of the North-Western 
Frontier Provinces and the Punjab, and t he Chief 
Commissioners of Oudh, the Central Provinces, 
Assam and Ajmer. The 1879 Act does not find 
mention in the Chronological List of Central Acts 
published by the Ministry of Law and Justice and 
hence, does not exist now. The 1884 Act is now 
obsolete and has been recommended for repeal by 
the PC Jain Commission Report  in its Appendix A-
5 as well.     
33. Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration 
Act, Act 6 of 1886  
Category: Symbols, Records and Statistics  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act provides for the v oluntary registration of 
the births and deaths of certain classes of persons, 
mainly Christians and Parsis, along with those 
governed by the Indian Succession Act. The 211th 
Law Commission Report calls the title of this Act 
‘misleading’ because the Act doe s not consist any 
provisions for registration of marriages, either 
voluntary or compulsory. Registration of only 
certain classes of people belonging to a specific 
religion is likely to fall foul of Article 14 of the 
Constitution. Further, registration of b irths and 
deaths is already provided for under the 
Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969, while 
marriage are registered under the Hindu Marriage 
Act, Special Marriage Act etc. The Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report in its Appendix A-5 as well.            

29 
 
34. King of Oudh’s Estate Act, Act 19 of 1887 
Category: Land Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
relevant state(s) 
The Act was enacted to provide for the 
administration of the estate of Wajid Ali Shah,  the 
King of the erstwhile princely state of Oudh. The 
Act gave exclusive authority to the Governor -
General-in-Council to act in the administration of 
the property of the King of Oudh and satisfy all 
claims made against it. Since almost 130 years 
have passed since this Act was enacted, and the 
position of the Governor -General-in-Council no 
longer exists, it would be safe to say that the 
purpose for which this Act was enacted has been 
served. This Act has also been recommended for 
repeal by the PC Jain Commi ssion Report 
(Appendix A-5).  
35. King of Oudh’s Estate, Act 14 of 1888  
Category: Land Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
relevant state(s) 
This Act was enacted to make further provision for 
the administration of the estate of the King of 
Oudh. The reason for repeal for the 1887 Act 
applies to this Act as well. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission  in its Appendix A-5.  
36. United Provinces Act, Act 20 of 1890  
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  

30 
 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted for the purposes of 
administration of the Northwestern Provinces and 
Oudh. It repeals and extends certain laws in those 
areas, and deals with the establishment of a Board 
of Revenue in Oudh. Since neither of these entities 
are current administrative units, this Act may be 
repealed. 
37. Reformatory Schools Act, Act 8 of 1897 
Category: Woman and Child Development  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to amend the law relating to 
reformatory schools and to make further provisions 
for dealing with ‘youthful offenders’. It gives the 
power to establish Reformatory Schools, inspect 
them, and for courts to direct youthful offenders to 
these schools. This Act may be in conflict with 
Article 14 of the Constitution as it o nly applicable 
to boy under the age of 15, and not to girls. The Act 
speaks of ‘detention’ in reformatory schools which 
is against the scheme of the Juvenile Justice (Care 
and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, which 
governs the juvenile justice procedure for all 
children below the age of 18, and provides for 
setting up of observation homes and special homes 
for juveniles in conflict with law. In light of this, the 
Reformatory Schools Act, 1897 is in conflict with 
newer law. 
38. Live-stock Importation Act, Act 9 of 1898 
Category: Public Health  
Recommendation: Repeal with the introduction of 
new law 

31 
 
This Act was enacted to make provisions for the 
regulation of importation of live -stock which may 
be affected by infectious or contagious disorders. 
Since the provisions of the Act have not kept pace 
with modern developments, this Act was proposed 
to be repealed and replaced by the Agricultural 
Biosecurity Bill, 2013 (which lapsed in the Lok 
Sabha). The Statement of Objects and Reasons of 
the 2013 Bill specifically m entions that this Act 
and the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914 are 
‘age-old legislations’ and ‘inadequate or obsolete 
definitions in these Acts need to be updated’. 
However, this Act cannot simply be repealed 
without new provisions to replace the on es being 
repealed.  
39. Prevention of Seditious Meetings Act, Act 
10 of 1911  
 Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act empowered a District Magistrate or 
Commissioner of Police to prohibit a public meeting 
in a proclaimed area if they believe such meeting is 
likely to promote sedition. This Act was enacted 
with the express purpose of clamping down on 
meetings being held by nationalists. The Act 
prohibited meetings ‘likely to cause disturbance or 
public excitement’, but the specific provision s 
creating offences suffer from vagueness. Given that 
private meetings are also covered under this Act by 
virtue of section 3(2), its provisions are unduly 
harsh. The continuation of this colonial legislation 
is unnecessary given the extensive provisions 
relating to sedition under the Indian Penal Code. 
Further, the provisions of the Act are likely to be 
ultra vires Articles 19(1)(a) and (b) 

32 
 
40. Bengal, Bihar and Orissa and Assam Laws 
Act, Act 7 of 1912   
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This law was enacted as a result of administrative 
reorganisation of the Provinces of Bengal, Bihar, 
Orissa and Assam. The construction of certain 
references in existing laws were altered as a result 
by this Act. The administrative nee ds of this Act 
have expired, and it may be repealed. This was also 
recommended by the PC Jain Commission  in its 
Appendix A-5.  
41. Wild Birds and Animals Protection Act, Act 
8 of 1912  
Category: Environmental Law   
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act made it an offence to capture, kill or carry 
on trade of any bird or animal included in the 
Schedule annexed to the Act. The purpose of the 
Act is now subsumed by the Wildlife (Protection) 
Act, 1972 which ensures the protection of wild 
animals, birds and plants with mo re stringent 
penalties.  
42. Destructive Insects and Pests Act, Act 2 of 
1914.   
Category: Agriculture and Animal Husbandry 
Recommendation: Repeal with the introduction of 
new law 

33 
 
The Act was enacted to prevent the introduction 
into and the transport from one State to another in 
India of any insects, fungus or other pest which 
may be destructive to crops. This Act was proposed 
to be repealed and replaced by the Agricultural 
Biosecurity Bill, 2013, as was the case with the 
Live-stock Importation Act, 1898 [Item 35 on this 
list]. This law is out of date and should be repealed, 
however, new law must be enacted to govern the 
subject matter.  
43. King of Oudh’s Estate Validation Act, Act 
12 of 1917  
Category: Land Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal with consultation of the 
state(s) 
The Act was enacted to validate deeds of 
conveyance and a trust deed relating to certain 
properties belonging to the King of Oudh. Copies of 
the said deeds of conveyance and trust deed are 
annexed in the Schedule to this Act. The reason for 
repeal for the 1887 Act and the 1888 Act (Entries 
31 and 32 of this list) applies to this Act as well. 
This Act has also been recommended for repeal by 
the PC Jain Commission  in its Appendix A-5.    
44. Police (Incitement to Disaffection) Act, Act 
22 of 1922  
Category: Criminal Justice 
Recommendation: Repeal  
This colonial Act introduced as a curb to 
nationalist activities made it an offence to spread 
disaffection among the police. The Act is loosely 
worded and prone to misuse. Also, the Act does not 

34 
 
describe what am ounts to ‘disaffection’. This law 
acts as a significant curb on the freedom of speech, 
though it is not an obsolete law given some 
documented uses. However, the need for this law 
should be re -examined in light of its potential 
infringement of Articles 19(1 ) (a) and (b) of the 
Constitution. 
 
45. Sheriff of Calcutta (Power of Custody) Act, 
Act 20 of 1931  
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act extended the powers of the Sheriffs of 
Calcutta to hold persons in lawful custody. If the 
Sheriff was required to take a route while holding 
a person that lay outside his jurisdiction, this Act 
permitted him to do so. The position now held by 
Sheriffs in Kolkata is purely titular, without any 
executive power, thus making this Act 
unnecessary. There is no recorded evidence of the 
use of this Act. This Act has been recommended for 
repeal by the PC Jain Commission (Appendix A-5).  
46. Public Suits Validation Act, Act 11 of 1932 
Category: Civil Procedure  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to validate certain suits 
relating to public matters instituted under Sections 
91 and 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
which were pending in 1932, and where the 
previous sanction of the State Government had not 
been obtained. These suits dealt with public 
nuisance and public trusts. This Act was 

35 
 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report in its Appendix A -5.  Given 
that more than eighty years have passed since the 
suits governed by this Act was filed, this Act may 
be repealed with a suitable savings  clause that 
ensures pending proceedings, if any, are 
unaffected by the repeal. 
47. Bengal Suppression of Terrorist Outrages 
(Supplementary) Act, Act 24 of 1932  
Category: Criminal Justice 
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act was enacted to supplement the Bengal 
Suppression of Terrorist Outrages Act, 1932 (the 
chief Act). The Supplementary Act has no relevance 
since the chief Act has been repealed. Further, this 
Act has been recommended for repeal by the PC 
Jain Commission in its Appendix A-5.  
48. Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, Act 2 of 
1933  
Category: Labour Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to prohibit the pledging of the 
labour of children. However, the purpose of the Act 
is defeated by the proviso to the definition of 
'agreement' under section 2. While an agreement to 
pledge the labour of a child is prohibited, the said 
proviso says that ‘an agreement made without 
detriment to a child, and not made in consideration 
of any benefit other than reasonable wages to be 
paid for the child's service’ is not prohibited. This 
proviso would amount to approving child labour if 
‘reasonable wages’ are paid to the child. 

36 
 
Additionally, the fines imposed under the Act are 
paltry and hardly serve as a deterrent. The Report 
of the Second Indian National Labour Commission, 
2002 has recommended repeal of the Act. The 
Report points out that provisions relating to 
pledging of child labour can be incorporated as part 
of the criminal law of the country. The provisions 
of this Act are not in sync with the Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 which is 
now in place to determine where, and under what 
conditions children can be employed. In addition, 
proposed amendments to the Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, in 2014, 
seek to outlaw all forms o f child labour. The 
provisions of this Act will be in conflict with these 
progressive amendments. 
49. Assam Criminal Law Amendment 
(Supplementary) Act, Act 27 of 1934  
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The purpose of this Act was to supple ment the 
Assam Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1934 (the 
chief Act). The chief Act and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 find mention in this Act. Neither 
of these legislations exist any more. Further, the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 has replaced the  
Cr.P.C., 1898. Hence, the Supplementary Act is 
redundant.  
50. Bangalore Marriages Validating Act, Act 16 
of 1936   
Category: Personal Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal  

37 
 
The purpose of this Act was to validate certain 
marriages solemnised by Mr. Walter James 
McDonald Redwood (a certain priest) in Bangalore. 
The Act has now served its purpose and hence, 
should be repealed. This Act has been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission  in its Appendix A-1.    
51. Berar Laws Act, Act 4 of 1941  
Category: State Reorg anisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to extend the application of 
certain Central laws to the erstwhile province of 
Berar. The object of this Act was to assimilate the 
provisions of the Central Acts passed before Apr il 
1st, 1937 with those which were passed after that 
date. Berar now ceases to exist as an independent 
administrative unit, and forms part of the State of 
Maharashtra. The 148th Law Commission Report, 
1993 considered this Act, and recommend its 
repeal for ‘obvious reasons’. 
52. Railways (Local Authorities’ Taxation) Act, 
Act 25 of 1941   
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to declare the extent to which 
railway property shall be liable to taxation imposed 
by an autho rity within a State. However, Section 
184 of the Railways Act, 1989 provides for 
‘Taxation on Railways by Local Authorities’. Hence, 
the purpose of the 1941 Act has been saved by the 
1989 Act. After an assessment of both the Acts and 

38 
 
by inserting a suitable savings provision, the 1941 
Act can be considered for repeal. 
53. War Injuries (Compensation Insurance) 
Act, Act 23 of 1943   
Category: Labour Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to impose on employers a 
liability to pay compensation to workmen 
sustaining war injuries, and to provide for the 
insurance of employers against such liability. 
There is no evidence of this Act being used in the 
last five decades. Further, the provisions of this Act 
may be validly covered under the Personal Injuries 
Compensation Insurance Act 1963. 
54. Junagadh Administration (Property) Act, 
Act 26 of 1948 
Category: Land Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted for the vesting of certain 
property belonging to the State of Junagadh in an 
Administrator appointed by the  Central 
Government. Junagarh was an erstwhile princely 
state in British India. Junagadh is now a district in 
Gujarat and is not administered under this law. 
Hence, this Act is now obsolete. The PC Jain 
Commission (Appendix A-5) has also recommended 
repeal of this Act.      
55. Continuance of Legal Proceedings Act, Act 
38 of 1948  
Category: Administration of Justice  

39 
 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act authorises the continuance of certain 
proceedings against the then newly -created 
Dominion of India or the Province s which were 
pending immediately before August 15, 1947. This 
Act has been recommended for repeal by the 96th 
Law Commission Report, 1984. While 
recommending its repeal, the Report mentions that 
the proceedings to which the Act refers must have 
by now been disposed of and hence, the law should 
be repealed as spent, subject to verification of the 
factual position. By way of abundant caution, a 
suitable savings clause may be inserted in the 
repealing law so that any pending proceedings are 
unaffected by the repeal of the Act. 
56. Mangrol and Manavadar (Administration of 
Property) Act, Act 2 of 1949 
Category: Land Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
relevant state(s) 
This Act was enacted to provide for the vesting of 
certain properties belonging to th e States of 
Mangrol and Manavadar in the Managers of the 
said States. Mangrol and Manavadar were both 
erstwhile princely states in British India. The 
properties vested in the Secretary of State were 
those which stood in the name of the Sheikh of 
Mangrol or the Khan of Manavadar. Since princely 
states do not exist in India now, these territories 
are not under the administration of these rulers. 
Mangrol and Manavadar are both municipalities in 
the district of Junagadh in Gujarat and hence, are 
administered by the State Government. This Act is 

40 
 
now obsolete. The PC Jain Commission (Appendix 
A-5) has also recommended repeal of this Act. 
57. Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation) 
Act, Act 24 of 1949   
Category: Laws Relating to Administration of Union 
Territories and Delhi 
Recommendation: Pending Repeal Bill should be 
passed.  
This Act grants the Director of Estates the power to 
reserve up to one -fourth of the total 
accommodation available in certain private hotels 
in Delhi for use by government officials. The Act 
was brought into force for the purpose of 
addressing the issue of accommodation shortage 
for government officials in Delhi. However, this 
issue is no longer alive as India Tourism 
Development Corporation (ITDC) hotels and State 
guest houses can be used for ma king 
arrangements for the accommodation of 
government officials in transit. In this context, this 
can be argued to be unconstitutional, violative of 
Article 19(1)(g). Hence, this Act should be repealed. 
The Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation) 
Repeal Bill, 2014 is pending in the Rajya Sabha at 
present, and should be passed. 
58. Companies (Donations to National Funds) 
Act, Act 54 of 1951  
Category: Corporate Laws   
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act enable companies to make donations to 
certain national funds, o r any other Central 
Government- approved charitable Funds. The 

41 
 
159th Law Commission Report recommended that 
this Act be repealed after incorporating relevant 
changes under the Companies Act, 1956. With the 
enactment of Companies Act, 2013, Section 135 
(Corporate Social Responsibility) read with 
Schedule VII imposes a mandatory duty on 
companies to contribute a specified percentage of 
their profits for a social and charitable purpose. 
Hence, the purpose of this Act has been subsumed 
by the 2013 Act. In July,  2014, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs confirmed that the relevant 
provisions of this Act has already been 
incorporated in the new Companies Act, 2013. This 
Act is therefore redundant. 
59. Indian Independence Pakistan Courts 
(Pending Proceedings) Act, Act 9 of 1952. 
Category: Administration of Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to render ineffective certain 
decrees and orders which were passed by courts in 
Pakistan, and to provide an alternative remedy to 
persons who had secured such decrees  or orders. 
Hence, the Act catered to a temporary situation 
that existed subsequent to the partition of India.  
This Act was considered but not recommended for 
repeal by the 96th Law Commission Report, 1984. 
The Report said that even though it may appear 
that the need for the Act does not exist anymore, ‘it 
is not possible to say with absolute certainty that 
no such suit as is governed by the Act can be filed 
at the present day.’  
However, another thirty years have passed since 
the 96th Law Commission Repor t arrived at this 

42 
 
conclusion. Further, the limitation clause in the 
Act specifies that no suits may be instituted under 
this Act after one year from the date of enactment 
or the date of decree, whichever is later. Thus, any 
new proceedings are clearly barr ed by limitation, 
and any pending proceedings may be saved by a 
suitable savings clause. 
60. Chandernagore (Merger) Act, Act 36 of 
1954  
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of 
Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to provide for the merging  of 
the French territory of Chandernagore into the 
State of West Bengal. The merger of territories has 
been achieved and the purpose of the Act is 
fulfilled. The Act is no longer in use and can be 
safely repealed with the condition that any action 
previously performed under the Act shall continue 
to be valid. This Act has also been recommended 
for repeal by the PC Jain Commission in its 
Appendix B.  
61. Newspaper (Price and Page) Act, Act 45 of 
1956 
Category: Media, Communications and Publishing 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to provide for the regulation 
of the prices charged for newspapers in relation to 
their pages so as to prevent unfair competition 
among newspapers. Section 3 of the Act 
empowered the Central Government to make 
orders providing  for the regulation of the prices 

43 
 
charged for newspapers in relation to their 
maximum or minimum number of pages, sizes or 
areas and for the space to be allotted for 
advertisements. Section 3 was struck down in 
Sakal Papers Pvt. Ltd . v. Union of India [AIR 1962 
SC 305] for violating Article 19(1)(a). Since the 
main provision, i.e. Section 3, has been struck 
down, fresh orders cannot be issued under the Act. 
Consequently, the Act serves no purpose, but 
remains on the statute books and should be 
repealed.  
62. Newspaper (Price and Page) Continuance 
Act, Act 36 of 1961 
Category: Media, Communications and Publishing 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Newspaper (Price and Page) Act, 1956 was 
originally enacted for a period of five years. This Act 
enacted in 1961 provided f or the indefinite 
continuation of the 1956 Act by deleting the 
provision in the original Act that limited its 
operation. Since the main Act should be deleted for 
the reasons stated above, this Act should be 
repealed as well.  
63. Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, 
Act 93 of 1956  
Category: Media, Communications and Publishing 
Recommendation: Consider for repeal 
This Act was enacted to prevent the dissemination 
of certain publications considered harmful to 
young persons. ‘Young person’ has been defined 
under the Act as a person under the age of 21 years 
which is inconsonant with several other 

44 
 
legislations defining the age of majority. Moreover, 
multiple laws govern this area —The IPC penalises 
speech and publications in various forms. The 
Protection of Chi ldren from Sexual Offences Act, 
2012 (POCSO) was enacted inter alia  to protect 
children from analogous harmful publications. 
This Act has also been recommended for repeal by 
the PC Jain Commission in its Appendix A-1.   
64. Women’s and Children’s Institutions  
(Licensing) Act, Act 105 of 1956  
Category: Women and Child Development  
Recommendation: Repeal with allied amendment of 
newer legislation 
The Act provides for the licensing of institutions for 
women and children. Institution under the Act are 
established and maintained for the reception, care, 
protection and welfare of women and children. The 
Ministry of Women and Child Development had 
said in 2012 that the 1956 Act has no value and 
stood repealed after the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2000 came into force. 
This stand taken by the Ministry was also affirmed 
by the High Court of Delhi in 2014 in Chhatravas, 
Chandra Arya Vidya Mandir  v. The Director, 
Department of Women and Child Development and 
Anr. [MANU/DE/0566/2014]. However, t here 
should be clarity in this respect and the repeal of 
the 1956 Act should be brought about by amending 
the existing repeal and savings clause of the 2000 
Act (which does not currently mention the 1956 
Act).     
 

45 
 
65. Orissa Weights and Measures (Delhi 
Repeal) Act, Act 57 of 1958   
Category: Consumer Affairs  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to repeal the Orissa Weights 
and Measures Act, 1943, in its application to the 
Union territory of Delhi. This Act provided that as 
soon as the Rajasthan Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Act, 1958 would come in force in the 
Union territory of Delhi, the Orissa Act would stand 
repealed. Since the purpose of this Act has been 
fulfilled, it  should be repealed. The Act has been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report in its Appendix A-5 as well.     
66. Travancore-Cochin Vehicles Taxation 
(Amendment and Validation) Act, Act 42 of 
1959 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal in consultation with 
relevant state(s) 
The Act was enacted to amend the Travancore -
Cochin Vehicles Taxation Act, 1950. Its purpose 
has been served, and it can now be repealed. The 
PC Jain Commission has also recommended repeal 
of this Act in its Appendix A-1.  
67. Mahendra Pratap Singh Estates (Repeal) 
Act, Act 48 of 1960 
Category: Land Laws    
Recommendation: Repeal 

46 
 
This Act was enacted to repeal the Mahendra 
Pratap Singh Estates Act, 1923. The 1923 Act 
provided for the forfeiture of the estates and other 
property of Mahendra Pratap Singh, who was the 
ruler of the princely state of Mursan (presently, in 
the State of Uttar Pradesh). The Act provided for 
granting his estate to his son. The repeal Act has 
now served its purpose and the 1923 Act is not in 
force any more. Hence, this Act is now redundant. 
Any pending proceedings under the original Act will 
continue to be saved under Section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act. The PC Jain Commission has also 
recommended repeal of this Act (Appendix A-5).     
68. Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, Act 31 
of 1962 
Category: Land Laws   
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act amended the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
and validated certain acquisitions under the 1894 
Act made before July 20th, 1962. The purpose of 
the Act has been fulfilled. Also, the 1894 Act has 
been repealed by Section 114(1) of the R ight to 
Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation 
(LARR) Act, 2013 and replaced by this new statute. 
Hence, this Act is now redundant. It has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report  in its Appendix A-1.     
69. Land Acquisition (Amendment and 
Validation) Act, Act 13 of 1967 
Category: Land Laws    
Recommendation: Repeal 

47 
 
This Act was enacted to amend the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 and to validate certain 
acquisitions. The purpose of this Act has also been 
fulfilled. Further, as already mentioned the 1894 
Act has been repealed. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report in its Appendix A-1.  
70. Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control (Nasirabad 
Cantonment Repeal) Act, Act 49 of 1968  
Category: Rent and Tenancy 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to repeal the Delhi and Ajmer 
Rent Control Act, 1952 in force in the cantonment 
of Nasirabad (in the municipal area of Ajmer, 
Rajasthan). This Act provided that the Rajasthan  
Premises (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950 
would be extended to Nasirabad cantonment, and 
the 1952 Act would be repealed. The purpose of 
this Act has been served. Additionally, the 
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001 has now been 
enacted by the State Legislature which has 
repealed the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent 
and Eviction) Act, 1950. The PC Jain Commission 
has recommended repeal of this Act in its Appendix 
A-1.       
71. Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of 
Publication) Repeal Act, Act 28 of 1976 
Category: Parliament and State Legislatures  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to repeal the Parliamentary 
Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act, 1956. 
The 1956 Act has been repealed and hence, the 
repealing Act of 1976 has served its  purpose. It is 

48 
 
now redundant. A newer law on this subject, the 
Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of 
Publication) Act, 1977 is now in force.   
72. Shipping Development Fund Committee 
(Abolition) Act, Act 66 of 1986  
Category: Maritime Law; Shipping and I nland 
Navigation  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The purpose of this Act was to abolish the Shipping 
Development Fund Committee (‘the Committee’) 
and provide for the disposal of its funds, assets and 
liabilities. These have been achieved. Thus, there is 
nothing further to be done under the Act. Also, this 
Act has been recommended for repeal by the PC 
Jain Commission  in its Appendix A -1 and the 
159th Report of the Law Commission, 1998.    
Summing-up 
4.6 In today’s times when national economies are 
increasingly becom ing globally ‘interdependent’ 
and ‘interconnected’ , ignoring to recognize the 
above symbiotic linkages between law and 
economy can prove very costly to the nation. As the 
economy gets liberalised  and modernised 
encompassing phenomenal changes brought in 
almost every walk of life the need for laws to keep 
pace with changes thus occurring become 
fundamental requirement lest there should appear 
legal gaps, inconsistencies and contradictions 
causing serious impediments to the processes of 
‘growth’ and of ‘development’.   
4.7 To conclude , it may not be out of place to 
remember what one of em inent scholar of 
jurisprudence Puchta long ago had to say : “Law 
grows with the growth and strengthens with the 

49 
 
strength of people........”.  We wonder whether ‘law’ 
in our system is growing and gaining strength or in 
many respects, say for example in case of obsolete, 
irrelevant and are archaic laws remaining on the 
statute books still remain muddled and outmoded.  
There is urgent need to ensure that laws and legal 
structures keep pace and are reflective and 
responsive to growing needs and challenges of the 
time.  Commission hopes that the suggestions and 
recommendations made in the report constitute a 
step in that march of law. 
 
[Justice A.P. Shah] 
Chairman 
 
 
 
  
[Justice S.N. Kapoor] 
Member 
[Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma] 
Member 
 
 
[Justice Usha Mehra] 
Member 
[Dr. S.S. Chahar] 
Member-Secretary 
[P.K. Malhotra] 
Ex-officio Member 
[Dr. Sanjay Singh] 
Ex-officio Member 
 

50 
 
Appendix – I 
(refer para   of the report) 
CATEGORIES OF CENTRAL LAWS 
Category 
Value 
Category Brief Description Number of 
laws in this 
category 
1 Administration of Justice 
Laws relating to the establishment and jurisdiction of various courts and their 
functioning. Further, it also includes all laws related to judges and legal services. 38 
2 Agriculture and Animal Husbandry 
Laws relating to agriculture, such as boards set up for promotion of certain 
agricultural produce and dairy products, relief related to agricultural lands, and 
protection of farmers rights. 9 
3 Alternative Dispute Resolution  Laws that provide for alternative dispute resolution mechanisms. 2 
4 Banking and Insurance Laws setting up, regulating, and nationalising banks and insurance corporations. 28 
5 
Charitable and Religious Institutions; 
Cooperative Societies 
This category provides for the setting up and regulation of charitable and religious 
institutions as well as various co-operative societies. 21 
6 
Citizenship; Admission into, 
Emigration to,  
and Expulsion from, India; and 
Cross-border Movement  
Laws relating to citizenship and determining the majority age in India; Laws relating 
to foreigners, immigration laws and extradition laws. 15 
7 Civil Procedure Laws that lay down the procedural aspects of any civil suit. 14 
8 Consumer Affairs Laws relating to metrology and consumer protection. 6 
9 Contracts and Torts 
Laws relating to contracts, sale of goods, and partnership. In addition, it includes the 
few laws related to tort. 7 
10 Corporate Laws 
Laws relating to companies, including limited liability partnerships, company 
securities, and competition law. 8 
11 Criminal Justice 
Laws relating to the criminal justice system, including laws related to substantive 
offences, laws dealing with criminal procedure, and laws setting up and regulating 62 

51 
 
various institutions involved in criminal justice, such as the police, prisons, and 
other enforcement bodies. 
12 Defence of India and Armed Forces 
Laws relating to the armed forces of India, including the army, navy and air forces. It 
further includes laws relating to cantonments and those in relation to war or use of 
force, such as weapons. 34 
13 Delimitation and Elections 
Laws relating to elections at various levels as well as delimitation for the purposes of 
elections 11 
14 Education 
Laws that govern the educational sector, such as right to education and laws setting 
up of various educational boards. 9 
15 Energy Laws Laws relating to petroleum, oil, coal, natural gas, electricity, and nuclear power. 16 
16 Environmental Law Laws that provide for the protection of the environment and prevention of pollution. 13 
17 Financial Laws 
Laws related to the financial sector in India, including various specialised 
institutions other than banks. 45 
18 Food and Public Distribution 
Laws relating to essential commodities, regulation of certain food products, 
warehousing, and the establishment of food corporation of India. 12 
19 Government Employees Laws relating to public servants, including their conditions of service and other 
related acts. 
15 
20 Industries 
Laws providing for the general regulation of all industries as well as laws dealing 
with certain industries such as mines. 17 
21 
Institutions of National and Cultural 
Importance 
Laws that deal with institutions that have been either declared as institutions of 
national importance, are monuments or have cultural significance. 18 
22 Intellectual Property Law 
Laws related to different types of intellectual property including trademarks, 
copyrights and patents. 7 
23 International Relations 
Laws relating to international bodies and international relations of India, including 
diplomatic and consular relations. 21 
24 Labour Laws 
General laws relating to labour welfare and protection as well as the laws providing 
for the regulation and safeguard of labour in specific industries. 60 

52 
 
25 Land Laws 
Laws relating to land acquisition, land ceiling, land administration laws prior to 
independence, and other land related laws. 42 
26 Land Revenue 
This category deals exclusively with the imposition, and the mechanism for 
imposing, land revenue by the government. Most of these laws are pre-independence 
era and would now be administered by States. 20 
27 
Laws Relating to Administration and 
Development of Local Areas 
Laws relating to setting up of local level bodies, such as municipal corporations and 
district boards. 12 
28 
Laws Relating to Administration of 
Union Territories and Delhi 
Laws relating to the general administration of Union Territories, and to the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi 23 
29 Legal, Medical and Other Professions 
Laws that regulates various professions and professionals, such as lawyers, doctors, 
chartered accountants, etc. 19 
30 
Maritime Law; Shipping and Inland 
Navigation Laws relating to various aspects of maritime law, shipping and inland navigation. 25 
31 
Media, Communications and 
Publishing 
Laws related to various forms of media, including print, newspapers and television. It 
also includes laws regulating different modes of communication and the publishing 
of books and newspapers. 17 
32 Nationalisation 
Laws that enabled and dealt with the nationalisation of various industries and 
companies, other than banks. 59 
33 Ombudsman and Monitoring Bodies 
Laws relating to the monitoring of government functions, such as those relating to 
the CAG, CVC and the Lokpal 5 
34 Personal Laws 
Laws governing the personal relationships of an individual, such as marriage, divorce, 
succession, etc.   31 
35 
President, Parliament and State 
Legislatures 
Laws related to the organisation of the parliament and various state legislatures. 
Further, it also includes laws relating to the President, Vice-President, Governors 
and ministers. 21 
36 Property Law Laws relating to private property, such as trusts, easements, transfer of property etc. 15 
37 Public Health  
Laws related to disease control, disabilities, and other public health related laws. It 
also includes laws that regulate the standards for food, medicines, cosmetics etc. 17 
38 Rent and Tenancy Rent control laws as well as laws regulating landlord and tenant relationships. 11 

53 
 
39 
Residuary Laws relating to 
Administration 
This is a residuary category, which includes laws relating to changing of name of a 
State or Union Territory, laws relating to the administration of Union Territories, and 
other general laws applicable to the administration and legislature. 6 
40 Social Welfare 
Laws protecting various disadvantaged groups, including laws setting up 
commissions for such groups. 14 
41 
State Re-organisation and Extension 
of Laws 
Laws related to the administrative formation of states and transfer of land in 
relation to re-organisation of States. In addition, laws that have extended, repealed 
or assimilated central or state laws of a certain area to other States or areas. 58 
42 Symbols, Records and Statistics 
Laws relating to national and state emblems, public records, and statistics collected 
for different purposes. 9 
43 Taxes, Tolls & Cess Laws Laws related to taxes, custom duties, excise, cess etc. 68 
44 Textiles Laws regulating various specialised textile industries. 7 
45 Trade and Commerce 
Laws relating to inter-state and international trade, including SEZs and import and 
export. In addition, it also includes the formation of Boards for the promotion of 
trade of certain cash crops. 21 
46 Transportation and Infrastructure 
Laws governing various aspects of the different modes of transportation, including 
railways, aircrafts, motor vehicles, ferries etc. It also includes laws relating to 
infrastructure of the country, including roads, waterways and dams. 30 
47 Tribunals Laws that establish specialised tribunals. 8 
48 Universities and Technical 
Institutions 
Laws that establish various universities, scientific and technical institutions. 46 
49 Woman and Child Development 
This category includes all laws that relate to the welfare and protection of women 
and children, including laws setting up commissions in this regard. 14 
 Total  1086 
 
 
 

54 
 
 
CENTRAL LAWS ARRANGED ACCORDING TO CATEGORY 
Category 
Value 
 Category 
Sl. No. Year 
Act. 
No. Name 
 1 Administration of Justice 1.1 1850 18 Judicial Officers Protection Act 
1.2 1852 8 Sheriffs' Fees Act                                        
1.3 1869 14 Bombay Civil Courts Act 
1.4 1870 7 Court-fees Act 
1.5 1871 19 Bengal Sessions Courts Act 
1.6 1873 3 Madras Civil Courts Act 
1.7 1875 18 Indian Law Reports Act 
1.8 1882 15 Presidency Small Cause Courts Act                         
1.9 1887 9 Provincial Small Cause Courts Act                         
1.10 1887 12 Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act                   
1.11 1888 12 City of Bombay Municipal (Supplementary) Act              
1.12 1891 16 Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act                  
1.13 1892 7 Madras City Civil Court Act                               
1.14 1919 15 Calcutta High Court (Jurisdictional Limits) Act            
1.15 1931 20 Sheriff of Calcutta (Power of Custody) Act    
1.16 1936 5 Decrees and Orders Validating Act 
1.17 1948 38 Continuance of Legal Proceedings Act 

55 
 
1.18 1950 7 High Courts (Seals) Act 
1.19 1950 18 Special Criminal Courts (Jurisdiction) Act 
1.20 1952 9 Indian Independence Pakistan Courts (Pending  Proceedings)  Act 
1.21 1953 41 Calcutta High Court (Extension of Jurisdiction) Act 
1.22 1954 28 High Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act 
1.23 1955 56 Manipur (Courts) Act 
1.24 1956 55 Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act 
1.25 1958 41 Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act 
1.26 1966 26 Delhi High Court Act 
1.27 1967 28 Court-fees (Delhi Amendment) Act 
1.28 1968 51 Judges (Inquiry) Act 
   1.29 1970 28 Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act 
1.30 1971 70 Contempt of Courts Act 
1.31 1976 57 High Court at Patna (Establishment of a Permanent Bench at  Ranchi) Act 
1.32 1976 77 Disturbed Areas (Special Courts) Act 
1.33 1981 26 High Court at Bombay (Extension of Jurisdiction to Goa, Daman and Diu) Act 
1.34 1984 61 Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Act 
1.35 1984 66 Family Courts Act 
1.36 1985 59 Judges (Protection) Act 
1.37 1992 27 Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in Securities) Act 

56 
 
1.38 2009 4 Gram Nyayalayas Act 
   See Also,  
Taxes, Tolls & Cess Laws:  
Union Territories (Stamp and Court-fees Laws) Act  
2  Agriculture and Animal 
Husbandry 
2.1 1879 17 Dekkhan Agriculturists’ Relief Act 
2.2 1884 12 Agriculturists' Loans Act                                 
2.3 1962 26 National Co-operative Development Corporation Act 
2.4 1966 54 Seeds Act 
2.5 1983 29 National Oil Seeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board Act 
2.6 1987 37 National Dairy Development Board Act 
2.7 1992 12 Destructive Insects and Pests (Amendment and  Validation) Act 
2.8 2001 53 Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Right Act  
2.9 2005 24 Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act  
   See Also,  
Trade and Commerce:  
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
Act, 1985 Taxes, Tolls & Cess Laws:  
Cotton Copra and Vegetable Oils Cess (Abolition) Act 
Produce Cess Laws (Abolition) Act 

57 
 
 3 Alternative Dispute 
Resolution  
3.1 1987 39 Legal Services Authorities Act 
3.2 1996 26 Arbitration and Conciliation Act 
     See Also,  
Civil Procedure:  
Goa, Daman and Diu (Extension of the Code of Civil 
Procedure and the Arbitration Act) Act 
4 Banking and Insurance 4.1 1873 5 Government Savings Banks Act 
4.2 1934 2 Reserve Bank of India Act 
4.3 1938 4 Insurance Act 
4.4 1948 62 Reserve Bank (Transfer of Public Ownership) Act 
4.5 1949 10 Banking Regulation Act 
4.6 1950 * State Bank of (Samastha) Act 
4.7 1953 54 Reserve Bank of India (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 
4.8 1955 23 State Bank of India Act 
4.9 1956 31 Life Insurance Corporation Act 
4.10 1956 79 State Bank of Hyderabad Act 
4.11 1959 38 State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act   
4.12 1962 56 State Associated Banks (Miscellaneous Provisions)   Act 
4.13 1965 23 Banking Laws (Application to Co-operative Societies) Act 

58 
 
4.14 1970 5 Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)  Act 
4.15 1972 57 General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act 
4.16 1976 21 Regional Rural Banks Act 
4.17 1976 72 Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of  Settlement) Act 
4.18 1980 40 Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of  Undertakings)  Act 
4.19 1981 28 Export-Import Bank of India Act 
4.20 1981 61 National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act 
4.21 1982 62 State Bank of Sikkim (Acquisition of Shares) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act  
4.22 1985 3 General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Amendment Act  
4.23 1987 53 National Housing Bank Act 
4.24 1989 39 Small Industries Development Bank of India Act 
4.25 1997 7 Industrial Reconstruction Bank (Transfer of Undertakings and Repeal) Act 
4.26 1999 41 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act 
4.27 2003 53 Industrial Development Bank (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act 
4.28 2009 48 
State Bank of Saurashtra (Repeal) and the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Amendment  
Act, 2009 
     See Also, 
Environmental Law:  
Public Liability Insurance Act 

59 
 
5 Charitable and Religious  
Institutions; Co-operative  
Societies 
5.1 1860 21 Societies Registration Act                                
5.2 1863 20 Religious Endowments Act                                  
5.3 1880 1 Religious Societies Act 
5.4 1890 6 Charitable Endowments Act                                 
5.5 1899 23 Church of Scotland Kirk Sessions Act 
5.6 1912 2 Co-operative Societies Act  
5.7 1913 6 Mussalman Wakf Validating Act                              
5.8 1920 14 Charitable and Religious Trusts Act                       
5.9 1920 15 Indian Red Cross Society Act                               
5.10 1923 42 Mussalman Wakf Act                                         
5.11 1925 24 Sikh Gurdwaras (Supplementary) Act                         
5.12 1930 32 Mussalman Wakf Validating Act 
5.13 1955 36 Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act 
5.14 1959 29 Public Wakfs (Extension of Limitation) Act 
5.15 1971 82 Delhi Sikh Gurdwaras Act 
5.16 1988 41 Religious Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act 
5.17 1988 54 Auroville Foundation Act   
5.18 1991 42 Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act 

60 
 
5.19 1995 43 Wakf Act 
5.20 2002 35 Haj Committee Act 
5.21 2002 39 Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act 
6 Citizenship; Admission 
into, Emigration to, and 
Expulsion  
from, India; and Cross-
border  
Movement  
6.1 1875 9 Majority Act 
6.2 1920 34 Passport (Entry into India) Act 
6.3 1939 16 Registration of Foreigners Act 
6.4 1946 31 Foreigners Act 
6.5 1948 58 Exchange of Prisoners Act 
6.6 1950 10 Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act 
  6.7 1955 57 Citizenship Act   
6.8 1962 34 Extradition Act 
6.9 1962 42 Foreigners Law (Application and Amendment) Act 
6.10 1967 15 Passports Act 
6.11 1983 31 Emigration Act   
6.12 1983 39 Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act 
6.13 2000 52 Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Act 
6.14 2003 49 Repatriation of Prisoners Act  
6.15 2010 31 Land Ports Authority of India Act, 2010  
7 Civil Procedure 7.1 1855 12 Legal Representatives' Suits Act                          

61 
 
7.2 1872 1 Indian Evidence Act 
7.3 1887 7 Suits Valuation Act                                       
7.4 1891 18 Bankers' Books Evidence Act                               
7.5 1908 5 Code of Civil Procedure 
7.6 1908 16 Registration Act 
7.7 1921 18 Maintenance Orders Enforcement Act                         
7.8 1932 11 Public Suits Validation Act     
7.9 1939 30 Commercial Documents Evidence Act   
7.10 1963 36 Limitation Act 
7.11 1965 30 
Goa, Daman and Diu (Extension of the Code of Civil Procedure  and the 
Arbitration Act) Act 
7.12 1969 44 Oaths Act 
7.13 1978 14 Interest Act 
7.14 1985 21 Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act      
   See Also,  
Media, Communications and Publishing: 
Information Technology Act 
8 Consumer Affairs 8.1 1937 1 Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act   
8.2 1951 39 Marking of Heavy Packages Act 
8.3 1958 57 Orissa Weights and Measures (Delhi Repeal) Act 

62 
 
8.4 1967 25 
Standards of Weights and Measures (Extension to  Kohima and Mokokchung 
Districts) Act 
8.5 1986 68 Consumer Protection Act 
8.6 2010 1 Legal Metrology Act, 2009 
9 Contracts and Torts 9.1 1855 13 Fatal Accidents Act                                       
9.2 1871 1 Cattle-trespass Act 
9.3 1872 9 Indian Contract Act 
9.4 1882 7 Powers-of-Attorney Act                                    
9.5 1930 3 Sale of Goods Act 
9.6 1932 9 Indian Partnership Act     
9.7 1963 47 Specific Relief Act 
10 Corporate Laws 10.1 1949 7 Scheduled Securities (Hyderabad) Act 
10.2 1951 54 Companies (Donations to National Funds) Act 
10.3 1960 63 Preference Shares (Regulation of Dividends) Act 
10.4 2003 12 Competition Act, 2002 
10.5 2004 1 Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Repeal Act, 2003 
10.6 2007 50 Tyre Corporation of India Limited (Disinvestment of Ownership) Act 
10.7 2009 6 Limited Liability Partnership Act 
10.8 2013 18 Companies Act, 2013 
   See Also,  
Legal, Medical and Other Professionals: 
Company Secretaries Act 

63 
 
11 Criminal Justice 11.1 1854 16 Police, Agra                                              
11.2 1856 20 Bengal Chaukidari Act                                     
11.3 1857 21 Howrah Offences Act                                       
11.4 1859 12 Calcutta Pilots Act                                      
11.5 1859 24 Madras District Police Act 
11.6 1860 45 Indian Penal Code                                         
11.7 1861 5 Police Act                                                
11.8 1867 3 Public Gambling Act                                       
11.9 1871 4 Coroners Act 
11.10 1873 16 North-Western Provinces Village and Road Police Act  
11.11 1876 19 Dramatic Performances Act                                 
11.12 1881 13 Fort William Act 
11.13 1888 3 Police Act                                                
11.14 1894 9 Prisons Act                                               
11.15 1900 3 Prisoners Act 
11.16 1908 6 Explosive Substances Act 
  11.17 1908 14 Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act 
11.18 1911 10 Prevention of Seditious Meetings Act 
11.19 1920 33 Identification of Prisoners Act                            
11.20 1922 22 Police (Incitement to Disaffection) Act                    
11.21 1923 19 Official Secrets Act                                       

64 
 
11.22 1925 8 Bengal Criminal Law Amendment (Supplementary) Act          
11.23 1932 23 Criminal Law (Amendment) Act                                 
11.24 1932 24 Bengal Suppression of Terrorist Outrages  (Supplementary) Act 
11.25 1934 27 Assam Criminal Law Amendment (Supplementary) Act          
11.26 1938 20 Criminal Law (Amendment) Act   
11.27 1946 25 Delhi Special Police Establishment Act 
11.28 1948 52 Bombay Public Security Measures (Delhi Amendment)  Act     
11.29 1949 64 Police Act 
11.30 1949 66 Central Reserve Police Force Act 
11.31 1950 29 Transfer of Prisoners Act     
11.32 1952 60 Commissions of Inquiry Act   
11.33 1952 63 State Armed Police Forces (Extension of Laws) Act 
11.34 1955 32 Prisoners (Attendance in Courts) Act 
11.35 1956 104 Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act 
11.36 1957 23 Railway Protection Force Act   
11.37 1958 20 Probation of Offenders Act 
11.38 1959 54 Arms Act (Reprint 1967). 
11.39 1966 33 Police Forces (Restriction of Rights) Act 
11.40 1967 16 Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act 
11.41 1967 37 Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 

65 
 
11.42 1971 69 Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act 
11.43 1974 2 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
11.44 1974 12 Economic Offences (Inapplicability of Limitation) Act 
11.45 1976 106 Untouchability (Offences) Amendment and Miscellaneous  Provision Act 
11.46 1978 34 Delhi Police Act 
11.47 1980 65 National Security Act 
11.48 1983 32 Punjab Disturbed Areas Act                                
11.49 1983 33 Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Act 
  11.50 1984 3 Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act 
11.51 1985 58 Intelligence Organisations (Restriction on Rights) Act 
11.52 1985 61 Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 
11.53 1986 47 National Security Guard Act 
11.54 1988 34 Special Protection Group Act 
11.55 1988 46 Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 
11.56 1988 49 Prevention of Corruption Act 
11.57 1989 33 Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act 
11.58 1993 36 SAARC Convention (Suppression of Terrorism) Act 
11.59 2004 26 Prevention of Terrorism (Repeal) Act 
11.60 2006 49 Indian Rifles (Repeal) Act 
11.61 2008 34 National Investigation Agency Act 

66 
 
11.62 2012 32 Protection of Children From Sexual Offences  Act, 2012   
   See Also, 
Civil Procedure:  
Bankers' Books Evidence Act  
Commercial Documents Evidence Act  
Oaths Act 
Indian Evidence Act 
Financial Laws:  
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act 
Government Employees:   
Central Vigilance Commission Act  
Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011 
12 Defence of India and 
Armed Forces 12.1 1888 4 Indian Reserve Forces Act                                 
12.2 1892 5 Bengal Military Police Act                                
12.3 1903 7 Works of Defence Act                                      
12.4 1923 6 Cantonments (House Accommodation) Act                      
12.5 1923 7 Indian Naval Armament Act                                  
12.6 1925 4 Indian Soldiers (Litigation) Act                           
12.7 1938 5 Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery Practice Act 
12.8 1947 15 Armed Forces (Emergency Duties) Act 
12.9 1947 16 Trading with the Enemy (Continuance of Emergency  Provisions)  Act 

67 
 
12.10 1948 31 National Cadet Corps Act 
  12.11 1948 56 Territorial Army Act 
12.12 1949 8 Seaward Artillery Practice Act  
12.13 1950 40 Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property)  Act 
12.14 1950 45 Air Force Act 
12.15 1950 46 Army Act 
12.16 1952 62 Reserve and Auxiliary Air Forces Act 
12.17 1954 31 Shillong (Rifle Range and Umlong) Cantonments Assimilation of Laws Act 
12.18 1955 19 Commanders-in-Chief (Change in Designation) Act 
12.19 1956 53 Lok Sahayak Sena Act (Reprint) 
12.20 1957 46 Cantonments (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Act 
12.21 1957 62 Navy Act 
12.22 1958 28 Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act 
12.23 1962 51 Defence of India Act 
12.24 1968 27 Civil Defence Act 
12.25 1968 34 Enemy Property Act 
12.26 1968 47 Border Security Force Act 
12.27 1971 59 Naval and Aircraft Prize Act 
12.28 1972 28 National Service Act 

68 
 
12.29 1983 34 Armed Forces (Punjab and Chandigarh) Special Powers Act 
12.30 1990 21 Armed Forces (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act 
12.31 1992 35 Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force Act 
12.32 2006 41 Cantonments Act 
12.33 2006 47 Assam Rifles Act 
12.34 2007 53 Sashastra Seema Bal Act 
   See Also, 
Government Employees:  
Railways Employment of Members of the Armed Forces Act 
13 Delimitation and Elections 13.1 1950 43 Representation of the People Act 
13.2 1951 43 Representation of the People Act 
13.3 1952 31 Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act 
13.4 1956 88 Representation of the People (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 
13.5 1959 10 Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act 
  13.6 1965 49 Union Territories (Direct Election to the House of the People) Act 
13.7 1968 3 Jammu and Kashmir Representation of the People (Supplementary) Act  
13.8 1976 10 Election Laws (Extension to Sikkim) Act 
13.9 1977 16 Disputed Elections (Prime Minister and Speaker) Act 
13.10 1991 11 
Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners and 
Transaction of Business) Act 

69 
 
13.11 2002 33 Delimitation Act 
14 Education 14.1 1956 3 University Grants Commission Act 
14.2 1960 39 Delhi Primary Education Act 
14.3 1973 18 Delhi School Education Act 
14.4 1987 52 All India Council for Technical Education Act 
14.5 1993 73 National Council for Teacher Education Act 
14.6 2005 2 National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 2004 
14.7 2007 5 Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act 
14.8 2009 9 Science and Engineering Research Board Act 
14.9 2009 35 Right of Childern to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 
15 Energy Laws 15.1 1857 5 Oriental Gas Company                                      
15.2 1867 11 Oriental Gas Company 
15.3 1934 30 Petroleum Act 
15.4 1948 14 Damodar Valley Corporation Act 
15.5 1948 53 Oil Fields (Regulation and Development) Act 
15.6 1957 20 Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act 
15.7 1962 33 Atomic Energy Act 
15.8 1962 50 Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of  Right of  User in Land) Act 
15.9 1971 54 Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Amendment  and Validation 
Act 

70 
 
15.10 1974 28 Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act 
15.11 1974 47 Oil Industry (Development) Act 
15.12 2000 45 Coal India (Regulation of Transfer and Validation) Act 
15.13 2001 52 Energy Conservation Act 
15.14 2003 36 Electricity Act 
15.15 2006 19 Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act 
15.16 2010 38 Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010    
16 Environmental Law 16.1 1879 6 Elephants' Preservation Act                               
  16.2 1882 21 Madras Forest (Validation) Act                            
16.3 1897 4 Indian Fisheries Act                                      
16.4 1912 8 Wild Birds and Animals Protection Act                      
16.5 1927 16 Indian Forest Act                                          
16.6 1960 59 Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 
16.7 1972 53 Wild Life (Protection) Act 
16.8 1974 6 Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 
16.9 1980 69 Forest (Conservation) Act 
16.10 1981 14 Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act   
16.11 1986 29 Environment (Protection) Act 
16.12 1991 6 Public Liability Insurance Act 
16.13 2003 18 Biological Diversity Act, 2002 

71 
 
   See Also, 
Taxes, Tolls & Cess Laws:  
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess 
Act Social Welfare:  
Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act 
17 Financial Laws 17.1 1855 28 Usury Laws Repeal Act                                     
17.2 1876 15 Bombay Municipal Debentures Act                           
17.3 1881 26 Negotiable Instruments Act 
17.4 1909 3 Presidency-towns Insolvency Act 
17.5 1914 9 Local Authorities Loans Act                                
17.6 1917 18 Post Office Cash Certificates Act                         
17.7 1918 10 Usurious Loans Act                                         
17.8 1920 5 Provincial Insolvency Act                                  
17.9 1944 18 Public Debt Act 
17.10 1950 49 Contingency Fund of India Act 
17.11 1951 33 Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 
17.12 1951 63 State Financial Corporations Act 
17.13 1952 74 Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act 
17.14 1956 42 Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act   
17.15 1959 46 Government Savings Certificates Act (Reprint) 
17.16 1961 47 Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation  Act    

72 
 
  17.17 1963 21 Compulsory Deposit Scheme Act     
17.18 1964 28 Legal Tender (Inscribed Notes) Act 
17.19 1968 60 State Agricultural Credit Corporation Act 
17.20 1974 37 Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act 
17.21 1974 52 Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling  Activities Act 
17.22 1976 13 Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators  (Forfeiture of  Property) Act 
17.23 1978 11 High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Act 
17.24 1978 21 Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amendment and Miscellaneous  Provisions) Act  
17.25 1978 43 Prize Chits and Money Circulation Scheme (Banning)  Act 
17.26 1979 24 Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act 
17.27 1982 40 Chit Funds Act 
17.28 1983 48 Public Financial Institutions (Obligation as to Fidelity  and Secrecy) Act 
17.29 1988 45 Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act   
17.30 1991 41 
Remittances of Foreign Exchange and Investment in Foreign  Exchange Bonds   
(Immunities and Exemptions) Act 
17.31 1992 15 Securities and Exchange Board of India Act    
17.32 1993 25 Gold Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) Act     
17.33 1996 22 Depositories Act 
17.34 1999 42 Foreign Exchange Management Act 

73 
 
17.35 2002 54 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of 
Security Interest Act 
17.36 2002 58 Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act 
17.37 2003 15 Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002  
17.38 2003 39 Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act 
17.39 2005 30 Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act 
17.40 2006 38 Government Securities Act 
17.41 2007 51 Payment of Settlement Systems Act 
17.42 2010 42 Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010  
17.43 2011 11 Coinage Act, 2011 
17.44 2012 12 Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 
17.45 2013 23 Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013 
18 Food and Public 
Distribution 18.1 1934 15 Sugarcane Act 
  18.2 1955 10 Essential Commodities Act 
18.3 1961 55 Sugar (Regulation of Production) Act 
18.4 1962 58 Warehousing Corporations Act 
18.5 1964 37 Food Corporations Act 
18.6 1965 20 Warehousing Corporations (Supplementary) Act 
18.7 1965 42 Cardamom Act 

74 
 
18.8 1976 31 Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act 
18.9 1980 7 
Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of  Supplies of  Essential  
Commodities Act 
18.10 1982 4 Sugar Development Fund Act 
18.11 2007 37 Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act 
18.12 2013 20 National Food Security Act, 2013  
   See Also, 
Taxes, Tolls & Cess Laws:  
U.P. Sugarcane Cess (Validation) Act 
Sugar Cess Act 
19 Government Employees 19.1 1850 12 Public Accountants' Defaults Act 
19.2 1850 37 Public Servants (Inquiries) Act 
19.3 1857 7 Madras Uncovenanted Officers' Act                          
19.4 1871 23 Pensions Act 
19.5 1919 1 Local Authorities Pensions and Gratuities Act             
19.6 1951 61 All-India Services Act 
19.7 1957 44 Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence)  Act 
19.8 1963 45  Administrators-General Act    
19.9 1965 40 Railways Employment of Members of the Armed Forces Act 
19.10 1965 50 Goa, Daman and Diu (Absorbed Employees) Act 

75 
 
19.11 1972 18 
Departmental Inquiries (Enforcement of Attendance of Witnesses and 
Production of Documents)  
Act 
19.12 1972 59 Former Secretary of State Service Officers (Conditions of  Service) Act 
19.13 1975 19 All-India Services Regulations (Indemnity) Act 
19.14 1976 59 Departmentalisation of Union Accounts (Transfer of  Personnel) Act 
19.15 1988 44 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited  (Determination of  Conditions of Service 
of Employees)  
Act 
     See Also, 
Criminal Justice:  
Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 
Prevention of Corruption Act 
20 Industries 20.1 1884 4 Explosives Act                                            
20.2 1886 5 Mirzapur Stone Mahal Act                                  
20.3 1913 5 White Phosphorus Matches Prohibition Act                   
20.4 1923 5 Indian Boilers Act                                        
20.5 1951 65 Industries (Development and Regulation) Act 
20.6 1952 20 Inflammable Substances Act 
20.7 1953 45 Coir Industry Act 
20.8 1956 61 Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act   

76 
 
20.9 1957 67 Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)  Act 
20.10 1968 50 Central Industrial Security Force Act 
20.11 1978 16 
Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) and  Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act 
20.12 1983 35 Dangerous Machines (Regulation) Act 
20.13 1987 16 
Goa, Daman and Diu Mining Concessions (Abolition  and  Declaration as 
Mining Leases) Act 
20.14 1995 44 Technology Development Board Act 
20.15 1999 40 Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment and Validation) Act 
20.16 2003 17 Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002 
20.17 2006 27 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006  
   See Also,  
Taxes, Tolls & Cess Laws: 
Cess and Other Taxes on Minerals (Validation) Act 
21 Institutions of National 
and Cultural Importance 21.1 1903 10 Victoria Memorial Act                                     
21.2 1904 7 Ancient Monuments Preservation Act                        
21.3 1910 10 Indian Museum Act 
21.4 1948 51 Imperial Library (Change of Name) Act   
21.5 1951 25 Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Act 
21.6 1951 41 Rajghat Samadhi Act 

77 
 
21.7 1958 24 Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 
  21.8 1959 57 Indian Statistical Institute Act 
21.9 1961 26 Salar Jung Museum Act 
21.10 1962 13 Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Act 
21.11 1964 14 Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha Act 
21.12 1969 43 Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library Act 
21.13 1975 22 Rampur Raza Library Act 
21.14 1976 76 National Library of India Act 
21.15 1984 5 Asiatic Society Act 
21.16 1994 6 Kalakshetra Foundation Act, 1993 
21.17 2001 29 Indian Council of World Affairs Act 
21.18 2010 10 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and 
Validation) Act, 2010 
22 Intellectual Property Law 22.1 1950 78 Khaddar (Protection of Name) Act 
22.2 1957 14 Copyright Act 
22.3 1970 39 Patents Act (Reprint) 
22.4 1999 47 Trade Marks Act 
22.5 1999 48 Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration  and Protection) Act 
22.6 2000 16 Designs Act 
22.7 2000 37 Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Act 

78 
 
23 International Relations 
23.1 1874 4 Foreign Recruiting Act 
23.2 1943 9 Reciprocity Act 
23.3 1945 47 International Monetary Fund and Bank Act 
23.4 1947 43 United Nations (Security Council) Act 
23.5 1947 46 United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act    
23.6 1947 47 Foreign Jurisdiction Act       
23.7 1948 41 Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees)   Act 
23.8 1958 42 International Finance Corporation (Status,  Immunities and  Privileges) Act 
23.9 1960 6 Geneva Conventions Act 
23.10 1960 32 International Development Association (Status,  Immunities  and Privileges) 
Act  
23.11 1966 18 Asian Development Bank Act 
23.12 1972 43 Diplomatic Relations (Vienna Convention) Act 
  
23.13 1973 2 
Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) (Extension to Jammu and 
Kashmir) Act 
23.14 1975 20 Tokyo Convention Act 
23.15 1981 48 Anti-Apartheid (United Nations Convention) Act 
23.16 1982 1 African Development Fund Act 
23.17 1982 65 Anti-Hijacking Act   

79 
 
23.18 1982 66 Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil Aviation Act 
23.19 1983 13 African Development Bank Act 
23.20 2000 34 Chemical Weapons Convention Act 
23.21 2005 21 
The Weapons of Mass Destruction and Their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of  
Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 
24 Labour Laws 24.1 1858 1 Madras Compulsory Labour Act                              
24.2 1886 21 Oudh Wasikas Act                                          
24.3 1923 8 Workmen's Compensation Act                                 
24.4 1925 19 Provident Funds Act                                        
24.5 1926 16 Trade Unions Act   
24.6 1933 2 Children (Pledging of Labour) Act                          
24.7 1936 4 Payment of Wages Act 
24.8 1938 24 Employers' Liability Act 
24.9 1942 18 Weekly Holidays Act 
24.10 1943 23 War Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Act   
24.11 1946 20 Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act 
24.12 1946 22 Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act    
24.13 1947 14 Industrial Disputes Act 
24.14 1948 9 Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act 
24.15 1948 11 Minimum Wages Act   

80 
 
24.16 1948 34 Employees' State Insurance Act 
24.17 1948 46 Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act  
24.18 1948 63 Factories Act 
24.19 1949 54 Industrial Disputes (Banking and Insurance Companies) Act 
24.20 1951 69 Plantations Labour Act 
24.21 1952 19 Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 
24.22 1952 35 Mines Act 
  
24.23 1955 45 
Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and 
Miscellaneous  
Provisions   Act 
24.24 1956 36 Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act 
24.25 1958 29 Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act 
24.26 1959 31 Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of  Vacancies) Act 
24.27 1961 27 Motor Transport Workers Act 
24.28 1961 52 Apprentices Act 
24.29 1961 53 Maternity Benefit Act 
24.30 1962 59 Personal Injuries (Emergency Provision) Act 
24.31 1963 37 Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Act 
24.32 1965 21 Payment of Bonus Act 
24.33 1966 32 Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment)  Act   

81 
 
24.34 1968 23 Public Provident Fund Act 
24.35 1970 37 Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act 
24.36 1970 51 Central Labour Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act 
24.37 1972 39 Payment of Gratuity Act 
24.38 1972 62 Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act 
24.39 1976 11 Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service)   Act 
24.40 1976 19 Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act 
24.41 1976 25 Equal Remuneration Act 
24.42 1976 61 
Iron Ore Mines, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines  Labour Welfare  
Fund Act 
24.43 1976 62 Beedi Workers Welfare Fund Act 
24.44 1979 30 Inter-State Migrant Workmen Regulation of Employment and Condition of 
Service) Act 
24.45 1980 41 Essential Services Maintenance (Assam) Act 
24.46 1981 33 Cine-Workers Welfare Fund Act 
24.47 1981 50 Cine-Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of  Employment) Act 
24.48 1986 27 Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund (Repeal) Act 
24.49 1986 54 Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act 
24.50 1986 61 Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act 
24.51 1988 51 
Labour Laws (Exemption from Furnishing Returns and  Maintaining Registers 
by certain Establishments) Act 

82 
 
24.52 1993 41 Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment) Amendment Act 
24.53 1993 46 Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines 
(Prohibition) Act 
  
24.54 1996 27 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of  Employment and 
Conditions of  Service) Act 
24.55 1997 31 Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) (Inapplicability to  Major Ports) Act 
24.56 2005 29 Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act 
24.57 2005 42 National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
24.58 2007 23 National Rural Employment Guarantee (Extension to Jammu And Kashmir) 
Act 
24.59 2008 33 Unorganised Workers' Social Security Act 
24.60 2014 7 
The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and  
Regulation of Street Vending) Act, 2014                                      
   See Also,  
Taxes, Tolls & Cess Laws:  
Iron Ore Mines, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines  
Labour Welfare Cess Act 
Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act 
Cine-Workers Welfare Cess Act 
Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess 
Act Industries: 
Dangerous Machines (Regulation) 
Act Social Welfare:  

83 
 
Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and Their 
Rehabilitation Act, 2013 
25 Land Laws 25.1 1836 10 Bengal Indigo Contracts Act 
25.2 1837 36 Madras Public Property Malversation Act                   
25.3 1850 25 Forfeited Deposits Act 
25.4 1852 11 Bombay Rent-free Estates Act                              
25.5 1859 5 Bengal Ghatwali Lands Act                                 
25.6 1863 19 Partition of Revenue-paying Estates                       
25.7 1863 23 Waste-Lands (Claims) Act 
25.8 1866 26 Oudh Sub-settlement Act 
25.9 1869 1 Oudh Estates Act                                          
25.10 1870 24 Oudh Taluqdars' Relief Act                               
25.11 1876 6 Chota Nagpur Encumbered Estates Act 
25.12 1877 14 Broach and Kaira Incumbered Estates Act 
25.13 1883 10 Bikrama Singh's Estates Act                               

84 
 
25.14 1883 19 Land Improvement Loans Act                                
  25.15 1885 18 Land Acquisition (Mines) Act                              
25.16 1887 19 King of Oudh's Estate Act                                 
25.17 1888 14 King of Oudh's Estate Act                                 
25.18 1891 15 Murshidabad Act                                           
25.19 1893 2 Porahat Estate Act                                        
25.20 1917 12 King of Oudh's Estate Validation Act                       
25.21 1933 23 Murshidabad Estate Administration Act 
25.22 1936 18 Red Cross Society (Allocation of Property) Act 
25.23 1941 12 Delhi Restriction of Uses of Land Act 
25.24 1948 26 Junagarh Administration (Property) Act 
25.25 1948 60 Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land  Acquisition) Act  
25.26 1948 66 Delhi and Ajmer-Merwara Land Development Act 
25.27 1949 2 Mangrol and Manavadar (Administration of Property)   Act 
25.28 1949 51 Requisitioned Land (Apportionment of Compensation) Act 
25.29 1952 30 Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable  Property Act 
25.30 1954 23 State Acquisition of Lands for Union Purposes (Validation)  Act 
25.31 1956 96 Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act 
25.32 1960 24 Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Act 

85 
 
25.33 1960 33 Manipur Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act 
25.34 1960 48 Mahendra Pratap Singh Estate (Repeal) Act 
25.35 1962 31 Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act 
25.36 1967 13 Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Act 
25.37 1969 42 Bihar Land Reforms Laws (Regulating Mines and Minerals)  Validation Act 
25.38 1971 40 Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act 
25.39 1972 30 Delhi Lands (Restriction on Transfer) Act 
25.40 1993 33 Acquisition of Certain Area at Ayodhya Act 
25.41 1999 15 Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Repeal Act 
25.42 2013 30 
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 
26 Land Revenue 26.1 1839 7 Madras Rent and Revenue Sales Act                         
26.2 1841 12 Bengal Land Revenue Sales Act                             
26.3 1842 13 Revenue, Bombay 
26.4 1842 17 Revenue Commissioners, Bombay 
  26.5 1845 1 Sales of Land for Revenue Arrears 
26.6 1847 9 Bengal Alluvion and Diluvion Act                            
26.7 1848 20 Bengal Landholders' Attendance Act                       
26.8 1849 10 Madras Revenue Commissioner Act 
26.9 1850 23 Calcutta Land-revenue Act 

86 
 
26.10 1851 12 Madras City Land Revenue Act                              
26.11 1853 6 Rent Recovery Act                                         
26.12 1856 18 Calcutta Land-revenue Act                                 
26.13 1859 11 Bengal Land-revenue Sales Act                             
26.14 1876 10 Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act 
26.15 1881 18 Central Provinces Land-revenue Act    
26.16 1887 17 Punjab Land-revenue Act                                   
26.17 1890 1 Revenue Recovery Act                                      
26.18 1892 10 Government Management of Private Estates Act              
26.19 1908 13 Central Provinces Financial Commissioner’s Act  
26.20 1960 43 Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act 
27 Laws Relating to 
Administration and 
Development of Local  
Areas 
27.1 1836 21 Bengal Districts Act                                      
27.2 1850 26 Improvements in Towns 
27.3 1883 20 Punjab District Boards Act                                
27.4 1899 4 Government Buildings Act 
27.5 1956 80 Manipur (Village Authorities in Hill Areas) Act 
27.6 1957 42 Naga Hills-Tuensang Area Act 
27.7 1961 49 Assam Municipal (Manipur Amendment) Act 
27.8 1971 76 Manipur (Hill Areas District Council) Act 
27.9 1971 84 North-Eastern Council Act 
27.10 1994 26 Manipur Panchayati Raj Act 

87 
 
27.11 1994 43 Manipur Municipalities Act 
27.12 1996 40 Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled  Areas) Act 
28 Laws Relating to 
Administration of Union 
Territories and Delhi 
28.1 1949 24 Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation) Act   
28.2 1957 61 Delhi Development Act 
28.3 1957 66 Delhi Municipal Corporation Act 
28.4 1961 35 Dadra and Nagar Haveli Act 
  28.5 1962 1 Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Act 
28.6 1962 49 Pondicherry (Administration) Act 
28.7 1964 23 Delhi Delegation of Powers Act 
28.8 1969 19 Union Territories (Separation of Judicial and Executive Functions) Act 
28.9 1973 17 Capital of Punjab Development and Regulation (Chandigarh Amendment) Act 
28.10 1974 1 Delhi Urban Art Commission Act, 1973 
28.11 1985 2 National Capital Region Planning Board Act 
28.12 1988 2 Chandigarh (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1987 
28.13 1994 27 Punjab Gram Panchayat, Samities and Zilla Parishad (Chandigarh Repeal) Act 
28.14 1994 44 New Delhi Municipal Council Act 
28.15 1994 45 Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act 
28.16 1999 6 Delhi Development Authority (Validation of  Disciplinary Powers) Act, 1998  
28.17 2006 22 Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act  

88 
 
28.18 2006 44 Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act 
28.19 2007 43 National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act 
28.20 2009 24 National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act 
28.21 2009 40 National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Act, 2009 
28.22 2011 5 National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2011 
28.23 2011 20 National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Act, 2011 
29 Legal, Medical and Other 
Professions 29.1 1879 18 Legal Practitioners Act                                   
29.2 1916 7 Indian Medical Degrees Act                                
29.3 1926 38 Indian Bar Councils Act                                    
29.4 1947 48 Indian Nursing Council Act      
29.5 1948 8 Pharmacy Act 
29.6 1948 16 Dentists Act    
29.7 1949 38 Chartered Accountants Act 
29.8 1952 53 Notaries Act 
29.9 1956 4 Bar Councils (Validation of State Laws) Act 
29.10 1956 102 Indian Medical Council Act 
29.11 1959 23 Cost and Works Accountants Act 
29.12 1961 25 Advocates Act 

89 
 
29.13 1970 48 Indian Medicine Central Council Act 
  29.14 1972 20 Architects Act 
29.15 1973 59 Homoeopathy Central Council Act 
29.16 1980 56 Company Secretaries Act 
29.17 1984 52 Indian Veterinary Council Act 
29.18 2001 45 Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act 
29.19 2006 35 Actuaries Act 
30 Maritime Law; Shipping 
and Inland Navigation 30.1 1838 19 Coasting Vessels Act                                      
30.2 1846 3 Boundary-marks, Bombay                                     
30.3 1853 11 Shore Nuisances (Bombay and Kolaba) Act                   
30.4 1881 16 Obstructions in Fairways Act 
30.5 1908 15 Indian Ports Act  
30.6 1917 1 Inland Vessels Act                                        
30.7 1925 26 Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act                        
30.8 1927 17 Light House Act                                            
30.9 1948 33 Calcutta Port (Pilotage) Act 
30.10 1958 44 Merchant Shipping Act    
30.11 1963 11 Marine Insurance Act 
30.12 1963 38 Major Port Trusts Act   

90 
 
30.13 1966 4 Seamen's Provident Fund Act 
30.14 1973 62 Konkan Passenger Ships (Acquisition) Act 
30.15 1976 80 
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic  Zone and other 
Maritime Zones Act 
30.16 1978 30 Coast Guard Act 
30.17 1981 42 Maritime Zones of India (Regulation of Fishing by Foreign Vessels) Act 
30.18 1982 49 
National Waterway (Allahabad-Haldia Stretch of the Ganga-Bhagirathi Hooghly 
River) Act 
30.19 1985 82 Inland Waterways Authority of India Act 
30.20 1986 33 Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act   
30.21 1986 66 Shipping Development Fund Committee (Abolition) Act 
30.22 1988 40 National Waterway (Sadiya-Dhubri Stretch of the Brahmaputra  River) Act 
30.23 1992 25 
National Waterway (Kollam-Kottapuram Stretch of  West Coast  Canal and 
Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals) Act 
  
30.24 2002 69 
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Maritime Navigation and Fixed 
Platforms on Continental Shelf Act 
30.25 2008 23 
National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra Stretch of Rivers, Geonkhali-Charbatia 
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and 
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Act   
   See Also, 
Trade and Commerce: 
Marking of Heavy Packages Act 

91 
 
31 Media, Communications 
and Publishing 
31.1 2008 24 
National Waterway (Kakinada-Puducherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly 
Tank,  
Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari and Wazirabad-
Vijayawada Stretch of River Krishna) Act, 2008  
31.2 1867 25 Press and Registration of Books Act 
31.3 1885 13 Indian Telegraph Act                                      
31.4 1898 6 Indian Post Office Act                                    
31.5 1933 17 Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act         
31.6 1950 74 Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act 
31.7 1952 37 Cinematograph Act 
31.8 1954 27 Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act 
31.9 1956 45 Newspaper (Price and Page) Act 
31.10 1956 93 Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act 
31.11 1961 36 Newspaper (Price and Page Continuance) Act 
31.12 1978 37 Press Council Act 
31.13 1990 25 Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act 
31.14 1995 7 Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act 
31.15 1997 24 Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act 
31.16 2000 21 Information Technology Act 
31.17 2007 11 Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharti) Act 

92 
 
32 Nationalisation 32.1 1971 63 Jayanti Shipping Company (Acquisition of Shares) Act 
32.2 1971 64 Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act 
32.3 1971 65 Asian Refractories Limited (Acquisition of Undertakings) Act 
32.4 1972 36 Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act 
32.5 1972 58 Indian Copper Corporation (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act 
32.6 1972 72 Sick Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Act 
32.7 1972 78 Richardson and Cruddas Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of  Undertakings) 
Act 
  32.8 1973 15 Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act 
32.9 1973 26 Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act 
32.10 1973 56 Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of Undertakings) Act 
32.11 1974 4 Esso (Acquisition of Undertakings in India) Act 
32.12 1974 57 Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act 
32.13 1976 2 Burmah Shell (Acquisition of Undertakings in  India) Act 
32.14 1976 22 Assam Sillimanite Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of  Refractory Plant) Act 
32.15 1976 89 Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) Act 
32.16 1976 96 
Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited (Acquisition and  Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act 
32.17 1976 97 Burn Company and Indian Standard Wagon Company (Nationalisation) Act 
32.18 1976 98 Laxmirattan and Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking  Over of  Management) 
Act 

93 
 
32.19 1976 100 Metal Corporation (Nationalisation and  Miscellaneous  Provisions) Act 
32.20 1977 17 
Caltex [Acquisition of Shares of Caltex Oil Refining (India)  Limited and of the  
Undertakings in India of Caltex (India)  Limited] Act 
32.21 1977 41 
Smith, Stainstreet and Company Limited (Acquisition and  Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act 
32.22 1977 42 
Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited (Acquisition  and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act 
32.23 1978 13 Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of  Undertakings) Act 
32.24 1978 41 
Britannia Engineering Company Limited (Mokameh Unit) and the  Arthur 
Butler and Company (Muzaffarpore) Limited  (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act 
32.25 1978 42 Bolani Ores Limited (Acquisition of Shares) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act     
32.26 1978 49 Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Act 
32.27 1979 28 Kosangas Company (Acquisition of Undertakings) Act    
32.28 1980 42 National Company (Acquisition and Transfer of  Undertakings)  Act 
32.29 1980 58 
Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Limited (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act 
32.30 1980 62 Jute Companies (Nationalisation) Act 
32.31 1980 64 Maruti Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act 
32.32 1980 67 
Bird and Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer  of  Undertakings and  
Other Properties)  
Act 
32.33 1980 70 Hind Cycles Limited and Sen-Raleigh Limited (Nationalisation) Act 

94 
 
32.34 1981 29 British India Corporation Limited (Acquisition of Shares) Act 
32.35 1981 31 Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act 
  
32.36 1981 41 
Burmah Oil Company [Acquisition of Shares of Oil India  Limited and of the 
Undertakings in  
India of Assam Oil  Company Limited and the Burmah Oil Company (India 
Trading)  Limited]  
Act 
32.37 1982 36 
Chaparmukh Silghat Railway Line and the Katakhal Lalabazar  Railway Line 
(Nationalisation)  
Act 
32.38 1982 50 Amritsar Oil Works (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act  
32.39 1982 71 Andhra Scientific Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act 
32.40 1983 40 Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Act 
32.41 1983 41 Transformer and Switchgear Limited (Acquisition and  Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act 
32.42 1984 16 Ganesh Flour Mills Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer  of 
Undertakings) Act 
32.43 1984 17 
Inchek Tyres Limited and National Rubber Manufacturers  Limited 
(Nationalisation) Act 
32.44 1984 33 Mogul Line Limited (Acquisition of Shares) Act    
32.45 1984 43 
Aluminium Corporation of India Limited (Acquisition and  Transfer of Aluminium 
Undertaking)  
Act 

95 
 
32.46 1984 55 
Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited  (Acquisition  and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act 
32.47 1984 57 Bengal Immunity Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of  Undertakings) 
Act 
32.48 1985 37 Tea Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Sick Tea Units)  Act 
32.49 1985 83 Futwah-Islampur Light Railway Line (Nationalisation) Act 
32.50 1986 30 
Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Limited (Acquisition and  Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act 
32.51 1987 36 Brentford Electric (India) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer  of Undertakings) 
Act 
32.52 1993 23 Industrial Finance Corporation (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act 
32.53 1993 24 
National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, the National Hydro-Electric 
Power  Corporation  
Limited and the North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Power Transmission Systems) Act 
32.54 1993 65 Oil and Natural Gas Commission (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act 
32.55 1994 13 Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings and Repeal) Act 
32.56 1994 56 
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (Acquisition  and  Transfer of Power 
Transmission System)  
Act 
32.57 1995 39 Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act   
32.58 1997 17 Lalitkala Akademi (Taking Over of Management) Act 
32.59 2005 14 
Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private 
Limited (Taking over of Management) Repeal Act 

96 
 
33 Ombudsman and 
Monitoring  
33.1 1971 56 Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and  Conditions of Service) 
Act 
 Bodies 33.2 2003 45 Central Vigilance Commission Act  
33.3 2005 22 Right to Information Act 
33.4 2014 1 Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013  
33.5 2014 17 Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011 
34 Personal Laws 34.1 1850 21 Caste Disabilities Removal Act 
34.2 1866 21 Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act 
34.3 1869 4 Indian Divorce Act 
34.4 1872 15 Indian Christian Marriage Act 
34.5 1874 3 Married Women's Property Act 
34.6 1880 12 Kazis Act 
34.7 1892 2 Marriages Validation Act                                  
34.8 1909 7 Anand Marriage Act 
34.9 1916 15 Hindu Disposition of Property Act                          
34.10 1925 39 Indian Succession Act 
34.11 1928 12 Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act 
34.12 1930 30 Hindu Gains of Learning Act        
34.13 1935 13 Jubbalpore and Chhattisgarh Divisions (Divorce Proceedings  Validation) Act 
34.14 1936 3 Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 
34.15 1936 16 Bangalore Marriages Validating Act   
34.16 1937 19 Arya Marriage Validation Act   

97 
 
34.17 1937 26 Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act 
34.18 1938 10 Cutchi Memons Act 
34.19 1939 8 Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act 
34.20 1948 40 Indian Matrimonial Causes (War Marriages) Act 
34.21 1952 1 Part B States Marriages Validating Act 
34.22 1954 43 Special Marriage Act 
34.23 1955 25 Hindu Marriage Act                                        
34.24 1956 30 Hindu Succession Act 
34.25 1956 32 Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act 
34.26 1956 78 Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 
34.27 1959 48 Miscellaneous Personal Laws (Extension) Act (Reprint 1976) 
34.28 1959 61 Married Women's Property (Extension) Act 
34.29 1960 19 Hindu Marriages (Validation of Proceedings) Act 
  34.30 1969 33 Foreign Marriage Act 
34.31 1986 25 Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act 
   See Also,  
Women and Child Development:  
Dowry Prohibition Act 
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 
35 President, Parliament and 
State Legislatures 35.1 1951 30 President's Emoluments and Pension Act 
35.2 1952 58 Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act   

98 
 
35.3 1953 20 Salaries and  Allowances of Officers of  Parliament  Act 
35.4 1954 30 Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament  Act 
35.5 1957 37 Legislative Councils Act 
35.6 1958 56 
Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly (Constitution and  Proceedings) 
Validation Act 
35.7 1963 20 Government of Union Territories Act 
35.8 1968 61 Legislative Assembly of Nagaland (Change in Representation)  Act 
35.9 1969 16 President (Discharge of Functions) Act 
35.10 1969 46 Punjab Legislative Council (Abolition) Act 
35.11 1973 50 Authoritative Texts (Central Laws) Act 
35.12 1975 33 Kerala Legislative Assembly (Extension of Duration) Act 
35.13 1976 28 Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of  Publication) Repeal Act 
35.14 1977 15 Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act 
35.15 1977 33 Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament Act 
35.16 1982 43 Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act 
35.17 1992 1 Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 
35.18 1997 30 Vice-President's Pension Act 
35.19 1999 5 
Leaders of Chief Whips of Recognised Parties and Groups in  Parliament 
(Facilities) Act, 1998 
35.20 2006 1 Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005 

99 
 
35.21 2010 16 Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010 
36 Property Law 36.1 1878 6 Indian Treasure-trove Act 
36.2 1882 2 Indian Trusts Act                                         
36.3 1882 4 Transfer of Property Act                                  
36.4 1882 5 Indian Easements Act                                      
  36.5 1891 8 Easements (Extending Act 5 of 1882)                       
36.6 1893 4 Partition Act                                             
36.7 1893 6 Sir Dinshaw Maneckjee Petit                               
36.8 1895 15 Government Grants Act                                     
36.9 1899 24 Central Provinces Court of Wards Act 
36.10 1913 2 Official Trustees Act                                      
36.11 1915 10 Sir Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy Baronetcy Act                     
36.12 1929 21 Transfer of Property (Amendment) Supplementary Act         
36.13 1951 70 Displaced Persons (Debts Adjustment) Act 
36.14 1954 15 Transfer of Evacuee Deposits Act 
36.15 1986 58 Delhi Apartment Ownership Act 
37 Public Health  37.1 1897 3 Epidemic Diseases Act                                     
37.2 1898 3 Lepers Act                                                
37.3 1898 9 Live-stock Importation Act                                

100 
 
37.4 1914 2 Destructive Insects and Pests Act                          
37.5 1919 12 Poisons Act                                               
37.6 1940 23 Drugs and Cosmetics Act 
37.7 1950 26 Drugs (Control) Act 
37.8 1954 21 Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act 
37.9 1968 46 Insecticides Act 
37.10 1971 34 Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 
37.11 1992 41 
Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of 
Production, Supply and  
Distribution) Act 
37.12 1994 42 Transplantation of Human Organs Act 
37.13 1994 57 Pre-conception  and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex 
Selection) Act 
37.14 2003 34 
Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and 
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act 
37.15 2006 34 Food Safety and Standards Act 
37.16 2009 27 Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Act 
37.17 2010 23 Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 
   See Also, 
Criminal Justice:  
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 

101 
 
38 Rent and Tenancy 38.1 1859 10 Bengal Rent Act                                           
38.2 1885 8 Bengal Tenancy Act 
38.3 1887 16 Punjab Tenancy Act                                        
38.4 1898 11 Central Provinces Tenancy Act                             
38.5 1950 42 Ajmer Tenancy and Land Records Act 
38.6 1952 38 Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act 
38.7 1961 30 Delhi (Urban Areas) Tenants' Relief Act   
38.8 1968 49 Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control (Nasirabad Cantonment  Repeal)  Act 
38.9 1971 68 Uttar Pradesh Cantonments (Control of Rent and Eviction) Repeal Act 
38.10 1974 54 East-Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Extension to Chandigarh)  Act 
38.11 1995 33 Delhi Rent Act 
   See Also, 
Defence of India and Armed Forces:  
Cantonments (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Act 
39 Residuary Laws relating to 
Administration 39.1 1862 3 Government Seal Act                                       
39.2 1897 5 Amending Act                                              
39.3 1897 10 General Clauses Act                                       
39.4 1897 14 Indian Short Titles Act                                   
39.5 1901 11 Amending Act                                              

102 
 
39.6 1903 1 Amending Act                                              
40 Social Welfare 40.1 1948 12 Rehabilitation Finance Administration Act   
40.2 1955 22 Protection of Civil Rights Act 
40.3 1956 63 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment)  Act 
40.4 1992 19 National Commission for Minorities Act 
40.5 1992 34 Rehabilitation Council of India Act 
40.6 1993 27 National Commission for Backward Classes Act 
40.7 1993 64 National Commission for Safai Karamcharis Act 
40.8 1994 10 Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 
40.9 1996 1 
Persons With Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection  of Rights and Full 
Participation)  
Act, 1995 
40.10 1999 44 
National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act 
40.11 2005 53 Disaster Management Act  
  
40.12 2007 2 
Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act 
40.13 2007 56 Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act 
40.14 2013 25 
Prohibition of Employment as Manual 
Scavengers and Their Rehabilitation Act, 2013 

103 
 
   See Also,  
Criminal Justice:  
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act 
Financial Laws:  
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013 
41 State Re-organisation and 
Extension of Laws 41.1 1847 1 Boundaries    
41.2 1855 37 Sonthal Parganas Act                                      
41.3 1857 10 Sonthal Parganas Act                                      
41.4 1871 21 Dehra Dun 
41.5 1872 4 Punjab Laws Act 
41.6 1874 15 Laws Local Extent Act 
41.7 1875 20 Central Provinces Laws Act                                
41.8 1876 18 Oudh Laws Act 
41.9 1879 19 Raipur and Khattra Laws Act 
41.10 1890 20 United Provinces Act                                      
41.11 1912 7 Bengal, Bihar and Orissa and Assam Laws Act  
41.12 1912 13 Delhi Laws Act                                             
41.13 1915 7 Delhi Laws Act                                            
41.14 1941 4 Berar Laws Act 

104 
 
41.15 1949 20 West Godavari District (Assimilation of Laws on Federal  Subjects) Act 
41.16 1949 59 Merged States (Laws) Act 
41.17 1950 30 Union Territories (Laws) Act 
41.18 1950 67 Cooch-Behar (Assimilation of Laws) Act 
41.19 1951 3 Part B States (Laws) Act 
41.20 1951 37 Scheduled Areas (Assimilation of Laws) Act 
41.21 1951 47 Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act 
41.22 1951 66 Part C States Miscellaneous Laws (Repealing) Act 
 
 41.23 1953 16 Scheduled Areas (Assimilation of Laws) Act 
41.24 1953 30 Andhra State Act 
41.25 1954 18 Lushai Hills District (Change of Name) Act 
41.26 1954 20 Absorbed Areas (Laws) Act 
41.27 1954 32 Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act 
41.28 1954 36 Chandernagore (Merger) Act 
41.29 1956 37 States Reorganisation Act                                 
41.30 1956 40 Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories)  Act 
41.31 1956 62 Jammu and Kashmir (Extension of Laws) Act 
41.32 1957 38 Inter-State Corporation Act 
41.33 1958 35 Manipur and Tripura (Repeal of Laws) Act    
41.34 1959 47 Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act 

105 
 
41.35 1959 56 Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of  Boundaries) Act 
41.36 1960 11 Bombay Reorganisation Act 
41.37 1960 57  British Statutes (Application to India) Repeal Act 
41.38 1960 64 Acquired Territories (Merger) Act 
41.39 1962 27 State of Nagaland Act 
41.40 1966 31 Punjab Reorganisation Act 
41.41 1968 24 Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act 
41.42 1968 25 Central Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act 
41.43 1968 26 Pondicherry (Extension of Laws) Act 
41.44 1968 36 Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory)  Act 
41.45 1969 55 Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act 
41.46 1970 53 State of Himachal Pradesh Act 
41.47 1971 81 North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act 
41.48 1979 31 Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act 
41.49 1986 34 State of Mizoram Act 
41.50 1986 69 State of Arunachal Pradesh Act 
41.51 1987 18 Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act 
41.52 1993 44 Central Laws (Extension to Arunachal Pradesh) Act 
41.53 2000 28 Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act 
41.54 2000 29 Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act 

106 
 
41.55 2000 30 Bihar Reorganisation Act 
  41.56 2006 52 Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act 
41.57 2011 15 Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011 
41.58 2014 6 Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014  
42 Symbols, Records and 
Statistics 42.1 1886 6 Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act             
42.2 1917 5 Destruction of Records Act                                 
42.3 1948 37 Census Act 
42.4 1950 12 Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act 
42.5 1963 19 Official Languages Act 
42.6 1969 18 Registration of Births and Deaths Act 
42.7 1993 69 Public Records Act 
42.8 2005 50 State Emblems of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Act 
42.9 2009 7 Collection of Statistics Act 
43 Taxes, Tolls & Cess Laws 43.1 1851 8 Indian Tolls Act 
43.2 1857 4 Tobacco Duty (Town of Bombay) Act                         
43.3 1863 16 Excise (Spirits) Act 
43.4 1864 15 Indian Tolls Act                                          
43.5 1867 1 Ganges Tolls 
43.6 1881 11 Municipal Taxation Act 

107 
 
43.7 1888 8 Indian Tolls Act                                          
43.8 1890 13 Excise (Malt Liquors) Act                                 
43.9 1899 2 Indian Stamp Act                                          
43.10 1901 2 Indian Tolls (Army and Air Force) Act   
43.11 1931 16 Provisional Collection of Taxes Act    
43.12 1941 25 Railways (Local Authorities' Taxation) Act 
43.13 1944 1 Central Excises Act 
43.14 1949 61 Professions Tax Limitation (Amendment and  Validation) Act 
43.15 1950 33 Opium and Revenue Laws (Extension of Application)  Act 
43.16 1953 49 Salt Cess Act 
43.17 1954 41 Taxation Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act 
43.18 1955 16 Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties)   Act 
43.19 1956 7 Sales Tax Laws Validation Act 
43.20 1956 69 Terminal Tax on Railway Passengers Act   
  43.21 1956 74 Central Sales Tax Act 
43.22 1957 27 Wealth-tax Act 
43.23 1957 58 Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act 
43.24 1958 18 Gift-tax Act 
43.25 1959 42 Travancore-Cochin Vehicles Taxation (Amendment and  Validation) Act 

108 
 
43.26 1960 38 Central Excises (Conversion to Metric Units) Act   
43.27 1960 40 Customs Duties and Cesses (Conversion to Metric Units) Act 
43.28 1961 4 U.P. Sugarcane Cess (Validation) Act 
43.29 1961 33 Union Territories (Stamp and Court-fees Laws) Act 
43.30 1961 43 Income-tax Act 
43.31 1961 46 Voluntary Surrender of Salaries (Exemption from  Taxation)  Act 
43.32 1962 52 Customs Act 
43.33 1962 55 Manipur (Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants) Taxation Act 
43.34 1962 57 Delhi Motor Vehicles Taxation Act 
43.35 1963 54 Central Boards of Revenue Act 
43.36 1964 7 Companies (Profits) Surtax Act 
43.37 1964 11 Taxation Laws (Continuation and Validation of Recovery  Proceedings) Act 
43.38 1965 41 Taxation Laws (Amendment and Miscellaneous  Provisions) Act 
43.39 1971 20 Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) (Delhi Validation of Appointments  and 
Proceedings) Act 
43.40 1972 25 Taxation Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act 
43.41 1974 45 Interest-tax Act 
43.42 1975 26 Tobacco Cess Act 
43.43 1975 43 Delhi Sales Tax Act 

109 
 
43.44 1975 51 Customs Tariff Act 
43.45 1976 55 
Iron Ore Mines, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines  Labour 
Welfare Cess Act 
43.46 1976 56 Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act 
43.47 1976 91 Delhi Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act 
43.48 1977 36 Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act         
43.49 1978 40 Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile Articles) Act 
43.50 1979 12 Punjab Excise (Delhi Amendment) Act 
43.51 1980 54 Hotel-Receipts Tax Act   
43.52 1981 30 Cine-Workers Welfare Cess Act 
  43.53 1982 3 Sugar Cess Act 
43.54 1983 28 Jute Manufactures Cess Act 
43.55 1986 5 Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 
43.56 1986 32 Research and Development Cess Act 
43.57 1986 46 Taxation Laws (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 
43.58 1987 4 Cotton Copra and Vegetable Oils Cess (Abolition) Act 
43.59 1987 35 Expenditure-tax Act 
43.60 1992 16 Cess and Other Taxes on Minerals (Validation) Act 
43.61 1996 28 Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Act 
43.62 2000 20 Direct-Tax Laws (Miscellaneous) Repeal Act 

110 
 
43.63 2002 36 Foreign Aircraft (Exemption from Taxes and Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) 
Act 
43.64 2004 25 Customs and Central Excise Laws (Repeal) Act 
43.65 2005 27 Bihar  Value Added Tax Act 
43.66 2006 24 Cess Laws (Repealing and Amending) Act 
43.67 2006 30 Union Duties of Excise (Electricity) Distribution Repeal Act, 2006 
43.68 2006 46 Produce Cess Laws (Abolition) Act 
   See Also,  
Financial Laws:  
Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act 
Remittances of Foreign Exchange and Investment in Foreign  
Exchange Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) Act 
Gold Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) Act  
44 Textiles 44.1 1948 61 Central Silk Board Act 
44.2 1963 41 Textiles  Committee Act   
44.3 1983 27 Jute Manufacturers Development Council Act 
44.4 1985 22 Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production) Act 
44.5 1987 10 Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act 
44.6 1987 14 Mental Health Act 
44.7 2009 12 National Jute Board Act 
   See Also,  
Taxes, Tolls & Cess Laws:  

111 
 
Jute Manufactures Cess Act 
45 Trade and Commerce 45.1 1838 5 Bengal Bonded Warehouse Association Act                   
45.2 1854 5 Bengal Bonded Warehouse Association Act                   
  45.3 1856 9 Indian Bills of Lading Act                                
45.4 1867 22 Sarais Act 
45.5 1942 7 Coffee Act 
45.6 1947 24 Rubber Act 
45.7 1953 29 Tea Act 
45.8 1955 42 Prize Competitions Act                                    
45.9 1956 90 Faridabad Development Corporation Act 
45.10 1963 22 Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act 
45.11 1972 13 Marine Products Export Development Authority Act   
45.12 1972 52 Antiquities and Art Treasures Act 
45.13 1975 4 Tobacco Board Act 
45.14 1979 5 Coconut Development Board Act 
45.15 1986 2 Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 
1985 
45.16 1986 10 Spices Board Act 
45.17 1986 63 Bureau of Indian Standards Act 

112 
 
45.18 1992 22 Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act 
45.19 1998 17 Lotteries (Regulation) Act 
45.20 2005 28 Special Economic Zones Act 
45.21 2006 32 Spirituous Preparations (Inter-State Trade and Commerce) Control (Repeal) Act 
   See Also,  
Transportation and Infrastructure:  
Multimodal Transportation of Goods Act 
Admission into, Emigration to, and Expulsion from, 
India: Land Ports Authority of India Act, 2010 
46 Transportation and 
Infrastructure 46.1 1855 32 Bengal Embankment Act                                     
46.2 1861 16 Stage-Carriages Act                                       
46.3 1873 8 Northern India Canal and Drainage Act 
46.4 1878 17 Northern India Ferries Act 
46.5 1879 14 Hackney-carriage Act 
46.6 1886 11 Indian Tramways Act                                       
46.7 1902 4 Indian Tramways Act                                       
46.8 1905 4 Indian Railway Board Act                                  
46.9 1934 22 Aircraft Act 
  46.10 1950 64 Road Transport Corporations Act 
46.11 1951 51 Railway Companies (Emergency Provisions) Act   

113 
 
46.12 1956 48 National Highways Act 
46.13 1956 49 River Boards Act 
46.14 1966 29 Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act   
46.15 1972 69 Carriage by Air Act   
46.16 1976 63 Betwa River Board Act 
46.17 1978 33 Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act 
46.18 1980 46 Brahmaputra Board Act 
46.19 1985 10 Calcutta Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Temporary Provisions 
Act 
46.20 1988 59 Motor Vehicles Act 
46.21 1988 68 National Highways Authority of India Act 
46.22 1989 24 Railways Act                                              
46.23 1993 28 Multimodal Transportation of Goods Act 
46.24 1993 49 Betwa River Board (Amendment) Act 
46.25 1994 55 Airports Authority of India Act 
46.26 2000 54 Central Road Fund Act 
46.27 2002 60 Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Act 
46.28 2003 13 Control of National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002 
46.29 2007 41 Carriage by Road Act 
46.30 2008 27 Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act 
   See Also,  
Criminal Justice:  

114 
 
Railway Protection Force Act, 
Tokyo Convention Act 
47 Tribunals 47.1 1956 33 Inter-State River Water Disputes Act 
47.2 1985 13 Administrative Tribunals Act   
47.3 1986 19 Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act 
47.4 1987 54 Railway Claims Tribunal Act 
47.5 1993 51 Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act 
47.6 2005 49 National Tax Tribunal Act  
47.7 2007 55 Armed Forces Tribunal Act 
47.8 2010 19 National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 
48 Universities and Technical 
Institutions 
48.1 1915 16 Banaras Hindu University Act                              
48.2 1920 40 Aligarh Muslim University Act   
48.3 1922 8 Delhi University Act                                       
48.4 1951 29 Visva-Bharati Act 
48.5 1956 25 All-India Institute of Medical Sciences Act 
48.6 1961 59 Institutes of Technology Act 
48.7 1966 51 Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,  Chandigarh, Act 
48.8 1966 53 Jawaharlal Nehru University Act 
48.9 1970 16 Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Act 
48.10 1973 24 North-Eastern Hill University Act 

115 
 
48.11 1974 39 University of Hyderabad Act 
48.12 1977 34 
Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital  (Acquisition and  Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act  
48.13 1980 52 Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and  Technology, 
Trivandrum, Act 
48.14 1985 50 Indira Gandhi National Open University Act 
48.15 1985 53 Pondicherry University Act 
48.16 1988 58 Jamia Millia Islamia Act 
48.17 1989 23 Assam University Act 
48.18 1989 35 Nagaland University Act 
48.19 1992 40 Central Agricultural University Act 
48.20 1993 45 Tezpur University Act 
48.21 1994 58 Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University Act 
48.22 1997 2 Maulana Azad National Urdu University Act, 1996 
48.23 1997 3 Mahatama Gandhi Antarashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Act, 1996 
48.24 1998 13 National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research  Act 
48.25 2000 8 Mizoram University Act 
48.26 2005 26 University of Allahabad Act 
48.27 2005 54 Manipur University Act 
48.28 2006 28 National Institute of Fashion Technology Act 

116 
 
48.29 2007 7 English and Foreign Languages University Act 
48.30 2007 8 Rajiv Gandhi University Act 
48.31 2007 9 Tripura University Act 
48.32 2007 10 Sikkim University Act 
  48.33 2007 29 National Institutes of Technology Act 
48.34 2007 52 Indira Gandhi National Tribal University Act 
48.35 2007 54 Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology Act 
48.36 2008 19 
Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, 
Puducherry Act 
48.37 2008 22 Indian Maritime University Act 
48.38 2009 8 South Asian University Act 
48.39 2009 25 Central University Act 
48.40 2010 39 Nalanda University Act, 2010 
48.41 2012 13 Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011     
48.42 2012 35 Rajiv Gandhi National Institutes of Youth Development Act, 2012   
48.43 2012 38 National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore Act, 2012                         
48.44 2013 26 The Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University Act, 2013 
48.45 2014 10 Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University Act, 2014     
48.46 2014 18 National Institute of Design Act, 2014 

117 
 
49 Woman and Child 
Development 49.1 1890 8 Guardians and Wards Act                                   
49.2 1897 8 Reformatory Schools Act                                   
49.3 1925 35 Madras, Bengal and Bombay Children (Supplementary) Act       
49.4 1956 105 Women's and Children's Institutions (Licensing) Act 
49.5 1960 10 Orphanages and Other Charitable Homes (Supervision  and  Control) Act 
49.6 1961 28 Dowry Prohibition Act 
49.7 1986 60 Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act 
49.8 1988 3 Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 
49.9 1990 20 National Commission for Women Act 
49.10 2000 56 Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 
49.11 2005 43 Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 
49.12 2006 4 Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 
49.13 2007 6 Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 
49.14 2013 14 Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Protection and 
Redressal) Act, 2013    
 
See Also 
Public Health:  
Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of 
Production, Supply and Distribution) Act  

118 
 
Labour: 
Children (Pledging of Labour) Act  
Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act  
Criminal Justice: Protection of Children From Sexual Offences Act, 2012  
 

119 
 
Appendix – II 
(refer para   of the report) 
 
LAWS RECOMMENDED FOR REPEAL BY VARIOUS COMMISSIONS BUT NOT UNDERTAKEN 
FOR REPEAL BY GOVERNMENT 
S. 
NO. 
NAME OF THE LAW NAME OF THE 
REPORT(S) WHICH 
RECOMMENDS REPEAL 
NAME OF THE 
CONCERNED 
DEPARTMENT 
(TENTATIVE) 
1. The Livestock Importation Act, 1898  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries, 
Ministry of 
Agriculture  
2. The Tobacco Board Act, 1975 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Commerce, Ministry 
of Commerce and 
Industry 
3. The Finance Commission 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1951 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance 
4. The Compulsory Deposit Scheme Act, 
1963 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 159th LCI Report 
Department of 
Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance 
5. The Additional Emoluments 
(Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 159th LCI Report 
Department of 
Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance 
6. The Shipping Development Fund 
Committee (Abolition) Act, 1986 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 159th LCI Report  
Department of 
Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance 
7. The Gift-Tax Act, 1958 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
8. The Central Excise Laws (Amendment 
and Validation) Act, 1982 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 159th LCI Report  
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
9. The Mineral Products (Additional 
Duties of Excise and Customs) Act, 
1958 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 159th LCI Report 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
10. The Young Persons (Harmful 
Publications) Act, 1956 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 

120 
 
11. The Indian Law Reports Act, 1875 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 96th LCI Report 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
12. The Continuance of Legal Proceedings 
Act, 1948 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 96th LCI Report 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
13. The Oriental Gas Company (Act 5 of 
1857) 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 96th LCI Report 
Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas 
14. The Oriental Gas Company, 1867 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 96th LCI Report 
Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas 
15. The Ganges Tolls Act, 1857 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 96th LCI Report 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
16. Amending Act, 1897 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
17. The Amending Act, 1901 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
18. The Amending Act, 1903 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
19. The Boundaries Act, 1847 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
20. The Central Sales Tax (Amendment) 
Act, 1969 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
21. The Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Shipping 
22. The Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(Amendment and Misc. Provisions) 
Act, 1978 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance 
23. The Excise (Malt Liquors) Act, 1890 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
24. The Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of 
Law and Justice 

121 
 
25. The Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
26. The Industrial Disputes (Amendment 
and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 
1956 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Labour 
and Employment 
27. The Land Acquisition (Amendment) 
Act, 1962 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
28. The Land Acquisition (Amendment and 
Validation) Act, 1967 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
29. The Laws Local Extent Act, 1874 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
30. The Legal Practitioner’s Act, 1879 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of 
Law and Justice 
31. The Parliamentary Proceedings 
(Protection of Publication) Repeal Act, 
1976 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
32. The Railway Companies (Emergency 
Provisions) Act, 1951 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Railways 
33. The Rent Recovery Act, 1853 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
34. The Reserve Bank of India 
(Amendment and Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1953 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance 
35. The Tobacco Cess Act, 1975 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
36. The Easements (Extending) Act, 1891 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
37. The Foreign Recruitment Act, 1874 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of External 
Affairs 
38. The Indian Railway Board Act, 1905 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Railways 
39. The Trading with the Enemy 
(Continuance of Emergency Provisions) 
Act, 1947 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 

122 
 
40. The Pondicherry (Extension Of Laws) 
Act, 1968 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
41. The Central Laws (Extension to Jammu 
and Kashmir) Act, 1968 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Jammu 
and Kashmir, Ministry 
of Home Affairs 
42. The Central Labour Laws (Extension to 
Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1970 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Jammu 
and Kashmir, Ministry 
of Home Affairs 
43. The Central Laws (Extension to 
Arunachal Pradesh) Act, 1993 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
44. The Diplomatic and Consular Officers 
(Oaths and Fees) (Extension to Jammu 
and Kashmir) Act, 1973 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of External 
Affairs 
45. The Goa, Daman and Diu (Extension of 
the Code of Civil Procedure and the 
Arbitration) Act, 1965 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
46. The Miscellaneous Personal Laws 
(Extension) Act, 1959  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
47. The Taxation Laws (Extension to 
Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1954 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Jammu 
and Kashmir, Ministry 
of Home Affairs 
48. The Taxation Laws (Extension to 
Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1972 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Jammu 
and Kashmir, Ministry 
of Home Affairs 
49. The Scheduled Areas (Assimilation of 
Laws) Act, 1951 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs 
50. The Scheduled Areas Act, 1953 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs 
51. The Shillong (Rifle Range Umlong) 
Cantonments Assimilation of Laws Act, 
1954 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
52. The West Godavari District 
(Assimilation of Laws on Federal 
Subjects) Acts, 1949 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
53. The Union Territories (Laws) Act, 1950 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
54. The Absorbed Areas (Laws) Act, 1954 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 

123 
 
55. The Central Provinces (Laws) Act, 
1875 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
56. The Cooch-Behar Assimilation of Laws 
Act, 1950 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
57. The Jammu and Kashmir (Extension of 
Laws) Act, 1956 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Jammu 
and Kashmir, Ministry 
of Home Affairs 
58. The Manipur and Tripura (Repeal of 
Laws) Act, 1958 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1 
and Appendix A-5) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
59. The Married Women’s Property 
(Extension) Act, 1959 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
60. The Opium and Revenue Laws 
(Extension of Application) Act, 1950 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
61. The Merged States (Laws) Act, 1949 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
62. The Union Duties of Excise 
(Distribution) Act, 1979 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
63. The Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 
1964 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
64. The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Health 
Research, Ministry of 
Health and Family 
Welfare 
65. The Hotel Receipts Tax Act,1980 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
66. The Delhi And Ajmer Rent Control 
(Nasirabad Cantonment Repeal) Act, 
1968 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Urban 
Development 
67. The Coking Coal Mines (Taking Over 
of Management) Act, 1973 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Coal 
68. The Coal Mines (Emergency 
Provisions) Act, 1971 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Coal 

124 
 
69. The Laxmi Ratan and Atherton West 
Cotton Mills (Taking over of 
Management) Act, 1976 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Textiles 
70. The Sick Textile Undertakings (Taking 
Over of Management) Act, 1972 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Textiles 
71. The Textiles Undertakings (Taking 
over of Management) Act, 1983 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Ministry of Textiles 
72. The Bangalore Marriage Validation 
Act, 1936 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice  
73. The Bar Councils (Validation of State 
Laws) Act, 1956 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of 
Law and Justice 
74. The Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Delhi 
Validation of Appointments and 
Proceedings Act, 1971 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
75. The Decrees and Orders Validating 
Act, 1936 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of Legal 
Affairs, Ministry of 
Law and Justice 
76. The Destructive Insects and Pests 
(Amendments and Validation) Act, 
1992 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Agriculture and 
Cooperation, Ministry 
of Agriculture 
77. The Himachal Pradesh Legislative 
Assembly (Constitution and 
Proceedings) Validation Act, 1958 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of State, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice  
78. The Hindu Marriage (Validation of 
Proceedings) Act, 1960 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
79. The Jubbalpore and Chhattisgarh 
Divisions (Divorce Proceedings 
Validation) Act, 1935 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
80. The Marriages Validation Act, 1892 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
81. The Mussalman Wakf Validating Act, 
1913 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
82. The Mussalman Wakf Validating Act, 
1930 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 

125 
 
83. The Part B State Marriages Validating 
Act, 1952 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
84. The Professions Tax Limitation 
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 1949 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
and 96th LCI Report 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
85. The Travancore-Cochin Vehicles 
Taxation (Amendment and Validation) 
Act, 1959 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
86. Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 
1860 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-3) 
Ministry of Shipping 
 
87. Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 
1849 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-3) 
Ministry of Shipping 
 
88. Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-3) 
Ministry of Shipping 
 
89. Armed Forces (Special Powers) 
Ordinance, 1942 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Department of 
Defence, Ministry of 
Defence 
90. Bank Notes (Declaration of Holdings) 
Ordinance, 1946 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Department of 
Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance 
91. Collective Fines Ordinance, 1942 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Department of Home, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
92. Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 
1944 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Department of Home, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
93. Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 
1946 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Department of Home, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
94. Military Nursing Service Ordinance, 
1949 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Department of 
Defence, Ministry of 
Defence 
95. Public Health (Emergency Provisions) 
Ordinance, 1944 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Department of Home, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
96. Secunderabad Marriage Validating 
Ordinance, 1945 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 

126 
 
97. Termination of War (Definition) 
Ordinance, 1946 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Department of 
Defence, Ministry of 
Defence 
98. War Gratuities (Income-Tax 
Exemption) Ordinance, 1945 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Ministry of Labour 
and Employment 
99. War Injuries Ordinance, 1941 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4) 
Ministry of Labour 
and Employment 
100. The Agriculturist Loans Act, 1884  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
101. The Ajmer Tenancy and Land Records 
Act, 1950 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
102. The Assam Municipal (Manipur 
Amendment) Act, 1961 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
103. The Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil 
Courts Act, 1887  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice  
104. The Bengal Alluvion and Diluvion Act, 
1847 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
105. The Bengal, Bihar and Orissa and 
Assam Laws Act, 1912 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
106. The Bengal Bonded Warehouse 
Association Act, 1838 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
107. The Bengal Bonded Warehouse 
Association Act, 1854 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
108. The Bengal Choukidari Act, 1856  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
109. The Bengal Districts Act, 1836 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
110. The Bengal Embankment Act, 1855 
  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
111. The Bengal Ghatwali Laws Act, 1859 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 

127 
 
112. The Bengal Indigo Contract Act, 1836 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
113. The Bengal Land Holder's Attendance 
Act, 1848 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
114. The Bengal Land Revenue Sales Act, 
1841 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
115. The Bengal Land Revenue Sales Act, 
1859 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
116. The Bengal Military Police Act, 1892 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
117. The Bengal Rent Act, 1859 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
118. The Bengal Suppression of Terrorist 
Outrages (Supplementary) Act, 1932 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
119. The Bengal Tenancy Act, 1885 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Land Resources 
120. The Bihar Land Reforms Laws 
(Regulating Mines and Minerals) 
Validation Act, 1969 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Land Resources 
121. The Births, Deaths and Marriages 
Registration Act, 1886 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Home, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
122. The Bombay Civil Courts Act, 1869 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
123. The Bombay Municipal Debentures 
Act, 1876 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
124. The Bombay Rent-Free Estates Act, 
1852 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
125. The Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 
1876 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 

128 
 
126. The Boundary-marks, Bombay, 1846 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
127. The Broach and Kaira Incumbered 
Estates Act, 1877 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
128. The Calcutta Land Revenue Act, 1850 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
129. The Calcutta Land Revenue Act, 1856 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
130. The Central Provinces (Courts of 
Wards) Act, 1895 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries, 
Ministry of 
Agriculture 
131. The Central Provinces Financial 
Commissioner’s Act, 1908 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
132. The Central Provinces Land Revenue 
Act, 1881  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
133. The Central Provinces Tenancy Act, 
1898 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
134. The Chota Nagpur Encumbered Estates 
Act, 1876 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
135. The City of Bombay Municipal 
(Supplementary) Act, 1888 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
136. The Coroners Act, 1871 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice  
137. The Dekkhan Agriculturists Relief Act, 
1879 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
138. The Disturbed Areas (Special Courts), 
Act, 1976 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
139. The Essential Services Maintenance 
(Assam) Act, 1980 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 

129 
 
140. The Fort William Act, 1881 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
141. The Goa, Daman and Diu (Absorbed 
Employees) Act, 1956 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
142. The Government Grants Act, 1895 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
143. The Government Management of 
Private Estates Act, 1892 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
144. The Hackney Carriage Act, 1879 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Urban 
Development 
145. The Howrah Offences Act, 1857 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
146. The Improvement in Towns Act, 1850 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Urban 
Development 
147. The Indian Tramways Act, 1886 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Urban 
Development 
148. The Indian Tramways Act, 1902 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Urban 
Development 
149. The Junagarh Administration (Property) 
Act, 1948 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
150. The Local Authorities (Loans) Act, 
1948 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance 
151. The Local Authorities Pensions and 
Gratuities Act, 1919 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of 
Personnel and 
Training, Ministry of 
Personnel, Public 
Grievances and 
Pensions 
152. The Madras, Bengal and Bombay 
Children (Supplementary) Act, 1925  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Women 
and Child 
Development 
153. The Madras City Civil Court Act, 1892 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 

130 
 
154. The Madras City Land Revenue Act, 
1851 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
155. The Madras Civil Courts Act, 1872 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
156. The Madras Compulsory Labour Act, 
1858 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Labour 
and Employment 
157. The Madras District Police Act, 1859 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
158. The Madras Forest (Validation) Act, 
1882 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of 
Environment and 
Forests 
159. The Madras Public Property 
(Malversation) Act, 1837 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
160. The Madras Rent and Revenue Sales 
Act, 1839 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
161. The Madras Revenue Commission Act, 
1849 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
162. The Madras Uncovenanted Officers 
Act, 1857 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of 
Personnel and 
Training, Ministry of 
Personnel, Public 
Grievances and 
Pensions 
163. The Mangrol and Manavadar 
(Administration of Property) Act, 1949 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
164. The Municipal Taxation Act, 1881 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance  
165. The Murshidabad Act, 1891 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
166. The Murshidabad Estates 
Administration Act, 1933 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
167. The North-Eastern Provinces Village 
and Road Police Act, 1873 (Act 16 of 
1873) [Error in the Jain Commission 
Report. Act 16 of 1873 is the North-
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 

131 
 
Western Provinces Village and Road 
Police Act, 1873] 
168. The Orissa Weights and Measures 
(Delhi Repeal) Act, 1958 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of 
Consumer Affairs, 
Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution 
169. The Partition Act, 1893 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
170. The Partition of Revenue-paying 
Estates Act, 1863  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
171. The Police Act, 1861 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
172. The Police Act, 1888 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
173. The Police Act, 1949 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
174. The Public Gambling Act, 1867 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
175. The Public Suits Validation Act, 1932 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
and 96th LCI Report 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
176. The Provisions of the Panchayats 
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) 
Act, 1996 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj 
177. The Punjab District Boards Act, 1883 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
178. The Revenue Commissioners Bombay 
Act, 1842 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
179. The Sales of Land for Revenue Arrears, 
1845 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
180. The Sarais Act, 1867 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Tourism 

132 
 
181. The Scheduled Securities (Hyderabad) 
Act, 1949 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of 
Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance 
182. The Sheriff of Calcutta (Power of 
Custody) Act, 1931 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
183. The Shore Nuisances (Bombay and 
Kolaba) Act, 1853 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of 
Environment and 
Forests  
184. Sir Dinshaw Maneekjee Petit Act, 1893 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
185. Sir Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy Baronetcy Act, 
1915 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
186 The Sonthal Paraganas Act, 1855 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
187. The Sonthal Paraganas Act, 1857 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
188. The Stage Carriages Act, 1861 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Urban 
Development 
189. The Tobacco Duty (Town of Bombay) 
Act, 1857 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
190. The Usurious Loans Act, 1918  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
191. The Usury Laws Repeal Act, 1855 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
192. The Waste Lands (Claims) Act, 1863 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
193. The Bikrama Singh's Estates Act, 1883 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
194. The King of Oudh's Estate Act, 1887 
  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 

133 
 
195. The King of Oudh's Estate Act, 1888 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
196. The King of Oudh's Estate Validation 
Act, 1917 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
197. The Mahendra Pratap Singh Estate 
(Repeal) Act, 1960 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
198. The Mirzapur Stone Mahal Act, 1886 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Mines 
199. The Punjab Disturbed Areas Act, 1983 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs  
200. The Punjab Gram Panchayat Samithi 
and Zilla Parishad (Chandigarh) Repeal  
Act, 1994 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj 
201. The Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
202. The Punjab Laws Act, 1872 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
203. The Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Department of Land 
Resources, Ministry of 
Rural Development 
204. The Government Buildings Act, 1899 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-5) 
Ministry of Urban 
Development 
205. The Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 
1954  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
206. The Andhra Pradesh and Madras 
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
207. The Andhra Pradesh and Mysore 
(Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
208. 
The Andhra State Act, 1953  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
209. The Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) 
Act, 1951 (47 of 1951). 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 

134 
 
210. 
The Assam Reorganisation 
(Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969). 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
211. 
The Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration 
of Boundaries) Act, 1968  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
212. 
The Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer 
of Territories) Act, 1956 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
213. 
The Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
214. 
The Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
215. 
The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Act, 1961  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
216. The Goa, Daman and Diu 
(Administration) Act, 1962  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
217. The Goa, Daman and Diu 
Reorganisation Act, 1987  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
218. The Haryana and Uttar Pradesh 
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1978  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
219. The Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur 
(New State) Act, 1954  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
220. The Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi 
Islands (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
221. The Legislative Assembly of Nagaland 
(Change in Representation) Act, 1968  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
222. The Lushai Hills District (Change of 
Name) Act, 1954  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
223. The Naga Hills-Tuensang Areas Act, 
1957  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 

135 
 
224. The North-Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
225. The Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
226. The Pondicherry (Extension) Act, 1962  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
227. The Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
228. The Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh 
(Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
229. The State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 
1986  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
230. The State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 
1970  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
231. The State of Mizoram Act, 1986  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
232. The State of Nagaland Act, 1962  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
233. The States Reorganisation Act, 1956  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix B) 
Department of States, 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
234. The Calcutta High Court (Extension of 
Jurisdiction) Act, 1953  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix C) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
235. The Calcutta High Court (Jurisdiction 
Limits) Act, 1919  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix C) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
236. The High Court of Bombay (Extension 
to Goa, Daman and Diu) Act, 1981  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix C) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
237. The High Court at Patna (Establishment 
of a Permanent Bench at Ranchi) Act, 
1976  
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix C) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 

136 
 
238. The High Courts (Seals) Act, 1950  PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix C) 
Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law and 
Justice 
239. The Arya Marriages Validation Act, 
1937 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
240. The Caste Disablities Removal Act, 
1850 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
 
241. The Cutchi Memons Act, 1938 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
 
242. The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages 
Act, 1939 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
243. The Hindu Disposition of Property Act, 
1956 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
 
244. The Indian Christian Marriage Act, 
1872 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
245. The Indian Divorce Act, 1869 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
246. The Indian Matrimonial Causes (War 
Marriages) Act, 1948 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
247. The Kazis Act, 1880 PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
 
248. The Married Women’s Rights to 
Property Act, 1874 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
 
249. 
The Muslim Law (Shariat) Application 
Act, 1937 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 

137 
 
250. The Converts’ Marriage Dissolution 
Act, 1866 
PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix D) 
Legislative 
Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice 
251. The Exchange of Prisoners Act, 1948 96th LCI Report Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
252. The Transfer of Evacuee Deposits Act, 
1954 
96th LCI Report Department of Internal 
Security, Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
253.  The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) 
Act, 1988 
159th LCI Report Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance 
 

138 
 
Appendix – III 
(refer para   of the report) 
 
Repealed Laws that are listed in the Law Ministry Chronological List of Central Acts  
Sl. No.  Year  Act. No.  Name  Repealing Provision  
1.   1857  19  Joint Stock Companies Act  Repealed by Schedule III to Section 219 of the Indian 
Companies Act, 1866  
2.   1865  3  Carriers Act  Repealed by Section 22(1) of the Carriage by Road Act, 
2007  
3.   1889  1  Metal Tokens Act  Repealed by Section 27(a) of the Coinage Act, 2011  
4.   1894  1  Land Acquisition Act  
Repealed by Section 114(1) of the Right to Fair  
Compensation and Transparency in Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013  
5.   1899  13  Glanders and Farcy Act  Repealed by Section 45(i) of the Prevention and Control of 
Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Act, 2009  
6.   1906  3  Coinage Act  Repealed by Section 27(b) of the Coinage Act, 2011  
7.   1910  5  Dourine Act  Repealed by Section 45(ii) of the Prevention and Control of 
Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Act, 2009  
8.   1918  2  Cinematograph Act  Repealed by Section 18 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952  
9.   1918  22  Bronze Coin (Legal Tender) Act  Repealed by Section 27(c) of the Coinage Act, 2011  
10.   1920  47  Imperial Bank of India Act  Repealed by Section 57(1) of the State Bank of India Act, 
1955  

139 
 
11.   1920  10  Indian Securities Act  Repealed by Section 35(1) of Government Securities Act, 
2006  
12.   1923  23  Legal Practitioners (Women) Act  Repealed by the Schedule to Section 50(5)(b) of the 
Advocates Act, 1961    
13.   1924  2  Cantonments Act  Repealed by Section 360(1) of the Cantonments Act, 2006  
14.   1926  21  Legal Practitioners (Fees) Act  Repealed by the Schedule to Section 50(5)(b) of the 
Advocates Act, 1961    
15.   1929  19  Child Marriage Restraint Act  Repealed by Section 21(1) of the Prohibition of Child 
Marriage Act, 2006  
16.   1941  5  Assam Rifles Act  Repealed by Section 168(1) of the Assam Rifles Act, 2006  
17.   1951  64  Evacuee Interest (Separation) Act  Repealed by the Schedule to Section 2 of The Displaced 
Persons Claims And Other Laws Repeal Act, 2005  
18.   1953  32  Collection of Statistics Act  Repealed by Section 34(1) of the Collection of Statistics 
Act, 2009  
19.   1954  37  Prevention of Food Adulteration Act  Repealed by Schedule II to Section 97(1) of the Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006  
20.   1956  1  Companies Act  Repealed by Section 465(1) of the Companies Act, 2013  
21.   1963  52  Unit Trust of India Act  Repealed by Section 21(1) of the Unit Trust of India 
(Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002  
22.   1969  54  Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
Practices Act  Repealed by Section 66(1) of the Competition Act, 2002  
23.   1971  52  Small Coins (Offences) Act  Repealed by Section 27(e) of the Coinage Act, 2011  

140 
 
24.   1972  35  Delhi Co-operative Societies Act  Repealed by Section 141 of the Delhi Co-operative 
Societies Act, 2003  
25.   1976  33  Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) 
Act  
Repealed by Section 2 of the Urban Land Ceiling and 
Regulation Repeal Act, 1999  
26.   1976  87  Delhi Agricultural Produce Marketing 
(Regulation) Act  
Repealed by Section 124(1) of the Delhi Agricultural 
Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1998.  
27.   1976  60  Standards of Weights and Measures 
Act  
Repealed by Section 57(1) of the Legal Metrology Act, 
2009  
28.   1976  49  Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act  Repealed by Section 54(1) of the Foreign Contribution 
(Regulation) Act, 2010  
29.   1984  36  Punjab State Legislature (Delegation 
of Powers) Act  
Repealed by the First Schedule to Section 2 of the 
Repealing and Amending Act, 1988  
30.   1985  54  Standards of Weights and Measures 
(Enforcement) Act  
Repealed by Section 57(1) of the Legal Metrology Act, 
2009  
31.   1986  56  Delhi Fire Prevention and Fire Safety 
Act  
Repealed by Section 65(b) of the Delhi Fire Safety Act, 
2007  
32.   1995  27  National Environment Tribunal Act  Repealed by Section 38(1) of the National Green Tribunal 
Act, 2010  
33.   1997  22  National Environment Appellate 
Authority Act  
Repealed by Section 38(1) of the National Green Tribunal 
Act, 2010  
34.   1998  14  Electricity Regulatory Commission 
Act  Repealed by Section 185(1) of the Electricity Act, 2003  
  
  

141 
 
Appendix – IV 
(refer para   of the report) 
 
List of Laws Passed by Parliament that are not listed on the Law Ministry’s Chronological List of Central Acts 
  
Sl.  
No.  
Year  Act. No.  Short Title  
1.   2008  23  National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra Stretch of Rivers, Geonkhali-Charbatia Stretch of East 
Coast Canal, Charbatia-Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Act  
2.   2008  24  
National Waterway (Kakinada -Puducherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly Tank, 
Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch 
of River Krishna) Act, 2008  
3.   2008  27  Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act  
4.   2008  33  Unorganised Workers' Social Security Act  
5.   2008  34  National Investigation Agency Act  
   

142 
 
Appendix – V 
(refer para   of the report) 
 
LIST OF STATUTES FOR FURTHER STUDY WITH A VIEW TO ASSESS 
SUITABILITY FOR REPEAL 
S. No. Act Year Act No. Category 
     
1.  Bengal Indigo Contracts 
Act 1836 10 Land Laws 
2.  
Bengal Districts Act 1836 21 
Laws Relating to 
Administration and 
Development of Local Areas 
3.  Madras Public Property 
Malverisation Act 1837 36 Land Laws 
4.  Bengal Bonded 
Warehouse Association 
Act 1838 5 Trade and Commerce 
5.  
Coasting Vessels Act 1838 19 
Maritime Law; Shipping and 
Inland Navigation 
6.  Madras Rent and Revenue 
Sales Act 1839 7 Land Revenue 
7.  Bengal Land Revenue 
Sales Act 1841 12 Land Revenue 
8.  Revenue, Bombay 1842 13 Land Revenue 
9.  Revenue Commissioners, 
Bombay 1842 17 Land Revenue 
10.  Sales of Land for Revenue 
Arrears  1845 1 Land Revenue 
11.  
Boundary-marks, Bombay 1846 3 
Maritime Law; Shipping and 
Inland Navigation 
12.  
Boundaries 1847 1 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
13.  Bengal Alluvion and 
Diluvion Act 1847 9 Land Laws  
14.  Bengal Landholders' 
Attendance Act 1848 20 Land Revenue 
15.  Madras Revenue 
Commissioner Act 1849 10 Land Revenue 

143 
 
16.  Public Accountants' 
Defaults Act 1850 12 Government Employees 
17.  Judicial Officers 
Protection Act 1850 18 Administration of Justice 
18.  Caste Disabilities Removal 
Act 1850 21 Personal Laws 
19.  Calcutta Land Revenue 
Act 1850 23 Land Revenue 
20.  Forfeited Deposits Act 1850 25 Land Laws 
21.  
Improvement in Towns Act 1850 26 
Laws Relating to 
Administration and 
Development of Local Areas 
22.  Public Servants (Inquiries) 
Act 1850 37 Government Employees 
23.  Indian Tolls Act 1851 8 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
24.  Madras City Land 
Revenue Act 1851 12 Land Revenue 
25.  Sheriffs' Fees Act 1852 8 Administration of Justice 
26.  Bombay Rent-free Estates 
Act 1852 11 Land Laws 
27.  Rent Recovery Act 1853 6 Land Revenue 
28.  Shore Nuisances (Bombay 
and Kolaba) Act 1853 11 
Maritime Law; Shipping and 
Inland Navigation 
29.  Bengal Bonded 
Warehouse Association 
Act 1854 5 Trade and Commerce 
30.  Police (Agra), Act 1854 16 Criminal Justice 
31.  Legal Representatives' 
Suits Act 1855 12 Civil Procedure  
32.  Usury Laws Repeal Act 1855 28 Financial Laws 
33.  
Bengal Embankment Act 1855 32 
Transportation and 
Infrastructure 
34.  
Sonthal Parganas Act 1855 37 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
35.  Indian Bills of Lading Act 1856 9 Trade and Commerce 
36.  Calcutta Land Revenue 
Act 1856 18 Land Revenue 
37.  Bengal Chaukidari Act 1856 20 Criminal Justice 

144 
 
38.  Tobacco Duty (Town of 
Bombay) Act 1857 4 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
39.  Oriental Gas Company 1857 5 Energy Laws 
40.  Madras Uncovenanted 
Officers' Act 1857 7 Government Employees 
41.  
Sonthal Parganas Act 1857 10 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
42.  Howrah Offences Act 1857 21 Criminal Justice 
43.  Madras Compulsory 
Labour Act 1858 1 Labour Laws 
44.  Bengal Ghatwali Lands 
Act 1859 5 Land Laws 
45.  Bengal Rent Act 1859 10 Rent and Tenancy 
46.  Bengal Land Revenue 
Sales Act 1859 11 Land Revenue 
47.  Calcutta Pilots Act 1859 12 Criminal Justice 
48.  Madras District Police Act 1859 24 Criminal Justice 
49.  
Stage-Carriages Act 1861 16 
Transportation and 
Infrastructure 
50.  
Government Seal Act 1862 3 
Residuary Laws relating to 
Administration 
51.  Excise (Spirits) Act 1863 16 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
52.  Partition of Revenue-
paying Estates 1863 19 Land Laws 
53.  Waste-Lands (Claims) Act 1863 23 Land Laws 
54.  Indian Tolls Act 1864 15 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
55.  Converts' Marriage 
Dissolution Act 1866 21 Personal Laws 
56.  Oudh Sub-settlement Act 1866 26 Land Laws 
57.  Ganges Tolls Act 1867 1 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
58.  Public Gambling Act 1867 3 Criminal Justice 
59.  Oriental Gas Company 1867 11 Energy Laws 
60.  Sarais Act 1867 22 Trade and Commerce 
61.  Oudh Estates Act 1869 1 Land Laws 
62.  Bombay Civil Courts Act 1869 14 Administration of Justice 
63.  Court Fees Act 1870 7 Administration of Justice 

145 
 
64.  Oudh Taluqdars' Relief 
Act 1870 24 Land Laws 
65.  Bengal Sessions Courts 
Act 1871 19 Administration of Justice 
66.  
Dehra Dun Act 1871 21 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
67.  Pensions Act 1871 23 Government Employees 
68.  
Punjab Laws Act 1872 4 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
69.  Indian Christian Marriage 
Act 1872 15 Personal Laws 
70.  Madras Civil Courts Act 1873 3 Administration of Justice 
71.  Government Savings 
Banks Act 1873 5 Banking and Insurance 
72.  Northern India Canal and 
Drainage Act 1873 8 
Transportation and 
Infrastructure 
73.  North-Western Provinces 
Village and Road Police 
Act 1873 16 Criminal Justice 
74.  Married Women's Property 
Act 1874 3 Personal Laws 
75.  Foreign Recruiting Act 1874 4 International Relations 
76.  
Laws Local Extent Act 1874 15 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
77.  Indian Law Reports Act 1875 18 Administration of Justice 
78.  Central Provinces Laws 
Act 1875 20 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
79.  Chota Nagpur 
Encumbered Estates Act 1876 6 Land Laws 
80.  Bombay Revenue 
Jurisdiction Act 1876 10 Land Revenue 
81.  Bombay Municipal 
Debentures Act 1876 15 Financial Laws 
82.  
Oudh Laws Act  1876 18 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
83.  Dramatic Performances 
Act 1876 19 Criminal Justice 
84.  Broach and Kaira 
Incumbered Estates Act 1877 14 Land Laws 

146 
 
85.  Indian Treasure-trove Act 1878 6 Property Law 
86.  Elephants' Preservation 
Act 1879 6 Environmental Law 
87.  Dekkhan Agriculturists' 
Relief Act 1879 17 
Agriculture and Animal 
Husbandry 
88.  Raipur and Khattra Laws 
Act 1879 19 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
89.  Municipal Taxation Act 1881 11 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
90.  Fort William Act 1881 13 Criminal Justice 
91.  Obstructions in Fairways 
Act 1881 16 
Maritime Law; Shipping and 
Inland Navigation 
92.  Central Provinces Land 
Revenue Act 1881 18 Land Revenue 
93.  Madras Forest (Validation) 
Act 1882 21 Environmental Law 
94.  Bikrama Singh's Estates 
Act 1883 10 Land Laws 
95.  Land Improvement Loans 
Act 1883 19 Land Laws 
96.  
Punjab District Boards 
Act 1883 20 
Laws Relating to 
Administration and 
Development of Local Areas 
97.  
Agriculturists' Loans Act 1884 12 
Agriculture and Animal 
Husbandry 
98.  Bengal Tenancy Act 1885 8 Rent and Tenancy 
99.  Land Acquisition (Mines) 
Act 1885 18 Land Laws 
100.  Mirzapur Stone Mahal Act 1886 5 Industries 
101.  Births, Deaths and 
Marriages Registration Act 1886 6 
Symbols, Records and 
Statistics 
102.  
Indian Tramways Act 1886 11 
Transportation and 
Infrastructure 
103.  Oudh Wasikas Act 1886 21 Labour Laws 
104.  Bengal, Agra and Assam 
Civil Courts Act 1887 12 Administration of Justice 
105.  Punjab Tenancy Act 1887 16 Rent and Tenancy 
106.  Punjab Land Revenue Act 1887 17 Land Revenue 
107.  King of Oudh's Estate Act 1887 19 Land Laws 

147 
 
108.  Indian Tolls Act 1888 8 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
109.  City of Bombay Municipal 
(Supplementary) Act 1888 12 Administration of Justice 
110.  King of Oudh's Estate Act 1888 14 Land Laws 
111.  Revenue Recovery Act 1890 1 Land Revenue 
112.  Excise (Malt Liquors) Act 1890 13 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
113.  
United Provinces Act 1890 20 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
114.  Murshidabad Act 1891 15 Land Laws 
115.  Colonial Courts of 
Admiralty (India) Act 1891 16 Administration of Justice 
116.  Marriages Validation Act 1892 2 Personal Laws 
117.  
Bengal Military Police Act 1892 5 
Defence of India and Armed 
Forces 
118.  Madras City Civil Court 
Act  1892 7 Administration of Justice 
119.  Government Management 
of Private Estates Act 1892 10 Land Revenue 
120.  Porahat Estate Act 1893 2 Land Laws 
121.  Government Grants Act 1895 15 Property Law 
122.  Epidemic Diseases Act 1897 3 Public Health 
123.  
Amending Act 1897 5 
Residuary Laws relating to 
Administration 
124.  
Reformatory Schools Act 1897 8 
Woman and Child 
Development 
125.  
Indian Short Titles Act 1897 14 
Residuary Laws relating to 
Administration 
126.  Lepers Act 1898 3 Public Health 
127.  Live-stock Importation Act 1898 9 Public Health 
128.  Central Provinces Tenancy 
Act 1898 11 Rent and Tenancy 
129.  
Government Buildings Act 1899 4 
Laws Relating to 
Administration and 
Development of Local Areas 
130.  
Church of Scotland Kirk 
Sessions Act 1899 23 
Charitable and Religious 
Institutions; Co-operative 
Societies 

148 
 
131.  Central Provinces Court of 
Wards Act 1899 24 Property Law 
132.  Indian Tolls (Army and Air 
Force) Act 1901 2 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
133.  
Amending Act 1901 11 
Residuary Laws relating to 
Administration 
134.  
Indian Tramways Act 1902 4 
Transportation and 
Infrastructure 
135.  
Amending Act 1903 1 
Residuary Laws relating to 
Administration 
136.  
Indian Railway Board Act 1905 4 
Transportation and 
Infrastructure 
137.  Central Provinces 
Financial Commissioners 
Act 1908 13 Land Revenue 
138.  Indian Criminal Law 
Amendment Act 1908 14 Criminal Justice 
139.  Prevention of Seditious 
Meetings Act 1911 10 Criminal Justice 
140.  
Co-operative Societies Act 1912 2 
Charitable and Religious 
Institutions; Co-operative 
Societies 
141.  Bengal, Bihar and Orissa 
and Assam Laws Act 1912 7 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
142.  Wild Birds and Animals 
Protection Act 1912 8 Environmental Law 
143.  
Delhi Laws Act 1912 13 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
144.  Official Trustees Act 1913 2 Property Law 
145.  White Phosphorus 
Matches Prohibition Act 1913 5 Industries 
146.  
Mussalman Wakf 
Validating Act 1913 6 
Charitable and Religious 
Institutions; Co-operative 
Societies 
147.  Local Authorities Loans 
Act 1914 9 Financial Laws 
148.  
Delhi Laws Act 1915 7 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
149.  Sir Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy 
Baronetcy Act 1915 10 Property Law 

149 
 
150.  Indian Medical Degrees 
Act 1916 7 
Legal, Medical and Other 
Professions 
151.  Hindu Disposition of 
Property Act 1916 15 Personal Laws 
152.  
Destruction of Records Act 1917 5 
Symbols, Records and 
Statistics 
153.  King of Oudh's Estate 
Validation Act 1917 12 Land Laws 
154.  Post Office Cash 
Authorities Act 1917 18 Financial Laws 
155.  Usurious Loans Act 1918 10 Financial Laws 
156.  Local Authorities Pensions 
and Gratuities Act  1919 1 Government Employees 
157.  
Passport (Entry into India) 
Act 1920 34 
Citizenship; Admission into; 
Emigration to, and 
Expulsion from, India; and 
Cross-border Movement 
158.  Maintenance Orders 
Enforcement Act 1921 18 Civil Procedure  
159.  Police (Incitement to 
Disaffection) Act 1922 22 Criminal Justice 
160.  Indian Naval Armament 
Act 1923 7 
Defence of India and Armed 
Forces 
161.  
Mussalman Wakf Act 1923 42 
Charitable and Religious 
Institutions; Co-operative 
Societies 
162.  Indian Soldiers (Litigation) 
Act 1925 4 
Defence of India and Armed 
Forces 
163.  Bengal Criminal Law 
Amendment 
(Supplementary) 1925 8 Criminal Justice 
164.  Madras, Bengal and 
Bombay Children 
(Supplementary) Act 1925 35 
Woman and Child 
Development 
165.  
Indian Bar Councils Act 1926 38 
Legal, Medical and Other 
Professions 
166.  Hindu Inheritance 
(Removal of Disabilities) 
Act 1928 12 Personal Laws 
167.  Transfer of Property 
(Amendment) 
Supplementary Act 1929 21 Property Law 

150 
 
168.  Hindu Gains of Learning 
Act 1930 30 Personal Laws 
169.  
Mussalman Wakf 
Validating Act 1930 32 
Charitable and Religious 
Institutions; Co-operative 
Societies 
170.  Provisional Collection of 
Taxes Act 1931 16 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
171.  Sheriff of Calcutta (Power 
of Custody) Act 1931 20 Criminal Justice 
172.  Public Suits Validation 
Act 1932 11 Civil Procedure  
173.  Criminal Law 
(Amendment) Act 1932 23 Criminal Justice 
174.  Bengal Suppression of 
Terrorist Outrages 
(Supplementary) Act 1932 24 Criminal Justice 
175.  Children (Pledging of 
Labour) Act 1933 2 Labour Laws 
176.  Murshidabad Estate 
Administration Act 1933 23 Land Laws 
177.  Sugarcane Act 1934 15 Food and Public Distribution 
178.  Assam Criminal Law 
Amendment 
(Supplementary) Act 1934 27 Criminal Justice 
179.  Jubbalpore and 
Chhattisgarh Divisions 
(Divorce Proceedings) 
Validation Act 1935 13 Personal Laws 
180.  Decrees and Orders 
Validating Act 1936 5 Administration of Justice 
181.  Bangalore Marriages 
Validating Act 1936 16 Personal Laws 
182.  Agricultural Produce 
(Grading and Marking) Act 1937 1 Consumer Affairs 
183.  Arya Marriage Validation 
Act 1937 19 Personal Laws 
184.  Criminal Law 
(Amendment) Act 1938 20 Criminal Justice 
185.  Employers' Liability Act 1938 24 Labour Laws 
186.  Registration of Foreigners 
Act 1939 16 Citizenship; Admission into; 
Emigration to, and 

151 
 
Expulsion from, India; and 
Cross-border Movement 
187.  
Berar Laws Act 1941 4 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
188.  Delhi Restriction of Uses 
of Land Act 1941 12 Land Laws 
189.  Railways (Local 
Authorities' Taxation) Act 1941 25 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
190.  War Injuries 
(Compensation Insurance) 
Act 1943 23 Labour Laws  
191.  Public Debt Act 1944 18 Financial Laws 
192.  Mica Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund Act 1946 22 Labour Laws 
193.  Rehabilitation Finance 
Administration Act 1948 12 Social Welfare 
194.  Junagarh Administration 
(Property) Act 1948 26 Land Laws 
195.  Continuance of Legal 
Proceedings Act 1948 38 Administration of Justice 
196.  Indian Matrimonial 
Causes (War Marriages) 
Act 1948 40 Personal Laws 
197.  Bombay Public Security 
Measures (Delhi 
Amendment) Act 1948 52 Criminal Justice 
198.  Mangrol and Manavadar 
(Administration of 
Property) Act  1949 2 Land Laws 
199.  West Godavari District 
(Assimilation of Laws on 
Federal Subjects) Act 1949 20 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
200.  
Delhi Hotels (Control of 
Accommodation) Act 1949 24 
Laws Relating to 
Administration of Union 
Territories and Delhi 
201.  Requisitioned Land 
(Apportionment of 
Compensation) Act 1949 51 Land Laws 
202.  
Merged States (Laws) Act 1949 59 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
203.  State Bank of Samastha 
Act 1950 * Banking and Insurance 

152 
 
204.  Union Territories (Laws) 
Act 1950 30 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
205.  Opium and Revenue Laws 
(Extension of Application) 
Act  1950 33 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
206.  Ajmer Tenancy and Land 
Records Act 1950 42 Rent and Tenancy 
207.  Road Transport 
Corporations Act 1950 64 
Transportation and 
Infrastructure 
208.  Cooch-Behar (Assimilation 
of Laws) Act 1950 67 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
209.  Khaddar (Protection of 
Name) Act 1950 78 Intellectual Property Law 
210.  
Part B States (Laws) Act 1951 3 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
211.  Companies (Donations to 
National Funds) Act 1951 54 Corporate Laws 
212.  Part C States 
Miscellaneous Laws 
(Repealing) Act 1951 66 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
213.  Part B States Marriages 
Validating Act 1952 1 Personal Laws 
214.  Indian Independence 
Pakistan Courts (Pending 
Proceedings) Act 1952 9 Administration of Justice 
215.  Delhi and Ajmer Rent 
Control Act 1952 38 Rent and Tenancy 
216.  Lushai Hills District 
(Change of Name) Act 1954 18 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
217.  State Acquisition of Lands 
for Union Purposes 
(Validation) Act 1954 23 Land Laws 
218.  Chandernagore (Merger) 
Act 1954 36 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
219.  Bar Councils (Validation 
of State Laws) Act 1956 4 
Legal, Medical and Other 
Professions 
220.  Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Act 1956 36 Labour Laws 
221.  Newspaper (Price and 
Page) Act 1956 45 
Media, Communications and 
Publishing 

153 
 
222.  Young Persons (Harmful 
Publications) Act 1956 93 
Media, Communications and 
Publishing 
223.  Women's and Children's 
Institutions (Licensing) 
Act  1956 105 
Woman and Child 
Development 
224.  Gift-tax Act 1958 18 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
225.  Manipur and Tripura 
(Repeal of Laws) Act 1958 35 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
226.  Orissa Weights and 
Measures (Delhi Repeal) 
Act 1958 57 Consumer Affairs 
227.  Travancore-Cochin 
Vehicles Taxation 
(Amendment and 
Validation) Act 1959 42 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
228.  Tripura Land Revenue 
and Land Reforms Act 1960 43 Land Revenue 
229.  Mahendra Pratap Singh 
Estate (Repeal) Act 1960 48 Land Laws 
230.  British Statutes 
(Application to India) 
Repeal Act 1960 57 
State Reorganisation and 
Extension of Laws 
231.  Preference Shares 
(Regulation of Dividends) 
Act 1960 63 Corporate Laws 
232.  Delhi (Urban Areas) 
Tenants' Relief Act 1961 30 Rent and Tenancy 
233.  Newspaper (Price and 
Page Continuance) Act 1961 36 
Media, Communications and 
Publishing 
234.  Land Acquisition 
(Amendment) Act 1962 31 Land Laws 
235.  Companies (Profits) 
Surtax Act 1964 7 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
236.  Land Acquisition 
(Amendment and 
Validation) Act 1967 13 Land Laws 
237.  Anti-Corruption Laws 
(Amendment) Act 1967 16 Criminal Justice 
238.  Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Extension to 
Kohima and Mokochung 
Districts) Act 1967 25 Consumer Affairs 

154 
 
239.  Delhi and Ajmer Rent 
Control (Nasirabad 
Cantonment Repeal) Act 1968 49 Rent and Tenancy 
240.  Coal Bearing Areas 
(Acquisition and 
Development) Amendment 
and Validation Act 1971 54 Energy Laws 
241.  Former Secretary of State 
Service Officers 
(Conditions of Service) Act 1971 56 Government Employees 
242.  Uttar Pradesh 
Cantonments (Control of 
Rent and Eviction) Repeal 
Act 1971 68 Rent and Tenancy 
243.  East-Punjab Urban Rent 
Restriction (Extension to 
Chandigarh) Act 1974 54 Rent and Tenancy 
244.  Untouchability (Offences) 
Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provision 
Act 1976 106 Criminal Justice 
245.  General Insurance 
Business (Nationalisation) 
Amendment Act 1985 3 Banking and Insurance 
246.  Administrative Tribunals 
(Amendment) Act 1986 19 Tribunals 
247.  Shipping Development 
Fund Committee 
(Abolition) Act 1986 66 
Maritime Law; Shipping and 
Inland Navigation 
248.  Destructive Insects and 
Pests (Amendment and 
Validation) Act 1992 12 
Agriculture and Animal 
Husbandry  
249.  Betwa River Board 
(Amendment) Act 1993 49 
Transportation and 
Infrastructure 
250.  Delhi Rent Act 1995 33 Rent and Tenancy 
251.  Industrial Reconstruction 
Bank (Transfer of 
Undertakings and Repeal) 
Act 1997 7 Banking and Insurance 
252.  Urban Land (Ceiling and 
Regulation) Repeal Act 1999 15 Land Laws 
253.  Central Industrial 
Security Force 
(Amendment and 
Validation) Act 1999 40 Industries 

155 
 
254.  Unit Trust of India 
(Transfer of Undertaking 
and Repeal) Act 2002 58 Financial Laws 
255.  Industrial Development 
Bank (Transfer of 
Undertaking and Repeal) 
Act 2003 53 Banking and Insurance 
256.  Sick Industrial Companies 
(Special Provisions) Repeal 
Act 2004 1 Corporate Laws 
257.  Customs and Central 
Excise Laws (Repeal) Act 2004 25 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
258.  Prevention of Terrorism 
(Repeal) Act 2004 26 Criminal Justice 
259.  Produce Cess Laws 
(Abolition) Act 2006 46 Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
260.  Indian Rifles (Repeal) Act 2006 49 Criminal Justice 
261.  State Bank of Saurashtra 
(Repeal) and the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Amendment Act, 
2009 2009 48 Banking and Insurance 
 
 