<CONFIDENTIAL—No: for Publication”

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT

(REPORT ON EVIDENCE OF OFFICERS ABOUT
FORGED STAMPS, CURRENCY NOTES, ETC).
(Section 5094 Cr. P. C. as proposed)

September, 1963

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW


CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION.
5, Jorbagh, New Delhi-3,
"September 27, 1963.
Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My pear Minister,

1 have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the
Lwenty-filti Report of the Law Commission on evidence of
officers about forged stamps, currency notes, etc.

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission
under the circumstances mentioned in paragraphs 1 to 3 of
the Report. A note discussing the points for consideration
and the case-law on the subject was prepared in September,
1962. This was discussed at the 4oth meeting of the Law
Commission held on the 29th and 30th September, 1662.

3. The subject was discussed again at the 44th meeting of
the Lave Commission held on the 2nd and 3rd March, 1963.
A draft Report was prepared in the light of the discussion at
the meeting, and circulated for comments to State Governments
and Ministries of the Central Government.

4. Comments received from the Ministries and the State
Governments on the draft Report were considered by the Law
Commission at the 48th meeting held from the 101 to 19th
September, 1963, and tbe draft Report was revised in
accordance with the decisions taken at that meeting, and
finalised.

5. Mr. Niren De was unable to attend the meeting of the
Commission at which the Report was finalised, and was out of
India when the Report was signed. The Report has not,
therefore, been signed by him.

6. My colleagues and I wish to record our appreciation of
the assistance we have received from Mr. P. M. Bakshi, our
Joint Secretary and Draftsman in the preparation of this
Report.

Yours sincerely,

J. L. KAPUR,


REPORT ON EVIDENCE OF OFFICERS ABOUT
FORGED STAMPS, CURRENCY NOTES, ETC.
CONTENTS

(PARAGRAPH SuBjecT Pace
I. Problem for consideration . पु + . . I
2. Scope of the Report . . . . . . I
3. Genesis of the Report . . . + . I
4 Judicial decisions . . . . . . r
5: Existing law . + . पु . + पु 3
6. Difficulty experienced under existing section 3
Fe Analysis of the suggestion and objectives to be

achieved पु पु . : - + 3
8. Evidence on commission or iz camera 4
9. Possible solutions 4
10. Amending section 510, Cr. P.C., to add these officers 5
ai. Insertion of new section making the opinion con-
clusive . पु . पु
12. Criticism of section 510 before the 1955 amendment 5
73. Proposed self-contained provision preventing pro-
duction, etc., of records : 6
14. Recommendation. . . . . . . z
15. Appendices
APPENDICES
APPENDIX I.—Proposals as shown in the form of draft
amendments to the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 न . woe न 8
APPENDIX TI.—Summary of case-law as to value of
reports of Chemical Examiner, etc. . 9
APPENDIX IIT.—Summary of case-law as to issue of Com-
missions in criminal cases. पु + Ir

APPENDIX IV.—Summary of case-law relating to defect in
section 510, Cr. P. C, before its amend-
ment in 1955 . . . . . 12


चर

REPORT एक EVIDENCE OF OFFICERS ABOUT FORGED
STAMPS, CURRENCY NOTES, ETC.

1. The Law Commission has been invited! to consider the
following problem in connection with section 510 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898. In a number of cases, both civil
and criminal, in which the genuineness of a document is
assailed, the date of the manufacture of the sheet of paper on
which the document is written or the date of the manufacture
of stamp used becomes a vital issue. While the officers con-
cerned tender the requisite information after having the
documents examined, they cannot disclose details of their line
of investigation or the distinctive marks on the paper or stamps
issued in a particular year, as that might result in a large
scale forgery of commercial documents and counterfeiting of
stamps. But if the officers concerned do not disclose the grounds
of their opinion, the value of their evidence is affected. This
situation has created a difficult problem, and it was suggested
to the Commission that an amendment of section 510 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure may be considered so as to make
the report of such officers admissible in evidence (without
summoning the officers) and in case the court desired a second
opinion, to make the report of the higher officer conclusive.

2. The suggestion referred to above® also contemplated that
a similar amendment may be considered in respect of officers
of the Mint. These officers are mentioned in section 510, but
their report, though admissible, is not conclusive. It was there-
fore proposed that their reports may also be made conelusive in
the manner stated above’.

Since the problem relating to stamp and currency notes
presents common features, it will be proper to treat rep orts of
officers of the Mint on the same fooing as those of officers of
the India Security Press.

3. As the matter mentioned above* was of some importance,
the Law Commission felt it desirable to examine this question
separately in advance of the general examination of the Code
of Criminal Procedure in which it is now engaged.

4. Apart from the suggestion made® to the Law Commission
by the Ministry of Finance, there are certain decided cases
which have focussed attention on the problem now under
consideration. A brief reference may be made to those cases®.

Fin ‘A suggestion on the subject was received from the Ministry of
ance, Department of Econornic Affairs, which is the administrative

Ministry concerned with the India Security Press, including the office
of the Controller of Stamps and the Mint,

?Para. 1, supra, footnote.

Para. 1, supra.

4Paras. 1-2, supra.

*Para. 1 and footnote thereto.

As to decisions on the value of reports of Chemical Examiner,
Appendix 1 spor” » ace

Problem for
considera-
tion.

Scope of
the Reports.

Genesis of
the Report.

Judicial
decisions.


In a Calcutta case’, the accused was on trial on a charge of
giving false evidence by denying a statement that certain
documents were forged. The prosecution case (that the docu-
ments were really false) was based upon the assertion that the
cartridge papers bearing a particular water mark (on which
they were written} were not in existence on the 20th April,
1909, the date on which the documents purported to have been
executed. To prove this, the prosecution called an employee
of the Office of the Controller of Stamps and Stationery who
gave evidence to that effect. He based his knowledge of the
fact not on his experience at that time (because he was not
employed in the particular office until 1923), nor on his subse-
quent experience, but on an entry in an unpublished record of
the Government which, he stated, showed the date on which
cartridge papers bearing the particular water mark were issued,
and the period for which they were in use. The witness
claimed privilege as to the particular date and the period, as
being a State secret, and was not prepared to let the Judges or
the lawyers see the entry. The court held that such evidence
was inadmissible, because—

(i) it was not expert evidence, the evidence merely
consisting of a statement that if a certain proposition were
true, then the document was not in existence in 1909;

(ii) the witness was making a very plain inference from
an entry of which no evidence was to be taken.

The court did not consider it necessary to decide whether
secondary evidence could in such a case be given of the entry.
But the court made the following observations: —

“There is room for the view that in some cases where
a witness is not compellable to produce a document, the
party who can get other secondary evidence can give
secondary evidence of it. On the other hand, it would
seem only commonsense to say that section 123 would
prevent any person from giving secondary evidence of a
document in a case such as the present.”.

This case was followed in a later Calcutta case”, where the
evidence of one 5. K. Chatterjee, a Superintendent of the
Office of the Deputy Controller, Stamp and Stationery, Calcutta,
given in support of a written report of that office, to the effect
that a certain demi-paper bearing the water mark M.D. consti-
tuting the second page of a will was not in existence on a
particular date, was held inadmissible. The reason was, that
the evidence was given by reference to the “confidential
register” which was not produced before the Court. The
question whether such evidence could be treated as secondary
evidence, and if so, whether secondary evidence of a State
secret given by a Government witness was admissible, was only

1Emneror v. Jaffarul Hossain (Rankin, C.J. C.C. Ghose J. agreeing),
LL.B. 59 Cal. 1046, 1050 — (1981-32), 36 C.W.N. 514, 817.
27%, B. Souza v. J. F. Souze, ALR, 1958 Cal. 440, 443 (D.B.).



4

3

indirectly touched in this case. The Court made these
observations : --

“As the evidence of Shri 8. K. Chatterjee is based
upon unpublished and privileged Government records, that
evidence is not admissible, as has been laid down in the
case reported! in 36 C.W.N. 514 and we respectfully agree
with the decision.”.

The correctness of this view was assailed before the Supreme
Court in re John Francis Souza and another v. Ernest Bento
Souza and another, but the Court did not decide this question
and left it apen.

5, Before discussing the problem posed before us, we may Existing
set out the provisions of the existing section 510 of the Code #४-
of Criminal Procedure, which is in the following terms:—

“510. (1) Any document purporting to be a report Report of
under the hand of any Chemical Examiner or Assistant the Chemical
Chemical Examiner to Government or the Chief Inspector फल:
of Explosives or the Director of Finger Print Bureau or
an officer of the Mint, upon any matter or thing duly
submitted to him for examination or analysis and report
in the course of any proceeding under this Code, may be
used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding
under this Code.

(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the
application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and
examine any such person as to the subject-matter of his
report.””.

6. While the section’ mentions officers of the Mint, it does Disicultry

not include within its ambit officers of the India Security Press experienced
and of the Office of the Controller of Stamps. Further, even under exist-
as regards the officers mentioned in the section, it makes their ing section.
reports admissible. but not conclusive. It is also to be noticed
that the section, as at present worded, makes it obligatory
upon the court to summon the officer making the report as a
witness in Court, if either party to the proceedings so desires.
There is one further difficulty’. Bringing the records of the
various departments in courts is inconvenient, and may even
involve the risk of the valuable records being stolen or other-
wise lost or tampered with.

7. On an analysis of the suggestion received by the Law Analysis of
Commission®, it appears that the main objectives to be achieved the augece-
are the following :— Objectives

(2) the report of the officer concerned should be Pieved.
admissible as evidence im criminal cases;

ba

"See para. 4, supra—Emp, v. Jaffarul Hosstin,

2Civil Appeal No. 470 of 1960 decided 26-3-1962 (Kapur, Das Gunta
and Raghubar Dayal JJ.).

8See para. 5, supre.

‘This point was not stressed in the suggestion received by the
Commission, .

‘See paragraph 1 and footnote thereto, supra. .
69 M of L-2 Fonte की


(४) subject to a second opinion of a superior officer,
the report should be conclusive as to the facts stated
therein;

(०) the officer concerned should not be liable to be
summoned in Court—

(1) either tp produce the doeuments on which the
report is based; or

(#) to give oral evidence derived from such
records.

Eridence on 8. A suggestion has been made that in order to meet the

or tn camera, Tifficulty experienced’, the evidence of the officers concerned
may be taken on commission or in camera, The law can be
amended so as to provide that the evidence of the officers in
question shall invariably be taken on commission. This will
prevent the officers from being summoned in Court. It is,
however, not desirable to make a mandatory provision in the
law that the evidence of a witness in a eriminal case upon
which may depend the entire caso of the prosecution shall be
taken on commission?

The law can also provide that the evidence of such officers
may be taken in camera. This will, however, mean that the
officer concerned will be liable to be summoned 85 ६ Witness
in court. In our epinion, the taking of evidence on commission
or in camera of the officer concerned will not achieve the
objectives’ in view.

Possible 9. We have, given careful consideration to the problem posed*
solutions. to us, and we think that there are the following possible
solutions: —

(४) Amendment of section 510, Criminal Procedure
Code’, so as to make it applicable to reports of officers of
the India Security Press, Nasik Road and of the Office at
the Controller of Stamps.

(8) Insertion of a new section in the Code on the lines

of section 25 of the Drugs Act, 1940, which will make the
report of the officers in question conclusive evidence cf the

facts stated therein.

(Hi) Insertion of a new self-contained provision in the
Criminal Procedure Code on the lines of sections 509 and
510 of the Code, which gives effect to the objectives in
view",

‘Paras. 1 and 6, supra.

*Cf. cases in Appendix LH.

3Paras. 1 and १(९), supra.

‘Paras, 1 and 7, supra.

*The section is cited in para. 5, supra.
‘Para. 7, supra.


ye

10. The first solution! may appear simple, but is not satis- Amending
factory. In the first place, with the exception of officers of section sD
the Mint (whom we propose? to omit from section 510), the add these
class of officers at present mentioned in section 510 do not officers,

fall in the same category as the officers of the India Security
Press or of the Office of ‘the Controller of Stamps. The latter
¢lass of officers are in possession of information contained in
certain records of the grate, which if divulged, may affect the
very security or financial stability of the State. Such is not
the case when a report is made in criminal cases by a Chemical
Examiner, the Chief Inspector of Explosives, ete, The report
of such olficers can only affect the parties to the case. Further,
under sub-section (2) of section 510, if an application is made
to the court in that behalf by either party, the court is bound
to summon and examine any person mentioned in sub-section
(1). It is true that the Law Commission, in an earlier Report’,
has recommended that the summoning of these officers should
he in the discretion of the court. But even if such a change is
made, the oflicer concerned could, under section 162 of the
Indian Evidence Act, be summoned to broduce the documents
en which his report is based and in such a case the section
requires that he must bring the documents in court.

11. The second solution’, making the opinion of the officer Insertion of
conclusive subject to the opinion of a higher officer, is an maiag

unusual one, and igs not in accordance with the procedure 5

inion con-

ordinarily adopted in criminal cases. It would deprive the elusive.

accused of an opportunity to cross-examine the officer making
the report and to lead evidence in rebuttal of the statements
contained therein, Tt is true that there is a precedent in section
25, Drugs Act, 1940: but we do not think that, for the present
purpose, it is necessary 10 adopt the drastic provisions of section
25 of the Drugs Act, 1940,

12. In this connection, it may be pointed out that before Criticism of
the amendment of 1955, section 310 did not contain any provi- section
sion for summoning the Chemical Examiner. etc., as a’ witness 570 before

in Court, although section 509 of the Code contained such a ihe 1955

provision, This defect in the law was pointed out by the
courts’. The section was accordingly amended in 1955 to meet
these objections. As already pointed out®, it may not, there-
fore. be advisable to embody a provision in the law which
altogether prohibits the summoning of the officer concerned in
court and thus deprives the accused of an opportunity of
testing the correctness of the opinion given by him,

TPara. 906), swpra.

*See App. I, s. 510.

414th Report, Vol. II, page 848, para. 26,
*Para. 9 (ii), supra.

5866 cases referred to in Appendix IV.

See para. 71, supra,

te


Proposed 13. ‘The third solution’ will, in our opinion, achieve the
ed provision main objectives in view*. A self-contained provision may be
preventing inserted after section 509, Cr. P.C. which, while not preventing

Prod actions the summoning of the officer concerned as a witness, will bar—

(a) the production of the records on which the report
is based; and

(0) except with the permission of the Master of the
Mint, ete..—

(४) the giving of evidence derived from such
records;

(i) the disclosure of the nature and varticulars of
the tests on which the report is based.

This solution will not be a serious departure from the
existing law on the subject, because section 123 of the Indian
Evidence Act already prevents the giving of evidence derived
from unpublished official records. The only additional pro-
vision will be that, notwithstanding section 162 of that Act’,
the officer concerned cannot be summoned to produce the
records on which his report is based. But subject to this, the
officer concerned will be liable to be examined as a witness
in court like any other person. We have already explained‘
that the production of the records in Court may be fraught with
certain dangers. On the analogy of section 123 of the Indian
Evidence Act, it may be provided that with the permission of
the Master of the Mint, etc. {if necessary the permission of
the head of the Department may be required) evidence may
be given from the records on which the opinion of the officer
eoncerned is based. A consequential amendment will be
necessary in section 510 for omitting reference to officers of
the Mint from that section.

Compared with section 25 of the Drugs Act, 1940, the new
provision suggested by us.is a mild one. It will be noticed that
in the draft amendment proposed by us®, the new section 509A
will apply only to such gazetted officers as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. The
object is that the privilege conferred by the section should apply
to high officers who could be trusted to make a report with a
due sense of responsibility. The rights of the individual are
being affected to the minimum possible extent. In any case,
the new provision can be justified on the ground that the
security of the State and its financial stability are primary and

Para. 9(iii), supra.
*Para. 7, supra.

«  3It is considered unnecessary to use the formula ‘notwithstanding,
etc’ in the actual amendment.

‘Para. है, supra.
5See Appendix 1, 5. 509A.



we

overriding considerations which must prevail over the rights,
if any, of the individual. In this connection, reference may be
made to a recent case of the House of Lords! where the
famous dictum of Lord Parker in the Zamora case* was cited
with approval: —

“Those who are responsible for the national security
must be the sole judges of what the national security
requires. It will be obviously undesirable that such matter
should be made the subject of evidence in a court of law
or otherwise discussed in public.”.

14, We therefore recommend that the third sclution? may gecommen-
be adopted. dation.

15. To give a concrete shape to our recommendation’, we Appendices.
have, in Appendix I, shown it in the form of draft amendments
to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

Appendix IT summarises the case-law as to the value to be
attached to the reports of the officers referred to in section 510
or of officers in an analogous position.

Appendix III summarises the case-law relating to the issue
‘of commissions in criminal cases.

_. Appendix [V summarises the case-law pointing out the defect
in section 510, Cr. P. C. as it stood before its amendment in 1955.

The cases cited in the last three Appendices are illustrative
only.

1. J. L. Kapur—Chairman.
2. K. G. Datar.
3. 5. K. Hiranandani. |
4. 8. 9, Sen-Varma. \ Members,
*5. Niren De.
6. T. K. Tope. J
P. M. BAKSHI,
Joint Secretary and Draftsman.

New Deut;
‘The 2ith September, 1963,

1Chandler and others v. Director of Public Prosecutions (1962)
3 WLR. 694, 714, 722.

2(1916) 2 A.C. 77, 107,

‘See para. 9 (iii) and 13, supra.

‘Para. 14, supra.

*Member Shri De could not attend the meeting at which the Report

was finulised. At the time of signing of the Report he was out of India,
He has. therefore, been unable to sign the Beport, :


Evidence of
officers of
Mint, etc.

APPENDIX I

Proposals as shown in the form of draft amendments to the
Cede of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

(This is a tentative draft only)
Section 509A (New)

After section 509 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898
(hereinafter referred to as the “principal Act”), the following
section shall be inserted, namely :—

“509A. (1) Any document purporting to be a report
under the hand of any such gazetted officer of the Mint or
of the India Security Press including! the office of the
Controller of Stamps and Stationery? as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
in this behalf, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to
him for examination and report in the course of any pro-
ceeding under this Code, may be used as evidence in any
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, although
such officer is not called as a witness.

(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine
any such officer as to the subject-matter of his report:

Provided that no such Officer shall be summoned to
preduce any records on which the report is based.

(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 123
and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, no such officer
shali, except with the permission of the Master of the Mint
or the India Security Press®, as the cuse may be, be per-
mitted—

(a) to give any evidence derived from uny unpub-
lished records on which the report is based; or

(0) to disclose the nature or particulars of any test
applied by him in the course of the examination of the
matter or thing.”.

Section 510

In section 510 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the
words “or an officer of the Mint”, shall be omitted‘.

'The words “including”, etc. have been used following a suggestion
made by the Ministry of Finance.

It is intended that cartridge papers, ete. which have figured in cases
should be covered clearly. (See para. 4) Hence stationery has been
specifically mentioned.

8The wording ‘Master of the Mint or the India Security Press’ has
‘been used, following a suggestion made by the Ministry of Finance.

“This is consequential on proposed section 509A.

8

§ of 18983.

»
« of 1872,


we

APPENDIX II

Summary of case-law as to value of reports of Chemicat.
Examiner, etc.
(Illustrative only)

(४) In the ease of Mst. Gajrani v. Emperor', it was held that
the Chemical Examiner, in giving the report that the contents
of a dhoti were duly examined by him “with the result that
arsenic was detected in the (Ib) but not in the remaining
articles...... The Reinsch's test was used”, should have also
mentioned the precautions which he took to ensure that arsenic:
was not present in the laboratory material used in the experi-
ment. It was further observed, that the officer in his report
should have stated the grounds of his opinion. These objections,
however. did not relate to the admissibility of the report in
evidence but to its value, This is clear from the following
obscrvations in the judgment :—

“In India the Chemical Examiner merely tenders a
report and he does not appear to give evidence. It is ex-
tremely desirable that his report should be full and complete
and take the place of evidence which he would give if he
were called to Court as a witness.”.

(b) In Ramkaran Singh v. Emperor’, the oral evidence of
an Excise Sub-Inspector stating that certain liquor was illicit,
was criticised in these words: —

“No doubt that the Excise Sub-Inspector is an expert
in his own Department and is able to distinguish liquor.
But the Court should have under section 51, Evidence Act,
ascertained the grounds on which his opinion was based,
so as to ६28६ it”,

(c) On a similar provision in a State Act, it has been held
that the certificate of the officer concerned should contain the
factual data prescribed by the statute. Otherwise it cannot be
acted upon*.

(७) Reference may also be made to a recent Supreme Court
decision in which it was pointed out that the Chemical Examiner,
in examining blood stains, should indicate the mumber of
blood* stains discovered by him.

(९) See also the Bombay and Gujarat decisions separately
cited.

IMst. Gajrani v. Emperor, ALR, 1933 All. 394, 398, 389,
2Ramkaran Singh v. Emperor, A.LR. 1935 Nagpur 18, 14.
3State v. Sahati Ram, A.LR. 1958 All. 34 0.8.

4Prabhu v. State of Bombay, ALR. 1956 S.C. 51.

See Appendix IV.


10

(4) See also the undernoted case!. All these cases, however,
relate to the value to be altached to the report of the officer
concerned, which necessarily must depend on the facts of each
case and do not really assist in the solution of the problem under
consideration,

1Bekram v. Emp., ALR. 1944 Bom. 321, 323.


APPENDIX III

Summary of case-law as to issue of Commissions in criminal
cases,

(Illustrative only)

Courts do not usually view with favour evidence recorded:
an commission. The power to issue commissions for the exa-
mination of witnesses, it is true, exists under sections 503 and
506 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898; but that power,
as has been observed, “should be used sparingly and only in the
clearest possible case”. Ordinarily, it is not proper to allow
the evidence of an important witness for the prosecution to be
taken on commission on the ground of inconvenience’, In a
recent case, the Supreme Court’ had occasion to make the
following observation, which may be of interest:—

“It is not necessary to refer 10 case-law on the point
because the matter is one to be decided on the facts in each
case, As a general rule it may be said that the important
witnesses on whose testimony the case against the accused
person has to be established, must be examined in court
and usually the issuing of a commission should be restricted
to forma] witnesses or such witnesses who could not be
produced without an amount of delay or inconvenience un-
Teasonable in the circumstances of the case. The idea of
examining witnesses on commission is primarily intended
for getting the evidence of witnesses other than parties
principally interested such as a complainant or any person:
whose testimony is absolutely essential to prove the prose-
cution case. In short, a witness in a criminal case should
not be examined on commission except in extreme cases of
delay, expense or inconvenience and in particular the
procedure by way of interrogatories should be resorted to:
in unavoidable situations.”

As was stressed in a Punjab case’, examination on commis-
sion is an exception rather than the rule; the accused has a right
to require that, save in special circumstances, he should be
confronted with the witnesses who are to give evidence against
hin and to cross-examine them in the presence of the trial

‘court’.

iMohammad Shafi v. Emp., A..R_1932 Patna 242, 243, left (Wort J.)
appresce by the, Supreme Court in Dkarmanand’s case, ALR. 1957 S.C.

2Cf. the Queen Empress v. T. Burke (1884), LL.R. 6 All. 224.

ADharmanand v. State of U.P, ALR. 1957 S.C. 594, 598, right = 1957
S.C.J. 431.

‘State of Delhi v. Krishnaswamy, ALR. 1954 East Punjab 294, 295,,
left (Bhandari C.J. and Bishan Narain J.).

“nM



APPENDIX IV

Summary of case-law relating to defect in section 510, Cr. P. C.
before its amendment in 1955.

(Mustrative onty)

(६) In Emperor v. Happul, Young J. (as he then was)
obserVed that no person had to be put in peril of capital or any
punishment on a written report not given on oath and untested
by cross-examination. He observed, “to accept such a report—
whatever it may contain—as proof of death by arsenic pvisoning
or of anything—appears to me 10 be an impossible proposition
in law". Section 510 as it stood before its amendment in 1935
was also crilicised in a Lahore case, That the section is an
exception to the hearsay rule has been pointed out by
Bhagwati J. in a Gujarat case* in these words: —

“There are two methods of testing evidence and ensur-
that truth comes out in evidence. The first is by admin-
tion of oath and the other is by cross-examination.........
These are the two most important safeguards against false
testimony and unless evidence is given on oath and is tested
by cross-examination, it is not legally admissible against the
party affected. This is the reason why hearsay evidence is
excluded; it ig not on oath and cannot be tested by cross-
examination. Section 510 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure as it originally stood pricr to its amendment by
Act 26 of 1955, however, made a departure inasmuch as it
provided that (the section is then quoted). .......... The

Court could receive the report in evidence without insisting
on proof of the report by examining the Chemical
Examiner....., This was an extraordinary provision which
was contrary to the fundamental basic principle of judicial
precedure that the evidence of one party should not, to use
the words of Lopes L. J. in Allen v. Allen’, ‘be received in
evidence against another party without the latter having an
opportunity of testing its truthfulness by  cross-
examination’.”,

(b) The view taken by the Gujarat High Court has been
dissented from in a recent case of the Bombay High Court'.
That case related to section 129-B of the Bombay Prohibition
Act, 1949 (25 of 1949) which is based on section 510 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898. In that case it was held that if a
report of the Chemical Analyser does not contain data of the
tests or experiments performed by him and the 1 and the reasons for his

1Emperor v. Happu, ALR, 1933 All. 837, 840 = LL.R. 56 All. 228.
2Ujaggar Singh v. Emperor, ALR. 1939 Lah. 149. *
Suleman v. State of Gujarat, ALR. 1961 Guj, 120, 123.

‘Allen v. Allen, 1804 Probate 248, 253.

"State v. Ram Singh, ALR. 1963 Bombay 68, 70.

12 oy

in,



we

13

opinion, the objection can only be to the weight attached to the
report and not to its admissibility. If neither party summons
the officer concerned it is open to the Court to act upon the
report.

(c) A later Gujarat case’ makes it clear that if the reasons
are not given in the report, the objection is to the value only.

(d) In the Allahabad case’, the criticism by Young J. was
in these words: —

“Whatever may be said of the wisdom of this enactment
—contrary as it is to the accumulated legal experience of
centuries of what is necessary for the protection of accused
person—nothing is more certain than that section 510,
fortunately for accused person, says nothing as to the weight
to be attached to the report.”.

1State of Gujarat v. Lasenmul (1963), 1 Cr. Law Journal 563. (Shelat
and Divan JJ.).

*Emperor v. Happu, ALR. 1933 All. 837, 540 = LL.R. 56 All. 228.

GMGIPND—TSW—69 M of Law (4554)—8-5-64—1850.