 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION 
OF 
INDIA 
 
 Report No. 250   
 
 
“Obsolete Laws: Warranting Immediate Repeal” 
(Third Interim Report) 
 
 
October, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

ii 
 
 
D.O. No.6(3)211/2011-LC(LS)                  29 October, 2014 
 
Dear Mr. Ravi Shankar Prasad ji, 
 
  
 As you are aware,  the Law Commission of India has undertaken a 
Study titled the “Legal Enactments: Simplifications and Streamlining” 
(LESS). As part of this Study , the Commission submitted two interim 
reports (Report Nos.248 and 249) on Obsolete Laws on 12 September 2014 
and 13 October 2014.    Now the Commission has identified 73 more laws 
for complete repeal and has put together as Report No.2 50 with the title 
“Obsolete Laws: Warranting Immediate Repeal” – Third Interim Report 
and is submitted herewith for consideration of the Government.  It is worth 
mentioning here that the Commission has in total recommended repeal of 
258 archaic laws till date, through three of its interim reports. 
 
 
 With warm regards, 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
   
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
 
Mr. Ravi Shankar Prasad 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi - 110115 
  
 


iii 
 
“Obsolete Laws : Warranting Immediate Repeal” 
(Third Interim Report) 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter Title 
 
Page 
1. Introduction 1-2 
2. Laws Recommended for Complete 
Repeal 
2-41 
3. A note on Mica Mines Labour Welfare 
Fund Act, Act 22 of 1946 
42 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 This Report forms the third instalment of the study 
undertaken by the Law Commission titled ‘The Legal 
Enactments: Simplification and Streamlining’. For this 
report, a further 158 laws have been studied and 73 of these 
have been recommended for complete repeal in this Report. 
1.2 In the first instalment of this study, titled “Obsolete 
Laws: Warranting Immediate Repeal” – An Interim Report No. 
248, 72 laws were identified as having become obsolete, and 
were recommended for immediate repeal. In the second 
instalment of this study, which formed Report No. 249, 88 
laws were recommended for wholesale repeal while 25 were 
recommended for partial repeal.  
1.3 In the 248 th Report, in addition, 261 laws were prima 
facie identified for repeal (listed in Appendix V of the 248 th 
Report). With this third report, the Law Commission has 
studied all 261 laws, and also carried out a study of the laws 
recommended for repeal by the Report of the Commission on 
Review of Administrative Laws, 1998 (the PC Jain 
Commission Report) a s well as earlier reports of the Law 
Commission. A study of 253 laws which were recommended 
for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report, and the 96 th 
Report on the Repeal on Certain Obsolete Laws (1984), 148th 
Report on the Repeal of Certain Pre-1947 Acts (1993) and the 
159th Report on Repeal and Amendment of Laws (1998) of the 
Law Commission, but which have not yet been repealed was 
also conducted (these laws have been listed in Appendix II of 
the 248th Report). Thus, the third Interim Report marks the 
culmination of a study of the 261 laws prima facie identified 
for repeal as well as the 253 laws recommended for repeal by 
other Commission Reports.      
1.4 Thus, Chapter 2 of this Report studies 7 3 laws 
recommended for complete repeal, and gives notes and 

2 
 
recommendations on each. It must be kept in mind that while 
recommending the repeal of these laws, the legislature 
competent to repeal the law must also be established in 
accordance with Article 372(1) of the Constitution. As 
explained in Chapter 4 of the 248th Report, pre-Constitutional 
laws, even where they have been passed by the Centre, can 
only be repealed by the Centre if the subject matter of the law 
now falls within List I or III of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution. Where a law falls within the domain of List II, it 
should be referred to the relevant State Governments for 
repeal. Accordingly, the competent legislature has been 
indicated in each of the laws being studied for repeal.   The 
Acts at serial numbers 73 and 74 have already been repealed.  
Therefore, the Central Government should remove these laws 
from its list of central Acts in force. 
1.5 Chapter 3 contains a note on Mica Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund Act, Act 22 of 1946 and similar welfare fund 
Acts. 
1.6 The Commission acknowledges the efforts put in by the 
Sub-Committee comprising Justice S N Kapoor, Member, 
Law Commission, Prof. Mool Chand Sharma, Member, Law 
Commission, Prof. Yogesh Tyagi, Member (Part Time), Law 
Commission, Mr. Arghya Sengupta and Ms. Srijoni Sen, 
Advocates from Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy, and also that of 
two young researchers, Ms. Ritwika Sharma and Mr. Sameer 
Rohatgi in finalizing this Report. 
  

3 
 
CHAPTER 2 
LAWS RECOMMENDED FOR COMPLETE REPEAL 
  This Chapter lists 73 statutes that w arrant 
complete repeal, with recommendations and notes on each: 
1. Mussalman Wakf Validating Act, Act 6 of 1913 and 
the Mussalman Wakf Validating Act, Act 32 of 1930  
Category: Charitable and Religious Institutions; Co-
operative Societies 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Mussalman Wakf Validating  Act declared the rights of 
Mussalmans to make settlements of property by way of ‘wakf’ 
in favour of their families, children and descendants. The Act 
declared that no such wakf  shall be deemed invalid merely 
because the benefit reserved therein for the poor or of other 
religious, pious or a permanent nature is postponed until 
after the extinction of the family, children or descendants of 
the person creating the wakf. This Act wa s enacted to 
statutorily supersede the position taken by the Privy Council 
in Abdul Fata Mahomed Ishak v. Russomoy Dhur Chowdhry  
[1894 (22) Cal 619 (PC)] that a wakf for the family members 
though coupled with a gift to charity on the failure of the line 
of descendants is not one substantially for charity and so was 
invalid. The Mussalman Wakf Validating Act, 1930 clarified 
that the Mussalman Wakf Validating Act, 1913 shall be 
deemed to apply to wakfs created before its commencement. 
Hence, the Validating Ac t of 1913 was given retrospective 
application by the 1930 Act. The Wakf Act, 1995 has now 
been enacted to provide for the better administration of wakfs 
and for matters connected therewith. The 1995 Act applies to 
all wakfs, whether created before or after the commencement 
of the Act. Private wakfs are considered valid by the Act of 
1995. Hence, the purpose of the Validating Acts of 1913 and 
1930 has been subsumed by the Act of 1995. Wakfs of a 
private nature created any time before 1995 are valid under 
the Wakf Act, 1995. The Central Government should repeal 

4 
 
both the 1913 and the 1930 Acts. However, since the 
Validating Acts of 1913 and 1930 are still used to validate 
wakfs created before 1913, a provision saving the wakfs 
validated by these Acts should be inserted into the 1995 Act. 
This Act has also been recommended for repeal by the PC 
Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1) and by the Ministry 
of Minority Affairs in its letter No. 12/10/2014 -Wakf dated 
9th September 2014 to the Member Secretary, Law 
Commission of India. 
 
2. Post Office Cash Certificates Act, Act 18 of 1917 
Category: Financial Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act restricted the transfer of post office 5 -year cash 
certificates and provided for the payment of certificates 
standing in the name of deceased persons. The Second 
Edition of the Post Office Savings Bank Manual (corrected up 
to 31st December 2006) specifies that 5-year post office cash 
certificates were discontinued from 14 th June 1947. 
Consequently, this Act is now redundant. The Central  
Government should now repeal this Act. A suitable savings 
clause should be inserted in the repealing Act.   
 
3. Local Authorities Pensions and Gratuities Act, Act 1 
of 1919 
Category: Government Employees  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act extended the powers of local authorities in regard to 
the granting of pensions and gratuities. The Act empowered 
local authorities to grant a pension or gratuity to any officer 
who may, since 4 th August 1914, have been wounded or 
otherwise incapacitated in service under the G overnment, 
and to the widow or child of any such officer who may have 
died in consequence of injuries received or illness contracted 

5 
 
since 4th August 1914, in the course of such service. The Act 
has fallen into disuse. Most States now have their own 
Pension Rules and the purpose of this Act is subsumed by 
such rules. Therefore, this Act is now redundant and the 
Central Government should repeal it. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-5). 
 
4. Bengal Criminal  Law (Amendment) Supplementary 
Act, Act 8 of 1925 
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal after consultation with the State of 
West Bengal 
The Act supplemented the Bengal Criminal Law Amendment 
Act, 1925. The Act provided that any person convict ed on a 
trial held by Commissioners under the Bengal Criminal Law 
Amendment Act, 1925 may appeal to the High Court of 
Judicature at Fort William in Bengal, and such appeal was to 
be disposed of by the High Court in the manner provided by 
the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1898. The 1898 Code has 
been repealed by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 but 
corresponding amendments have not been made to this 
Supplementary Act. Consequently, the Act is now redundant. 
There is no evidence of recent use of this Act. H ence, the 
Central Government should repeal this Act after consultation 
with the State of West Bengal. 
 
5. Madras, Bengal and Bombay Children 
(Supplementary) Act, Act 35 of 1925 
Category: Women and Child Development  
Recommendation: Consider for repeal.   
The Act supplemented certain provisions of the Madras 
Children Act, 1920 (which was rechristened as the Tamil 
Nadu Children Act, 1920 by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of 

6 
 
Laws Order, 1969), the Bengal Children Act, 1922 and the 
Bombay Children Act, 1924. The Bengal  Children Act has 
been repealed by Section 51 of the West Bengal Children Act, 
1959. The Bombay Children Act, 1924 was repealed by the 
Bombay Children Act, 1948. Also, Section 63 of the Juvenile 
Justice Act, 1986 repealed all laws in force in any State which 
corresponded to the Juvenile Justice Act. By virtue of Section 
63, the Tamil Nadu Children Act, 1920 should stand 
impliedly repealed. The Central Government should write to 
the State of Tamil Nadu and ascertain the status of the Tamil 
Nadu Children Act,  1920 and thereafter, consider the 
Supplementary Act for repeal. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A -1) and by the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development in its letter F. No. 22-22/2014-CW-I dated 30th 
September 2014 to the Member Secretary, Law Commission 
of India. 
 
6. Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act, Act 
12 of 1928  
Category: Personal Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act provided that no person governed by Hindu law 
would be excluded fr om any right or share in joint family 
property by reason only of any disease, deformity, or physical 
or mental defect. However, the Act excluded a person who 
had been from birth a lunatic or an idiot. The purpose of the 
Act has now been subsumed by Section  28 of the Hindu 
Succession Act, 1956 which provides that no person shall be 
disqualified from succeeding to any property on the ground 
of any disease, defect or deformity. There are no instances of 
recent judgments rendered under this Act. The 1928 Act is  
now redundant. Hence, the Central Government should 
repeal this Act.  A suitable savings clause needs to be inserted 
in the repealing Act. 

7 
 
 
7. Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, Act 2 of 1933 
Category: Labour Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act prohibited t he making of agreements to pledge the 
labour of children, and the employment of children whose 
labour had been pledged. However, the purpose of this Act is 
defeated by the proviso to the definition of ‘agreement’ under 
Section 2. While an agreement to pledge the labour of a child 
is prohibited, the said proviso says that ‘an agreement made 
without detriment to a child, and not made in consideration 
of any benefit other than reasonable wages to be paid for the 
child’s service’ is not prohibited. This proviso would have the 
effect of approving child labour upon the payment of 
reasonable wages. For this reason, the Report of the Second 
Indian National Labour Commission, 2002 also 
recommended repeal of this Act. Also, the fines imposed 
under the Act are paltry a nd would hardly serve as a 
deterrent. Hence, the Central Government should repeal this 
Act. Simultaneously, amendments should be made to the 
Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 to 
penalise agreements pledging the labour of children. The 
Ministry of Labour and Employment is also contemplating 
repeal of this Act.   
 
8. Jubbulpore and Chhattisgarh Divisions (Divorce 
Proceedings) Act, Act 13 of 1935 
Category: Personal Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal. 
The Act removed certain doubts and validated certain  
proceedings of the High Court of Judicature of Allahabad. The 
Act declared that from 31 st August 1923, the Court of the 
Judicial Commissioner of the Central Provinces alone would 
have the jurisdiction of the High Court under the Indian 

8 
 
Divorce Act, 1869 w ithin the Jubbalpore and Chhattisgarh 
divisions of the Central Provinces. The Act also validated 
certain decisions taken by the High Court of Allahabad and 
deemed such decisions to be as good and valid in law as if 
such proceedings had been taken by the Co urt of the 
Financial Commissioner. The Central Provinces, as they 
existed prior to Independence, do not exist now. Jabalpur is 
now a district in the State of Madhya Pradesh. Chhattisgarh 
was an administrative division in erstwhile Central Provinces. 
The territory falling under this division in now a part of the 
modern-day State of Chhattisgarh. The purpose of the Act 
has therefore now been fulfilled. A suitable savings clause 
should be inserted in the repealing Act. The Central 
Government should repeal this  law after consultation with 
the relevant State governments . This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-1).  
 
9. Decrees and Orders Validating Act, Act 5 of 1936 
Category: Administration of Justice 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act removed certain doubts as to the validity of certain 
proceedings in the High Courts of Judicature at Bengal, 
Madras and Bombay. The Act clarified that no decree passed 
or order made by any of these High Courts in the exercise of 
their ordinary original civil jurisdiction under Clause 12 of its 
Letters Patent, or by the High Court of Judicature at Rangoon 
under Clause 10 of its Letters Patent, shall be called in 
question on the ground that the High Court passing that 
decree or making the order had no jurisdiction to do so. The 
purpose of this Act has been served and the Central 
Government should now repeal this Act. A suitable savings 
clause should be inserted in the repealing Act. This Act has 
also been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain  
Commission Report (Appendix A-1).       

9 
 
 
10. Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, Act 20 of 1938 
Category: Criminal Justice 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act provided for punishment of certain acts prejudicial 
to the recruitment of persons to serve in the Armed Forces of 
the Union. This Act was enacted to punish persons who made 
public speeches to dissuade persons from enlisting in the 
Defence Forces and from taking part in any war in which the 
British Empire would be engaged. The punishment 
prescribed for such an act was imprisonment for a term 
extending to 1 year, or fine, or both. This Act was meant to 
serve the needs of the British Empire and is now redundant. 
There is no evidence of recent use of this Act. Hence, the 
Central Government should repeal this Act.    
 
11. Delhi Restriction of Land Uses Act, Act 12 of 1941 
Category: Land Law  
Recommendation: Repeal, in consultation with relevant 
state(s).   
The Act regulated in the province of Delhi the use of land for 
purposes other than agricultural purposes. The Act 
authorised the Chief Commissioner of Delhi to declare certain 
areas to be ‘controlled’. Previous permission of the Chief 
Commissioner was required for undertaking construction in 
such areas. The office of the Chief Commissioner of Delhi has 
ceased to exist. Also , the purpose of this Act has been 
subsumed because restrictions on the use of agricultural 
land are now imposed under Section 81 of the Delhi Land 
Reforms Act, 1954. There is no evidence of recent use of this 
Act. Therefore, the Central Government should repeal this 
Act after consulting the State Governments. 
 

10 
 
12. Trading with the Enemy (Continuance of Emergency 
Provisions) Act, Act 16 of 1947 
Category: Defence of India and Armed Forces 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act provided for the continuation of certain provisions of 
the Defence of India Rules, 1939 relating to the control of 
trading with States, and persons and firms belonging to 
States at war with the Government of India, and the custody 
of the property belonging to them. The purpose of this Act has 
been subsumed by the Enemy Property Act, 1968 which 
provides for the continuing of vesting of enemy property 
vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property for India under 
the Defence of India Rules, 1962 and the Defence on India 
Rules, 1971. Hence, this Act is now  redundant and the 
Central Government should repeal this Act. This Act has also 
been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-4).   
 
13. Rehabilitation Finance Administration Act, Act 12 
of 1948 
Category: Social Welfare 
Recommendation: Consider for repeal  
The Act established a Rehabilitation Finance Administration, 
for the purpose of giving financial assistance on reasonable 
terms to displaced persons to enable them to settle in 
business and industry. ‘Displaced person’ was defined as - i) 
a person who, being displaced from any area outside India on 
account of civil disturbances or fear of such disturbances, 
has settled and is engaged or intends to engage in any 
business or industry in India, or ii) a person in India who,  
having had his business, industry or property, wholly or 
partially outside India, has lost, wholly or partially, such 
business, industry, or property on account of civil 
disturbances or the fear of such disturbances, and who is 

11 
 
engaged, or intends to engage in any business or industry in 
India. There is no evidence from readily available sources to 
suggest that the Rehabilitation Finance Administration 
rendered any assistance after the culmination of the 5th Five 
Year Plan (1974-1979). This Act has now fallen into disuse. 
Hence, the Central Government should ascertain the status 
of the Rehabilitation Finance Administration and consider 
repeal of this Act. 
 
14. Indian Matrimonial Causes (War Marriages) Act, Act 
40 of 1948 
Category: Personal Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act conferred upon courts temporary jurisdiction in 
certain matrimonial cases. It applies to marriages solemnized 
during the ‘war period’ where the husband was, at the time 
of the marriage, domi ciled outside India and the wife was 
immediately before the marriage, domiciled in India. ‘War 
period’ was defined under the Act as the period commencing 
on 3rd September 1939 and ending on 31 st March 1946. The 
Act conferred jurisdiction on the High Court to entertain 
proceedings for divorce or for nullity of marriage. The purpose 
of the Act has been served and it can be repealed. A suitable 
savings clause should be inserted in the repealing Act. This 
Act also finds mention in the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix D).   
 
15. Bombay Public Security Measures (Delhi 
Amendment) Act, Act 52 of 1948 
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act amended the Bombay Public Security Measures Act, 
1947 as extended to the Province of Delhi. The text of the 

12 
 
Bombay Public Security Measures Act, 1947 is not available 
on the Law Ministry’s website, or from any other readily 
available source, an indication that it is not in use. Neither 
are there any other documented instances where this Act has 
been used in the last few decades. The Delhi Amendment Act 
has also now fallen into disuse. Therefore, the Central 
Government should repeal this Act. 
 
16. Exchange of Prisoners Act, Act 58 of 1948 
Category: Citizenship; Admission into, Emigration to, and 
Expulsion from, India; and Cross-border Movement 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act provided, in pursuance of an agreement with 
Pakistan for the exchange of certain prisoners from India to 
Pakistan and also, the reception in India of certain prisoners 
from Pakistan. The Act defines ‘prisoner’ under Section 2(b) 
as ‘any person committed to custody in a prison on or before 
1st August 1948 under the writ, warrant or order of any court 
or authority other than a Civil Court or Court Martial’. The 
purpose of this Act has now been subsumed by the Consular 
Access Agreement signed between India and Pakistan in May 
2008. Therefore, the Central Government should repeal this 
Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal by the 
96th Report of the Law Commission of India.    
 
17. Scheduled Securities (Hyderabad) Act, Act 7 of 1949 
Category: Corporate Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act provided for the control of the transfer of certain 
securities and for the issue of duplicate securities in respect 
thereof. The Act provided that the Reserve Bank of India shall 
not, without the approval in writing of the Central 
Government, recognise for any purpose any transfer of a 

13 
 
scheduled security otherwise than to the Government of 
Hyderabad made or purported to have been made on or before 
31st December 1948. Such security was deemed to have been 
vested in the Government of Hyderabad. This Act has served 
its purpose and the Central Government should now repeal 
this Act. A suitable savings clause should be inserted in the 
repealing Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal 
by the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-5).  
 
18. West Godavari District (Assimilation of Laws on 
Federal Subject) Act, Act 20 of 1949 
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act assimilated certain laws in force in different parts of 
the West Godavari district of the Province of Madras. The Act 
prescribed that, on the appointed day as specified under the 
Act, all laws in force in the Eluru Taluk (a taluk in the West 
Godavari district) would extend to the scheduled areas ( this 
refers to areas which find mention in the Schedule appended 
to the Act, and not to Scheduled Areas under the 
Constitution). Simultaneously, all laws in force in the 
scheduled areas would cease to be in  force. The purpose of 
this Act has now been fulfilled. Hence, the Central 
Government should repeal this Act. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-1).  
 
19. Merged States (Laws) Act, Act 59 of 1949 
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act extended certain laws to certain areas administered 
as parts of Governor’s Provinces or as Chief Commissioner’s 
Provinces. The Act listed certain Acts in its Schedule and 
extended those Acts to the new provinces constituted by the 

14 
 
States’ Merger (Chief Commissioner’s Provinces) Order, 1949. 
The Act is now redundant as Governor’s or Chief 
Commissioner’s Provinces have ceased to exist. Hence, the 
Central Government should repeal this Act. This Act has also 
been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1). 
 
20. Professions Tax Limitation (Amendment and 
Validation) Act, Act 61 of 1949 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act amended the Professions Tax Limitation Act, 1941 
and validated the imposition in the United Provinces of 
certain taxes on circumstances and property. The Act 
amended the Schedule appended to the Professions Tax 
Limitation Act, 1941. The Act also provided that taxe s 
imposed under Section 128(1)(ix) of the United Provinces 
Municipalities Act, 1916 or Section 108(b) of the United 
Provinces District Boards Act, 1922 would not be invalid 
merely on the ground that the tax imposed exceeded the limit 
of Rs. 50 per annum. B oth the United Provinces Act s have 
fallen into disuse and taxes are not imposed under these 
Acts. Also, the Professions Tax Limitation Act, 1941 was 
repealed by the Amending Order, 1950. Hence, this Act is 
now redundant and the Central Government should re peal 
this Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal by 
the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).    
 
21. State Bank of Samastha Act, 1950 
Category: Banking and Insurance  
Recommendation: Repeal after consultation with the State 
Bank of India. 
The text of this Act is not available on the Law Ministry’s 
website, or from any other readily available source, an 

15 
 
indication that it is not in use. Neither are there any other 
documented instances where this Act has been used in the 
last few decades. Therefore, the Central Government should 
repeal this law after consultation with the State Bank of 
India.  
 
22. Opium and Revenue Laws (Extension of Application) 
Act, Act 33 of 1950 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act provided for the  extension of certain opium and 
revenue laws to certain parts of India. By means of Section 2 
of this Act, the Opium Act, 1857, Opium Act, 1878, Revenue 
Recovery Act, 1890, Government Trading Taxation Act, 1926, 
Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930, Taxation on Incom e 
(Investigation Commission) Act, 1947 and the Payment of 
Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949, and the rules and 
orders made thereunder which were in force immediately 
before the commencement of this Act in certain parts of India, 
were extended to the rest of India (except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir). All these Acts so extended, except the Revenue 
Recovery Act, 1890, have now been repealed. Most States 
either have their own revenue recovery Acts or have 
introduced amendments to the Revenue Recovery A ct, 1890 
and consequently, this Act has fallen into disuse. 
Consequently, the Opium and Revenue Laws (Extension of 
Application) Act, 1950 has now become redundant. There is 
no evidence of recent use of this Act. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A -1). Hence, the Central Government should 
repeal this Act. 
 

16 
 
23. Cooch-Behar (Assimilation of Laws) Act, Act 67 of 
1950 
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act assimilated certain laws in force in Cooch -Behar to 
the laws in force in the rest of West Bengal. Cooch-Behar was 
a princely state in British India which was, post -
Independence, merged into the State of West Bengal by 
means of the States’ Merger (West Bengal) Order, 1949. On 
the appointed day (as prescribed under this Act), all laws in 
force in the State of West Bengal were to come into force in 
Cooch-Behar. Simultaneously, all laws in force in Cooch -
Behar were to cease to be in force. The purpose of this Act 
has been  fulfilled. Hence, the Central Government should 
repeal this Act. This Act has also been recommended for 
repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).   
 
24. Khaddar (Protection of Name) Act, Act 78 of 1950 
Category: Intellectual Property Law   
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act regulated the use of the words ‘khaddar’ and ‘khadi’ 
when applied as a trade description of woven materials. The 
Act mandated that the words ‘khaddar’ and ‘khadi’, whether 
in Hindi, English, or in any other language, when applied  to 
any woven material, shall be deemed to be a trade description 
within the meaning of the Indian Merchandise Act, 1889. This 
was done to indicate that such material is cloth woven on 
handlooms in India from cotton, silk or woollen yarn or from 
a mixture of any two or all of such yarns. The Indian 
Merchandise Act, 1889 has been repealed but a 
corresponding amendment has not been made in this Act. In 
fact, ‘khadi’ was registered as a mark registered under the 
Trade Marks Act, 1999 and the Khadi Mark Regulat ions, 
2013 were issued for the purpose of authentication of 

17 
 
genuine khadi. Hence, this Act is now redundant and can be 
repealed. 
 
25. Part B States (Laws) Act, Act 3 of 1951 
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act provided for the extension of certain laws to the Part 
B States in India. The Acts and Ordinances so extended to 
the Part B States found mention in the Schedule appended 
to the Act. Part B States were former princely states which 
were governed by a Rajpramuk h. However, Part B States as 
they existed immediately post -Independence, do not exist 
now. The purpose of this Act has been fulfilled. Hence, the 
Central Government should repeal this Act. This Act has also 
been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commis sion 
Report (Appendix A-1). 
 
26. Part C States Miscellaneous Laws (Repealing) Act, 
Act 66 of 1951 
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act repealed certain laws that were in force in certain 
Part C states. The laws which were so repealed are mentioned 
in the Schedule appended to this Act. The purpose of this Act 
has been fulfilled. Hence, this Act must be repealed.  
 
27. Part B States Marriages Validating Act, Act 1 of 1952 
Category: Personal Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act validated certain marriages solemnized in certain 
Part B states between 26 th January 1950 and 31 st March 
1951, under the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872. All 

18 
 
these marriages were to be deemed to be good and valid in 
law as if such marriages had been solemnized by a person 
duly authorized to do so. The Act was clearly time -specific 
and has served its purpose. Hence, it should be repealed and 
a suitable savings clause should be inserted to the repealing 
Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal by the 
PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).      
 
28. Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, Act 38 of 1952 
Category: Rent and Tenancy  
Recommendation: Repeal, in consultation with relevant 
state(s) 
The Act provided for the control of rents and evictions, and 
for the lease of vacant premises to the Government, in certain 
areas of Delhi and Ajmer. The Act was repealed in its 
application to Delhi by the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958. The 
rent control law applicable to Ajmer is the Rajasthan Rent 
Control Act, 2001. There is no evidence of recent use of this 
Act and it is now redundant. Therefore, the Central 
Government should write to the concerned State Government 
recommending the review of this law by the State, with a view 
to repeal. The Central Government should also remove this 
law from its lists of central Acts in force. 
 
29. Reserve Bank of India (Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, Act 54 of 1953 
Category: Banking and Insurance 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act was enacted to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934 and to add certain provisions with regard to high 
denomination notes. Most provisions of this Act have been 
repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1957. Only 
Section 9 of this Act remains which prescribes that the High 
Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Ordinance, 1946 

19 
 
would not apply to any bank note of the denominational value 
of Rs. 500, Rs. 1000 or Rs. 10,000 issued after the 
commencement of this Act, but no such bank note issued 
before 13th January 1946 shall be legal tender in payment or 
on account of the amount expressed therein at any place in 
India. The Act has served its purpose. Hence, the Central 
Government should repeal this Act. The Ministry of Law and 
Justice should also ascertain the status of the High 
Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Ordinance, 1946 
and if it is still in force, the Central Government should repeal 
this Ordinance as well. A suitable savings clause sho uld be 
inserted in the repealing Act. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-1).  
 
30. State Acquisition of Lands for Union Purposes 
(Validation) Act, Act 23 of 1954 
Category: Land Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act validated the acquisition under the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894 of lands by certain State Governments for the 
purposes of the Union and orders passed and proceedings 
held in connection therewith. The 1894 Act has now been 
repealed. The purpose of this Act has been fulfilled. Hence, it 
can be repealed after inserting a suitable savings clause in 
the repealing Act.  
 
31. Taxation Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) 
Act, Act 41 of 1954 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act provided for the extension of certain taxation laws to 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Section 2 of the Act 
extended the Sea Customs Act, 1878; the Indian Income-Tax 

20 
 
Act, 1922; the Land Customs Act, 1924; the Government 
Trading Taxation Act, 1926; the Indi an Tariff Act, 1934; the 
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944; the Payment of Taxes 
(Transfer of Property) Act, 1949 and the Estate Duty Act, 
1953 to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. All these Acts, 
except the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 have been 
repealed. The Short Title, Extent and Commencement clause 
of the 1944 Act has been amended to extend this Act to the 
whole of India. Consequently, the Taxation Laws (Extension 
to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1954 has fulfilled its purpose 
and is now redundant. The C entral Government should 
repeal this Act. This Act has also been recommended for 
repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).    
 
32. Bar Councils (Validation of State Laws) Act, Act 4 of 
1956 
Category: Legal, Medical and Other Professions  
Recommendation: Repeal – savings clause 
The Act validated certain State laws amending the Indian Bar 
Councils Act, 1926. The Act provided that the laws specified 
in the Schedule to the Act shall be deemed to always have 
been valid as if they had been enacted by the Parliament. The 
purpose of this Act has been fulfilled. Hence, the Central 
Government should repeal this Act. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-1). 
 
33. Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Miscellaneo us 
Provisions) Act, Act 36 of 1956 
Category: Labour Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act amended the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. Also, 
this Act repealed the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) 

21 
 
Act, 1950. The purpose of this Act has been served. Hence, 
this Act must be repealed. 
 
34. Jammu and Kashmir (Extension of Laws) Act, Act 62 
of 1956 
Category: State Re-organisation and Extension of Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act provided for the extension of certain laws to the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir. The Acts so extended found mention 
in the Schedule appended to the Act. Corresponding 
amendments have been made to the Short Title, Extent and 
Commencement clause of these Acts to provide for their 
extension to Jammu and Kashmir. This Act has now served 
its purpose and hence the Central Government should repeal 
this Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal by 
the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).     
 
35. Gift-Tax Act, Act 18 of 1958 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal and remove from the Law 
Ministry’s lists of central Acts 
This Act provided for the levy of gift-tax. The Act charged for 
every assessment year a tax referred to as gift-tax in respect 
of the gifts, if any, made by a person during the previous year 
at the rate(s) specified in the Schedule appended to the Act. 
However, gift -tax was abolished as per Section 75 of the 
Finance Act, 1998. Consequently, the Act ceased to have 
effect after 1 st October 1998. Due to misuse of the abolition 
of gift-tax in the form of widespread transfer of insincere gifts 
from non -relatives, Section 56(2)(v) of the Income Tax Act, 
1961 was enacted. According to Section 56(2)(v), any amount 
exceeding Rs. 25,000 obtained by a pers on or a Hindu 
Undivided Family (HUF) without any consideration from any 

22 
 
person on or after 1 st September 2004 but before 1 st April 
2006 would be taxed. Since this amendment was made into 
the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Gift -Tax Act, 1958 is still not 
in force. The Act has been kept in abeyance and still remains 
on the statute book. The Central Government should formally 
repeal this Act. If the need to impose gift-tax arises, the same 
can be met with enacting a new law on gift -tax, whenever 
necessary. This Act has also been recommended for repeal by 
the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).  
 
36. Manipur and Tripura (Repeal of Laws) Act, Act 35 of 
1958 
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act was enacted to repeal ce rtain laws in force in the 
Union territories of Manipur and Tripura (as these then were). 
The Act provided for: 
Firstly, when the Assam Co -operative Societies Act, 1949 
would be extended to the Union territory of Manipur, the 
Manipur Co-operative Societies Act, 1947 would be repealed. 
However, the Manipur Co -operative Societies Act, 1976 is 
now in force and has repealed Assam Co -operative Societies 
Act, 1949 in its operation to Manipur.   
Secondly, when the Bombay Co-operative Societies Act, 1925 
and the Bombay Money Lenders Act, 1946 would be extended 
to the Union territory of Tripura, the Tripura Co -operative 
Societies Act, 1858 would be repealed. However, the Tripura 
Co-operative Societies Act, 1974 repealed the two Bombay 
Acts as extended to the Union territory of Tripura.  
Consequently, this Act has served its purpose and is now 
redundant. Hence, it should be repealed. This Act was also 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-5).   
 

23 
 
37. Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly 
(Constitution and Proceedings) Validation Act, Act 56 of 
1958 
Category: President, Parliament and State Legislatures 
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act was enacted to validate the constitution and 
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of Himachal Pradesh 
which was formed under the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur 
(New State) Act, 1954. The Act prescribed that no court shall 
question any Act passed, or any grant, resolution, proceeding 
or thing made, passed, adopted, taken or done, by or before 
the new Legislative Assembly merely on the ground that the 
new Legislative Assembly had not been duly constituted. The 
Act was enacted specifically to validate the proceedings of the 
Assembly between 1st July 1954 and 31st October 1956. The 
Act was clearly time-specific and has now served its purpose. 
Hence, the Central Government should repeal this Act with a 
suitable savings clause. This Act has also been recommended 
for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).   
 
38. Miscellaneous Personal Laws (Extension) Act, Act 48 
of 1959 
Category: Personal Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to provide for the extension of certain 
personal laws to parts of India in which they were not in force 
then. The Acts so extended find mention in the Schedule 
appended to the Act. Corresponding amendments have been 
carried out in the Short Title, Extent and Commencement 
clause of these Acts. Hence, this Act has served its purpose 
and the Central Government should repeal this Act. This Act 
has also been recommended for rep eal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report (Appendix A-1).   
 

24 
 
39. Married Women’s Property (Extension) Act, Act 61 
of 1959 
Category: Personal Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal with an amendment to the Married 
Women’s Property Act, 1874.  
The Act provided for the extension  of the Married Women’s 
Property Act, 1874 to parts of India in which it was not in 
force. The Act amends the Extent clause of the Married 
Women’s Property Act, 1874 to extend this Act to the whole 
of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. This Act 
also amends Section 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 
1874. Corresponding amendments have been carried out in 
the Short Title, Extent and Commencement clause and 
Section 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874. Hence, 
this Act has served its purpose and the Central Government 
should repeal this Act. This Act has also been recommended 
for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).     
 
40. Hindu Marriage (Validation of Proceedings) Act, Act 
19 of 1960 
Category: Personal Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act was enacted to validate certain proceedings under 
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. This Act validated all 
proceedings taken and decrees passed by a court purporting 
to exercise jurisdiction under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 
before the commencement of this Act. The Act has served its 
purpose and the Central Government should repeal this Act. 
A suitable savings clause should be inserted in the repealing 
Act. This Act finds mention in Appendix D of the PC Jain 
Commission Report.     
 

25 
 
41. British Sta tutes (Application to India) Repeal Act, 
Act 57 of 1960 
Category: State Reorganisation and Extension of Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act repealed 259 British statutes in their application to 
India. The purpose of this Act has been fulfilled and hence, it 
can be repealed. 
 
42. Compulsory Deposit Scheme Act, Act 21 of 1963 
Category: Financial Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act made it compulsory for all categories of persons, as 
mentioned in Section 2 of the Act, to make certain deposits. 
According to Section 2, the Act was meant to be applicable to 
five different categories of persons viz., persons liable to 
payment of land revenue; persons liable to payment of tax 
under the Income -Tax Act, 1961; holders of immovable 
properties situated in urban areas assessed to tax; employees 
of the Government and local authorities, and dealers whose 
annual turnover is Rs. 15,000 or more and who are not liable 
to payment of income tax under the Income -Tax Act, 1961. 
The Act has gradually fallen into disuse because of the 
discontinuance of various sub -schemes. The sub -schemes 
which were to be implemented through the State 
Governments and local authorities concerned were dropped 
owing to considerable practical difficulties. The scheme 
relating to employees not taxable to income tax was 
withdrawn from 23 rd September 1963. For the other 
categories, the Compulsory Deposit (Income Tax Payers) Act, 
1974 was enacted (which was also discontinued with effect 
from 1st April 1985). The Law Commission of India in its 159th 
Report on Repeal and Amendment of Laws has documented 
the Department of Economic Affairs’ proposal to repeal this 
Act. The reason furnished by the Department of Economic 

26 
 
Affairs for proposing repeal of this Act was that in future any 
occasion or necessity for such compulsory deposits will not 
arise. Hence, the Department proposed repeal of this Act 
while making provision for disposal  of the amounts already 
in deposit under the respective enactments. Consequently, 
the Central Government should repeal this Act. A suitable 
savings clause should be inserted in the repealing Act. This 
Act has also been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain  
Commission Report (Appendix A -1) and the 159 th Report of 
the Law Commission of India. 
 
43. Goa, Daman and Diu (Extension of the Code of Civil 
Procedure and the Arbitration) Act, Act 30 of 1965 
Category: Civil Procedure 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act provided for the extension of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 and the Arbitration Act, 1940, to the Union 
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu. The Act also repealed any 
law in force in Goa, Daman and Diu as corresponds to the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the Arbi tration Act, 1940. 
Consequently, this Act repealed the Portuguese Civil 
Procedure Code of 1939 which was in force in the Goa, 
Daman and Diu. The Short Title, Extent and Commencement 
clause of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 has been amended 
to provide for i ts extension to the whole of India. The 
Arbitration Act, 1940 has been repealed by Section 85 of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 extends to the whole of India. Hence, 
the purpose of this Act has been s erved and the Central 
Government should repeal this Act. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-1).      
    
 

27 
 
 
44. Goa, Daman and Diu (Absorbed Employees) Act, Act 
50 of 1965 
Category: Government Employees 
Recommendation: Consider for repeal. 
This Act was enacted to grant the Government power to frame 
rules of employment for those persons who were in the civil 
or administrative services under the Portuguese 
administration of Goa and Daman and Diu. ‘Absorbed 
employee’ was defined by the Act as a person who 
immediately before 20 th December 1961 was holding an 
absorbed post and who on or after that date either served or 
has been serving in that or any other post in connection with 
the administration of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and 
Diu in any of the departments of the Central Government. 
Since a considerable period of time has elapsed since 20 th 
December 1961, the possibility of litigation pending under 
this Act is low. However, as a matter of abundant caut ion, 
the Central Government should consult the Government of 
the State of Goa to ascertain the status of the Act an d the 
matters pending under it and then repeal the law, if 
necessary, with a savings clause. 
 
45. Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, Act 16 of  
1967 
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal  
This Act made certain amendments to the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1947. The 1947 Act was itself repealed by the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Hence, this law is 
redundant and can be repealed.  
 

28 
 
46. Standards of Weights and Measures (Extension to 
Kohima and Mokochung Districts) Act, Act 25 of 1967 
Category: Consumer Affairs 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act extended the Standards of Weights and Measures 
Act, 1956 to the Kohima and Mokochung districts in the State 
of Nagaland. The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 
1956 was repealed by the Standards of Weights and 
Measures Act, 1976. This law is redundant and serves no 
purpose. Hence, it should be repealed.    
 
47. Pondicherry (Extension of Laws) Act, Act 26 of 1968 
Category: State Re-organisation and Extension of Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to provide for the extension of certain 
laws to the then newly formed Union territory of Pondicherry. 
The Acts so extended found ment ion in the Schedule 
appended to the Act. Corresponding amendments have been 
made to the Short Title, Extent and Commencement clause 
of these Acts to provide for their extension to Pondicherry. 
This Act has now served  its purpose and hence, the Central 
Government should repeal this Act. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-1).   
 
48. Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, Act 28 of 1969 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 
1956. The Act also validated all assessment, re -assessment, 
levy or collection of tax made before 9 th June 1969. The Act 
also exempted from tax any sale of goods in the course on 

29 
 
inter-State trade or commerce eff ected during the period 
between 10 th November 1964 and 9 th June 1969. The 
amendments made have by this Act have been effected in the 
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. Hence, the purpose of this Act 
has been fulfilled and the Central Government should repeal 
this Act. A suitable savings clause should be inserted in the 
repealing Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal 
by the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).   
 
49. Central Labour Laws (Extension to Jammu and 
Kashmir) Act, Act 51 of 1970 
Category: Labour Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act provided for the extension of certain central labour 
laws to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Acts which 
were so extended find mention in the Schedule appended to 
the Act. The Acts mentioned in the Schedule have  been 
amended to provide for their extension to the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. Hence, this Act has served its purpose and the 
Central Government should repeal this Act. This Act has also 
been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1).   
 
50. Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Delhi Validation of 
Appointments and Proceedings Act, Act 20 of 1971 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted in order to validate the appointments of 
certain officers under the  Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 
1941 as in force in the Union territory of Delhi and to validate 
proceedings taken by such officers under that Act and the 
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. Section 73 of the Delhi Sales Tax 
Act, 1975 repealed the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941 

30 
 
in its application to Delhi. Hence, this Act is now redundant 
and the Central Government should repeal this Act. A 
suitable savings clause should be inserted into the repealing 
Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal by th e 
PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).   
 
51. Uttar Pradesh Cantonments (Control of Rent and 
Eviction) Repeal Act, Act 68 of 1971 
Category: Rent and Tenancy 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted for the repeal of the Uttar Pradesh 
Cantonments (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1952. The 
purpose of this Act has now been served and the Central 
Government should repeal this Act.    
 
52. Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, A ct 
64 of 1971 
Category: Nationalisation 
Recommendation: Repeal, subject to factual verification that 
this Act has served its purpose.  
The Act provided for the taking over, in public interest, of the 
management of coking coal mines and coke oven plants, 
pending nationalisation of such mines and plants. It enabled 
the taking over of private coking companies pending 
nationalisation. The Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act 
was enacted in 1972. Consequently, the Coking Coal Mines 
(Emergency Provisions) Act,  1971 is now redundant. The 
Central Government should repeal this Act subject to factual 
verification that this Act has served its purpose. This Act has 
also been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report (Appendix A-1).   
 

31 
 
53. Taxation Laws (Ext ension to Jammu and Kashmir) 
Act, Act 25 of 1972 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act provided for the extension of certain taxation laws to 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Acts which were so 
extended found mention in the Schedule appended to the Act. 
The Acts mentioned in the Schedule have been amended to 
provide for their extension to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. Also, the Schedule itself was repealed by the 
Repealing and Amending Act, 1978. Hence, the Act has 
served its purpose and the Central Government should repeal 
this Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal by 
the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).   
 
54. Former Secretary of State Service Officers 
(Conditions of Service) Act, Act 59 of 1972 
Category: Government Employees 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act provided for the variation or revocation of the 
conditions of service of former Secretary of Service officers in 
respect of certain matters. ‘Former Secretary of State Service 
Officer’ has been defined by the Act as a person referred to in 
sub-clause (a) or (b) of Article 312A(1) of the Constitution of 
India. This Act applies to persons appointed by the Secretary 
of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of 
the Crown in India before the commencement of the 
Constitution. This class of officers are no longer in service 
since they were appointed prior to 1947 and 67 years have 
passed since then. Even with respect to officers of this service 
who retired on or before 1972 (as referred to i n Article 
312A(1)(b)), 42 years have passed since 1972. Hence, the 
Central Government should repeal this Act. A suitable 
savings clause should be inserted in the repealing Act as a 

32 
 
matter of abundant caution so as to protect any rights that 
may have accrued to any of these officers under this Act.  
 
55. Sick Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of 
Management) Act, Act 72 of 1972 
Category: Nationalisation  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act provided for the taking over, in public interest, of the 
management of the sic k textile undertakings, pending 
nationalisation of such undertakings. This was done for the 
expeditious rehabilitation of such undertakings so as to serve 
the interests of the general public by the augmentation of the 
production and distribution, at fair p rices, of cheaper 
varieties of cloth. The nationalisation of the sick textile 
undertakings was carried out by means of the Sick Textile 
Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974. Hence, the Taking 
over of Management Act has now served its purpose and the 
Central Government should repeal this Act. A suitable 
savings clause should be inserted into the repealing Act. This 
Act has also been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report (Appendix A-1).       
 
56. Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, Act 15 
of 1973 
Category: Nationalisation 
Recommendation: Repeal, subject to factual verification that 
this Act has served its purpose. 
The Act provided for the taking over, in the public interest, of 
the management of coal mines pending nationalisation. The 
Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act was passed in May, 1973 
making the present act redundant. Hence, the Central 
Government should repeal this Act subject to factual 
verification that this Act has served its purpose. A suitable 
savings clause should be in serted in the repealing Act. The 

33 
 
Act has been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain 
Commission Report (Appendix A-1). 
 
57. Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposits) Act, 
Act 37 of 1974 
Category: Financial Laws  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act provided for, i n the interest of national economic 
development, for the compulsory deposit of additional 
emoluments and for the framing of a scheme in relation 
thereto. The Act provided for the compulsory deposit by all 
persons into two separate accounts – the additional wages 
deposit account and the additional dearness allowance 
deposit account. The Law Commission of India in its 159 th 
Report on Repeal and Amendment of Laws has documented 
the Department of Economic Affairs’ proposal to repeal this 
Act. The reason furnish ed by the Department of Economic 
Affairs for proposing repeal of this Act was that in future any 
occasion or necessity for such compulsory deposits will not 
arise. Hence, the Department proposed repeal of this Act 
while making provision for disposal of the  amounts already 
in deposit under the respective enactments. As a result, the 
Central Government should repeal this Act. A suitable 
savings clause should be inserted in the repealing Act. This 
Act was also recommended for repeal in the PC Jain 
Commission Report (Appendix A -1) as well as in the 159 th 
Report of the Law Commission of India.        
 
58. Tobacco Cess Act, Act 26 of 1975 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act provided for the levy and collection, by way of a cess, 
of a duty of excise on Virginia tobacco and a duty of customs 
on tobacco, for the development of the tobacco industry. The 

34 
 
Act imposes a duty of excise at the rate of one paisa per 
kilogram on  Virginia tobacco which is produced in India. 
However, the objective of revenue generation for the 
development of the tobacco industry is not met through the 
proceeds of the cess which are negligible compared to the 
amount spent in the administration of the cess. In 2003-04, 
the cess collected under the Act was only Rs. 13,94,000. 
Therefore, the Central Government should repeal this Act. 
This Act has also been recommended for repeal by the PC 
Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).      
 
59. Laxmi Ratan and Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking 
Over of Management) Act, Act 98 of 1976 
Category: Nationalisation  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act provided for the taking over, in the public interest, of 
the management of the undertaking of certain companies, 
pending nationalisation of such undertaking, with a view to 
ensuring the supply of certain varieties of cloth needed by the 
weaker sections of the community as well as the Department 
of Defence. This undertaking, the Laxmi Ratan and Atherton 
West Cotton Mills, was nati onalised by the Textile 
Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1995. Hence, this Act has 
served its purpose and the Central Government should repeal 
this Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal by 
the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-1).     
 
60. Untouchability (Offences) Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, Act 106 of 1976 
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act amends the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955 and 
also, the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
Corresponding amendments have been carried out in both 

35 
 
the enactments. Hence, the purpose of this Act has been 
fulfilled and the Central Government should repeal this Act. 
The Act also saves the effect of the previous operation of the 
Untouchability (Offences) Act,  1955. However, since a 
considerable number of years of elapsed since the enactment 
of the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955 as well as this 
Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, it is safe to 
assume that no right, privilege, obligation or liabilit y under 
the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955 as originally named 
still persists. Hence, the Central Government should repeal 
this Act.    
 
61. Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, Act 21 of 1978 
Category: Financial Laws 
Recommendation: Consider for repeal.  
This Act provided for the acquisition and transfer of the 
undertaking of the Credit Guarantee Corporation of India 
Limited in order to serve better the need for providing credit 
guarantee to commercial banks. The Act  also amended the 
Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961 and the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934. Corresponding amendments have 
been carried out in both these Acts. However, since this Act 
also provides for the particulars of the merger of the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation and the Credit Guarantee Corporation 
of India Limited, the Central Government should consider 
repeal of this Act only after consultation with the Reserve 
Bank of India.      
 
62. Hotel Receipts Tax Act, Act 54 of 1980 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act provided for the levy of hotel receipts taxes on certain 
hotels. However, the levy of this tax was discontinued in the 

36 
 
year 1982 by virtue of Section 7 of the Finance Act, 1982. 
Thus, this Act is now redundant and the Central Government 
should repeal this Act. A suitable savings clause should also 
be inserted in the repealing Act. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-1).      
 
63. Central Excise Laws (Amendment a nd Validation) 
Act, Act 58 of 1982 
Category: Taxes, Tolls and Cess Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act provided for the amendment of certain provisions of 
certain central excise laws and for the validation of duties 
collected under such laws. This Act has  now served its 
purpose. The Law Commission of India in its 159th Report on 
Repeal and Amendment of Laws (1998) also recommended 
repeal of this law after verifying that no cases are pending 
under it. Hence, the Central Government should repeal this 
Act sub ject to factual verification. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-1).   
 
64. Punjab Disturbed Areas Act, Act 32 of 1983 
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Consider for repeal.  
This Act provided for the suppression of disorder and for the 
restoration and maintenance of public order in the disturbed 
areas of Punjab. The Act empowered the State Government to 
declare the whole or any part of any district of Punjab as a 
disturbed area. This Act was enacted as a direct response to 
the rise of militancy in Punjab during the 1980s and gives 
extensive powers to police officers to use force in order to 
maintain peace and order. By virtue of a notification dated 
16th November 1996, the whole State of Punjab was declared 

37 
 
a disturbed area for a period of six months, i.e., from 18 th 
November 1996 to 17 th May 1997. Also, by a notification 
dated 9 th March 1989, Amritsar, Gurdaspur and Ferozepur 
were declared as disturbed areas. However, this notification 
was withdrawn on 28 th July 2008. Prima facie, there are no 
areas declared as disturbed in the State of Punjab and the 
need for this Act has been dispensed with. The Central 
Government should write to the Government of Punjab to 
ascertain the status of the Act and also, if any areas are still 
declared as disturbed areas within the State. This Act has 
been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1).     
 
65. Textiles Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) 
Act, Act 40 of 1983 
Category: Nationalisation  
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act provided for the taking over, in the public interest, of 
the management of certain textile undertakings (which find 
mention in the Schedule appended to this Act) pending 
nationalisation. These unde rtakings were nationalised by 
means of the Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 
1995. Hence, this Act is now redundant and the Central 
Government must repeal this Act. This Act has also been 
recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission Report 
(Appendix A-1).   
 
66. General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) 
Amendment Act, Act 3 of 1985 
Category: Banking and Insurance 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to amend the General Insurance 
Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972. The amendments made 
by this Act have been carried out in the General Insurance 

38 
 
Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972. The purpose of this Act 
has been served and hence, the Central Government should 
repeal this Act. A suitable savings clause should be inserted 
in the repealing Act.     
 
67. Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, Act 19 
of 1986 
Category: Tribunals 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act amended the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. 
Sections 2 to 23 of this Act have already been repealed by 
Repealing and Amending Act, 2001. Section 24 specifies that 
every person holding office as Chairman, Vice -Chairman or 
other Member of the Ce ntral Administrative Tribunal (CAT) 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be 
deemed to be either a Judicial Member (if he possesses any 
of the qualifications specified for appointment as a Judicial 
Member under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985) or an 
Administrative Member. Section 25 of this Act validates any 
action taken (including any applications admitted or orders 
passed) by the CAT before the coming into force of this 
Amendment Act. The purpose of this Act has been fulfilled 
and the Central Government should repeal this Act. To save 
the rights and privileges of the members specified under 
Section 24 and also, the action taken by the CAT as 
contemplated by Section 25, a suitable savings clause should 
be inserted in the repealing Act.      
 
68. Destructive Insects and Pests (Amendment and 
Validation) Act, Act 12 of 1992   
Category: Public Health 
Recommendation: Repeal  
The Act amended the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 
1914. The 1914 Act has been recommended for repeal by the 

39 
 
Law Comm ission of India in its 248 th Report on Obsolete 
Laws: Warranting Immediate Repeal. This Act would no 
longer be relevant once the 1914 Act is repealed. Hence, the 
Central Government should repeal this Amendment and 
Validation Act of 1992 along with the 1914 Act.   
 
69. Central Laws (Extension to Arunachal Pradesh) Act, 
Act 44 of 1993 
Category: State Re-organisation and Extension of Laws 
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to provide for the extension of certain 
Central laws to the State of Arunachal Prad esh. The Act so 
extended find mention in the Schedule appended to the Act. 
Corresponding amendments have been made to the Short 
Title, Extent and Commencement clause of these Acts to 
provide for their extension to the State of Arunachal Pradesh. 
Hence, this Act has now served its purpose and the Central 
Government should now repeal this Act. This Act has also 
been recommended for repeal by the PC Jain Commission 
Report (Appendix A-1).    
 
70. Betwa River Board (Amendment) Act, Act 49 of 1993 
Category: Transportation and Infrastructure 
Recommendation: Repeal 
The Act was enacted to amend the Betwa River Board Act, 
1976. The purpose of this amendment was to change the 
name of the Rajghat Reservoir (an inter -state dam project of 
the Governments of Madhya Pradesh and  Uttar Pradesh) to 
Rani Laxmibai Sagar and to bring into effect such change of 
name in the Betwa River Board Act, 1976. Corresponding 
amendments have been made to the Betwa River Board Act, 
1976. This Act has now served its purpose and the Central 
Government should repeal this Act.  

40 
 
 
71. Punjab Gram Panchayat Samithi and ZillaParishad 
(Chandigarh) Repeal Act, Act 17 of 1994  
Category: Laws Relating to Administration of Union 
Territories and Delhi  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to repeal the Punjab  Gram Panchayat 
Act, 1952 and the Punjab Panchayat Samities and Zilla 
Parishads Act, 1961 as in force the Union territory of 
Chandigarh. Both these Acts have been repealed by the 
Punjab Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 which extends to the whole 
State of Punjab. H ence, the Chandigarh Repeal Act of 1994 
is now redundant. The Central Government should repeal 
this Act. This Act has also been recommended for repeal by 
the PC Jain Commission Report (Appendix A-5).  
 
72. Indian Rifles (Repeal) Act, Act 49 of 2006 
Category: Criminal Justice  
Recommendation: Repeal 
This Act was enacted to repeal the Indian Rifles Act, 1920. 
The purpose of this Act has been served and the Central 
Government should repeal this Act.  
 
73. Murshidabad Estate Administration Act, Act 23 of 
1933 
Category: Land Laws 
Recommendation: Remove from the Law Ministry’s lists of 
central Acts 
The Act provided for the appointment of a Manager on behalf 
of the Secretary of State of the properties of the Nawab 
Bahadur of Murshidabad and defined the powers and duties 
of the Manager. This Act has been repealed by the 

41 
 
Murshidabad Estate (Trust) Act, 1963. Therefore, the Central 
Government should remove this law from its lists of central 
Acts in force. 
 
74. Ajmer Tenancy and Land Records Act , Act 42 of 
1950 
Category: Rent and Tenancy  
Recommendation: Remove from the Law Ministry’s lists of 
central Acts 
The Act declared and amended the law relating to agricultural 
tenancies, record -of-rights and certain other matters in 
Ajmer. This Act has been repealed by the Rajasthan Revenue 
Laws (Extension) Act, 1957. Therefore, the Central 
Government should remove this law from its lists of central 
Acts in force. 
 
 
 

42 
 
 
