 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION 
OF 
INDIA 
 
 Report No. 252   
 
 
Right of the Hindu Wife to Maintenance: 
 A relook at Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 
 
 
 
January 2015 
 
  
 

ii 
 
 
D.O. No.6(3)/265/2014-LC(LS)                6 January, 2015 
 
 
Dear Mr. Sadananda Gowda ji, 
  
 The Hon’ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana, while 
passing its order dated 11.02.2014 in the matter of Avtar Singh 
Vs. Jasbir Singh, desired that a copy of its Judgment may be 
sent to the Law Commission of India for taking appropriate 
measures for amending the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956, w.r.t. the admissibility of maintenance to a women, 
whose husband is unable to main tain her. The Committee 
undertook an extensive study of the subject and analyzed all 
the pertinent laws in this regard, including the provisions of 
the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act and also the classic 
Hindu Law.  After the detailed analyses, the Co mmission has 
put its recommendations in the form of a Report, i.e., Report 
No.252 titled “ Right of the Hindu Wife to Maintenance: A 
relook at Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 ” and is submitted for consideration 
of the Government. 
 
 With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
  
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
Mr. D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi – 110115 


iii 
 
Right of the Hindu Wife to Maintenance: 
 A relook at Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter Title 
 
Page 
1. Introduction 1-3 
2. Section 18 vis -à-vis Section 19 of the 
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act 
4-5 
3. Joint Hindu Family and Hindu 
Coparcenary 
6-7 
4. Right to Maintenance in Classical 
Hindu Law 
8-14 
5. Proposed amendment to the Hindu 
Adoption and Maintenance Act 
15-16 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 In a decision given by the Hon’ble High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana in Avtar Singh vs. Jasbir Singh, 
RSA No. 29/1988 (O&M), decision dated 11.02.2014 , 
a lacuna in the position of Hindu Women qua their 
property and maintenance rights under the existing 
law was identified. 
 
1.2 In the said case, the Plaintiff was the wife of a 
man of unsound mind, who had sought 1/4 th share 
in the land belonging to the family, from her father in 
law as maintenance for herself, her husband and her 
minor sons. The said share had been provided to her 
by her father in law through a family settlement before 
the Gram Panchayat, but the wife was later forcibly 
dispossessed of the land by her father in law and 
brother in law. Since the said property had been 
voluntarily given by the f ather in law to his son of 
unsound mind and his family through a family 
settlement, the substantial question of law regarding 
the legal obligations of the father in law in such 
situations was not raised and the case was decided on 
the basis of whether the said family settlement before 

2 
 
the Gram Panchayat was required to be registered in 
order to effect the validity. However, before parting 
with the case, the Ld. Judge made the following 
observations with regard to legal position of Hindu 
wives: 
“Before parting with judgment, it would be 
appropriate to mention that no provision has been 
brought to my notice by learned counsel for the 
parties that if husband is insane or of unsound 
mind, the daughter in law who is not having any 
source of maintenance can claim maintenance for 
herself. When she has to maintain her mentally ill 
husband, her condition is worse than being a 
widowed daughter in law. In such a situation, the 
wife should be deemed to be dependent upon the 
father in law and entitled to maint enance as 
provided under Section 19 of the Hindu Adoptions 
and Maintenance Act. 
Copy of this Order be sent to the Union Ministry 
of Law and Justice and Law Commission of India 
for taking appropriate measures for amendment 
in the Act.” 
 
1.3 Based on the abo ve recommendation, the Law 
Commission of India decided to look into the question. 
 
1.4 Accordingly, the Commission formed a 
Committee for this purpose comprising of the Mr. 

3 
 
Justice (Retd.) Ajit Prakash Shah, Chairman, Law 
Commission of India,; Justice (Ret d.) Ms. Usha 
Mehra, Member, Law Commission of India, Ms. 
Dipika Jain , Associate Professor, Jindal Global 
University, Sonepat; and Mr. Saptarishi Mandal, 
Assistant Professor, Jindal Global University, 
Sonepat. 
 
1.5. The Committee undertook an extensive study of 
the subject and analyzed all the pertinent laws in this 
regard, including the provisions of the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act , 1956 and also the 
classic Hindu Law. 
 
  

4 
 
CHAPTER 2 
Existing Provisions of Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 
 
2.1 Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act provides for the wife to be 
maintained by her husband during her lifetime. 
Section 19 on the other hand speaks of the right of 
maintenance of a widowed daughter in law by her 
father in law. 
 
2.2 Therefore, under the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, the wife of a person who is 
incapacitated does not enjoy such right to 
maintenance against the relatives of the husband 
even if the husband is a member of a joint family. The 
only remedies available to  such women to get any 
form of maintenance is to either file a suit for partition 
in respect of the estate of her husband or file for 
divorce in order to claim maintenance. However, both 
such courses take considerable time in our country 
leaving the women in such situations with no effective 
remedy whatsoever for herself as also for her children.  

5 
 
2.3 In order to address this issue, it is imperative to 
undertake a brief background analysis of the 
prevailing position of law in this regard.  
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER 3 
Joint Hindu Family and Hindu Coparcenary 
 
3.1 A joint Hindu family comprises of all persons 
lineally descended from a common ancestor, and 
includes their wives and unmarried daughters as well. 
In classical Hindu law, the joint Hindu family was 
treated to be the normal condition of a Hindu family. 
It must be noted that this idea of joint -ness of the 
Hindu family is separate from any notion of joint-ness 
of property ownership. Mulla’s Principles of Hindu 
Law clarifies that “the existence of joint estate is no t 
an essential requisite to constitute a joint family, and 
a family which does not own any property may 
nevertheless be joint.”1 Authoritative judgments have 
explained this point as follows: “Hindus get a joint 
family status by birth, and the joint family property is 
only an adjunct of the joint family.” 2 However, where 
there is joint estate and subsequently the members 
become separate in estate, the family ceases to be a 
joint Hindu family. 
                                                           
1Pg 358 
2Janakiram v Nagamony, (1926) 49 Mad 98 

7 
 
3.2 A coparcenary on the other hand is a much 
narrow concept than the Hindu family. It includes 
only those persons who acquire a birth interest in the 
joint family property or coparcenary property. In 
classical Hindu law, these members were the sons, 
grandsons and great grandsons of the last holder of 
the joint property. After the 2005 amendment to the 
Hindu Succession Act, 1956, the members also 
include the daughters of the coparceners. Although 
the daughters are now included in the coparcenary, 
other female members in the family, such as the 
mother, wife and daughter -in-law are not 
coparceners, though they are joint family members. 
The latter members do not have the rights of the 
coparceners with respect to joint family property, but 
enjoy all the general rights of residence and 
maintenance, that members of the joint family have. 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER 4 
Right to Maintenance in Classical Hindu Law 
 
4.1 The classical Hindu law on maintenance was 
devised in such a way that no member of the join t 
family, especially the female members, should be left 
unprovided for. Maintenance was a supreme duty 
that a Hindu owed to all those who were dependent 
on him, and which bound both the person and the 
property, including even the purchaser of joint family 
property.  
 
4.2 The above idea was based on the principle that 
maintenance is an integral part of the concept of join 
family. Family law scholars, Paras Diwan and 
Peeyushi Diwan note the relevance of the notion of the 
joint-ness of family life, to understand the basis of 
maintenance: 
Every member of the joint family has a right to 
maintenance against the joint family property … 
It was the duty of the karta to see that all 
reasonable wants of the family members were 

9 
 
satisfied. If the karta failed to fulfil his duty, the 
members could enforce it by legal action. 
Even with t he emergence of the concept of self -
acquired property and the coparcenor’sright of 
partition, maintenance did not lose its 
importance. Rather the concept of maintenance 
further grew and developed. So far the right was 
available against certain properties, now it 
became available against certain persons also.3 
 
4.3 Under classical Hindu law, the liability to pay 
maintenance arises under two conditions. It is either 
an incident of the relationship between the parties, 
which leads to a personal obligation to p ay 
maintenance. In other cases, the liability to maintain 
certain members of the family is based on possession 
of property, for example, by way of inheritance. 
Several scholars also note that classical Hindu law 
made a distinction between the moral and legal rights 
of maintenance.4If a male Hindu, did not perform his 
moral obligation to pay maintenance during his 
                                                           
3Diwan, Paras and PeeyushiDiwan (1990). Law of Maintenance in India. New Delhi: Deep 
& Deep, Pp. vii-viii 
4Diwan, Paras and PeeyushiDiwan (1990). Law of Maintenance in India. New Delhi: Deep 
& Deep, p. 17; Aggarwal, S.N. (1988). Commentary on the Law of Maintenance. 3rd review 
edition. Allahabad: Orient Publishing. p. 3 

10 
 
lifetime, then upon his death, the obligation would 
transform into a legal obligation which could be 
realized against the property of the deceased  male. 
This illustrates that the obligation to maintain 
attached to a person even after his death, but at the 
same time also underscores the significance attached 
to maintenance in classical Hindu law.  
 
4.4 On the specific question of the wife’s right to 
maintenance, all major scholars and commentators 
agree that paying maintenance to the wife is a 
“personal obligation” of the husband, which arises 
from the fact of marriage, from the moment the 
marriage takes place. 5 Wife has a special position in 
the classical law on maintenance, such that refusal to 
maintain a wife attracts stricter censure than in case 
of other members of the family. Shastri’s exposition of 
the principle is particularly illuminating and relevant 
for our purpose here: 
The establishment of  such a relation, ipso -facto, 
provides a right to the wife to have maintenance 
                                                           
5Diwan, Paras and PeeyushiDiwan (1990). Law of Maintenance in India. New Delhi: Deep 
& Deep, p. 39; Aggarwal, S.N. (1988). Commentary on the Law of Maintenance. 3rd review 
edition. Allahabad: Orient Publishing. p. 8; Sharma, Preeti (1990). Hindu Women’s Right 
to Maintenance. New Delhi: Deep & Deep. P. 77; Gupte, N.Y.(2001). Law Relating to 
Family Courts Act, 1984. 3rd Edition. Mumbai: Ravindra. p. 153 

11 
 
from her husband, right to the daughter -in-
law to have maintenance from her father-in-
law in case of inability of the husband to 
maintain her and a right to the widow to have 
maintenance from the property of her husband or 
from those persons who are managing the affairs 
of the property of her husband.6 
 
4.5 The above position is reflected in judicial 
decisions too. In Ramabai v Trimbak Ganesh Desai 7, 
the husband, an undivided mem ber of a Hindu join 
family had deserted the wife. The wife claimed 
maintenance for herself and her child from the 
husband’s relatives. The Bombay High Court held: 
No doubt, the authorities do not show that the 
relations of a deserted wife are under a personal 
liability to maintain her; but they do show that 
she is entitled to be maintained out of her 
husband’s property to the extent of one -third of 
the proceeds of that property. 
                                                           
6Shastri, Madhu (1990). Status of Hindu Women: A Study of Legislative Trends and Judicial 
Behaviour. Jaipur: RBSA. Pp. 171-172 
7 (1872) 9 Bom HC 283 

12 
 
4.6 The High Court thus upheld the claim of the wife 
to receive maintenance from her husband’s relatives, 
even though the latter did not have a personal 
obligation to do so. The validity of this holding is 
indicated by the fact that this judgment is cited in the 
authoritative book, Mayne’s Hindu Law & Usage 8, to 
illustrate the wife’s  established right to receive 
maintenance from the husband’s family members. 
 
4.7 In Gopala Pattar v Parvathi Ammal 9, following 
the above and other similar judgments, the Madras 
High Court observed, 
It is difficult to see any distinction between the 
position of a widow who has been obliged to 
enforce her charge for maintenance and that of an 
abandoned wife who is obliged to do the same. 
… 
If she has this right against her husband 
personally it can be enforced by the attachment 
and sale of his property  and that property 
consists of an undivided share in the joint family 
property. A charge therefore so long as the 
                                                           
8Misra, Ranganath and Vijender Kumar (Ed.) Mayne’s Hindu Law & Usage. 16 th Edition. 
New Delhi: Bharath Law House. p. 1285 
9 AIR 1929 Mad 47 

13 
 
husband is alive and available is not really of 
such benefit to the wife for in effect she is able to 
in-force a charge in execution, but if the husband 
should die or abscond, her right would be very 
considerably impaired, for she could no longer 
enforce the personal obligation, and would have 
to institute' proceedings against the family and 
against the family property. If there is no legal 
objection to a charge being given it is. 
 
4.8 The High Court ordered maintenance to be paid 
to the abandoned wife, out of the husband’s share in 
the joint family property. 
 
4.9 Mulla’sPrinciples of Hindu Law , another 
authoritative exposition on both classical and modern 
Hindu law, draws of Mitakshara, Chapter II, section 
10, and states the following: 
When a person is excluded from inheritance on 
account of disability, he, and his wife and 
children, are entitled to maintenance out of the 
property which he would have inherited but for 
the disability and where he is excluded from a 
share on partition, he and his wife and his 

14 
 
children are entitled to have a provision made for 
their maintenance out of the joint family 
property.10 
 
4.10 Mulla goes on to state that the right to 
maintenance of such a wife, is “conditional upon her 
continued chastity.”11One must hasten to add that by 
virtue of Section 28 of the Hindu Succession Act 1956, 
there is no longer any disqualification from 
inheritance on the ground of any “disease,  defect of 
deformity.” 
 
4.11 Thus there is sufficient basis in classical Hindu 
law to cast a legal obligation on the father -in-law to 
maintain the daughter -in-law, when the husband of 
the latter is unable to do so. The above discussion 
lends support to the legislative amendment proposed 
by the Commission that seeks to spell out in the law, 
the father-in-law’s obligation to pay maintenance to 
the daughter-in-law. 
  
                                                           
10Mulla, Principles of Hindu Law, Vol I, twentieth edition, (ed SA Desai), Third Reprint, 
2009. New Delhi: LexisNexis Butterworths.p. 223 
11 Ibid, at 888. 

15 
 
CHAPTER 5 
Proposed amendment to the Hindu Adoption and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 
 
5.1 In view of the analyses made in the foregoing 
chapters, the Commission feels it necessary that the 
right of a Hindu woman, whose husband is unable to 
provide maintenance to her, must be protected and, 
accordingly,  recommends insertion of sub -section 4 
under Section 18 as below: 
 
“Section 18 (4) - Where the husband is unable to 
provide for his wife, on account of physical 
disability, mental disorder, disappearance, 
renunciation of the world by entering any 
religious order or other similar reasons, the 
Hindu wife is entitled to claim maintenance 
during her lifetime, from members of the jo int 
Hindu family of the husband, except where the 
husband has received his share in the joint 
family property. 
 

16 
 
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, the 
term “mental disorder” shall have the same 
meaning assigned to it under the Explanation to 
Section 13(1)(iii) of the Hindu Marriage Act.” 
 
