 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION 
OF 
INDIA 
 
 
 
Report No.254 
 
 
 
 
The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) 
Bill, 2013 
 
 
February 2015 
 
  


ii 
 
 
D.O. No.6(3)/274/2015-LC(LS)                 12 February, 2015 
 
Dear Mr. Sadananda Gowda ji, 
  
 As you know, in the meeting taken by Hon’ble Finance Minister on 12 
November 2014, in pursuance of the informal decision taken by the Cabinet, it 
was decided to have the views of the Law Commission of India on the issues 
relating to the proposed amendment s to the Prevention of Corruption 
(Amendment) Bill, 2013.  Accordingly, on 8 January 2015, the Department of 
Legal Affairs forwarded the proposal received from Secretary, Department of 
Personnel and Training, to the Law Commission of India, with a request that a 
report on the matter may be submitted by the end of February 2015. 
 
In view of the short span of time available with  us to submit our views, 
we carried out a study of the United Nations Convention Against Corruption 
(UNCAC) and other relevant statu tes and case-laws of India and the U.K., and a 
draft of the report was given shape.  This was further subjected to extensive 
deliberations, discussions and in-depth study by the Commission and, thus, we 
have finalised the Report, which is presented with th is letter as Report No.254 
titled “The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013”.   
 
 With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
 
  
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
Mr. D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi – 110115 


iii 
 
  

iv 
 
Report No.254 
The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) 
Bill, 2013 
Table of Contents 
Chapter Title Page 
I Background to the Report 1-5 
A. History of Anti-Corruption Law in India 1-2 
B. The proposed Amendments to the PC Act, 1988 2-4 
C. Mandate of the Present Law Commission  4-5 
II Analysis of Section 7 of the 2013 
Bill 
6-24 
A. Section 7: Definitions and Use of Language 6-10 
B. Section 7(1) o the 2013 Bill 10-17 
C. Section 7(2) of the 2013 Bill 17-24 
III Analysis of Section 8 of the 2013 
Bill 
25-30 
A. Sections 8(a) and (b) of the 2013 Bill 25-27 
B. Explanation to Section 8 of the 2013 Bill 27-30 
IV Analysis of Sections 9 and 10 of 
the 2013 Bill 
31-42 
A. Section 9 of the 2013 Bill 31-35 
B. Section 10 of the 2013 Bill 35-40 
V Analysis of Section 11 of the 2013 
Bill 
41 
VI Analysis of Sections 12 and 15 of 
the 2013 Bill 
42-43 
VII Analysis of Section 17A(1) of the 
2013 Bill 
44-47 
VIII Analysis of Sections 18A -I of the 
2013 Bill 
48-50 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
BACKGROUND TO THE REPORT 
 
A. History of Anti-Corruption Law in India 
 
1.1 Regulation of corruption in some form or the other has 
a long history in India. The first law broadly dealing with 
corruption and the attachment of property was a pre -
independence, war time ordinance called the Criminal Law 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1944 (Ord inance No. XXXVIII of 
1944) (hereinafter “1944 Ordinance”). It was enacted under 
the Government of India Act, 1935 to prevent the disposal 
or concealment of property procured by means of certain 
scheduled offences, including offences under the Indian 
Penal Code of 1860 (hereinafter “IPC”). The ordinance is one 
of the few remaining permanent ordinances, given that it 
was enacted when the India and Burma Emergency 
Provisions were in effect and when, the six month clause 
requiring ordinances to be statutorily enacted was 
suspended. It has subsequently been incorporated in the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 ( hereinafter “PC Act, 
1988”) thus giving the ordinance, the status of law. 
 
1.2 The first direct and consolidated law on the subject of 
corruption was the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, which 
was enacted in independent India to supplement the 
provisions of the IPC. The existing provisions under the IPC 
and other laws had proved inadequate to deal with cases of 
bribery and corruption of public servants , which had 
increased greatly during the war years, due to scarcity and 
controls. Therefore, a new law was required to deal with 
various post -war scenarios, which provided multiple 
opportunities for corruption – these included post -war 
reconstruction schem es, termination of contracts, and 

2 
 
disposal of a large number of government surplus stores. 1 
The 1947 Act sought to incorporate (with modifications) the 
attachment provisions from the 1944 Ordinance; introduced 
the offence of criminal misconduct, similar to  section 13 of 
the present 1988 Act; and criminalised attempts to commit 
certain offences under the Act. 
 
1.3 However, the scope of the 1947 Act was considered too 
narrow and the PC Act was enacted in 1988 to replace the 
1947 Act and certain provisions in the IPC dealing with 
corruption. It sought to, inter alia, widen the scope of the 
definition of public servant; incorporate the offences under 
sections 161 -165A of the IPC; increase the penalties 
provided; and provide for day to day trial of cases. 
 
B. The Proposed Amendments to the PC Act, 1988 
 
1.4 The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 
(hereinafter “2013 Bill”) was introduced in the Rajya Sabha 
on 19th August 2013 to amend the PC Act, 1988, the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 and the 1944 
Ordinance. The 2013 Bill was referred to the Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and 
Justice on 23 rd August 2014, and the Committee su bmitted 
its report on 6 th February 2014. Subsequently, on 12 th 
November 2014, an informal and improved version of the 
2013 Bill was circulated ( hereinafter “2014 amendment”) 
and approved at a Cabinet meeting, based on the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee. This amended 
draft was sent to the Commission by way of reference. 
 
1.5 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the 2013 Bill 
makes it clear that the amendments were necessitated by 
India’s ratification of the United Nations Convention Against 
Corruption ( hereinafter “UNCAC”) in May 2011, judicial 
                                                           
1 Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill preceding the enactment of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. 

3 
 
pronouncements, and the need to bring domestic laws in 
line with international practices. It reads as follows: 
 
The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 provides for 
prevention of corruption and for matters connected 
therewith. The ratification by India of the United Nations 
Convention Against Corruption, the international 
practice on treatment of the offence of bribe ry and 
corruption and judicial pronouncements have 
necessitated a review of the existing provisions of the 
Act and the need to amend it so as to fill in gaps in 
description and coverage of the offence of bribery so as 
to bring it in line with the current i nternational practice 
and also to meet more effectively, the country's 
obligations under the aforesaid Convention . Hence, the 
present Bill. [Emphasis supplied] 
 
1.6 However, a perusal of the proposed 2013 amendments 
makes it clear that the amendments subst antially replicate 
the provisions of the UK Bribery Act 2010 ( hereinafter 
“Bribery Act”). This creates certain problems because the 
Bribery Act was enacted to repeal the common law offence 
of bribery and the whole of the Public Bodies Corrupt 
Practices Act 1889, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1906, 
and the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1916. The UK Law 
Commission in its 313 th Report on Reforming Bribery  in 
November 2008 proposed a draft Bribery Bill, which formed 
the basis for the eventual 2010 Act. It p roposed to replace 
the existing offences with two general offences of bribery, a 
special offence relating to bribing a foreign public official 
and a corporate offence for negligently failing to prevent 
bribery by an employee or agent.2  
 
1.7 More important ly, and this distinction is significant, 
the Bribery Act applies to any person and is not restricted 
                                                           
2 The United Kingdom Law Commission, Reforming Bribery, Law Com. No. 313 
(2008), at xiii. 

4 
 
to public servants, as in India. In other words, in the UK, a 
bribe by a person ‘P’ of a company ‘A’ to another person ‘Q’ 
of a company ‘B’ is made an offe nce under the Bribery Act, 
2010; whereas the same is not covered by the PC Act. 
 
1.8 The UK Law Commission (and the 2010 Act) did not 
draw a distinction between public servants and the private 
sector in determining the limits of the bribery offence, partly 
because of the increasing private sector provision of goods 
and services in public interest. The Act caters to its wide 
scope by providing for “ different paths to liability, some of 
which are especially suited to, but by no means confined to, 
those who ho ld public office .”3  The PC Act in contrast is 
applicable only to “public servants” or those “expecting to be 
a public servant”, which along with “public duty”, has been 
defined very broadly under section 2 of the 1988 Act.  
 
1.9 Thus, the approach of the 2013 Bill to transplant 
certain provisions from the UK Bribery Act, while well 
intended, is misconceived and will serve to create further 
confusion and ambiguity. 
 
C. Mandate of the Present Law Commission 
 
1.10 Pursuant to the informal decision taken at the C abinet 
Meeting and the circulation of an improved draft on 12 th 
November 2014 further modifying the 2013 Bill (the “2014 
amendments”), the Secretary of DoPT vide letter being, D.O. 
No.428/04/2014-AVD-IV(B) dated 17 th November 2014, 
requested the Law Secret ary at the Department of Legal 
Affairs to make a reference to the Twentieth Law 
Commission for its views on the proposed amendments in 
the 2013 Bill and the 2014 amendments. 
 
                                                           
3 Ibid., at ¶¶ 3.212-3.218. 

5 
 
1.11 On 8th January 2015, the Department of Legal Affairs, 
Ministry of Law & Just ice, Government of India vide Note 
No.A–45012/1/2015-Adm.III(LA) forwarded the letter to the 
Law Commission requesting its views and recommendations 
on the proposed amendments of the PC Act, 1988, relating 
to the definition of offences, provisions regardin g sanction 
for prosecution, and other provisions in the 1988 Act. The 
Commission was requested to examine the matter at the 
earliest and send its report as soon as possible, preferably 
before the end of February 2014. Accordingly the present 
reference came to this Commission in the aforesaid terms. 
 
1.12 Pursuant to this reference, and considering the short 
span of time within which the Report had to be submitted, 
the Commission carried out a study of the UNCAC; 
provisions of Indian law including the 1944 O rdinance, the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act 2002, and the Lokpal 
and Lokayukta Act 2013; provisions in UK law including the 
UK Bribery Act, the Guidance prepared by the UK Ministry 
of Justice under the Bribery Act, and the reports prepared 
by the UK L aw Commission; practice and relevant 
judgments in Indian and British law; and provisions under 
the American Federal Corrupt Practice Act.  
 
1.13 The Chairman held various meetings with the full time 
members of the Commission and was very ably assisted by 
Ms. Vrinda Bhandari, who served as a Consultant to the 
Commission. 
 
1.14 Thereafter, upon extensive deliberations, discussions 
and in-depth study, the Commission has given shape to the 
present Report. 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
ANALYSIS OF SECTION 7 OF THE 2013 BILL 
 
2.1 Section 7 regulates the demand side offence, namely 
acts relating to a public servant being bribed. As the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons makes clear, the 
definition of the offence under the section was: 
 
proposed to be substituted by a new comprehen sive 
definition which covers all aspects of passive bribery, 
including the solicitation and acceptance of bribe 
through intermediaries and also acts of public servants 
acting outside their competence. 
 
2.2 Nevertheless, in attempting to create “a new 
comprehensive definition”, section 7 of the 2013 Bill has 
substantially lifted from sections 2 -4 of the UK Bribery Act. 
In doing so, it has created great ambiguity in the 
interpretation of the section. 
A. Section 7: Definitions and Use of Language 
S. 7, PC Act, 1988 S. 7(1), 2013 Amendment S. 2(1) UK Bribery Act  
Any public servant who 
 accepts 
 obtains 
 agrees to accept 
 attempts to obtain  
 
“any gratification 
whatever, other than 
legal remuneration….”  
 
in the context of “official 
acts” or “official 
functions” 
Any public servant who 
 requests any person for 
 obtains 
 agrees to receive 
 accepts 
 attempts to obtain 
 
 “any undue financial or 
other advantage” …. 
 
in the context of “improper 
performance” of “a relevant 
public function or activity” 
Any person who 
 requests,  
 agrees to receive or  
 accepts 
 
“a financial or other 
advantage”…..  
 
in the context of 
“improper performance” 
of a “relevant function or 
activity” 
 
 
 
2.3 The PC Act, 1988 made it an offence for a public 
servant to “accept, obtain, agree to accept or attempt to 
obtain” any gratification whatever, other than legal 
remuneration under certain circumstances. The amended 

7 
 
Section 7(1) uses the terms “ requests any person for, 
obtains, agrees to receive , accepts or attempts to obtain” 
any “undue financial or other advantage” for the “improper 
performance” of a “relevant public function or activity”. The 
changes proposed in the 2013 amendment seem to bring it 
line with the UK Bribery Act, which regulates corruption in 
the private sector as well, rather than with the UNCAC. This 
is problematic for a number of reasons. 
 
2.4  The proposed section 7 now covers five types of 
acts by a public servant, namely requests any per son for; 
obtains; agrees to receive; accepts; or attempts to obtain any 
undue financial or other advantage. 
 
2.4.2  The 1988 formulation of section 7 included the 
words “accepts, obtains, or attempts to obtain”, to which the 
2013 amendment added “requests for” and “agrees to 
receive”. These two phrases are lifted from section 2 of the 
UK Bribery Act (and not the UNCAC) without realising that 
the phrase “requests for” seems to already be criminalised 
under “attempts to obtain”. 
 
2.4.3  This amalgamation of f ive words/activities in 
section 7(1) thus, seems redundant. Instead of being 
clarificatory, it will only create confusion and 
interpretational disputes in the future. 
 
2.4.4 Recommendation: The phrase “requests for” 
should be deleted from section 7(1)(a), (b), (c), (d) and 
Explanation 1 of the 2013 Bill. 
  
2.5.1  The phrase “any gratification whatever, other 
than legal remuneration” was changed to “financial or other 
advantage”, seemingly to bring it in line with section 2 of the 
Bribery Act. However, in 20 14, this was substituted by a 
new phrase “ undue financial or other advantage” 
throughout the Act, which was then defined under section 

8 
 
2(d) to “ mean[s] any gratification, benefit or advantage, 
property or interest in such property, reward, fee, valuable 
security or gift or any other valuable thing (other than legal 
remuneration).” The word “undue” seems to have been taken 
from the UNCAC’s formulation of “undue advantage”.  
 
2.5.2  To put it simply, the UK Act talks about “financial 
or other advantage” while the UNCAC talks about “undue 
advantage”, although neither Act/Convention define these 
phrases. The effect of the 2013 and 2014 amendments to 
the PC Act has been to combine these two formulations and 
introduce (and define) the phrase “undue financial or other 
advantage”. 
 
2.5.3  The proposed 2014 amendment seems to revert 
to the spirit of the 1988 formulation, without any clear 
explanation of the distinction attempted to be drawn, if any, 
between ‘due’ and ‘undue’ financial or other advantage. 
Even otherwise, the “financial or other advantage” 
formulation seems narrower than the existing section 7 
formulation of “any gratification whatever, other than legal 
remuneration”. Unlike the  2013/2014 formulation,  
“gratification” has been defined by Explanation (b) of the 
existing section 7 of the 1988 Act to expressly “not [be] 
restricted to pecuniary gratifications or to gratifications 
estimable in money”. For example, it clearly covers se xual 
favours as “gratification” in return for the public servant to 
do/refrain from doing a certain act. However, “other 
advantage” in “financial or other advantage” being 
interpreted using ejusdem generis , does not seem to cover 
sexual favours in return f or the public servant’s acts or 
omissions. Thus, the proposed amendment is actually 
narrowing the scope of corruption, instead of the stated 
intent of expanding it. 
 
2.5.4  A better, and more elegant, solution will be to rely 
on the UNCAC’s formulation of “undue advantage” and 

9 
 
define it using the original 1988 formulation in 
Explanations (b) and (c) of section 7. 
 
2.5.5 Recommendation: The definition of “undue 
financial or other advantage” in section 2(d) should be 
deleted and the phrase “undue financial or other 
advantage” should be dropped from the entire Bill. 
Instead, it should be substituted with “undue 
advantage” throughout the 2013 Bill and the 1988 Act.  
Section 2(d) should now read as follows:  
 
‘(d) “undue advantage” means any gratification 
whatever, other than legal remuneration.  
Explanation 1 : The word “gratification” is not 
limited to pecuniary gratifications or to 
gratifications estimable in money. 
Explanation 2 : The expression “legal 
remuneration” is not restricted to remuneration 
paid to a public servant , but include s all 
remuneration which he is permitted by the 
Government or the organisation, which he serves, 
to receive.’ 
 
2.6.1  Section 7 repeatedly refers to the term “relevant” 
public function or activity borrowing from sections 2 and 3 
of the Bribery Act’s term “relevant function or activity”. 
There are two problems with this formulation: 
 
a.  The term “relevant function or activity” has been 
included, and defined in section 3 of the Bribery 
Act, because the Act sought to punish private 
acts of bribery, but wanted to classify only some 
of them as punishable. This is not relevant in the 
Indian context because the PC Act only deals with 
corruption amongst public servants. Hence, the 
word “relevant” is not as useful. 

10 
 
b. Moreover, unlike section 3 of the Bribery Act 
which defines “relevant function or activity”, the 
proposed section 7(2)(a) only defines “public 
function or activity”, thereby creating 
unnecessary confusion about the use of 
“relevant”.  
 
2.6.2 Recommendation: The word “relevant”, whe re 
it appears before “public function or activity” should be 
dropped from the entire Act.  
 
B. Section 7(1) of the 2013 Bill 
 
2.7.1  Section 7(1)(a) deals with situations where a 
public servant takes a bribe in return for performing a 
public function “improperly”. On the face of it, thus, section 
7(1)(a) does not seem to cover situations, which are very 
common in India, where pub lic servants take bribes to 
perform their functions ‘properly’. Conversely, section 7(1)(b) 
is a take off from section 2(3) of the Bribery Act and it is 
unclear as to what it seeks to convey and cover, especially 
when the Bribery Act covers private and com mercial bribery 
as well, whereas this amendment is only for actions of 
public servants.  
 
2.7.2  Section 7(1)(b), and its interplay with section 
7(1)(a) can be understood only if one examines the kinds of 
situation the UK Parliament had in mind while draft ing 
section 2. Since the Bribery Act was envisaged to cover 
public and private activities, the UK Law Commission 
viewed section 2(3) (or section 7(1)(b) of the 2013 Bill) as 
covering instances where “R, a civil servant, asks for £1,000 
for himself to process a routine application .” This makes 
sense when seen in contrast with section 2(2) (or section 
7(1)(a) of the 2013 Bill) where the illustration for improper 
performance is where “ R asks P for £10,000 if he – R – or a 
colleague destroy supporting docu ments submitted by rival 

11 
 
bidders for a contract P is seeking to secure with R’s 
employer.”4 
 
2.7.3  The Law Commission further goes on to state that 
in the UK, R (any person)  
 
… may commit bribery in one of two main ways, 
both of which we have included un der a single 
“umbrella” offence. Broadly speaking, first, R may 
offer to or actually engage in a misuse of his or her 
position in exchange for an advantage (“doing P a 
favour”). Secondly, R may misuse his or her 
position simply by asking for or accepting a n 
advantage in the first place (“compromising R’s 
position”).   
 
2.7.4  First, there are the “advantage in exchange for 
favour” cases. Under our recommendations:  
(a)  Either the advantage (or the prospect thereof) 
must be a reward for improper conduct, or  
(b)  the advantage (or the prospect thereof) must 
be requested, agreed to or accepted with the 
intention that improper conduct will be 
performed, or  
(c)  the improper conduct must be engaged in, in 
consequence of or in anticipation of, a request, 
agreement to or acceptance of the advantage.  
 
2.7.5  Secondly, there are the “compromise of R’s 
position” cases. Under our recommendations the request 
for, agreement to accept, or acceptance of the advantage 
must in itself constitute improper conduct.5  
 
2.7.6  It is thus clear that first set of cases are covered 
by section 7(1)(a), (c), and (d) whereas the second set of 
                                                           
4 UK Law Commission, supra note 2, at xiii and iv. 
5 UK Law Commission, supra note 2, at ¶¶3.193-3.195. 

12 
 
“compromising R’s position” cases are covered by section 
7(1)(b) of the 2013 Bill. The intent of the UK Law 
Commission in distinguishing between the two sets of cases 
was that “where public office holders are concerned, it might 
be thought not to matter a great deal whether or not they 
misconduct themselves in exchange for an advantage. It is 
enough that they have misconducted themselves, whateve r 
the reason was.”6 
 
2.7.7  By merely lifting the provisions of the UK Act, 
without understanding its scope and context or without 
providing any examples of how the PC Act might apply, the 
2013 amendment only increases the ambiguity around the 
interpretation of the different components of the bribery 
offence under section 7. This can be resolved by providing 
an appropriate illustration to resolve the confusion around 
the word “improper”. 
 
2.7.8  However, the exact phrasing of section 7(1)(b) of 
the 2013 Bill still causes certain problems. First, it seems to 
comprise the “minimum morality” of entire section 7 offence 
insofar as it criminalises the mere act of obtaining/agreeing 
to receive/attempting to obtain. If the mere asking for a 
bribe is made an offence , then the purpose of sections 
7(1)(a), (c), and (d) seem superfluous, and should instead be 
re-numbered to subsume it within the main section. For 
instance, if a public servant asks for a bribe to process a 
routine application, it will be covered under se ction 7(1)(b). 
Section 7(1)(c), which criminalises public servants being 
rewarded for their actions, is then unnecessary. 
 
2.7.9  Second, having four sub-sections seem to suggest 
that section 7(1)(a), (c) and (d) are required because there 
are certain case s, which are not covered by section 7(1)(b), 
or where the mere act of asking for a bribe is not a criminal 
offence. That cannot have been the intention of the 
                                                           
6 Ibid., ¶ 3.218. 

13 
 
Legislative in expanding the scope of the bribery offence 
under section 7.  
 
2.7.10 Recommendation: Section 7(1) should be 
amended (keeping in mind the above suggestions) in the 
following manner: 
 
(1) Any person, being, or expecting to be, a public 
servant who obtains or agrees to receive or accepts 
or attempts to obtain, an  undue advantage from 
any person shall be punishable, with imprisonment 
which shall not be less than three years but which 
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable 
to fine.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -
section (1), any person, being, or expecting to be, a 
public servant who, – 
(a) obtains or agrees to receive or accepts or 
attempts to obtain from any person, any 
undue advantage, intending that, in 
consequence, a public function or activity 
would be performed improperly either by 
himself or by another public servant; or 
(b) obtains or agrees to receive or accepts or 
attempts to obtain, a n undue advantage as a 
reward for the improper performance (whether 
by himself or by another public servant) of a 
public function or activity; or  
(c) performs, or induces another public servant 
to perform, improperly a public function or 
activity in anticipation of or in consequence 
of agreeing to receive or accepting a n undue 
from any person, 
shall be punishable, with imprisonment which shall 
not be less than three years but which may extend 
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 
 

14 
 
Explanation 1. –– For the purpose of sub -section 
(1), the obtaining, agreeing to receive, accepting, or 
the attempting to obtain an undue advantage itself 
constitutes the improper performance of a public 
function or activity. 
Illustration: A public servant, ‘R’ asks a person, ‘P’ 
to give him Rs. 10,000 to process his routine 
ration card application on time. R is guilty of an 
offence under this sub-section. 
 
2.8.1  At this stage it is necessary to refer to 
Explanation 5 in the 2014 amendment, where the terms 
“obtains” and “attempts to obtain” have been defined only 
for the purpose of section 7(1)(b) of the 2013 Bill. The 
proposed Explanation 5 reads as “ for the purpose of clause 
(b) of this sub -section, the expressions “obtains” and 
“attempts to obtain” shall cover cases where a person being, 
or expecting to be a public servant, obtains or attempts to 
obtain, any undue financial or other advantage for another 
person, by abusing his position as a public servant or by 
using his personal influence over another public servant, or 
by any other corrupt or illegal means.”  
 
2.8.2  However, with the changes proposed to the 
formulation of section 7(1) of the 2013 Bill ab ove, it is 
necessary to make certain changes to this proposed 
Explanation 5. 
 
2.8.3  First, the proposed Explanation 5 defines the 
terms “obtains” and “attempts to obtain” for the purposes of 
section 7(1)(b) of the 2013 Bill. Since, as per the 
Commission’s recommendations, section 7(1)(b) is now 
section 7(1), Explanation 5 has to be read in consonance 
only with the Commission’s proposed section 7(1). 
 
2.8.4  Secondly, the phrase “any undue financial or 
other advantage” should be replaced with the phrase “an y 

15 
 
undue advantage” in line with the Commission’s 
recommendation above. 
 
2.8.5  Thirdly, the Explanation only talks about the 
public servant using such advantage “for another person”, 
and omits to include the phrase “for himself”, which needs 
to be changed. 
 
2.8.6  Fourthly, for the sake of clarification, the 
Explanation should also include the “acting in violation of a 
statutory duty or any set of rules, government policies, 
executive instructions and procedures ” as part of the 
proscribed conduct. 
 
2.8.7 Recommendation: Thus, the Commission 
recommends that the proposed Explanation 5 in the 
2014 Bill should be deleted and re -introduced as 
Explanation 2 to section 7 of the 2013 Bill (given that 
the Commission next recommends the deletion of 
Explanation 2 to section 7(1) of the 2013 Bill) as 
follows: 
 
Explanation 2: For the purpose of sub-section (1), the 
expressions “obtains” or “attempts to obtain” shal l 
cover cases where a person, being, or expecting to be, 
a public servant, obtains or attempts to obtain, any 
undue advantage for himself or for another person, by 
abusing his position as a public servant or by using 
his personal influence over another pub lic servant; or 
by acting in violation of a statutory duty or any set of 
rules, government policies, executive instructions 
and procedures;  or by any other corrupt or illegal 
means.  
 
2.9.1  The proposed Explanation 2 to section 7(1) in the 
2013 Bill is also problematic. It states that: 
 

16 
 
It shall be immaterial, whether such person being, or 
expecting to be, a public servant knows or believes that 
the performance of the public function or activity is 
improper or whether the public servant who is induced 
to perform improperly a relevant public function or 
activity knows or believes that the performance of the 
public function or activity is improper. 
  
2.9.2  The Explanation is a combination of sections 2(7) 
and (8) of the Bribery Act, although it does not take into 
account the specific classes sections 2(7) and (8) seek to 
cover. For instance, section 2(7) of the Bribery Act states 
that it is immaterial “in ca ses 4 to 6”, whether R knows or 
believes that the performance of the function or activity is 
improper. Thus, section 2(7) does not apply to Case 3 
(under section 2(2) of the UK Act, and similar to section 
7(1)(a) of the 2013 Bill), where R receives an adva ntage, 
intending that in consequence, a relevant function should 
be performed improperly.  
 
2.9.3  The incongruity of Explanation 2 to section 7(1) 
in the 2013 Bill is evident because, unlike the Bribery Act, it 
applies to all cases. Moreover, it seems com pletely 
unnecessary and unclear in in the Indian context, given 
that the PC Act relates only to public servants, and defines 
“public duty” (and hence, “public servant”) under sections 
2(b) and (c) of the 1988 Act very broadly. 
 
2.9.4 Recommendation: Explanation 2 to section 
7(1) of the 2013 Bill should be deleted. 
 
2.10.1 Explanation 4 to section 7(1) has omitted to cover 
any person “expecting to be a public servant”. 
 
2.10.2 Recommendation: The phrase “person 
expecting to be a public servant” should be inserted 
after the term “public servant” in Explanation 4 to 

17 
 
section 7(1) of the 2013 Bill, now Explanation 3 as per 
the Commission’s recommendations. 
 
C. Section 7(2) of the 2013 Bill 
 
2.11.1 Section 7(2) is a take -off from sections 3, 4 and 5 
of the UK Bribery Act. Sections 3 and 4 of the Bribery Act 
are relevant in the UK context because, although they 
sought to punish private acts of bribery, they wanted to 
classify only some acts as punishable . This made it 
important to define the terms “relevant function or activity” 
or “improper performance” to which the bribe relates or 
“relevant expectation”.  
 
2.11.2 However, the PC Act only deals with corruption 
by public servants and already defines the terms “public 
servant” and “public duty” in section 2 of the 1988 Act. For 
this reason, the definitions under section 7(2) are not 
relevant or necessary in the Indian context, and in fact, will 
only create confusion. 
 
S. 7(2)(a), 2013 
Amendment 
S. 3 UK Bribery Act  
It is a “public function or 
activity” if 
 It is a the function or 
activity is of a public 
nature;  
 the function or activity 
is performed in the 
course of a person's 
employment as a public 
servant; 
 the person performing 
the function or activity 
is expected to perform it 
impartially and in good 
faith; and 
 the person performing 
the function or activity 
is in a position of trust 
by virtue of performing 
it; 
It is a “relevant function or activity” if  
 it falls within sub-section (2) 
(a) any function of a public nature,  
(b) any activity connected with a business,(including 
trade or profession), 
(c) any activity performed in the course of a person’s 
employment, 
(d) any activity performed by or on behalf of a body of 
persons (whether corporate or unincorporate) 
 
 AND  meets one or more of conditions A to C. 
Condition A : a person performing the function or 
activity is expected to perform it in good faith  
Condition B: person performing the function or 
activity is expected to perform it impartially  
Condition C:  person performing the function or 
activity is in a position of trust by virtue of performing 
it  
 

18 
 
2.11.3 Section 7 (2)(a) dealing with the definition of a 
“public function or activity” is completely derived from 
sections 3(2)(a), (c), 3(3), 3(4) and 3(5) of the UK Act, instead 
of the provisions of the UNCAC. Given that the UK Act did 
not want to bring all private activities within the fold of the 
Bribery Act, it was necessary to determine the public nature 
of the function or whether it was performed in a position of 
trust. Therefore, various permutations and combinations of 
activities were brought within the section’s ambit. In the 
2013 amendment, we are only l ooking at functions being 
performed by a public servant, and as such the same 
exclusions/conditions may not be relevant. Even then, the 
scheme operating in the UK Act is not replicated and the 
definitions of “public function or activity” and “relevant 
expectation” having been made cumulative, create unending 
confusion.  
 
2.11.4 For instance, the focus in section 7(2)(a)(i) and (ii) 
on the public nature of the activity or the performance in 
the course of a person’s employment as public servant 
seems completely unnecessary given that section 2(b) of the 
existing PC Act defines “public duty” (and hence, “public 
servant”) in the broadest of terms. While the first two sub -
clauses of section 7(2)(a) seem unnecessary, the final two 
sub-clauses in section 7(2)(a), n amely section 7(2)(a)(iii) and 
(iv) are just confusing. First, they make cumulative, 
conditions that are supposed to be disjunctive. The UK Law 
Commission gives using examples of referees and agents 
accepting contractors’ bids, emphatically states that “ the 
duty to act in good faith is not the same as a duty to act 
impartially,” 7  and therefore treats the two as disjunctive 
conditions. Section 7(2)(a)(iii) places both conditions 
simultaneously on the public servant.  
                                                           
7 UK Law Commission, supra note 2, at ¶ 3.108. For instance, paying an academic 
referee to write an unduly partial reference is a breach of the duty of good faith, and 
not the duty of impartiality. Similarly, when agents accepting bids from contractors, 
are not under a duty to assess the bids impartially, they must only assess the bids 
in good faith. The duty of impartiality on the other hand, is cast on the mediator.  

19 
 
 
2.11.5 Moreover, section 7(2)(a)(iv)’s requirement that in 
addition to the aforesaid conditions, the “person” performing 
the function or activity must be in a position of trust by 
virtue of performing it is unnecessary, confusing and 
redundant. The exact lift from section 3(5) of the Bribery Act 
is evident when one considers the use of the word “person” 
whereas the PC Act, the section, and even the sub -section 
(a)(ii) talk about the function or activity being carried out in 
a person’s course of employment as a “public servant”.  
 
2.11.6 More importantly, however, is the fact that the 
Bribery Act introduced this concept of “position of trust”, 
keeping in mind facts, such as the “ position in which [R] is 
expected to safeguard, or not to act against, the financial 
interests of another person ”. 8  The UK Law Commission 
expressly rejected the idea of placing any special reliance on 
the legal concept of trust and instead looked at this 
provision covering those under a recognised ‘relationship’ of 
trust such as banker -clients/ doctor-patients, as all those 
in a position of trust by virtue of their circumstances such 
as access to documents or premises. Thus, they give an 
example of a security guard R, paid to look the other way 
while a person, P, from the rival company ente rs the 
company premises and sifts through confidential 
documents.9 In the Indian context, it is very unclear how 
this “position of trust” will be interpreted given that the 
doctrine of public trust has not yet been brought into 
criminal law (and only applies to large tort cases). 
 
2.11.7 Further, sections 7(2)(b) -(c) of the 2013 Bill are 
derived from sections 4(1) and (2) of the UK Act. For the 
reasons of the scope of the Bribery Act and the 
impracticality of blatant lifting its language without 
consistency of theme and coverage, these sub -sections 
                                                           
8 Ibid., at ¶ 3.156-3.157. 
9 Ibid., at ¶ 3.160. 

20 
 
further create confusion. For instance, it is unclear why 
section 7(2)(c)(i) uses impartially and good faith as 
disjunctive terms, whereas in section 7(2)(a)(iii) on the 
definition of public function they are used  conjunctively. 
Similarly, the invocation of the concept of “position of trust” 
in the definition of “relevant expectation” is also confusing. 
 
2.11.8 Section 7(2)(d) is a copy of section 4(3) of the UK 
Act, as is evident from the table below: 
 
S. 7(2)(d), 2013 Amendment S. 4(3), UK Bribery Act  
Anything that a public servant  does, 
or omits to do, arising from or in 
connection with that person's past 
performance of a public function or 
activity shall be treated as being 
done, or omitted, by that person in 
the performance of that function or 
activity 
 Anything that a person does (or 
omits to do) arising from or in 
connection with that person’s past 
performance of a relevant function 
or activity is to be treated for the 
purposes of this Act as being done 
(or omitted) by that person in the 
performance of that function or 
activity. 
 
 
2.11.9 However, it is unclear what it conveys. The UK 
Law Commission Report provides some guidance through 
this example: 
 
“R has recently retired from an influential 
position in the civil service. He or she is 
approached by P who is seeking a lucrative 
contract with a Government department. P 
pays R a large sum of money to provide 
confidential information to P about the 
bidding processes. In this example, a 
prosecution should not fail at the outset 
simply because R is not currently engaged in 
a profession or performing a public function. 
The transaction between P and R clearly 
relates to past co nduct of a public or 
professional kind. That should be sufficient 

21 
 
to bring the matter within the scope of the 
offence.”10 
 
2.11.10 The incongruity of such a provision in the 2013 
Bill or the PC Act is evident from the fact that the section 
4(3) of the Bribery Act, 2010 focuses on the acts of “any 
person” and hence relates to the past performance of a 
person in the private sector as well. In fact, the blatant 
lifting and non -application of mind to the Indian context is 
evident that while the word “person ” arising in the first line 
of section 4(3) has been changed to “public servant” in 
section 7(2)(d), the rest of section 7(2)(d) talks about 
“person”. This is completely unnecessary in the PC Act 
context, insofar as it only relates to public servants. 
 
2.11.11 Recommendations:  
 Sections 7(2)(a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) should be deleted. 
Thus, the definition of “public function or activity” 
and “relevant expectation” should be deleted. 
 If this is not accepted, then the conditions in section 
7(2)(a) and (b) sh ould be made disjunctive, instead of 
being cumulative. 
 
2.12  Keeping in mind all the changes proposed in this 
Chapter, and other consequential amendments that follow, 
the comprehensively drafted section 7 will now read as 
follows: 
 
7. Offence relating to public servant being bribed 
(1) Any person, being, or expecting to be, a public 
servant who obtains or agrees to receive or accepts or 
attempts to obtain, an  undue advantage from any 
person shall be punishable, with imprisonment which 
shall not be less than three years but which may 
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.  
                                                           
10 UK Law Commission, supra note 2, at ¶¶ 3.26-3.27. 

22 
 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section 
(1), any person, b eing, or expecting to be, a public 
servant who, – 
(a) obtains or agrees to receive or accepts or 
attempts to obtain from any person, any undue 
advantage, intending that, in consequence, a 
public function or activity would be performed 
improperly either by himself or by another public 
servant; or 
(b) obtains or agrees to receive or accepts or 
attempts to obtain, a n undue advantage as a 
reward for the improper performance (whether by 
himself or by another public servant) of a public 
function or activity; or  
(c) performs, or induces another public servant to 
perform, improperly a public function or activity 
in anticipation of or in consequence of agreeing to 
receive or accepting a n undue advantage from 
any person, 
 
shall be punishable, with imprisonment which shall 
not be less than three years but which may extend to 
seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 
 
Explanation 1. –– For the purpose of sub -section (1), 
the obtaining, agreeing to receive, accepting, or the 
attempting to obtain  an undue advantage  itself 
constitutes the improper performance of a public 
function or activity. 
 
Illustration: A public servant, ‘R’ asks a person, ‘P’ to 
give him Rs. 10,000 to process his routine ration card 
application on time. R is guilty of an offence under this 
sub-section. 
 

23 
 
Explanation 2.–– For the purpose of sub-section (1), the 
expressions “obtains” or “attempts to obtain” shall 
cover cases where a person, being, or expecting to be, 
a public servant, obtains or attempts to obtain, any 
undue advantage for himself or fo r another person, by 
abusing his position as a public servant or by using 
his personal influence over another public servant ; or 
by acting in violation of a statutory duty or any set of 
rules, government policies, executive instructions and 
procedures; or by any other corrupt or illegal means. 
 
Explanation 3.— For the purpose of this section, it 
shall be immaterial whether— 
 (a) such person being, or expecting to be, a public 
servant obtains or agrees to receive or accepts, or 
attempts to obtain (or is to a gree to receive, or accept) 
the advantage directly or through a third party;  
(b) the undue advantage is, or is to be, for the benefit 
of such person being or expecting to be, a public 
servant or another person. 
 
Explanation 4. –– “Expecting to be a public servants” – 
For the purpose of this section, if a person not 
expecting to be in office agrees to receive or accepts or 
attempts to obtain from any person, any undue 
advantage by deceiving such other person into a belief 
that he i s about to be in office, and that he will then 
serve him, he may be guilty of cheating, but he is not 
guilty of the offence defined in this section. 
 
Explanation 5. — For the purpose of this section, 
where a public servant, or a person expecting to be a 
public servant, induces a person erroneously to believe 
that his influence with the Government has obtained a 
title or other benefit for that person and thus induces 
that person to give the public servant, any undue 

24 
 
advantage as a reward for this service, th e public 
servant has committed an offence under this section. 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
ANALYSIS OF SECTION 8 OF THE 2013 BILL 
 
3.1 Section 8 introduces a new supply side offence, namely 
acts relating to bribing of a public servant, given that the 
1988 Act did not directly criminalise “active domestic 
bribery”. The Statement of Objects and Reasons makes it 
clear that the proposed secti on 8 was introduced to make 
domestic law consistent with the UNCAC (there being no 
mention of the UK Bribery Act) because: 
 
Experience has shown that in a vast majority of cases, 
the bribe -giver goes scot free by taking resort to the 
provisions of section 24 and it becomes increasingly 
difficult to tackle consensual bribery. The aforesaid 
Convention enjoins that the promise, offering or giving, 
to a public official, directly or indirectly, of an undue 
advantage, for the official himself or herself or anothe r 
person or entity, in order that the official act or refrain 
from acting in the exercise of his or her official duties, be 
made a criminal offence. Accordingly, it is proposed to 
substitute a new section 8 to meet the said obligation. 
 
A. Sections 8(a) and (b) of the 2013 Bill 
 
3.2  The issues regarding the definition of “undue 
financial or other advantage”, the improper performance of a 
“relevant public function or activity” and the definition of 
“relevant expectation”, discussed in the context of section 7,  
are applicable here as well. 
 
3.3.1  Section 8 (a) suffers from similar problems as 
section 7(1)(a) in that it prima facie suggests that the section 
criminalises only those cases where the person bribes a 
public servant to perform a public function or act ivity 
“improperly”. It does not seem to cover those cases, which 

26 
 
are very common in India, where the bribe giver is seeking 
the performance of a routine, or ‘proper’ public function e.g. 
giving a bribe to process a routine application. 
 
3.3.2  Section 8(b)  is similar to Section 7(1)(b) of the 
2013 Bill and is also unclear, unless we see the examples 
given by the UK Law Commission while discussing these 
principles in the context of attempting to cover both the 
private sector and public servants under the Act . The UK 
Law Commission intended that the section 8(b) provision of 
the 1988 Act (section 1(3) of the UK Act) cover routine 
“facilitation” payments where, regardless of the public 
servant doing anything for the bribe giver, merely accepting 
the financial o r other advantage would be improper. 
Consider this example: 
 
“Suppose R must by law issue P with a licence. 
Even so, P gives R £500 to issue the licence (for 
example, to rest assured in his or her own mind 
that R will issue the licence). In such a case, P 
will be guilty of bribery under our scheme if P 
knew or believed that it would be improper for R 
to accept the £500. We recommend that even 
where P is not trying to persuade R to perform a 
relevant function or activity improperly (or to 
reward R for such c onduct), it should still be 
bribery if P knew or believed that it would in 
itself be improper for R to accept an 
advantage.”11  
 
3.3.3 Recommendation:  
 
Sections 8(a) and (b) should be amended to provide 
the following illustrations to bring clarity in the 
interpretation of section 8: 
                                                           
11 UK Law Commission, supra note 2, at ¶¶ 3.76-3.77. 

27 
 
 Illustration for section 8 (a): A person, ‘P’ gives 
a public servant, ‘R’ Rs. 10,000 to ensure that 
he is granted a license, over all the other 
bidders. P is guilty of an offence under this sub -
section. 
 Illustration for section 8 (b): A person ‘P’ goes to 
a public servant, ‘R’ and offers to give him Rs. 
10,000 to process his routine ration card 
application on time. P is guilty of an offence 
under this sub-section. 
 
B. Explanation to Section 8 of the 2013 Bill:  
 
3.4.1  The 2014 amendment inserted a new sub -section 
(2) to section 8 clarifying that  
 
“Nothing in sub -section (1) shall apply to a person, if 
that person has, after informing a law enforcement 
authority or investigating agency, offered or gave any 
undue financial or other advantage to another person in 
order to assist such law enforcement authority or 
investigating agency in its investigation of the offence 
alleged against the latter.” [Emphasis supplied] 
 
3.4.2  There is a potential for confusion with this 
Explanation: The use of the phase “to another person”, 
instead of to a “person, being or expecting to be a public 
servant” is to take into account that in many instances, 
cases relating to trap are not always restricted to public 
servants directions. Many times, the person giving the bribe 
may be required to pay the bribe money to a third person, a 
conduit, which would then be subsequently delivered to the 
public servant.  
3.4.3  Thus, the use of the word “person” in the 
proposed sub-section (2) will cover all such cases where the 
immediate recipient of the bribe may be a person other a 

28 
 
public servant or a person expecting to be a public servant. 
However, for the avoidance of doubt it is recommended that 
an Explanation is added to this sub -section clarifying tha t 
“another person” shall include a public servant or a person 
expecting to be a public servant. 
 
3.4.4 Recommendation: After Section 8(2), add the 
following Explanation: 
 
“Explanation: For the avoidance of doubt it is 
hereby clarified that the phase “another person” in 
this sub -section shall include a person being, or 
expecting to be, a public servant.”  
 
3.5  Keeping in mind all the changes proposed in this 
Chapter, and ot her consequential amendments that follow 
from the Commission’s recommendations, the 
comprehensively drafted section 8 will now read as follows: 
 
8. Offence relating to bribing a public servant 
Any person who—  
(a) offers, promises or gives an undue advanta ge to 
another person, and intends such undue 
advantage—  
(i) to induce a public servant to perform 
improperly a public function or activity; or  
(ii) to reward such public servant for the improper 
performance of such public function or activity; 
or  
 
(b) offers, promises or gives an undue advantage to 
a public servant and knows or believes that the 
acceptance of such undue advantage by the public 
servant would itself constitute the improper 
performance of a public function or activity,  
 

29 
 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not 
be less than three years but which may extend to 
seven years and shall also be liable to fine:  
 
Provided that when the offence under this section has 
been committed by a commercial organisation, such 
commercial organisat ions shall be punishable with 
fine.  
 
Illustration for sub -section (a): A person, ‘P’ gives a 
public servant, ‘R’ Rs. 10,000 to ensure that he is 
granted a license, over all the other bidders. P is guilty 
of an offence under this sub-section. 
 
Illustration for sub -section (b): A person ‘P’ goes to a 
public servant, ‘R’ and offers to give him Rs. 10,000 to 
process his routine ration card application on time. P 
is guilty of an offence under this sub-section. 
 
Explanation.—It shall be immaterial whether the 
person to whom the undue advantage is offered, 
promised or given is the same person as the person 
who is to perform, or has performed, the public 
function or activity concerned, and, it shall also be 
immaterial whether such undue advantage is offered, 
promised or given by the person directly or through a 
third party. 
 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a person, if 
that person has, after informing a law enforcement 
authority or investigating agency, offered or given any 
undue advantage to another  person in order to assist 
such law enforcement authority or investigating 
agency in its investigation of the offence alleged 
against the latter. 
 

30 
 
Explanation.–– For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby 
clarified that the phase “another person” in this sub -
section shall include a person being, or expecting to 
be, a public servant. 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
ANALYSIS OF SECTIONS 9 AND 10 OF THE 2013 BILL 
 
4.1  Section 8 of the 2013 Bill criminalises the 
commercial organisation’s act of bribing a public servant; 
the proviso to section 8 of the 2013 Bill clarifies that “ when 
the offence under this section has been committed by a 
commercial organisation, such commercial organisations shall 
be punishable with fine.” Section 9 on the other hand, holds 
a commercial organis ation liable for failure to prevent 
persons associated with it from bribing a public servant to 
obtain/retain business or an advantage in the conduct of 
business for such commercial organisation. Section 10 
follows from section 9 (and not section 8) and st ates that in 
cases where the “ commercial organisation has been guilty of 
an offence under section 9 ”, every person in charge of and 
responsible to it shall be deemed guilty, unless he/she can 
prove that the offence was committed without their 
knowledge or that they had exercised all due diligence. 
 
A.  Section 9 of the 2013 Bill 
 
4.2.1  Section 9 creating an offence relating to bribing of 
a public servant by a commercial organisation is taken from 
section 7 of the UK Act, which deals with the failure of a 
commercial organisation to prevent bribery. In the UK 
context, it would be punishable for a private person to bribe 
another private person or a public servant in the context of 
commercial organisations intending to obtain or retain 
business. In the proposed  2013 amendment, the only 
bribery that is made punishable is when it pertains to a 
public servant for the purposes of section 9(1)(a) and (b). 
Hence, section 9 is a distinct offence from section 8. 
 
4.2.2  The proviso to section 9 of the 2013 Bill provides  
for a defence for the commercial organisation to prove that it 

32 
 
had in place adequate procedures designed to prevent “any 
person associated with it” from undertaking the stipulated 
criminalised conduct. This bears reference to section 7(2) of 
the UK Briber y Act, read with sections 7(4) and 9 thereof, 
with the underlying premise that the “ individual failings of 
particular members of staff do not necessarily illustrate 
systematic failures in the way that it [company] sought to 
prevent the commission of bribery.”12  
 
4.2.3  Section 9 of the UK Act, however, creates a 
mandatory obligation on the Secretary of State to publish 
“guidance about procedures that relevant commercial 
organisations can put in place to prevent persons associated 
with them from bribing  as mentioned in section 7(1) ”. The 
section further envisages a regular revision to the guidance. 
The UK authorities have put in place a detailed “guidance” 
for such procedures, 13 to provide clarity and certainty. As 
the UK Law Commission noted: 
 
…the adequacy of a system can be made to depend 
on the size (and, we might add, the resources) of the 
company in question. In a small company with five 
employees, it might be perfectly adequate for the 
managing director simply to remind the employees 
(and others) periodically of their obligations.14 
 
4.2.4  The Guidance published by the UK government 
lists six principles, in addition to case studies, to help 
determine the adequacy of procedures: 
 
(a) The principle of proportionate procedures - A 
commercial organisation’s procedures to prevent 
bribery by persons associated with it are 
                                                           
12 UK Law Commission, supra note 2, at ¶ 6.108. 
13 Ministry of Justice, Bribery Act of 2010: Guidance, (2011), 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/legislation/bribery-act-2010-guidance.pdf>. 
14 UK Law Commission, supra note 2, at ¶ 6.109. 

33 
 
proportionate to the bribery risks it faces and to 
the nature, scale and complexity of the 
commercial organisation’s acti vities. They are 
also clear, practical, accessible, effectively 
implemented and enforced. 
(b) Top-level commitment: The top-level management 
of a commercial organisation (be it a board of 
directors, the owners or any other equivalent 
body or person) are commit ted to preventing 
bribery by persons associated with it. They foster 
a culture within the organisation in which bribery 
is never acceptable. 
(c) Risk assessment: The commercial organisation 
assesses the nature and extent of its exposure to 
potential external and internal risks of bribery on 
its behalf by persons associated with it. The 
assessment is periodic, informed and 
documented. 
(d) Due diligence: The commercial organisation 
applies due diligence procedures, taking a 
proportionate and risk based approach, in 
respect of persons who perform or will perform 
services for or on behalf of the organisation, in 
order to mitigate identified bribery risks. 
(e) Communications (including training): The 
commercial organisation seeks to ensure that its 
bribery prevention policie s and procedures are 
embedded and understood throughout the 
organisation through internal and external 
communication, including training, that is 
proportionate to the risks it faces. 
(f) Monitoring and review: The commercial 
organisation monitors and reviews p rocedures 
designed to prevent bribery by persons associated 

34 
 
with it and makes improvements where 
necessary.15 
 
4.2.5  However, the proposed amendment to section 9 of 
the 2013 Bill does not require any such guidance and 
places no obligation on the government  in this regard. This 
is especially important given that the proviso places the 
burden of proof on the commercial organisation. This 
provision will lead to an immediate and significant impact 
on the conduct of business by corporations, especially in 
light of the fact that they will not have any clarity on what is 
expected of them and will not even know if the procedures 
and processes they adopt are in compliance or in possible 
breach. This might also impede the efficient functioning of 
small businesses, whi ch will not be able to determine the 
“adequate standard” themselves. 
 
4.2.6  Moreover, even the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
(hereinafter “FCPA”), 1977 in the United States mandates 
the US Attorney General to issue guidelines. While the UK 
Bribery Act mandates consultation of the Secretary of State 
with the Scottish Ministers, the FCPA Act requires the 
Attorney General to consult all the interested persons 
through public notice and comments procedures before 
publishing the guidelines. In both countries thu s, there are 
extensive guidelines on procedures, which commercial 
organisations may use on a voluntary basis to conform their 
conduct to the law and relevant government policy on 
enforcement. 
 
4.2.7  In the Commission’s recommendation, section 9 
should be brought into force only when the guidelines under 
the proposed section 9(5) are prescribed and published by 
the Central Government. 
 
                                                           
15 Guidance, supra note 13, at 20-32. 

35 
 
4.2.8 Recommendation: Section 9 should be 
amended to provide for a section, along the lines of 
section 9 of the UK Bribery Act, introducing a statutory 
obligation on the government to publish guidance as to 
the procedures that commercial organisations can take 
to put in place “adequate systems”.   
 
In Section 9, a further sub-clause (5) can be added to the 
following effect: 
 
(5) The Central Government shall prescribe and 
publish guidelines about the adequate procedures, 
which can be put in place by commercial 
organisations to prevent persons associated with 
them from bribing any person, being or expecting 
to be, a public servant. 
 
Provided that such guidelines shall be prescribed 
and published by the Central Government after 
following a consultation process in which the views 
of all the interested stakeholders are obtained 
through public notice. 
 
B. Section 10 of the 2013 Bill 
 
4.3.1  Section 10 extends the liability of the commercial 
organisation to every person in charge of and responsible to 
the organisation for the conduct of i ts business through a 
deeming provision. Given that the section begins with “when 
a commercial organisation has been guilty”, it is clear that 
section 10 only pertains to section 9, and is not connected 
to section 8 – it again provides differing standards of how to 
treat corporate bribery within the same enactment. 
 
4.3.2  The effect of section 10 is that if an employee (P) 
of a company (C), sitting in Bangalore bribes a local official 
(R) to get its clearance on time, then the combined effect of 

36 
 
the 2013 B ill is that P will be liable under section 8; R 
under section 7; and C under section 9, unless it can prove 
it has in place adequate procedures designed to prevent 
such conduct. However, section 10 will operate to deem 
every single person in charge of, and  responsible to, C – 
thus, every Director on the Board of Directors, who may be 
sitting in Delhi more than 2000 kms away – guilty, and the 
burden on proof will shift on each of these Directors to 
prove they had no knowledge or had exercised due diligence. 
The situation could be even worse if for instance, P had the 
high level clearance of one of the sitting Directors to bribe R, 
because of which every other Director will now be faced with 
the difficult task of discharging their high burden of proof. 
 
4.3.3  As is evident thus, section 10(1) of the 2013 Bill 
is overbroad and unlike the provisions in the UNCAC or the 
UK Bribery Act. However, even section 10(2), with its 
elements of negligence, is overtly broad and not along the 
lines of section 14(2) of the U K Bribery Act. To provide for 
consistency and coherence between sections 9 and 10 of the 
2013 Bill and to remove the over -broad elements of 
negligence, section 10 should be redrafted. 
 
4.3.4 Recommendation: Section 10 of the Bill 
should be amended, with sub-section (1) being deleted 
and sub-section (2) being modified. The revised Section 
10 will read as follows: 
 
“10. Where an offence under section 9 is 
committed by a commercial organisation, and such 
offence is proved to have been committed with the 
consent or connivance of any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the commercial 
organisation, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punishable 
with impriso nment which shall not be less than 

37 
 
three years but which may extend to seven years 
and shall also be liable to fine.” 
 
4.4  Keeping in mind all the changes proposed in this 
Chapter, and other consequential amendments that follow 
from the Commission’s recom mendations, the 
comprehensively drafted sections 9 and 10 will now read as 
follows: 
 
9. Offences relating to bribing a public servant by a 
commercial organisation 
 
9. (1) A commercial organisation shall be guilty of an 
offence and shall be punishable with fine, if any 
person associated with the commercial organisation 
offers, promises or gives an undue advantage to a 
public servant intending— 
(a) to obtain or retain business for such 
commercial organisation; and 
(b) to obtain or retain an advantage in the 
conduct of business for such commercial 
organisation: 
Provided that it shall be a defence for the commercial 
organisation to prove that it had in place adequate 
procedures designed to prevent persons associated 
with it from undertaking such conduct. 
 
(2) F or the purposes of this section, a person offers, 
promises or gives an undue advantage to a public 
servant if, and only if, such person is, or would be, 
guilty of an offence under section 8, whether or not the 
person has been prosecuted for such an offence. 
 
(3) For the purposes of section 8 and this section,—  
(a) "commercial organisation" means— 

38 
 
(i) a body which is incorporated in India and 
which carries on a business, whether in 
India or outside India; 
(ii) any other body which is incorporated 
outside In dia and which carries on a 
business, or part of a business, in any part 
of India; 
(iii) a partnership firm or any association of 
persons formed in India and which carries 
on a business (whether in India or outside 
India); or 
(iv) any other partnership or a ssociation of 
persons which is formed outside India and 
which carries on a business, or part of a 
business, in any part of India; 
(b) "business" includes a  trade or profession or 
providing service including charitable service;  
(c) a person is said to be a ssociated with the 
commercial organisation if, disregarding any 
offer, promise or giving an undue advantage 
which constitutes offence under sub -section (1), 
such person is a person who performs services 
for or on behalf of the commercial organisation.  
 
Explanation 1.—The capacity in which the person 
performs services for or on behalf of the 
commercial organisation shall not matter 
irrespective of whether such person is employee 
or agent or subsidiary of such commercial 
organisation.  
 
Explanation 2. —Whether or not the person is a 
person who performs services for or on behalf of 
the commercial organisation is to be determined 
by reference to all the relevant circumstances and 
not merely by reference to the nature of the 

39 
 
relationship between such person  and the 
commercial organisation.  
 
Explanation 3 .—If the person is an employee of 
the commercial organisation, it shall be 
presumed unless the contrary is proved that such 
person is a person who performs services for or 
on behalf of the commercial organisation.  
 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the offence under section 8 
and this section shall be cognizable. 
 
(5) The Central Government shall prescribe and 
publish guidelines about the adequate procedures, 
which can be put in place by commercial organisations 
to prevent persons associated with them from bribing 
any person, being or expecting to be, a public servant. 
 
Provided that such guidelines shall be prescribed and 
published by the Central Government af ter following a 
consultation process in which the views of all the 
interested stakeholders are obtained through public 
notice. 
 
10.  Person in charge of commercial organisation 
to be guilty of offence 
 
Where an offence under section 9 is committed by a 
commercial organisation, and such offence is proved to 
have been committed with the consent or connivance 
of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of 
the commercial organisation, such director, manager, 
secretary or other officer shall be guilty o f the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less 

40 
 
than three years but which may extend to seven years 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
ANALYSIS OF SECTION 11 OF THE 2013 BILL 
 
5.1.1  Section 11 of the 1988 PC Act has been omitted 
because it dealt with a public servant accepting a valuable 
thing, without consideration (or for inadequate 
consideration), from a person concerned in proceeding or 
business transacted by such public servant – this was 
considered to have been included in the new, 
comprehensive definition of bribery under section 7. 
 
5.1.2  On plain reading, it seems that section 11 has 
not been retained in any form in the proposed section 7.  
Section 11 of the 1988 Act deals with cases where for 
instance, a public servant takes free treatment in p rivate 
hospital, knowing fully well that the private hospital has 
applied for certain permissions, which are under the public 
servant’s jurisdiction. Section 11 of the 1988 Act 
criminalised this act. 
 
5.1.3  However, under the proposed re -formulation of 
section 7, with the main offence being the mere acceptance 
of an “undue advantage” defined to include “any 
gratification whatever, other than legal remuneration”, such 
an offence is now covered under section 7 of the 2013 Bill. 
 
5.1.4 Recommendation: Section 11 should remain 
deleted, if section 7 is recast as suggested. 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
ANALYSIS OF SECTIONS 12 AND 15 OF THE 2013 BILL 
 
6.1.1  Section 12 of the 1988 PC Act criminalises the 
abetment of “any offence punishable under this Act”, 
whereas section 15 criminalises an attempt to commit 
offences under section 13(1)(c) and (d) [now section 13(a) of 
the 2013 Bill]. 
 
6.1.2  Pursuant to the 2013 Lokpal and Lokayukta Act 
(hereinafter “Lokpal Act”) , section 12 was amended to 
provide for a minimum punishment of three years, up to five 
years for abetment, whereas section 15, was amended to 
provide for a minimum period of imprisonment of two years, 
up to five years. 
 
6.1.3  A conjoint reading of the two sections under the 
2013 Bill reveals that the minim um punishment for the 
abetment of any offence, including the attempt to commit an 
offence is three years, whereas the minimum punishment of 
actually attempting an offence is two years. There is a clear 
discrepancy insofar as the punishment given for the 
principal act (of attempt) is less than the abetment of the 
act. 
 
6.1.4 Recommendation: Section 12 of the 2013 Bill 
needs to be amended and after the words “punishable 
under this Act”, the words “apart from any offence 
under Section 15” needs to be inserted. 
 
 
6.2  Thus, section 12 will now read as follows: 
 
12. Punishment for abetment of offences 
defined in the Act 

43 
 
Whoever abets any offence punishable under this 
Act, apart from any offence under section 15, 
whether or not that offence is committed in 
consequence of that abetment, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall be not less than three years but which may 
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
ANALYSIS OF SECTION 17A(1) OF THE 2013 BILL 
 
7.1.1  The proposed Section 17A of the PC Act, 
introduced pursuant to the 2014 amendment, provides for 
investigation of offences relatable to recommendations made 
or decision taken by a public servant in the discharge of 
their official duties. Section 17A(1) prov ides for “previous 
approval” to be taken from the Lokpal or the Lokayukta, as 
the case may be, where the “ alleged offence is relatable to 
any recommendation made or decision taken by a public 
servant in the discharge of his official functions or duties. ” 
The proposed Section 17A(1) reads as follows: 
 
17A. Investigation of offences relatable to 
recommendations made or decision taken by public 
servant in discharge of official functions or duties. 
(1) No police officer shall conduct any investigation into 
any offe nce alleged to have been committed by a 
public servant under this Act, where the alleged 
offence is relatable to any recommendation made or 
decision taken by a public servant in the discharge 
of his official functions or duties, without the 
previous approval- 
 
(a) of the Lokpal, in the case of a public servant who 
is employed, or as the case may be, was at the 
time of commission of the alleged offence 
employed in connection with the affairs of the 
Union, and is a person referred to in clauses (a) 
to (h) of sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Lokpal 
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013; 
(b) of the Lokayukta of the State or such authority 
established by law in that State under whose 
jurisdiction the public servant falls, in the case of 
a person who is employed, as the case may b e, 

45 
 
was at the time of commission of the alleged 
offence employed in connected with the affairs of 
a State, 
 
conveyed by an order issued by the Lokpal in 
accordance with the provisions contained in 
Chapter VII of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 
or Lokayukta of the State or such authority referred 
to in clause (b) for processing of inestigation against 
the public servant 
 
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary 
for cases involving arrest of a person on the spot on 
the charge of accepting or  attempting to accept any 
undue financial or other advantage for himself or for 
any other person intending that, in consequence, a 
relevant public function or activity shall be 
performed improperly either by himself or by 
another public servant. 
 
7.1.2  The proposed section 17A (1), introduced in 2014, 
thus extends such a limited requirement of “previous 
approval” to public servants who are or were in service at 
the time of the alleged offence. This is in line with the 
provisions of section 197 Cr.P.C. and the scheme of section 
14 of the Lokpal Act. 
 
7.1.3  The proviso to the proposed section 17A (1) is 
similar to Clause (2) of the repealed section 6A of the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 ( hereinafter “DSPE 
Act”) which provided that in certain factual scenarios/gross 
cases, no sanction/previous approval would be necessary. 
However, the proviso to the proposed section 17A (1) is 
narrower than Section 6A (2) of the DSPE Act – now 
requiring that even if a person is caught on the spot while 
accepting illegal gratification (“undue financial or other 
advantage”), it would have to be shown by the prosecution 

46 
 
that it was intended that such acceptance consequential to 
a relevant public function or activity being performed 
improperly. 
 
7.1.4 Recommendation: The following expression 
should be deleted from the proviso to Section 17A(1): 
 
“intending that in consequence a relevant public 
function or activity shall be performed improperly 
either by himself or another public servant” 
 
7.2  The amend ed version of the proposed section 
17A(1), introduced vide the 2014 amendment, along with 
other consequential amendments, should now read as 
follows: 
 
17A. Investigation of offences relatable to 
recommendations made or decision taken by public 
servant in discharge of official functions or duties. 
(2) No police officer shall conduct any investigation into 
any offence alleged to have been committed by a 
public servant under this Act, where the alleged 
offence is relatable to any recommendation made or 
decision taken by a public servant in the discharge 
of his official functions or duties, without the 
previous approval- 
 
(c) of the Lokpal, in the case of a public servant who 
is employed, or as the case may be, was at the 
time of commission of the alleged offence 
employed in connection with the affairs of the 
Union, and is a person referred to in clauses (a) 
to (h) of sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Lokpal 
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013; 
(d) of the Lokayukta of the State or such authority 
established by law in that State under whose 
jurisdiction the public servant falls, in the case of 

47 
 
a person who is employed, as the case may be, 
was at the time  of commission of the alleged 
offence employed in connected with the affairs of 
a State, 
 
conveyed by an order issued by the Lokpal in 
accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 
VII of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 or 
Lokayukta of the State or such authority referred to in 
clause (b) for processing of investigation against the 
public servant 
 
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary for 
cases involving arrest of a person on the spot on the 
charge of accepting or attempting to accept any undue 
advantage for himself or for any other person. 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
ANALYSIS OF SECTIONS 18A-I OF THE 2013 BILL 
 
8.1.1  Provisions regarding attachment and forfeiture 
have been introduced vide sections 18A-N of the 2013 Bill. 
However, they are bound to create confusion given that 
separate procedures for attachment and forfeiture in cases 
of corruption of public servants are covered under the 
following three laws: 
a. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Ordinance 1944; 
b. Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 
(“hereinafter PMLA”);  
c. The Lokpal and Lokayukta Act, 2013. 
 
8.1.2  Hence, it might be better suited to replace the 
proposed sections 18A-18N with a single provision referring 
to the forfeiture and attachment procedures in the PMLA  
Act or the Criminal Law Ordinance of 1944. This will ensure 
our compliance with the UNCAC. 
 
8.1.3  However, there may be some practice difficulties 
in the adoption of the PMLA procedure in cases investigated 
and prosecuted by State Government agencies suc h as the 
State Police, State Anti -Corruption Bureaus etc. It may not 
be desirable to load the Enforcement Directorate, the 
Adjudicating Authority and the Appellate Tribunal with 
thousands of cases under the PC Act all over the country as 
an exclusive forum  for handling matters relating to 
attachment and forfeiture of property. 
 
8.1.4  Further, the reach of the 1944 Ordinance is 
slightly different than that of the PMLA inasmuch as the 
Ordinance enables the filing of application for attachment 
by the appropriate government merely on the belief that any 
person has committed a scheduled offence and the said 
person has procured money or other property by means of 

49 
 
the offence, whether or not any court has taken cognizance 
of the offence. 
 
8.1.5  PMLA on the contra ry enables provisional 
attachment where the Director or authorised Deputy 
Director believes that any person is in possession of any 
proceeds of crime (not necessarily the person who 
committed the crime) and such proceeds are likely to be 
concealed, transferred, etc. which may result in frustrating 
any proceedings for confiscation of such proceeds. PMLA 
requires that an order for provisional attachment cannot be 
passed by the Director or authorised Deputy Director 
unless, in relation to the scheduled offence , a report has 
been forwarded to a Magistrate under Section 173 of the 
CrPC or a complaint has been filed by a person authorised 
to investigate the offence before a Magistrate or court for 
taking cognizance of the scheduled offence. 
 
8.1.6  Having regard t o these factors, a better option 
would be to provide for recourse for both the PMLA and the 
Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance of 1944, whichever 
may be found most convenient, depending upon the nature 
of the case. 
 
8.1.7  It may, therefore, be desirable to delete the 
proposed new Chapter IVA and in its place, incorporate a 
new Section 18A along the lines of the provision made in the 
earlier Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and 
Official of Public International Organisations Bill, 2011, 
which was introduced in the Lok Sabha in 2011 but lapsed 
with the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha. 
 
8.1.8 Recommendation: The proposed Chapter IVA 
should be deleted and be re-cast as follows: 
 
“18A. Save as otherwise provided under the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, the 

50 
 
provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment 
Ordinance, 1944 shall, as far as may be, apply to 
the attachment, administration of attached 
property and execution of order of at tachment or 
confiscation of money or property procured by 
means of an offence under this Act.” 
 
Consequential amendments will also need to be made to 
the PMLA, 2002 so as to include all the offences under 
the PC Act, as now redefined, as predicate offences  
under the Act by appropriate substitution of Paragraph 
8 of Part A of the Schedule to the PMLA. 
 
8.2  The amended version of the proposed Chapter 
IVA, introduced under the 2013 Bill, will now read as 
follows: 
 
Chapter IVA: ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY 
18A. Save as otherwise provided under the Prevention of 
Money Laundering Act, 2002, the provisions of the 
Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944 shall, as far 
as may be, apply to the attachment, administration of 
attached property and execution of or der of attachment 
or confiscation of money or property procured by means 
of an offence under this Act.” 
 
 
 
