 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION 
OF 
INDIA 
 
 
Report No.256 
 
Eliminating Discrimination 
Against Persons Affected by 
Leprosy 
 
 
 
April 2015 
 
  


ii 
 
 
D.O. No.6(3)/273/2015-LC(LS)                         7 April, 2015 
 
Dear Mr. Sadananda Gowda ji, 
  
  On a reference from the then Minister for Law and Justice, Shri Ravi 
Shankar Prasad, the Law Commission of India undertook the task of identifying 
laws which can either be repealed or which need amendments in view of the 
existing climate of economic libera lization.  Through its four Reports, viz., 
Report Nos. 248 -251, the Commission recommended repeal of 288 obsolete 
laws.  In its Report No.249 , the Commission recommended the repeal of The 
Lepers Act, 1898 in consultation with the relevant State(s).  Howeve r, on a 
request from the Leprosy Mission Trust of India, the Commission took up the 
study of amending / repealing laws discriminatory towards people affected by 
leprosy. 
Leprosy is one of the oldest known diseases, but remains misunderstood 
in all its aspe cts including its etiology, causation, means of transmission and 
curability. To this day, it remains among the most dreaded of diseases.  In 
2014, India had the largest number of new Leprosy cases globally (58%). From 
2005 till 2014, the National Leprosy E radication Programme (NLEP) has 
recorded a rate of 1.25 to 1.35 lakh new cases every year, a majority being 
children, who are threatened with isolation and discrimination at a very young 
age.  
 
Although Leprosy may cause irreversible disabilities,  with ad vances in 
medicine, it is now a completely curable disease that can be rendered non -
infectious early on in treatment itself, through Multi -Drug Therapy, which has 
cured more than 15 million persons over two decades alone. Government of 
India has undertaken  programmes to provide free -of-cost treatment to Persons 
affected by Leprosy, even as the search continues for newer and more effective 
methods of treatment. 
 
 


iii 
 
- 2 - 
 
However, a major obstacle to uplift the status of Persons affected by 
Leprosy is the social stigma associated with Leprosy. In many spheres of life, 
such persons continue to be outcast from society. 
 
Another problem is that of Indian laws, which continue to directly and 
indirectly discriminate against Persons affected by Leprosy. In 2010, the United 
Nations General Assembly unanimously adopted a Resolution on the 
Elimination of Discrimination against Persons affected by Leprosy, accompanied 
by Principles and Guidelines listing out measures to improve the living 
conditions of such persons. F urther, the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 2007 (“UNCRPD”) promotes, protects and 
ensures the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental 
freedoms by all persons with disabilities.  
  
India has signed  and ratified the UNCRPD, and is also a member of the 
UN General Assembly that unanimously passed the Resolution on the 
Elimination of Leprosy. However, no action has been taken by the Central 
Government or by State Governments to modify or repeal any of the legislations. 
Under the Constitution, the Union of India has both the obligation as well as 
the competence to enact a comprehensive law eliminating discrimination 
against Persons affected by Leprosy. This is now an urgent need. 
 
To address precisely thi s concern, after a series of meetings and 
deliberations, the Law Commission of India has finalized its Report No.256  
titled “ Leprosy Affected Persons and the Laws applicable to them ” and is 
submitted herewith for consideration by the Government. 
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
 
Sd/-  
 
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
Mr. D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi  
  

iv 
 
Report No.256 
Eliminating Discrimination Against  
Persons Affected by Leprosy 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter Title Page 
I INTRODUCTION AND BAC KGROUND 
TO THE REPORT 
1-5 
II LEPROSY AND THE STAT US OF 
PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY 
IN INDIA: THE NEED FOR CHANGE 
6-14 
A Understanding Leprosy 6-8 
B Facts and Myths surrounding Leprosy 8-9 
C The Prevalence of Leprosy 9-11 
D Preventive and Curative Treatments 11-14 
III ATTEMPTS MADE THUS F AR IN 
ADDRESSING THE CONCE RNS OF 
PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY 
15-17 
IV THE DOMESTIC LEGAL 
FRAMEWORK: FACILITATING 
DIRECT AND INDIRECT 
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST 
PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY 
IN INDIA 
18-22 
V INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS IN 
ADDRESSING THE CONCERNS OF 
PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY 
AND THEIR FAMILIES 
23-26 
VI PRACTICES IN OTHER 
JURISDICTIONS IN RELATION TO 
PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY 
27-34 
(i) Azerbaijan 28-29 
(ii) Costa Rica 29 
(iii) Ecuador 29-30 
(iv) Egypt 30 
(v) Finland 30-31 
(vi) Greece 31 

v 
 
(vii) Japan 32 
(viii) Korea 32-33 
(ix) Oman 33 
(x) Ukraine 33-34 
VII. RECOMMENDATIONS 35-50 
A Repeal or Amendment of the Laws 35-39 
(i) Personal Laws 35-36 
(ii) Beggary Laws 36 
(iii) The Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995 and 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014 
37-38 
(iv) State Municipal and Panchayati Raj Acts 38-39 
B Call for Affirmative Action 39-47 
(i) Measures against discrimination 40 
(ii) Land Rights 41-42 
(iii) Right to Employment 42-43 
(iv) Educational and training opportunities 43 
(v) Appropriate use of Language 43-44 
(vi) Right to Freedom of Movement 44 
(vii) Concessions during treatment 44-45 
(viii) Social Awareness 45-46 
(ix) Welfare Measures 46-47 
C Summary 47-50 
(i) Laws and provisions to be repealed 47 
(ii) Laws to be modified or amended 47-48 
(iii) Provisions enabling the government to 
undertake affirmative action 
48-50 
 ANNEXURE 51-65 

 1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND TO THE 
REPORT 
 
1.1  As per the letter dated 24 June 2014 from 
Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, the Minister for Law and 
Justice, Government of India, the 20 th Law 
Commission of India under the Chairmanship of 
Justice (Retd.) A.P. Shah undertook the task of 
identifying laws, which can either be repealed or which 
need change in light of the existing climate of economic 
liberalization. 
 
1.2  The study titled “Legal Enactments 
Simplification and Streamlining” undertaken by the 
Law Commission, produced four interim reports on 
laws, rules, regulations and circulars (“laws”) that are 
in force in Ind ia, which warrant immediate repeal or 
amendment. 
 
1.3  In its Second Interim Report No. 249 on 
“Obsolete Laws: Warranting Immediate Repeal ”, the 
20th Law Commission recommended the repeal of the 
Lepers Act (Act 3) of 1898, in consultation with the 
relevant State(s). Section 1(3) of the Lepers Act 
mandates that it shall not come into force in any 
territory until the concerned State Government makes 
a de claration to that effect. Contrary to general 
conception, the Lepers Act continues to exist on the 
statute books of India, even though the States of 
Gujarat, Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, West Bengal, 
Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Punjab, Karnataka, Orissa, 
Himachal Pradesh, and Maharashtra, and the Union 
Territories of Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 

 2 
Chandigarh have repealed its application within their 
respective jurisdictions.  The Act provides for the 
exclusion, segregat ion and medical treatment of 
pauper lepers. It also provides for the establishment of 
‘leper asylums’ and conditions for employment of 
personnel in these asylums.  
 
1.4  The Law Commission recognised that the 
Lepers Act is completely out of sync with the modern 
understanding of Leprosy and its treatment through 
Multi-Drug Therapy (“MDT”). 1  As a result of its 
observations, the Commission recommended the 
repeal of the Act for being in violation of Article 14 of 
the Constitution, owing to the forcible exclusi on and 
segregation of persons affected by Leprosy under the 
Act.2 
 
1.5  The Law Commission also acknowledged in 
its Second Interim Report No. 249 that India is a 
member of the UN General Assembly that unanimously 
passed the Resolution on the Elimination of  
Discrimination against Persons affected by Leprosy 
and their Family Members, 2010 (A/RES/65/215) 
(“UN Resolution on Persons affected by Leprosy and 
their Family Members”). 3   The Lepers Act, as 
mentioned in the Second Interim Report, goes against 
the spiri t of this Resolution and therefore requires 
immediate repeal in consultation with States, which 
continue to apply it within their respective territories. 
 
1.6  After the release of the Second Interim 
Report, The Leprosy Mission Trust India approached 
the Law Commission in late 2014, for further action in 
                                                        
1 Recommendation 57, Law Commission Report on “Obsolete Laws: Warranting Immediate 
Repeal”, Second Interim Report No. 249, Law Commission of India, Government of India 
(October, 2014) pg 32-33. (“Law Commission Report No. 249”).  
2Ibid. 
3 Law Commission Report No. 249 (n 1). 

 3 
respect of laws applicable to the persons affected by 
Leprosy.  
 
1.7  The Leprosy Mission Trust India (“TLMTI”), 
was founded in 1874 as ‘The Mission to Lepers’ by 
Wellesley Bailey. 4 In its 140 years of exis tence, TLMTI 
has through a comprehensive, participatory and 
country-wide consultation involving Persons affected 
by Leprosy, endeavoured to promote and undertake 
various efforts for the benefit of Persons affected by 
Leprosy, which include awareness and ad vocacy 
programs, healthcare and sustainable livelihood 
initiatives, and education, training and research. 5 
However, after India’s declaration that Leprosy is no 
longer a public health issue, on the basis of a World 
Health Organisation (“WHO”) standard, 6 the cause of 
persons affected by Leprosy has taken a backseat in 
the Indian context, making it harder for TLMTI and 
other similar organisations working on Leprosy in 
India, to translate their efforts in a scalable measure to 
cater to the needs of persons aff ected by Leprosy. 
Complete eradication of Leprosy is however different 
from this standard of elimination as a public health 
issue. 
 
1.8   The 20 th Law Commission took note of the 
commendable efforts of TLMTI in addressing the 
concerns of Persons affected b y Leprosy through its 
awareness and advocacy initiatives. The Commission 
also recognised the need for the modification and 
repeal of existing laws, regulations, policies, customs 
                                                        
4 The “Our History” page on the website of the Leprosy Mission Trust India  (TLMTI), available 
at <http ://www.tlmindia.org/index.php/about-us/who-we-are/our-history>, accessed on 
24th January, 2014. 
5  The “About Us” page on the website of  TLMTI, available at 
<http://www.tlmindia.org/index.php/about-us/who-we-are>, accessed on 24th January, 
2014. 
6 ‘Guide to Eliminate Leprosy as a Public Health Problem’, WHO (2000), available at 
<http://www.who.int/lep/resources/Guide_Int_E.pdf?ua=1>, accessed on 24th January, 
2014. 

 4 
and practices that negatively affect Persons affected by 
Leprosy and promote their exclusion, segregation and 
discrimination. In light of these observations, the Law 
Commission has undertaken the present study on 
“Eliminating Discrimination against Persons 
affected by Leprosy ” in order to provide the 
Government with a detailed insi ght into the level of 
discrimination and stigma associated with Leprosy, 
along with its constructive recommendations for a new 
model law to eliminate discrimination faced by Persons 
affected by Leprosy.  
 
1.9  The second chapter of this Report deals with 
the disease of Leprosy and the current status of 
Persons affected by Leprosy. The third chapter 
examines the attempts made thus far in addressing 
the concerns of Persons affected by Leprosy in India. 
The fourth chapter provides an insight into the 
domestic legal framework that facilitates direct and 
indirect discrimination of Persons affected by Leprosy 
and their family members, while the fifth chapter 
focuses on the international efforts in addressing these 
concerns through the United Nations Convention on 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UN General 
Assembly Resolution on Persons affected by Leprosy 
and their Family Members, and the Principles and 
Guidelines for the Elimination of Discrimination 
against Persons affected by Leprosy and their Family 
Members’. The sixth chapter offers an insight into the 
past and present practices in other jurisdictions in 
relation to Persons affected by Leprosy. The seventh 
chapter lists out the recommendations, including the 
specific provisions and laws that require re peal, 
amendment or modification and the proposal for 
affirmative action that promotes the social inclusion of 
Persons affected by Leprosy. The final chapter 
proposes a draft legislation in India that endorses the 

 5 
elimination of discrimination against Perso ns affected 
by Leprosy and their family members through deriving 
its legislative competence from Article 253 of the 
Constitution. 
 
1.10  In order to undertake the present study on 
Persons affected by Leprosy and to formulate the draft 
legislation addressing the abovementioned issues, the 
Commission formed a sub-committee comprising of the 
Chairman, Justice S.N. Kapoor, Professor (Dr.) Mool 
Chand Sharma, Prof. (Dr.)  Yogesh Tyagi, Dr. Arghya 
Sengupta, Ms. Yasha swini Mittal, and Ms. Vrinda 
Bhandari.  
 
1.11  The Commission would also like to place on 
record its special appreciation for Mr. Munish 
Kaushik, Ms. Seema Baquer and Ms. Nikita Sarah, the 
representatives of The Leprosy Mission Trust India, 
whose inputs were incisive, vital and require special 
mention. It appreciates the commendable efforts put in 
by Mr. Arghya Sengupta and Ms. Yashaswini Mittal of 
Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy and Ms. Vrinda Bhandari 
and Ms. Sumathi Chandrashekaran, Consultants to 
the Commission in finalizing this report. Ms. Ayushi 
Agarwal Law Student, provided research assistance. 
 
1.12  Thereafter, upon extensive deliberations, 
discussions and in -depth study, the Commission has 
given shape to the present Report. 
  

 6 
CHAPTER II 
 
LEPROSY AND THE STATUS OF PERSONS 
AFFECTED BY LEPROSY IN INDIA: THE NEED FOR 
CHANGE 
 
A. Understanding Leprosy 
 
2.1.1  Leprosy or Hansen’s disease is one of the 
world’s oldest diseases. Ancient Hindu scriptures make 
specific references to Leprosy, while Ayurvedic  texts of 
the 6th Century BC note the symptoms of Leprosy. 7 
The ancient Manusmriti also discusses Leprosy while 
laying down the rules and regulations governing 
marriage. 8  However, in spite of its ancient history, 
Leprosy as a disease is largely misunderstood, in all its 
aspects including its etiology, causation, means of 
transmission and its curability.9 
 
2.1.2  The disease of Leprosy is triggered by the 
causative agent Mycobacterium Leprae , a bacillus 
which was first discovered by a Norwegian doctor, 
Gerhard Armauer Hansen in 1873. 10  An untreated 
person suffering from Leprosy can spread the infection 
through the passage of air. 11  According to sources, 
more than 85% of Persons affected by Leprosy are non-
infectious and do not spread Leprosy, while over 99% 
of the world population has a natural immunity or 
                                                        
7 Navin Chawla, “Vocational Rehabilitation and Social Reintegration of the Leprosy Affected 
in India”, available at 
<http://eci.nic.in/ECI_Main/DJ/Vocational%20and%20Rehabilitation%20and%20Social%20Rein
tegration%20of%20the%20Leprosy%20Affected%20in%20India%20(Page1-Page114).pdf>, 
accessed on 24th January, 2014. 
8Ibid. 
9 Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
available at <http://mohfw.nic.in/WriteReadData/l892s/9823984802http.pdf>,  accessed on 
24th January, 2014. 
10Shigeki Sakamoto, “Requests Addressed To The Advisory Committee Stemming From Human 
Rights Council Resolutions: Elimination Of Discrimination Against Persons Affected By Leprosy 
And Their Family Members”, UN Human Rights Council, Doc. No. A/HRC/AC/3/CRP.2 (31 
July, 2009). 
11Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 

 7 
resistance to Leprosy. 12 Persons affected by Leprosy 
exhibit symptoms of pale and reddish skin, numbness 
of hands or feet or loss of feeling in a patch of skin. 13 
The incubation period of Leprosy ranges from fiv e 
years to as long as twenty years.14 
 
2.1.3  Leprosy has been largely known to be a 
human disease, in that the human body is the 
principal reservoir of Mycobacterium Leprae . 15 If not 
treated early, Leprosy can lead to Grade I (i.e. sensory 
impairment, or muscle weakness without contractures) 
or Grade II (i.e. visible impairment, muscle atrophy, or 
bone absorption of shortening or contractures) 
deformities.16 One of the important factors leading to 
disabilities in Persons affected by Leprosy is the early 
neglect in getting a diagnosis, and proper treatment for 
those who exhibit signs of absence of pain, itching and 
other such symptoms.17 Neglect over prolonged periods 
usually leads to the infection getting severe, causing 
deformity and secondary pyogenic infection causing 
permanent damage to hands and feet, loss of eyebrows 
and depressed noses. 18 Manifestations of the disease 
appear to vary according to geographi cal variations 
and host responses.19 
 
                                                        
12Ibid; See also “Leprosy in Our Time”, A Report by the Nippon Foundation and Sasakawa 
Memorial 
Health Foundation (2013), available at <http://www. nippon-
foundation.or.jp/en/what/projects/leprosy/Leprosy_in_Our_Time2013.pdf>, accessed on 
24th January, 2014. 
13 Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10). 
14 Navin Chawla (n 7); Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 
15 Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 
16  Enhanced Global Strategy for Further Reducing the Disease Burden Due to Leprosy, 
Updated Operational Guidelines, WHO (2011 -2015), available at 
<http://www.searo.who.int/entity/global_leprosy_programme/documents/enhanced_global
_strategy_2011_2015_operational_guidelines.pdf>, accessed on 24th January, 2014; See also 
Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 
17 Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 
18 Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 
19 Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 

 8 
2.1.4  The disease of Leprosy has two main 
varieties - lepromatous and non -lepromatous. 20  The 
persons falling under the lepromatous variety, 
comprise about 15 -20% of Persons affected by 
Leprosy.21 The lepromatous variety is a severe form of 
Leprosy that causes the easy spread of infection when 
left untreated or inadequately treated. 22 Up to 80 -85% 
of all cases of Leprosy are of the non -lepromatous or 
non-severe variety, where the infection is feeble, and 
does not spread eas ily to others. 23 In India the vast 
majority of Persons affected by Leprosy, are of the non-
lepromatous variety. 24 A majority of Leprosy -affected 
beggars also fall within this category.25 
 
B. Facts and Myths surrounding Leprosy 
 
2.2.1  There are several myths and distortions 
surrounding Leprosy that are sought to be clarified in 
this Chapter. Such myths consider Leprosy as a 
hereditary and infectious disease that is caused due to 
impure blood and poverty.26 Many also believe that the 
infection of Leprosy spreads  through food and water 
and is difficult to detect.27 However, all such beliefs are 
not based on evidence and therefore without merit.28 
 
2.2.2  Leprosy is not a hereditary disease and is 
not caused due to impure blood or poverty, but due to 
the causative agent Mycobacterium Leprae as 
mentioned above. Further, even though Leprosy is a 
chronic infectious disease, i t is neither difficult to 
                                                        
20 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
21 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
22 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
23 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
24 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
25 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
26 Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 
27 Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 
28 Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 

 9 
diagnose nor hard to treat. The main consideration for 
an effective Leprosy treatment is early detection and 
regularity in treatment.  
 
2.2.3  All persons are not susceptible to Leprosy, 
although insanitary conditions, malnutrition and lack 
of personal hygiene may increase the chances of 
getting infected by the Leprosy bacillus or a host of 
other diseases and infections caused on account of 
such conditions. 29  Further, Leprosy is not a fatal 
disease, even though on account of the stigma and 
discrimination, it may caus e permanent psychological 
and social damage to the victims.30 
 
C. The Prevalence of Leprosy 
 
2.3.1  To this day, Leprosy continues to be the 
most dreaded of all diseases (with the possible and 
recent exception of AIDS).31 As of 2014, India accounts 
for 58% of the new Leprosy cases in the world, leading 
the list of countries that have reported high figures of 
Leprosy infection globally.32 As per the 1985 records of 
the WHO, India had estimated 7,30,540 of its citizens 
to be affected by Leprosy. However after the 
introduction of MDT in the same year, the government 
was able to reduce the overall rate of Leprosy to 1 new 
case per 10,000 population by December 2005, by 
means of door to door surveys and other drives 
initiated for the purpose of administering MDT. This 
reduction in the overall rate marked the elimination of 
Leprosy as a public health issue in India. 
 
                                                        
29 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
30 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
31 Navin Chawla (n 7).  
32 Annual Report of the International Federation of Anti -Leprosy Associations (2012 – 2013), 
available at 
<http://www.ilep.org.uk/fileadmin/uploads/Documents/Annual_Reports/annrep13.pdf>, 
accessed on 24th January, 2014. 

 10 
2.3.2  However, once the declaration of the 
elimination of Leprosy as a public health issue was 
made, the vertical health program me of  Leprosy was 
merged into the general healthcare system of the 
country. This transition did not happen as smoothly 
and in as well -planned a manner as it should have, 
leading to gaps in service delivery including the 
detection of Leprosy, which continue to exist till today. 
In addition, from 2005 onwards there was an increase 
in the incidence of Leprosy in India, on account of the 
shift in public health priorities from Leprosy to AIDS 
and cancer. Thus, from 2005 till 2014, the 
National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP) of the 
Government of India has been recording a rate of 1.25 
to 1.35 lakh new cases every year. 33During 2013-2014 
alone, 1.27 lakh new cases of Leprosy were detected in 
India.34 A major portion of the se new cases of Leprosy 
in India are of children, who face the threat of isolation 
and discrimination at a very young age . An estimated 
number of 850 Leprosy colonies are currently 
operating in India and housing Persons affected by 
Leprosy that have been otherwise segregated from the 
public.35 
 
2.3.3  Therefore, after a sharp decline till 2005, the 
detection or incidence of Leprosy  has not shown much 
improvement. It is however pertinent to mention that 
the recent draft of the Na tional Health Policy, 2015 
endeavours to carry on the efforts of the Government 
to fully eliminate Leprosy in India through an 
integrated approach towards “communicable diseases”. 
This however does not extend to repealing 
                                                        
33 NLEP – Progress Report for the year 2013-14, Central Leprosy Division, Directorate General 
of Health Services, available at 
<http://nlep.nic.in/pdf/Progress%20report%2031st%20March%202013-14.pdf>, accessed on 
24th January, 2014. 
34Ibid. 
35 NLEP – Progress Report (n 33). 

 11 
discriminatory legislation and introducing new 
protective leg islation which is the subject matter of 
this Report.  
 
D. Preventive and Curative Treatments 
 
2.4.1  Prior to its earliest known cure, there was 
no scientifically established treatment for Leprosy. On 
account of the lack of a cure, isolation of the patient  
into asylums and Leprosy colonies was considered to 
be the only measure for the containment of the disease 
from spreading onto the healthy population. 36 Later 
on, with the introduction of Dapsone as the earliest 
known cure, Leprosy control programs took the form of 
Survey, Education and Treatment (“SET”) strategy 
model, comprising house -to-house surveys for case 
detection, treatment in out -patient clinics, and health 
education.37 However, on account of the reluctance of 
people to cooperate with household sur veys, and their 
hesitation to attend Leprosy clinics due to the 
prevailing ostracism against the disease, it became 
difficult for Persons affected by Leprosy to get treated 
with Dapsone in the initial years. 38  In addition, 
Persons affected by Leprosy who di d get treated with 
Dapsone, in some instances, developed resistance to 
the drug and therefore could not benefit from the 
treatment.39 
 
2.4.2  Although Leprosy is the cause of irreversible 
disabilities,40with advances in science and technology 
in the field of Leprosy treatment during the last three 
                                                        
36Leprosy: The Facts, Myth and Treatment of Disease (n 9). 
37 Report of the Working Group on Disease Burden for the 12th Five Year Plan, Planning 
Commission, Government of India (2011), available at 
<http://planningcommission.gov.in/aboutus/committee/wrkgrp12/health/WG_3_1communic
able.pdf>, accessed on 24th January, 2014. 
38 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
39 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
40Navin Chawla (n 7). 

 12 
decades, it is now a completely curable disease that 
can be rendered non -infectious in the initial stages of 
the treatment itself. The treatment that has made it 
possible to cur e Leprosy is the process of Multi -Drug 
Therapy (“MDT”), which was first recommended by the 
WHO in early 1980s after over 40 years of research 
and testing. 41  Under MDT, powerful drugs such as 
Rifamipicin, Clofazimine and others in combination 
with Dapsone, are administered to the affected person 
to effectively fight the Leprosy bacillus. Over the past 
two decades, more than 15 million Persons affected by 
Leprosy are said to have been cured under MDT.42 
 
2.4.3  The MDT regimen requires regularity, 
supervision a nd continuity to be effective. The 
regimens are worked out on the basis of whether a 
particular case involves paucibacillary (very few 
number of bacilli), which requires a prescribed regimen 
for about six months, or multibacillary (very large 
number of bacilli), which requires a prescribed regimen 
of about one year on an average. After its first dose 
itself, MDT kills 99.9% of the Leprosy bacteria that 
cause the disease, thereby rendering Persons affected 
by Leprosy non -contagious and eliminating the need 
for the segregation of such persons along with their 
family members. 43  MDT has been used to treat 
patients in India for the past two decades, and has 
been instrumental in substantially reducing the 
incidence of Leprosy among Indians, especially during 
                                                        
41 Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10). 
42Report by the Nippon Foundation and Sasakawa MemorialHealth Foundation (n 12). 
43Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10); See also Eighth Report of the WHO Expert Committee on Leprosy, 
WHO Technical Report Series (2012), available at 
<http://www.searo.who.int/entity/global_leprosy_programme/publications/8th_expert_co
mm_2012.pdf>, accessed on 24 th January, 2014; Report of the tenth meeting of the WHO 
Technical Advisory Group on Leprosy Control, WHO Regional Office for South -East Asia 
(2009), available at 
<http://www.searo.who.int/entity/global_leprosy_programme/publications/10th_tag_meeti
ng_2009.pdf>, accessed on 24th January, 2014. 

 13 
the 19 85-2005 period. 44  An early detection of the 
disease along with its immediate treatment via MDT 
can save infected persons from irreversible 
deformities. 45  After completing a full course of 
treatment through MDT, a relapse of the disease in 
previously affected persons is very rare.46 
 
2.4.4  In addition to treatment under MDT, 
reconstruction surgery (“RCS”) is also performed on 
the Persons affected by Leprosy for the correction of 
disability of hands, feet and eyes caused on account of 
the disease. 47  The Governme nt of India has 
undertaken programmes to provide free -of-cost 
treatment to Persons affected by Leprosy through MDT 
and has also introduced subsidies and compensation 
schemes for RCS for such persons. 48Meanwhile, the 
search is on for newer and more effective  methods of 
treatment of Leprosy through vaccination and 
prophylaxis. 
 
2.4.5  As per several surveys and studies 
conducted on Persons affected by Leprosy, it has been 
noted that a major obstacle to the uplift of the status 
of Persons affected by Leprosy is  the social stigma 
associated with Leprosy. 49 Persons suffering from the 
early stages of the disease are dissuaded from 
approaching a doctor, on account of fear of 
ostracisation and isolation. 50The main reason for the 
stigma and discrimination against Person s affected by 
                                                        
44Report of the Working Group on Disease Burden (n 37) 
45 Hundred and Thirty -First Report on the ‘Petition Praying for the Integration and 
Empowerment of People Affected by Leprosy’, Rajya S abha Committee on Petitions (2008 ) 
(“131st Report on Leprosy”). 
46Enhanced Global Strategy for Further Reducing the Disease Burden Due to Leprosy (n 16). 
47 131st Report on Leprosy (n 45). 
48 131st Report on Leprosy (n 45). 
49  Hundred and Thirty -Eight Report on the ‘Action Taken by Government  on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in its Hundred and Thirty -First Report on Petition 
Praying for the Integration and Empowerment of People Affected by Leprosy’, Rajya Sabha 
Committee on Petitions (2010) (“138th Report on Leprosy”). 
50Ibid. 

 14 
Leprosy has been the disabling and disfiguring nature 
of Leprosy that goes against the aesthetic notion of 
physical beauty that prevails in society. 51  The 
deformities of Persons affected by Leprosy have also 
been traditionally considered to ca use repugnance. 52 
Further, in the absence of any understanding about 
the cause and cure of Leprosy for many decades, the 
Persons affected by Leprosy were viewed, in a number 
of societies, as objects of divine punishment where the 
disease was considered as a  visitation of past sins, 
requiring the out casting of such persons. 53 In many 
spheres of life the world over including in India, the 
process of out -casting of Persons affected by Leprosy 
continues to take place, although the scale of such 
process has considerably diminished in light of the 
growing awareness regarding the disease.  
 
2.4.5  In light of the large number of fresh cases in 
India, especially post -2005, an early detection of 
Leprosy is the need of the hour to prevent Persons 
affected by Leprosy from exhibiting physical 
deformities. To address this issue, the l aw and policy 
in India needs to adapt to the growing needs of the 
Persons affected by Leprosy and remove provisions 
within its framework that discriminate and isolate 
such persons. In this context, several attempts have 
already been made to address the cause of  Persons 
affected by Leprosy that shall be discussed in the next 
chapter. 
 
  
                                                        
51 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
52 Navin Chawla (n 7). 
53 Navin Chawla (n 7). 

 15 
CHAPTER III 
 
ATTEMPTS MADE THUS FAR IN ADDRESSING 
THE CONCERNS OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY 
LEPROSY 
 
3.1  Several attempts have been made in India 
thus far to uplift the status of Persons affected by 
Leprosy and their family members through concerted 
action. One such attempt was made by Dr. Shivajirao 
Patwardhan, a Homeopathic doctor who founded the 
“Jagdamba Leprosy Mission” or Tapovan in the 
Amravati district of Maharashtra in 1950, and devoted 
his whole life for Leprosy patients. 54  Tapovan is 
considered to be one of the finest and most 
comprehensive treatment and rehabilitation complexes 
for Leprosy patients. 55   Dr. Patwardhan undertook 
great struggles in dispelling the canards associated 
with the disease of Leprosy and was successful in 
improving the living conditions of several Persons 
affected by Leprosy.56 
 
3.2  Another sterling endeavour for the uplift of 
Persons affected by Leprosy was undertaken by Baba 
Amte (Murlidhar Devidas Amte) in Warora, 
Maharashtra. Baba Amte started working for those 
struck by Leprosy outside Warora, immediately after 
his marriage. 57 He set up 11 weekly clinics around 
Warora and later started “Anandwan”, a self -contained 
ashram for Persons affected by Leprosy and their 
family members. 58  Baba Amte’s Anandwan was 
                                                        
54  Padmashri Dr. Shivajirao Patwardhan, Note on Amravati District, available at 
<http://court.mah.nic.in/courtweb/static_pages/courts/amravati.pdf>, accessed on 25th 
January, 2014. 
55Ibid. 
56 Note on Amravati District (n 54). 
57 Maharashtra Bhushan – Baba Amte, Website of the Maharashtra Collector, available at 
<http://chanda.nic.in/htmldocs/anandwan.html>, accessed on 25th January, 2014. 
58Ibid. 

 16 
registered in 1951, and has since grown considerably 
in light of grants and lan d given by the government. 59 
Anandwan today consists of two hospitals, a 
university, an orphanage, a school for the blind and 
technical wings.60 It is now a self-sufficient unit, where 
more than 5,000 people are dependent on it for their 
livelihood.61 
 
3.3  In addition to the aforementioned efforts by 
individuals, several efforts have also been undertaken 
by the government to tackle the concerns of Persons 
affected by Leprosy. In this regard, an appeal for the 
integration and empowerment of Persons affected by  
Leprosy had been made to governments at the Central 
and State level by the Rajya Sabha Committee on 
Petitions in their Hundred and Thirty First -Report.62 
The Committee, in its report, looked into eleven points 
for consideration that included the formulatio n of a 
national policy for the empowerment of Persons 
affected by Leprosy, amendment to all the relevant 
legislations that harmed the interest of Persons 
affected by Leprosy, access to medical facilities and 
civic amenities and other such assistance measur es 
that are for the general benefit of such persons. 63 
Through the Report, the Committee made several 
pertinent recommendations that sought to do away 
with the marginalisation and stigmatisation of Persons 
affected by Leprosy and that strived to make the le gal 
framework in India more responsive to their needs.64 
 
                                                        
59 Maharashtra Bhushan – Baba Amte (n 57 ); See also Baba Amte, Website of Anandwan, 
available at <http://www.anandwan.in/about -anandwan/baba-amte.html>, accessed on 
25th January, 2014. 
60Ibid. 
61 Maharashtra Bhushan – Baba Amte (n 57) and Baba Amte (n 59). 
62 131st Report on Leprosy (n 45). 
63 131st Report on Leprosy (n 45). 
64 131st Report on Leprosy (n 45). 

 17 
3.4  Subsequently, the Hundred and Thirty -
Eighth Report of the same Committee analysed the 
actions taken by the Central and State governments on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Hundred and Thirty -First Report.65 In this Report, the 
Committee took note of the actions taken by the 
government on the relevant recommendations made 
previously and analysed the progress made thereafter 
on those actions. 66  In this regard, with respect to 
legislative amendments, the Committee noted the 
explanations offered by the relevant Ministries and 
made additional recommendations, in instances where 
necessary.67 
 
3.5  However even though the efforts made thus 
far have been noteworthy and have considerably 
improved the lives of many Persons affected by Leprosy 
and their family members, the long -standing stigma 
associated with Leprosy and the archaic laws 
applicable to them continue to exist. This is most 
evident if we consider the domestic legal framework, 
described in detail in the next chapter. 
  
                                                        
65 138th Report on Leprosy (n 49). 
66 138th Report on Leprosy (n 49). 
67 138th Report on Leprosy (n 49). 

 18 
CHAPTER IV 
 
THE DOMESTIC LEGAL FRAMEWORK: 
FACILITATING DIRECT AND INDIRECT 
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST PERSONS AFFECTED 
BY LEPROSY IN INDIA 
 
4.1  Several Indian laws are both directly as well 
as indirectly discriminatory against Persons affected by 
Leprosy. The issues surrounding such discrimination 
were taken up for consideration by the Rajya Sabha 
Committee on Petitions in 2008 and have also been 
deliberated upon by the same Committee in its Action 
Taken Report (Hundred and Thirty -Eight Report) of 
2010.68 However, no affirmative action has been taken 
by the Central Government or by some of the State 
Governments, to modify or repeal any of the 
legislations that are applicable to Persons affected by 
Leprosy. 
 
4.2  Certain provisions under the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955, the Dissolution of Muslim 
Marriage Act, 1939, the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, the 
Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872, the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954 and the Hindu Adoption and 
Maintenance Act, 1956, are directly discriminatory 
against Persons affected by Leprosy and consider 
Leprosy to be an ‘incurable and virulent’ disease. An 
infection from Leprosy for not less than two years, 
under these legislations, serves as a legitimate ground 
for divorce or separation between spouses. 
 
4.3  Under the State Beggary Acts, Persons 
affected by Leprosy are earmarked in the same 
category as persons suffering from lunacy. Further, 
                                                        
68See 131st Report on Leprosy (n 45) and 138th Report on Leprosy (n 49). 

 19 
medical examination and ar rest and detention of 
Persons affected by Leprosy for an unspecified 
duration are also provided for under these Acts, in line 
with past notions wherein Leprosy was considered to 
be incurable. Children, who are wholly dependent on 
begging until the age of f ive and who have a parent 
suffering from Leprosy, are also liable to be detained 
under such Acts. The Life Insurance Corporation Act, 
1956 contains a discriminatory provision, wherein 
higher premium rates are to be charged from Persons 
affected by Leprosy on account of the higher risk to 
their lives as understood through past notions. Several 
State Municipal and Panchayati Raj Acts, which are 
listed out in Chapter VII, also contain specific 
provisions that bar Persons affected by Leprosy from 
holding or contesting for civic posts. 
 
4.4  In respect of indirect discrimination, 
relevant provisions under the Railways Act, 1989, the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 and State Acts such as the Bombay Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1888, permi t the denial of certain 
rights, privileges and concessions to persons who 
suffer from an infectious or contagious disease or 
disability. Leprosy, in light of its traditional 
understanding, continues to be included within the 
range of such contagious diseas es and disabilities. On 
the other hand, the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 
1992 and the Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995, do 
not include all categories of Persons affected by 
Leprosy within their purview, which results in the 
denial of access to s pecial privileges for many of such 
persons.   
 
4.5  In addition to the aforementioned 
legislations, the decision of the Supreme Court in 

 20 
Dhirendra Pandua v. State of Orissa 69 also adds to the 
long-standing notion of Leprosy being an incurable 
and infectious  disease requiring segregation and 
special treatment. In the aforementioned case the 
criteria for selection of persons to civic offices under 
Sections 16(1)(iv) and 17(1)(b) of the Orissa Municipal 
Act, 1950 was discussed. The two sections disqualified 
Persons affected by Leprosy from occupying civic 
offices under the said Act. The Supreme Court noted 
that although scientific developments now have a cure 
for Leprosy, few studies demonstrated that nearly 10% 
of the patients continue to harbour viable persist ers of 
the disease, despite two years of regular therapy. 70 The 
Court further noted that in light of available sources, it 
was evident that despite various measures, at the 
relevant time, reactivation of Leprosy could not be 
completely ruled out and was dep endent on a 
multiplicity of factors. 71  In light of its findings, the 
Court upheld the disqualification of the petitioner by 
observing that the legislature in its wisdom has 
rightfully retained the provisions in the statute that 
bar Persons affected by Lepro sy from occupying civic 
offices, as there is a reasonable concern of the disease 
being contagious.72 
 
4.6  It is pertinent to mention here however, that 
the Supreme Court observed in its discussion in the 
aforementioned case, that the notion about Leprosy 
was changing, given that in light of the 
recommendation of the Working Group on Eradication 
of Leprosy, app ointed by the Government of India, 
several State Governments and Union Territories had 
repealed the antiquated Lepers Act, 1898 and similar 
                                                        
69 AIR 2009 SC 163. 
70Ibid at Para 19-21. 
71Ibid. 
72Ibid atPara 27-29. 

 21 
State Acts that provided for the segregation and 
medical treatment of Persons affected by Leprosy. 73 
The Court stated  that, keeping in view the research 
conducted on Leprosy along with professional inputs, 
the legislature may perhaps seriously reconsider its 
stance of retaining provisions in statutes that 
discriminated against such persons.74 
 
4.7  The need for better tre atment of Persons 
affected by Leprosy has also been recognised by 
Courts, in instances where Persons affected by Leprosy 
have been segregated or discriminated against. For 
example, in a recent order in the case of Pankaj Sinha 
v. Union of India ,75  the Supr eme Court again noted 
that even though Leprosy, as of today, is curable, on 
account of the lack of empathy shown by the 
concerned authorities, it still remains a stigmatic 
disease in the society. The Court also held that such 
stigmatisation affects human d ignity and the basic 
concept of humanness.76 
 
4.8  In the case of Maharashtra State Road 
Transport Corporation v. Uttam Shatrughan Raserao ,77 
the employment of the complainant was terminated as 
he was considered unfit to work. The complainant 
suffered from Leprosy and was considered to be in a 
poor condition to work in any post offered by the 
establishment authorities. However, the Bombay High 
Court dismissed the arguments advanced by the 
establishment authorities, and held that since Leprosy 
is now curable, persons suffering from the disease 
need to be treated and rehabilitated instead of being 
                                                        
73Ibid atPara 30-31. 
74Ibid. 
75  Supreme Court Order dated 28 November, 2014, Manupatra citation: 
MANU/SCOR/51230/2014. 
76Ibid. 
77 2002 (4) BomCR 68. 

 22 
shunned. 78  The Court finally extended the grant of 
benefits in favour of the complainant in light of the 
clarifications issued by the establishment, wherein 
employees whose services were terminated on account 
of their permanent disability were entitled to a 
supplementary gratuity. 79  In the case of Dhirendra 
Pandua as well, the Court took cognizance of the 
changing notions regarding Leprosy and called upon 
the legislature to consider changing the legislations 
applicable to Persons affected by Leprosy in light of 
scientific developments that had found a cure t o the 
disease.80 
 
4.9  Considering these legislative and judicial 
patterns and as noted in Dhirendra Pandua , the law 
applicable to Persons affected by Leprosy in India is 
obsolete as it adheres to specific standards of 
treatment and segregation that are no longer 
applicable to such persons, especially in light of the 
recent compelling developments in science and the 
discovery of MDT, which has emerged as a reliable and 
suitable cure for Leprosy.  
 
4.10  Thus, a strong case can be made out for the 
need for le gislative intervention in amending, 
modifying and/or repealing relevant provisions under 
various legislations that discriminate against Persons 
affected by Leprosy and seek to segregate them from 
the general public. 
  
                                                        
78Ibid at Para 4. 
79Ibid. 
80 Dhirendra Pandua v. State of Orissa (n 69) atPara 30-31. 

 23 
CHAPTER V 
 
INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS IN ADDRESSING THE 
CONCERNS OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY 
AND THEIR FAMILIES 
 
5.1  The United Nations General Assembly 
unanimously adopted a Resolution on the Elimination 
of Discrimination against Persons affected by Leprosy 
81  (“UN Resolution on Leprosy”) on 21 st December 
2010. This Resolution recognised and strongly urged 
nations to abide by the Principles and Guidelines for 
the Elimination of Discrimination against Persons 
affected by Leprosy and their Family Members’ 82 
(“Principles and Guidelines on Leprosy”) adopted by 
the UN Human Rights Council in 2010.  
 
5.2  The Resolution and the Principles and 
Guidelines substantiate the need for amending and 
repealing laws applicable to Persons affected by 
Leprosy and call on governments to pursue measures 
to end the di scrimination of such persons. 83 
Specifically, they call on governments to modify, repeal 
or abolish existing laws, regulations, policies, customs 
and practices that discriminate directly or indirectly 
against Persons affected by Leprosy and their family 
members. 84  Family members of such persons are 
included within the ambit of the Resolution and the 
Principles and Guidelines on Leprosy, in order to 
promote the understanding that Leprosy is no longer 
an easily communicable disease and is in fact curable 
through the MDT. The family members of Persons 
affected by Leprosy are exposed to discrimination and 
                                                        
81UNGA res. 68/215, Sixty-Fifth Session, UN Doc. A/RES/65/215 (2010). 
82UNHRC res. A/HRC/15/30 (30 September, 2010). 
83Ibid. 
84Ibid. 

 24 
exclusion on account of their association with the 
Person affected by Leprosy.85 
 
5.3  The Principles and Guidelines on Leprosy 
list out several measures for improving the living 
conditions of Persons affected by Leprosy. These 
measures include treatment of Persons affected by 
Leprosy and their family members with dignity, and on 
an equal basis with other members of society as 
provided for under international h uman rights 
instruments including the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights (“UDHR”), International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (“ICESCR”), 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
(“ICCPR”) and the Convention on Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities. As per the Principles and Guidelines, 
Persons affected by Leprosy and their family members 
cannot be denied the right to marry, the right to have 
children and the right to adopt. Persons affected by 
Leprosy and their family membe rs are required to be 
given the same rights as everyone else with respect to 
(1) citizenship and identity documents; (2) recruitment 
policies; and (3) education and training in any field.  
 
5.4  The Principles and Guidelines also calls 
upon States to uphol d the dignity of Persons affected 
by Leprosy and their family members, through the 
repeal, amendment and modification of legislations to 
suit the needs of such persons and to ensure equality 
and non -discrimination of such persons through 
prohibitions and specific measures. The States are also 
asked to pay special attention to women, children and 
other vulnerable groups affected by Leprosy, while 
implementing its programs for the benefit of Persons 
affected by Leprosy. Access to healthcare, promotion in 
                                                        
85  Strategic Framework for Reduction of Stigma & Discrimination, NLEP, available at 
<http://nlep.nic.in/pdf/Stigma.pdf>, accessed on 25th January, 2014. 

 25 
standard of living, participation in political, cultural 
and recreational activities and reunification with 
family along with community living are also 
guaranteed under the Principles and Guidelines for the 
benefit of Persons affected by Leprosy and their fami ly 
members. The key measures for the enforcement of the 
Principles and Guidelines include legislative 
interventions and awareness building initiatives that 
promote the inclusion of Persons affected by Leprosy 
and their family members into mainstream society.   
 
5.5  The United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 2007 (“UNCRPD”) 
also promotes, protects and ensures the full and equal 
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental 
freedoms by all persons with disabilities. 86  The 
UNCRPD does not specifically deal with Persons 
affected by Leprosy or their family members, but 
provides the framework for tackling their concerns 
through equal opportunity measures, awareness 
programs and prohibitions against segregation and 
discrimination on the basis of their disability.87 
 
5.6  India has signed and ratified the UNCRPD, 
and is also a member of the UN General Assembly that 
unanimously passed the Resolution on the Elimination 
of Leprosy. 88 Being part of the UN General Assembly, 
India has the obligation to suitably change or repeal its 
laws in order to make them more amenable to the 
present-day needs of the Persons affected by Leprosy 
in light of the UN Resolution that specifically calls on 
nations to abide by the Principles and Guidelines on 
Leprosy adopted by the UN Human Rights Council. In 
                                                        
86 UN Doc. A/61/611 (2006). 
87Ibid. 
88Data provided to the Law Commission of India by T he Leprosy Mission Trust India (TLMTI) 
(on file with the Law Commission). 

 26 
this regard, Article 51 and Article 253 of the 
Constitution of India 89  play an important role in 
entrusting the Parliament of India with the requisite 
power to operationalise this change or repeal the 
discriminatory laws discussed above, as necessary. 
Article 51 deals with India’s obligation to promote 
international peace and endeavour to uphold its 
international obligations and commitments. Since the 
eradication of leprosy is a clear international 
commitment, the State is obliged to take all measures 
to ensure its fulfilment. In this effort, it is aided by 
Article 253 which vests the legislative competence in 
Parliament to make laws in furtherance of India ’s 
international commitments, irrespective of whether the 
subject-matter in question falls in List II of the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution, i.e. within the legislative 
competence of the States. Thus the Union of India has 
both the obligation as well  as the competence to enact 
a comprehensive law eliminating discrimination 
against Persons affected by Leprosy which is a key step 
in the eradication of the stigma associated with the 
disease in the country. This is now an urgent need 
when one considers th at it has been five years since 
the adoption of the UN Resolution on the Elimination 
of Leprosy and no definitive action has been taken by 
the Government of India in the interim. 
  
                                                        
89 Article 51 of the Directive Principles on State Policy under Part IV of the Constitution 
reads as: 
 
The State shall endeavour to — (a) promote international peace and security; (b) maintain 
just and honourable relations between nations; (c) foster respect for international law and 
treaty obligations in the dealings of organized peoples with one another; and (d) encourage 
settlement of international disputes by arbitration; 
 
Article 253 of the Chapter on Relations between the Union and the States under Part XI of 
the Constitution reads as: 
 
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament has power 
to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing any 
treaty, agreement or convention with any o ther country or countries or any decision made 
at any international conference, association or other body. 

 27 
CHAPTER VI 
 
PRACTICES IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS IN 
RELATION TO PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY 
 
6.1  Till a little more than a decade ago, several 
jurisdictions across the world sanctioned the 
compulsory segregation and isolation of Persons 
affected by Leprosy through legislation. For instance, 
South Africa, Australia and Pakistan imple mented 
legislations that were similar to the Lepers Act, 1898 in 
India, to enforce compulsory segregation of Leprosy 
patients.90 Japan set up leprosaria under the Leprosy 
Prevention Law of 1907, to segregate all Leprosy 
patients and place them separately in  such 
leprosaria.91 In 1907, Philippines also imposed a legal 
responsibility on the Director of Health to compulsorily 
segregate such persons. 92  The laws of Malaysia, 
Bahamas, Republic of Korea, Egypt, Singapore and 
Myanmar also sanctioned the isolation of such persons 
for quite some time.93 
 
6.2  In the addition to the practice of 
segregation, Singapore prohibited Persons affected by 
Leprosy from travelling by public transport under its 
Railways Act of 1906, while Thailand required aliens to 
submit along with  their application, a recent medical 
certificate from a physician attesting to the fact that 
the alien was not of unsound mind and not suffering 
from leprosy under its Alien Occupation Law. 94 
Persons affected by Leprosy were further denied 
national identity cards in the State of Angola, while the 
children of such persons were denied from attending 
                                                        
90Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10). 
91Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10). 
92Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10). 
93Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10). 
94Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10). 

 28 
public schools in the villages of China for many 
years.95 
 
6.3  However, the stigmatisation and 
ostracisation of Persons affected by Leprosy through 
such laws and practices started to diminish after the 
late 1990s, when the world community took note of the 
discriminatory spirit of such laws and decided to 
curtail their implementation in their individua l 
jurisdictions.96 To this end, several countries redrafted 
their legislations and policies to make them more 
amenable to the needs of Persons affected by Leprosy 
and to ensure that the basic rights of all such persons 
were statutorily guaranteed to them. A  few of such 
legislations and policies that are significant have been 
laid down below. 
 
(i) Azerbaijan 
 
6.3.1  The State of Azerbaijan has been committed 
to providing political and financial support for the 
elimination of discrimination against registered 
Leprosy patients and their family members. 97 To this 
end, the government of Azerbaijan has (1) started 
public awareness campaigns through the media and 
through publications to dispel the misconceptions 
surrounding Leprosy; and (2) established patient care 
institutions for the benefit of Persons affected by 
Leprosy. 98 In recent years, the government has also 
recognised the right of those affected by Leprosy to 
access free -of-cost treatment, education and work 
                                                        
95Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10). 
96Shigeki Sakamoto (n 10). 
97Annual Report of The United Nations High Commissioner For Human Rights And Reports Of 
The Office Of The High Commissioner And The Secretary -General on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Persons affected by Leprosy and their Family M embers, UN Doc. No. 
A/HRC/10/62 (23 February, 2009), available at <http://daccess -dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G09/115/36/PDF/G0911536.pdf?OpenElement>, accessed on  
25th January, 2015 (“Annual Report of the OHCHR”). 
98Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 

 29 
opportunities and to receive State compensation. 99 
Persons affected who have undergone treatment and 
have been cured of Leprosy are also provided with a 
one-time financial package, as well as with a job and 
private dwelling by the local executive power to assist 
them in reintegrating themselves into society.100 
 
(ii) Costa Rica 
 
6.3.2  In 1974, Costa Rica introduced an 
ambulatory treatment without confinement for Persons 
affected by Leprosy along with an education campaign 
to combat discrimination against Persons affected by 
Leprosy.101 In 2002, the commitments to eliminating 
the disease by 2005 were further strengthened by the 
government of Costa Rica through several protocols 
and public health measures, such as the re -
instauration of epidemiological vigilance and the 
strengthening of capacities for health professionals.102 
 
(iii) Ecuador 
 
6.3.3  Under Articles 32 and 50 of the Constitution 
of Ecuador, all persons who suffer from catastrophic 
diseases and are in need of preferential and specialised 
treatment, are guaranteed the right to free -of-cost 
health services. 103  In this regard, the treatment 
through MDT is made available free -of-cost, to all 
Persons affected by Leprosy, through the generous 
donations of the WHO and the Pan -American Health 
Organization.104 
 
                                                        
99Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
100Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
101Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
102Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
103Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
104Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 

 30 
6.3.4  Based on statistical information and disease 
control, the government of Ecuador has undertaken 
specific steps (1) to train its health personnel; (2) to 
coordinate with national and international civil society 
organizations in order to implement education 
campaigns to fight discriminati on against the disease; 
(3) to provide specialised medical attention to persons 
with disabilities as a result of Leprosy; and (4) to 
systematically control and monitor the main provinces 
where Leprosy is prevalent.105 
 
(iv) Egypt 
 
6.3.5  In Egypt, Persons affecte d by Leprosy are 
entitled to full medical treatment for Leprosy free -of-
cost and at any medical establishment, until such 
persons have been cured and have fully recovered. 106 
In cases where Leprosy has led to disabilities, the 
Persons affected by Leprosy can  also undergo medical 
and social rehabilitation in order to reintegrate 
themselves as well as their family members, back into 
mainstream society. 107 Law No. 131 of 1946, which 
provides for the segregation of Persons affected by 
Leprosy has not been enforced in Egypt since 1984, 
after the introduction of MDT as recommended by the 
WHO.108 
 
(v) Finland 
 
6.3.6  Under Section 6 of the Constitution of 
Finland, the general standards on non -discrimination 
ensure that every person, including Persons affected 
by Leprosy and their family members, are treated 
                                                        
105Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
106Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
107Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
108Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 

 31 
equally before the law.109 In addition, the Finnish Non-
Discrimination Act provides for a general framework 
for equal treatment of all such persons in all aspects of 
employment, occupation and education. 110  The said 
Act defines discrimination in an extensive way, 
attempting to cover both direct and indirect 
discrimination.111 Provisions to prevent discrimination 
against all persons on any ground are also included 
within the Penal Code, the Employment Contracts Act 
and the Act on the Status and Rights of Patients.112 
 
(vi) Greece 
 
6.3.7  The Greek Law No. 1137/1981 specifically 
provides for the treatment and social protection of 
persons suffering from Hansen’s disease that includes 
the provision for monthly income support to Persons 
affected by Leprosy who are either undergoing 
treatment, or have been treated and cured of the 
disease.113 The income support is also provided to the 
family members of Persons affected by Leprosy 
including their children. 114 In addition to support and 
treatment, the Law No. 1137 imposes a mandatory 
duty upon doctors and hospital staff to ensure 
confidentiality. 115 Terms such as “leprosy” or “leper” 
have been eliminated from all public documents in 
Greece in light of the said law.116 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
109Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
110Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
111Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
112Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
113Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
114Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
115Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
116Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 

 32 
(vii) Japan 
 
6.3.8  In March 2005, the members of the 
Verification Committee in association with the Japan 
Law Foundation presented a report entitled 
“Verification Committee Concerning Hansen’s Disease 
Problem”.117 The Committee was set up by the Ministry 
of Health, Labour and Welfare to assess the scientific 
and historical significance of the segregation policy in 
relation to Persons affe cted by Leprosy and to provide 
guidance on the formulation of government policies in 
relation to such persons.118 
 
6.3.9  Subsequently in 2001, an Act on Payment of 
Compensation to Inmates of Hansen’s’ Disease 
Sanatoria was passed in Japan to provide financi al 
assistance to Persons affected by Leprosy. 119 Another 
law aimed at extending social welfare services to such 
persons was enacted in 2008. 120 In the same year, the 
Ministry of Justice also placed the elimination of 
prejudice against persons living with HIV a nd Persons 
affected by Leprosy as a priority for its human rights 
week that year.121 
 
(viii) Korea 
 
6.3.10 The National Assembly in the Republic of 
Korea passed a legislative bill for People affected by 
Leprosy on 20 September, 2007. 122 The Government 
also publicly apologised and offered compensation to 
                                                        
117Verification Committee Concerning Hansen'sDisease Problem , Final Report (Japan Law 
Foundation, 2005), available at 
<http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/policy/health/01/pdf/01.pdf>, accessed on 25th January, 
2015; See also Annual Report of the OHCHR and the Secretary General (n 97). 
118Ibid. 
119 Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
120 Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
121Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
122Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 

 33 
Persons affected by Leprosy on account of the 
systematic wrongdoings against such persons that had 
continued for several decades.123 
 
(ix) Oman 
 
6.3.11 The Royal Decree No. 101/96 in Oman 
ensures material and medical assistance to Omani 
citizens and their families in case of sickness, 
incapacity or old age. 124 Under the Islamic Sharia law, 
the values of cooperation, dignity and equality prevail 
irrespective of social status, health and any other 
consideration. 125  The Omani Ministry of Social 
Development is vested with the responsibility of 
addressing issues surrounding Leprosy. 126  A 
government house set -up for Persons affected by 
Leprosy can accommodate up to ten Leprosy patients 
at a time, who then enjoy the best social, psychological 
and healthcare services available. 127  The families of 
such persons also receive housing assistance and 
monthly social security grants during the treatment of 
such persons and after the completion of treatment. 128 
After the com pletion of treatment, the Omani Ministry 
also endeavours to make an effort to support the re -
integration of the discharged persons into society.129 
 
(x) Ukraine 
 
6.3.12 Under Article 27 of the Ukrainian Law No. 
1645-III dated 6 April 2000, all Persons affected b y 
Leprosy receive medical assistance and treatment. 130In 
                                                        
123Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
124 Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
125Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
126Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
127 Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
128Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
129Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
130 Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 

 34 
addition, Law No. 1645-III also provides for the setting-
up of specialised medical facilities for the Leprosy 
patients. 131  While living in these facilities, Leprosy 
patients enjoy the freedom of movement , regular 
communication and the right to vote. 132  Persons 
affected by Leprosy are also given land for agricultural 
work, and are allowed to be adequately represented in 
local state organizations and municipalities.133 
 
6.3.13 The above -mentioned legislations and 
policies are significant in that they demonstrate the 
attempts made by the international community to 
eliminate discrimination against Persons affected by 
Leprosy through affirmative action and anti -
discrimination policies. The Law Commission has 
taken note of these laws and policies in other 
jurisdictions and has endeavoured to incorporate some 
of the best practices in these laws and policies into its 
proposed Bill annexed to this Report. 
  
                                                        
131Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
132Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 
133Annual Report of the OHCHR (n 97). 

 35 
CHAPTER VII 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
A. Repeal or Amendment of the Laws 
 
7.1  In this Chapter, the Law Commission 
examines the specific provisions that directly or 
indirectly discriminate against Persons affected by 
Leprosy and therefore require immediate repeal, 
amendment or modification in order to make their 
application more  amenable to the present -day 
developments in the treatment of Leprosy.  
 
(i) Personal Laws 
 
7.2  Under Section 13(1)(iv) of the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955, Section 2(vi) of the Dissolution of 
Muslim Marriage Act, 1939, Section 10(1)(iv) of the 
amended Indian Divorce Act, 1869, Section 27(g) of the 
Special Marriage Act, 1954 and Section 18(2)(c) of the 
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956, Leprosy 
affecting either spouse constitutes a ground for 
divorce, annulment of marriage or separation without 
forfeiture of maintenance. One of the main objectives 
behind the inclusion of these provisions under the 
relevant legislations has been to restrain the spread of 
the infection of Leprosy (given that it is a 
communicable disease) to the unaffected spouse. 
However as noted above in this Report, Leprosy is no 
longer an incurable disease and can be treated by 
MDT, which in its first dose itself kills 99.9% of the 
Leprosy bacillus and renders the infection non -
contagious and non -virulent. On account of this, the 
Law Commission recommends that an infection of 
Leprosy affecting either spouse should not by itself 
constitute a ground for divorce, annulment of marriage 
or separation. The need for repeal of these provisions 

 36 
has been recognised by the Rajya Sabha Committee on 
Petitions in its Hundred and Thirty-First Report and in 
its Hundred and Thirty-Eighth Report. 
 
(ii) Beggary Laws - including Andhra Pradesh 
Prevention of Begging Act, 1977, Bombay 
Prevention of Begging Act, 1959, Gujarat 
Prevention of Begging Act, 1959 and several 
other analogous legislations 
 
7.3  Under all the State -level beggary prevention 
laws, the term leper has been used to refer to Persons 
affected by Leprosy. These laws also allow for beggars 
and their dependents who suffer from Leprosy to be 
detained or confined to Leprosy asylums indefinitely. 
The purpose behind such detention and confinement 
relates to the notion that Leprosy is an incurable and 
contagious disease. However, as noted in this Report, 
this notion is incorrect since Leprosy is now curable by 
MDT. Hence, Persons affected by Leprosy should not 
be detained or confined to Leprosy asylums indefinitely 
only on account of their infection of the disease. 
Additionally, the use of the term leper is derogatory 
and contributes to the stigma associated with the 
disease. Therefore, the Law Commission recommends 
that such a term should be removed from  the statute 
book and all government records to curtail the 
perpetuation of the stigma associated with the disease. 
The need for the removal of the term leper under State 
beggary prevention laws has been recognised by the 
Rajya Sabha Committee on Petitions  in its Hundred 
and Thirty -First Report and its Hundred and Thirty -
Eighth Report. 
 
 
 

 37 
(iii) The Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995 and 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014 
 
7.4  Under Section 2(I)(iii) of the Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 1995 disability means inter-alia a 
Leprosy-cured person. The term Leprosy -cured has 
been defined under Section 2(n) of the Act and Section 
9 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014, 
to mean any person who has been cured of Leprosy 
but is suffering  from (i) loss of sensation in hands or 
feet as well as loss of sensation and paresis in the eye 
and eye -lid but with no manifest deformity; (ii) 
manifest deformity and paresis; but having sufficient 
mobility in their hands and feet to enable them to 
engage in normal economic activity; (iii) extreme 
physical deformity as well as advanced age which 
prevents him from undertaking any gainful 
occupation. Under Section 2(t) of the Act, persons with 
disability are individuals who are suffering from not 
less than 40% of any disability as certified by a 
medical authority. Section 2(1)(c) of the Rehabilitation 
Council of India Act, 1992 uses the same definition of 
disability with all its sub -categories, as mentioned 
under Section 2(I) the Persons with Disabilities Ac t. As 
per TLMTI, the term Leprosy -cured does not appear to 
include Persons affected by Leprosy who are 
undetected or undergoing treatment and yet exhibit all 
or any of the three conditions described in the 
schedule. This term should therefore be amended to  
have a wider scope that covers larger number of 
persons who are affected by Leprosy, such as 
undetected Persons affected by Leprosy or Persons 
affected by Leprosy undergoing treatment.  
 
7.5  Further, TLMTI has provided data that 
indicates that the 40%  and above disability criteria 
under the Persons with Disabilities Act fails to cover 

 38 
persons cured of  Leprosy with only Grade I disability, 
since the loss of sensation constitutes only 6 -9% 
disability as per calculation process . On account of 
these observations, the Law Commission recommends 
that the term Leprosy cured needs to either be removed 
or broadened to cover all categories of Persons affected 
by Leprosy.  
 
(iv) State Municipal and Panchayati  Raj Acts – 
including the Orissa Municipal Act, 1950, 
Andhra Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1965, 
Orissa Gram Panchayats Act, 1964, Andhra 
Pradesh Panchayati Raj Act, 1994, 
Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh Panchayati 
Raj Act, 1993, the Rajasthan Panchayati Act , 
1994 and the Rajasthan Municipality Act, 
1959 and several other analogous legislations. 
 
7.6  The provisions on eligibility in the various 
State Municipality and Panchayat Raj legislations 
listed above, state that Persons affected by Leprosy are 
liable to be disqualified from holding a civic post on the 
ground of their infection of Leprosy. The validity of 
these provisions has been upheld by the Supreme 
Court in its judgement in the case of Dhirendra 
Pandua. However, subsequent to this judgement, 
several nations including India, have taken note of the 
rampant discrimination against Persons affected by 
Leprosy and have pledged through the UN Resolution 
on the Elimination of Leprosy to end all forms of 
discrimination and segregation against such persons. 
Under Principle 5 of the Principles and Guidelines on 
Leprosy adopted by the Resolution, all States including 
India, have been vested with the duty to provide 
Persons affected by Leprosy and their family members, 
with the right to stand for elections and to h old office 
at all or any level in the government on an equal basis 

 39 
as others. In light of this Principle, the Law 
Commission observes that there is a strong basis to do 
away with the restrictions on eligibility of Persons 
affected by Leprosy to stand for civic posts.  
 
B. Call for Affirmative Action 
 
7.7  In addition to the modification and repeal of 
specific provisions as discussed above, the Law 
Commission also recommends the enactment of a 
legislation that promotes the social inclusion of 
Persons affected by Leprosy and their family members 
through affirmative action. India’s commitment to 
uphold the UNCRPD and UN Resolution on the 
Elimination of Leprosy as discussed previously, 
provides the required basis for the enactment of such a 
legislation under Articl e 253 of the Constitution of 
India.  
 
7.8  In this regard, the non-obstante clause 
under Article 253 read along with Entry 14 of List I of 
Schedule VII of the Indian Constitution (Union List), 
provides the Parliament of India with the requisite 
power to make any law for the whole or any part of the 
Indian territory for implementi ng any treaty, 
agreement or convention with any other country or 
countries or any decision made at any international 
conference, association or other body. The power 
under Article 253 has been exercised to give effect to 
various treaties and agreements tha t include the 
UNCRPD, the signing of the Uruguay Round final Act 
on GATT 1994 and the decisions taken at the United 
Nations Conference on the Human Environment held 
in Stockholm, 1972. 
 
7.9  The relevant legislation promoting 
affirmative action towards Per sons affected by Leprosy 

 40 
and their family members needs to take note of the 
contemporary needs of such persons and address all 
aspects of their well -being in order to promote their 
holistic development and inclusion into society.  
 
7.10  The key aspects that require attention in the 
context of such a legislation include the following:  
 
(i) Measures against discrimination 
 
7.10.1 It has been noted at various instances in 
this Report that Persons affected by Leprosy along with 
their family members are discriminated against in 
every institution, be it political, social, economic or 
educational. 134  Such discrimination against both 
Persons affected by Leprosy and their family members 
ranges from non -admission, to segregation, to 
discouragement to participate .135 Children of Persons 
affected by Leprosy, who are not infected with the 
disease, are also treated in a similar fashion by 
society.136 
 
7.10.2 The Law Commission recommends that to 
tackle these issues of discrimination, the proposed 
legislation on Persons a ffected by Leprosy and their 
family members, should (a) prohibit discrimination 
against Persons affected by Leprosy and their family 
members in all institutions; (b) implement affirmative 
measures for the social inclusion of such persons into 
mainstream society; (c) guarantee to all such persons, 
the right to access healthcare, adequate housing, 
education, employment and other such basic 
amenities.  
 
                                                        
134 Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 
135Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 
136Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 

 41 
(ii) Land Rights 
 
7.10.3 As has been noted previously, the long -
standing practice of moving Persons affected by 
Leprosy and their family members from mainstream 
society into clusters near hospitals needs to be curbed. 
These clusters have come to be known as Leprosy 
colonies, and are usually established outside the city 
limits. This practice reinforces segregation and  
deprives the Persons affected by Leprosy and their 
family members from owning or possessing property. 
These colonies are either established on government 
land including forest and railway lands or private land 
given for the purpose of establishing such co lonies by 
private individuals or institutions.137 
 
7.10.4 As noted previously, there are at present 
about 850 colonies in India. 138  It has also been 
estimated that no new Leprosy colonies have come up 
in the last 14 years, although people diagnosed with 
the disease continue to migrate to existing colonies. 139 
Further, people who have been living in the colonies 
for years together wish to continue residing there with 
their families including children. However, in spite of 
their continued residence in these colonies, many 
Persons affected by Leprosy and their fa mily members 
still do not have any land rights and live under the 
constant threat of eviction. 140 The lack of ownership 
and title to land also discourages Persons affected by 
Leprosy and their family members from developing the 
colony. 
 
                                                        
137Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 
138Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 
139 Data provided by TLMTI (n 88).. 
140Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 

 42 
7.10.5 The Law Commis sion recommends that to 
tackle these issues of land rights, the proposed 
legislation should (a) take measures to legalise title 
and ownership of property in Leprosy colonies; and (b) 
in case, land rights cannot be given, explore alternative 
settlement opti ons with the consent of the Persons 
affected by Leprosy and their family members. 
 
(iii) Right to Employment 
 
7.10.6 The economic empowerment of Persons 
affected by Leprosy and their family members is a 
crucial need, which must be actively supported and 
facilitated by the State. However, many employers 
misuse the existing employment legislations to 
terminate the employment of persons once they are 
diagnosed with Leprosy.141 
 
7.10.7 Section 2(o)(oo)(c) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 is relevant in this regard, since it states that 
the termination of the service of an employee or a 
workman on the ground of continued ill -health does 
not constitute retrenchment. This section does not 
mention Leprosy as a ground for termination as such, 
but may be indirectly resort ed to terminate the 
employment of an affected person or his/her family 
member due to the social stigma attached to the 
condition.  
 
7.10.8 The Law Commission recommends that to 
tackle these issues of employment, the proposed 
legislation should include meas ures that prohibit 
termination of employment of Persons affected by 
Leprosy and their family members solely on the basis 
of the infection of the disease and the associated 
                                                        
141Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 

 43 
stigma. The government can also consider providing 
quotas in institutions for Person s affected by Leprosy 
and their families or alternative employment 
opportunities, where they are physically capable of 
being employed, in order to encourage such persons to 
become financially independent.  
 
(iv) Educational and training opportunities 
 
7.10.9 Persons affected by Leprosy and, in some 
instances, their family members are denied admission 
to educational and training institutions on account of 
Leprosy. On account of this denial, such persons and 
their family members cannot obtain the requisite 
professional training or educational qualifications to 
access employment opportunities. In some cases, the 
family members of Persons affected by Leprosy forge 
addresses or lie about their identity in order to go to a 
school, college or a vocational training institute.142 
 
7.10.10 The Law Commission recommends that to 
tackle these issues, the proposed legislation should 
endeavour to ensure the admission of Persons affected 
by Leprosy and their family members in schools, 
colleges and training institutions for their benefit.  
 
(v) Appropriate use of Language 
 
7.10.11 Language is a significant medium of 
perpetuating existing stigmas. Bearing this in mind, an 
effort needs to be made to discourage the use of the 
term ‘leper’ and other such synonymous terms, as it 
carries negative connotations with reference to Persons 
affected by Leprosy. The term also hampers the efforts 
for the inclusion of Persons affected by Leprosy into 
                                                        
142Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 

 44 
mainstream society and affects their sense of dignity 
as human beings.  
 
7.10.12 The Law Commission recommends that to 
tackle this issue of language, the proposed legislation 
should endeavour to replace the term ‘leper’ and other 
such synonymous terms in national, regional or local 
languages in all government and private documents, to 
‘persons affected by Leprosy’ or a similar term to that 
effect in the  relevant national, regional or local 
language. 
 
(vi) Right to Freedom of Movement 
 
7.10.13 People affected by Leprosy are not permitted 
to travel in public transport with the same freedom as 
others. Section 56 of the Railways Act, 1989  and 
Section 8(4) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 are resorted 
to, in order to deny Persons affected by Leprosy the 
right to travel in railways or the right to obtain a 
driving license, as applicable. The Law Commission 
recommends that to tackle this issue of movement, the 
proposed legislation should provide measures that 
endeavour to ensure that the Persons affected by 
Leprosy are guaranteed the right of travel in public 
transport and the right to obtain a license in light of 
the their treatment and condition. The legislation 
should also ensure non -discrimination of Persons 
affected by Leprosy in public transports such as 
railways. 
 
(vii) Concessions during treatment 
 
7.10.14 Poverty and distance from big cities are a 
living reality for most of the Persons affected by 
Leprosy living in the 850 Leprosy colonies of India. 
Such persons have to travel long distances for 

 45 
education, skills training, livelihood options and 
accessing healthcare benefits.143  Many of the Persons 
affected by Leprosy rely on local public transport for 
their daily movement, although, as noted before, the 
access to public transport is highly curtailed for such 
persons. 144  In such a scenario, monetary help for 
travel, lodging and medicines can go a long way in 
assisting such persons in continuing treatment for as 
long as required.  In this regard, the Maharashtra 
State Road Transport Corporation, for example, has 
been providing persons cured of Leprosy with 75% 
concession on their buses. 
 
7.10.15 Following this lead, the Law Commission 
recommends that the proposed legislation should 
provide relevant concessions and monetary benefits to 
Persons affected by Leprosy, who are undergoing 
treatment, for their travel, lod ging during treatment (if 
required) and their medicines.  
 
(viii) Social Awareness 
 
7.10.16 Creating awareness regarding the cure and 
transmission of Leprosy is the principal way through 
which, the discrimination and stigma against Persons 
affected by Leprosy and  their family members can be 
systematically curbed. The dire lack of awareness 
regarding the disease leads to segregation of Persons 
affected by Leprosy and their family members. 
Additionally, due to lack of awareness regarding the 
curability and treatment of the disease, many persons 
are afraid to seek medical assistance on account of the 
associated stigma.145 
 
                                                        
143Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 
144 Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 
145Data provided by TLMTI (n 88). 

 46 
7.10.17 The Law Commission recommends that to 
tackle these issues, the proposed legislation should 
suggest measures for creating awareness regarding the 
disease, its treatment and its curability through 
campaigns and programs in schools, hospitals, 
government institutions and private establishments.  
 
(ix) Welfare Measures 
 
7.10.18 As has been noted in various parts of the 
Report, Persons affected by Leprosy and members of 
their family live under several financial and social 
constraints that make it impossible, in some 
instances, to continue treatment and to participate in 
social and cultural activities in society. However, 
through the implementation o f a variety of welfare 
measures these issues can be addressed. Such welfare 
measures include the provision for unemployment 
benefits, parental leave, health insurance or other 
such social insurance on account of Leprosy or 
otherwise. Financial assistance t o Persons affected by 
Leprosy and their family members, while such persons 
are undergoing treatment or have completed 
treatment, will also go a long way in addressing their 
financial concerns. In addition, supplementary 
measures relating to counselling dur ing treatment, 
community participation and other such initiatives can 
also serve as an effective mechanism for the holistic 
development of Persons affected by Leprosy and 
members of their family. 
 
7.10.19 The Law Commission recommends that to 
implement suc h welfare measures, the proposed 
legislation should impose specific duties upon public 
and private establishments to execute such measures 
in order to foster an environment for financial and 
social growth of all Persons affected by Leprosy and 

 47 
members of t heir family. This includes the 
establishment of Central and State Commissions in 
order to ensure that such measures are enforced 
strictly and both private and public establishments are 
accountable in case of non-enforcement.  
 
C. Summary 
 
7.11  In light of the above stated observations in 
this Report, the 20th Law Commission recommends 
that  
 
(i) The following Laws and provisions be repealed: 
 
The Lepers Act, 1898 in its entirety; 
Sub-section (g) of Section 27 of the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954; 
Sub-section (vi) of Section 2 of the Dissolution of 
Muslim Marriage Act, 1939; 
Clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of Section 13 of the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955; 
Clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of Section 10 of the Indian 
Divorce Act, 1869; 
Clause (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the Hindu 
Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956. 
 
(ii) The following Laws be modified or amended: 
 
The Legal Services Act, 1987  
 
After sub-clause (d) of section 12, the following sub-
clause shall be inserted, namely  
(dd) a person who suffers from, or has 
previously suffered or has been cured of 
Leprosy; or  
 
 

 48 
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 
 
After the first proviso to sub-section (4) under Section 
8 of the Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: 
Provided furth er that the licensing authority 
shall not refuse to issue a learner's licence to 
a person affected by Leprosy, who has been 
certified by a registered medical practitioner, 
as having either been cured of Leprosy, or as 
having been administered with the firs t dose 
under Multi -Drug Therapy, with continuing 
treatment for Leprosy being provided. 
 
(iii) Provisions enabling the government to 
undertake affirmative action in the following 
areas be introduced: 
 
Health  
Ownership of property 
Social Welfare 
Education 
Employment 
Awareness and training 
Participation of Persons affected by Leprosy in the 
formulation of policies 
Setting-up of a Central and State Commission on 
Leprosy, to monitor the compliance of the provisions of 
the Act in respect of public and private e stablishments 
and to make recommendations to the Central or State 
Government, as applicable, for the proper 
implementation of this Act. 
 
7.12  Although amendments can be made in each 
and every law specified above, the Commission 
recommends that a single st atute should deal with all 
aspects of rights of Persons affected by Leprosy and 

 49 
their family members. This will ensure coherence and 
send out a strong signal of the resolve of the 
Government of India to tackle discrimination faced by 
Persons affected by Leprosy.  
 
7.13  This statute should be titled as the 
“Elimination of Discrimination against Persons affected 
by Leprosy Bill, 2015 ”. This stand -alone law, apart 
from comprehensively covering the repeal/modification 
of the specified statutes, shall contain principles of 
non-discrimination and equal protection before law. 
These principles shall specify that (1) No person, or 
public or private establishment shall discriminate 
against any person affected by Leprosy, or members of 
his family on any ground in relation to their affliction 
of Leprosy, or their disability, physical attributes or 
any other form of their association with Leprosy ; and 
(2) All persons affected by Leprosy and members of 
their family shall be entitled to the recognition, 
enjoyment and exercise, on an equal basis, of all 
human rights including freedoms guaranteed by the 
Constitution of India. Further, the law shall al so 
contain enabling provisions regarding affirmative 
action and repeal and amend discriminatory provisions 
listed above.  
 
7.14  A model Bill is provided in the Annexure for 
the consideration of the Government of India. The Law 
Commission of India believes that the fact that India is 
home to the most number of Persons affected by 
Leprosy in the world is a matter of deep shame. 
Further, despite clear scientific evidence and 
pioneering social efforts, the stigma associated with 
leprosy still continues unabate d. The proposed Bill is 
an important step in eliminating the social 
discrimination faced by such persons, a necessary 
precursor to their reintegration into society. As a 

 50 
humane society that believes in human rights for all, 
especially its poorest, the Law Commission believes 
that the Bill should be converted into a law as 
expeditiously as possible by the Government of India.  
 
Sd/- 
 [Justice A.P. Shah] 
Chairman 
 
 
  
Sd/- 
[Justice S.N. Kapoor] 
Member 
Sd/- 
[Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma] 
Member 
 
 
Sd/- 
[Justice Usha Mehra] 
Member 
Sd/- 
[Dr. (Mrs.) Pawan Sharma] 
Secretary 
Sd/- 
[P.K. Malhotra] 
Ex-officio Member 
Sd/- 
[Dr. Sanjay Singh] 
Ex-officio Member 
 
 
  

 51 
ANNEXURE  
 
  
ELIMINATING DISCRIMINATION AGAINST 
PERSONS AFFECTED BY LEPROSY (EDPAL) BILL, 
2015 
 
A Bill 
to enact a comprehensive protection regime for 
persons affected by Leprosy and members of their 
family; to eliminate any discrimination or denial of 
equal treatment; to repeal and amend existing laws 
that negatively affect such persons and promote the ir 
segregation and discrimination; and to enable the 
State to discharge its positive obligations through 
affirmative action 
 
REAFFIRMING that all human beings are born free 
and equal in dignity and rights, and that everyone is 
entitled to the enjoyment of human rights without 
distinction of any kind, such as caste, sex, language, 
religion, disability or deformity, national or social 
origin, birth or other status; 
 
REAFFIRMING that persons affected by Leprosy and 
members of their family are entitled to be tr eated as 
individuals with dignity and bearers of human 
rights, including equality before the law and the 
equal protection of the law, without any 
discrimination; 
 
RECALLING India’s obligations as a signatory to the 
United Nations Resolution on the Eliminat ion of 
Discrimination against persons affected by Leprosy 
and their Family Members, 2011, the United Nations 
Principles and Guidelines for the Elimination of 
Discrimination against persons affected by Leprosy 
and their Family Members, 2010, and the United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
 

 52 
Disabilities 2006; 
 
ENABLING the government to give due consideration 
to the principles and guidelines mentioned herein, 
while repealing certain obsolete and archaic laws 
and formulating policies and guidelines for the equal 
and non -discriminatory treatment of persons 
affected by Leprosy; 
 
Now therefore be it enacted in the Sixty-fifth year of 
the Republic of India:- 
 CHAPTER I: PRELIMINARY  
SHORT TITLE 
AND 
COMMENCEME
NT 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Persons affected by Leprosy 
Act, 2015. 
 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(1) “appropriate government” means,— 
 
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any 
establishment wholly or substantially financed 
by that Government, or any body  constituted 
by a law made by Parliament or a Cantonment 
Board constituted under the Cantonments 
Act, 2006, the Central Government; or 
(ii) in relation to the State Government or any 
other establishment under sub -section (2) of 
this section that is not covered under clause (i) 
of this sub-section, the State Government; 
 
(2) “establishment”– means and includes a 
company, club, firm or any other body 
 

 53 
corporate or association of persons jointly 
carrying out a systematic activity for 
consideration or otherwise including  but not 
limited to;  
(i) a society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860, or a co -operative 
society under the Co -operative Societies Act, 
1912  
(ii) a trust under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or 
corresponding state law under which trusts 
may be established; 
(iii)any organisation or institution or authority 
established by or under a Central Act or State 
Act or otherwise;  
(iv) any industry under Section 2(j) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; or 
(v) any shop or establishment governed by a State 
Act concerning su ch shops and 
establishments; 
 
(3) “disability due to Leprosy” – means grade 1 or 
grade 2 disability in the hand, leg or eye that 
hinders full and effective participation of a 
person affected by Leprosy in society equally 
with others, whether or not his extent of 
disability has been specified in measurable 
terms; 
 
Explanation: (i) Grade 1 disability includes sensory 
impairment, scars with sensory impairment or 
muscle weakness without contractures. 
(ii) Grade 2 disability includes visible impairment, 
Lagophthalmos, Iridocyclitis, visual acuity of <6/60, 
burns, deep cracks, wounds (both simple and deep 
ulcers), muscle atrophy, bone absorption of 
shortening or contractures. 
 
(4) “Leprosy” – means a disease triggered by 
Mycobacterium Leprae  characterised by  
symptoms of pale and reddish skin, numbness 
of hands or feet or loss of feeling in a patch of 

 54 
skin, and which may lead to disability as 
defined under sub-section (3) of this section; 
 
(5) “leprosy cured person” – includes, 
notwithstanding anything in the Persons with 
Disability Act, 1995 or any other law 
pertaining to persons with disability, any 
person affected by Leprosy, regardless of the 
percentage of his disability, who has been 
certified by a registered medical practitioner, 
as having b een administered with the first 
dose under Multi -Drug Therapy, which 
renders his illness non -contagious, and such 
person continues with or has completed 
treatment for Leprosy. 
 
(6) “person affected by Leprosy” – means and 
includes a person who suffers from, or  has 
previously suffered or has been cured of 
Leprosy, whether or not such person has 
undergone treatment under Multi -Drug 
Therapy; 
 
(7) “Multi-Drug Therapy” (MDT) – means the 
medical treatment wherein a combination of 
drugs are administered to a person affect ed by 
Leprosy in order to render the infection non -
contagious through the first dose and kill 
Mycobacterium Leprae; 
 
(8) “members of their family”, with reference to 
persons affected by Leprosy, means — 
(i) spouse of the person affected by Leprosy; 
(ii) parents of the person affected by Leprosy; 
(iii)children of the person affected by leprosy; and 
(iv) brothers or sisters of the person affected by 
Leprosy. 
 CHAPTER II: EQUALITY AND NON-DISCRIMINATION  
EQUALITY AND 
NON-
DISCRIMINATIO
3. (1) No person, establishment or government, shall 
discriminate against any person affected by Leprosy, 
or members of his family on any ground in relation 
 

 55 
N 
 
to their affliction with Leprosy, or their disability, 
physical attributes or any other form of the ir 
association with Leprosy; 
 
(2) All persons affected by Leprosy and members of 
their family shall be entitled to the recognition, 
enjoyment and exercise, on an equal basis, of all 
human rights including freedoms guaranteed by the 
Constitution of India. 
 
REPEAL OF 
CERTAIN 
ENACTMENTS 
 
4. The statutes and provisions enumerated in 
Schedule I are hereby repealed. 
AMENDMENTS 
TO CERTAIN 
ENACTMENTS 
 
5. The statutes and provisions enumerated in 
column I of Schedule II shall stand amended in 
accordance with respective entries in column II of 
Schedule II. 
CERTAIN LAWS 
TO BE INVALID 
 
6. Laws that are not enumerated in Schedule I or 
Schedule II, whether Central or State, which directly, 
or indirectly discriminate against persons affected by 
Leprosy shall be in valid insofar as such laws 
discriminate against persons affected by Leprosy. 
 
Illustration 
 
A, a person affected by Leprosy who is found 
begging, is arrested and detained under the 
provisions of a State Prevention of Begging Act, 
solely on account of his affliction with Leprosy. With 
the coming into force of this section, any such 
provision for t he arrest and detention of persons 
affected by Leprosy under the State Prevention of 
Begging Act shall be invalid. The detention and 
arrest of A will be invalid.  
 
 
SUBSTITUTION 
OF CERTAIN 
TERMS 
7. Notwithstanding any other law for the time being 
in force, in all laws that are in force, and in all 
official records of the Government of India, State 
Governments, and establishments defined under 
sub-section (2) of Section 2, the term ‘leper’ and 
other such terms in national, regional and local 

 56 
languages, shall be substituted by the term ‘persons 
affected by Leprosy’ or any other term in the 
national, regional or local language that is 
synonymous. 
 
 CHAPTER III: RIGHTS OF PERSONS AFFECTED BY 
LEPROSY 
 
DUTY TO 
UPHOLD 
RIGHTS 
8. (1) No government, establishment or person, shall 
deny persons affected by Leprosy and members of 
their family, any rights guaranteed to them under 
this Chapter. 
(2) All legislative, administrative and other measures 
necessary to ensure compliance of the provisions of 
this Chapter shall be undertaken by the appropriate 
government. 
 
RIGHT TO 
HEALTH AND 
TREATMENT 
9. (1) No person affected by Leprosy shall be denied 
the right to treatment for Leprosy under Multi -Drug 
Therapy. 
(2) All persons affected by Leprosy shall have the 
right to access other healthcare facilities including 
but not limited to reconstruction surgeries and 
medicines. 
 
DISCLOSURE 
OF MEDICAL 
RECORDS 
10. The medical records relating to Leprosy of 
persons affected by Leprosy and members of their 
family shall be treated as confidential and shall not 
be disclosed to any person or establishment unless:  
(1) the prior informed consent of the affected person  
to such disclosure has been obtained; or  
(2) such disclosure, without such consent, is 
authorised by law. 
RIGHT TO 
OWNERSHIP OF 
PROPERTY 
11. No person affected by Leprosy, or members of his 
family, shall be denied the right to own property or 
to reside, purchase, rent, use or otherwise occupy, 
any property, merely for reason of such person being 
affected by leprosy. 
RIGHT TO 
ACCESS PUBLIC 
GOODS AND 
SERVICES 
12. No person affected by Leprosy, or any member of 
his family, shall be denied the right  to access, or 
enjoy or use any goods, accommodation, service, 
facility, benefit, privilege or opportunity dedicated for 

 57 
the use of the general public or customarily available 
to the public, whether or not for a specific fee, 
including shops, public restau rants, hotels and 
places of public entertainment or the use of wells, 
tanks, bathing ghats, roads, burial grounds or 
funeral ceremonies and places of public resort. 
RIGHT TO 
MOVEMENT 
13. No person affected by Leprosy, or any member of 
his family, shall b e denied the right to movement in 
respect of all or any public transport or for obtaining 
a driving license for all or any vehicle, on account of 
being affected with leprosy. 
RIGHT TO 
EDUCATION 
14.  No person affected by Leprosy, or any member 
of his family, shall be denied the right to education 
and training opportunities in any institution, 
including the right to continue or resume his 
education or training in any institution, after duly 
furnishing a certificate by a registered Med ical 
Practitioner that attests that such affected person 
has been administered with the first dose under 
Multi-Drug Therapy and continues to undergo or 
has completed treatment for Leprosy  or any such 
similar treatment as approved by the Government of 
India or World Health Organisation. 
 
RIGHT TO 
EMPLOYMENT 
15. No person affected by Leprosy, or any member of 
his family, shall be denied the right to be nominated, 
selected or elected, or to continue his appointment, 
as the case may be, to a public office or f or private 
employment, after he has duly furnished a certificate 
by a registered Medical Practitioner that attests that 
such person has been administered with the first 
dose under Multi -Drug Therapy and continues to 
undergo or has completed treatment for Leprosy. 
 
RIGHT TO 
FORM FAMILY 
16. No person affected by Leprosy, or any member of 
his family, shall be denied the right to marry, and 
form a family including through access to adoption 
or assisted procreation (including donor 
insemination). 
 
 CHAPTER IV: MEASURES FOR AFFIRMATIVE ACTION  

 58 
DUTY TO 
UNDERTAKE 
MEASURES 
17. Without prejudice to the generality of the 
obligations mentioned under Section 8 and in 
addition to them, the appropriate government shall 
undertake all measures specified in this Chapter. 
 
HEALTH-
RELATED 
MEASURES 
 
18. The appropriate government shall undertake the 
following measures relating to healthcare, for all 
persons affected by Leprosy and members of their 
family, that shall include but not be limited to: 
(1) implementation of a wareness programmes for 
all persons affected by Leprosy that emphasise 
the importance of an early treatment through 
Multi-Drug Therapy, to reduce chances of any 
kind of disability as a result of Leprosy;  
(2) formulation of guidelines and protocols for 
addressing the healthcare needs of all persons 
affected by Leprosy; 
(3) access to healthcare facilities that include 
reconstruction surgeries, and goods and 
services for all persons affected by Leprosy, to 
improve the health status of, and respond to 
the needs of all persons affected by Leprosy; 
(4) humane treatment of all persons affected by 
Leprosy by health care providers; 
(5) adoption of policies, and programmes for 
education and training of healthcare 
professionals, to enable them to deliver the 
highest attainable standard of healthcare to all 
persons affected by Leprosy and members of 
their family; 
(6) protection of all persons affected by Leprosy 
and members of their family against unethical 
or involuntary medical procedures or research, 
including in relation to vaccines, treatments or 
microbicides for terminal or such other 
diseases; and 
(7) providing medical and psychological treatment 
and counselling for all persons affected by 
Leprosy and members of their family, to assist 
them in overcoming their trauma suffered on 
account of their disability, physical attributes 
or any other form of their association with 
Leprosy. 
 

 59 
MEASURES 
RELATED TO 
OWNERSHIP 
AND TITLE  
 
19 (1). The appropriate government  shall make 
efforts to provide security of tenure, title and 
ownership of pro perty for all persons affected by 
Leprosy and members of their family living in leprosy 
colonies. 
 
(2) No person affected by Leprosy or members of his 
family shall be removed or evicted from the existing 
leprosy colonies without prior sanction of Central o r 
State Commission of Leprosy, as the case may be, 
and without being rehabilitated and adequately 
compensated.  
 
MEASURES 
RELATED TO 
SOCIAL 
WELFARE 
20. The appropriate government shall undertake the 
following measures relating to social welfare, for all 
persons affected by Leprosy, and members of their 
family, that shall include but not be limited to: 
(1) formulation of special financial packages that 
are designed for providing means of livelihood 
and adequate housing for persons affected by 
Leprosy and their family members, during and 
after the treatment; 
(2) formation and establishment of a Community -
based Rehabilitation forum;  
(3) promotion of schemes for neighbourhood 
support and security; 
(4) access to social security and other social 
protection measures, including employment 
benefits, parental leave, unemployment 
benefits, health insurance or other social 
insurance, family benefits, funeral benefits, 
pensions and benefits with regard to the loss 
of support for spouses or partners as the 
result of illness or death on  account of 
Leprosy, and poverty  reduction strategies and 
programmes; and 
(5)  enforcement of social programmes, including 
support programmes, to address factors 
relating to discrimination of the affected 
persons, that increase their vulnerability to 
isolation, homelessness and mental trauma. 
 

 60 
MEASURES 
RELATED TO 
EDUCATION 
AND 
EMPLOYMENT 
 
21. The appropriate government shall undertake the 
following measures relating to education and 
employment for persons affected by Leprosy, who 
have either been cured of Leprosy, or who have been 
duly certified, by a registered Medical Practitioner, 
as having been administered with the first dose 
under Multi -Drug Therapy and is continuing 
treatment for Leprosy, and members of the family of 
any person affected by Leprosy, that shall include 
but not be limited to: 
(1) implementation of educational programmes 
that impart education and training that is 
directed at the development of personalities, 
talents, and mental and physical abilities of 
persons, to their fullest potential, and 
responds to their needs; and 
(2)  access to employment and advancement 
opportunities, in all areas of public service, 
including all levels of government service and 
employment in public institutions. 
 
OTHER 
MEASURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. The appropriate government shall undertake the 
following other measures in the interest of all 
persons affected by Leprosy and members of their 
family, that shall include but not be limited to: 
(1) enforcement of social awareness programmes 
to dispel misconceptions surrounding Leprosy 
and disseminate information in respect of its 
treatment through Multi-Drug Therapy; 
(2) enforcement of special programmes for 
addressing discrimination, prejudice and other 
social factors that undermine the health of 
persons affected by Leprosy because of their 
disability, physical attributes;   and 
(3) implementation of training and awareness -
raising programmes in all establishments and 
institutions, including but not limited to 
schools and hospitals, to raise awareness 
regarding the needs of those affected by or 
associated with the disease. 
 

 61 
PARTICIPATION 
IN THE 
FORMULATION 
OF POLICIES 
 
23. Persons affected by Leprosyshall be entitled to 
participate in the formulation of policies affecting 
their welfare. 
 
 
ADMINISTRATI
ON 
 
24. (1) The Central Government shall within 12 
months of the coming into force of this Act, by 
notification, constitute a Central Commission on 
Leprosy, to monitor the compliance of the provisions 
under Chapter III and Chapter IV of this Act in 
respect o f all establishments for which the Central 
Government is the appropriate Government, and to 
make recommendations to the Central Government, 
for the proper implementation of this Act. 
 
(2) State Governments shall, within 12 months of the 
coming into force o f this Act, by notification, 
constitute a State Commission on Leprosy, to 
monitor the compliance of the provisions under 
Chapter III and Chapter IV of this Act in all 
establishments for which the State Government is 
the appropriate Government, and to make 
recommendations to the State Government, for the 
proper implementation of this Act within 12 months 
of the coming into force of this Act. 
 
 CHAPTER V: ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES  
NON-
COMPLIANCE 
OF 
PROVISIONS, 
RULES OR 
MEASURES 
UNDER THE 
ACT 
25. Notwithstanding any other law for the time being 
in force, any person affected by Leprosy or member 
of his family or a person acting bona fide on their 
behalf, aggrieved with the violation or non -
compliance of the provisions of Part III of this Act or 
any rules made thereunder, may institute a petition 
against the concerned persons or establishments in 
the District Court in whose jurisdiction the said 
person ordinarily resides or where the violation or 
non-compliance is alleged to have taken place and 
the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
shall apply to such proceedings. 
 
LEGAL AID 26(1). Where persons aggrieved under Section 25 of 
this Act, are unable to, or do not have the sufficient 
means to, engage a legal practitioner to represent 
them i n any proceeding under this Act, the 
appropriate Legal Services Authority under the Legal 
 

 62 
Services Authorities Act, 1987 shall provide legal aid 
to such persons. 
 
(2) Persons affected by Leprosy and members of their 
family filing a petition under Section 2 5 of this Act 
shall be deemed to be persons entitled to legal 
services under Section 12 of the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987. 
LIABILITY FOR 
NON-
COMPLIANCE 
 
27. In any petition under Section 25, where the 
Court finds that any person or establishment has 
breached or not complied with the provisions of this 
Act, it shall award to the person affected by Leprosy 
or a member of his family, compensation, and 
damages of not less than twenty five thousand 
rupees along with all costs incurred in litigation. 
 
 CHAPTER VI: MISCELLANEOUS   
POWER TO 
ISSUE 
DIRECTIONS 
28. The appropriate government may, in exercise of 
its powers and performance of its functions under 
this Act, issue such directions, as it may deem fit, 
for the purposes of this Act, to  any person or 
establishment and such person or establishment 
shall be bound to comply with such directions. 
 
POWER TO 
CALL FOR 
INFORMATION 
29. The appropriate government may call for such 
information from any person or establishment as it 
may deem necess ary to carry out the purposes of 
this Act. 
 
POWER TO 
MAKE RULES 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act; 
(2) Every rule made under sub -section (1) shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive session 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
 

 63 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
POWER TO 
REMOVE 
DIFFICULTIES 
31. If  any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the Central government may, 
by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this 
section after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 
 
APPLICATION 
OF CERTAIN 
LAWS 
32. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, 
and not in derogation of the Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 1995 or any laws pertaining to persons with 
disability.  
 
ACT TO HAVE 
OVERRIDING 
EFFECT  
33. The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any enactment or instrument having 
the force of law. 
 
 
  

 64 
SCHEDULE I – REPEALED PROVISIONS AND ACTS 
1) Repeal of the Lepers Act, 1898 in its entirety; 
 
2) Repeal of explanation (g) of Section 27 of the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954; 
 
3) Repeal of sub-section (vi) of Section 2 of the Dissolution of 
Muslim Marriage Act, 1939; 
 
4) Repeal of clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of Section 13 of the 
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955; 
 
5) Repeal of clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of Section 10 of the 
Indian Divorce Act, 1869; 
 
6) Repeal of clause (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the 
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956. 
 

 65 
SCHEDULE II – AMENDMENTS  
 
Legislation (I) Amendment (II) 
1) Legal Services Act, 
1987 
 
 
 
 
2) Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988 
 
After sub-clause (d) of section 12, the 
following sub-clause shall be inserted, 
namely: 
(dd) aperson who suffers from, or has 
previously suffered or has been cured 
of Leprosy; or 
After the first proviso to sub-section 
(4) under Section 8 of the Act, the 
following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: 
Provided further that the licensing 
authority shall not refuse to issue a 
learner's licence to a person affected 
by Leprosy, who has been certified by 
a registered medical practitioner, as 
having either been cured of Leprosy, or 
as having been administered with the 
first dose under Multi-Drug Therapy, 
with continuing treatment for Leprosy 
being provided. 
 
 
 
 
 