 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
Report No.257 
 
 
Reforms in Guardianship and 
Custody Laws in India 
 
 
 
 
May 2015 
 
  


ii 
 
 
D.O. No.6(3)/268/2014-LC(LS)                         22 May, 2015 
 
Dear Mr. Sadananda Gowda ji, 
  
   In order to emphasize the “welfare of the child” as the paramount consideration 
in adjudicating custody and guardianship matters, the Law Commission of India 
decided to study the issue of adopting a shared parenting system in India.   
         The Commission, in November 2014, issued a Consultation Paper on the 
subject.  The Consultation Paper analysed shared parentage systems across the 
world and reviewed the existing law in India.  It also posed a set of questions 
pertaining to shared parenting and invited c omments from the public.  On 
receiving several of response s from the publi c, the Commission set up a sub 
committee to study the legal provisions pertaining to shared custody in both 
developing and developed countries, with special emphasis on the circumstances 
in which joint custody may be granted, parenting plans and mediation.  Further, 
through a series of meetings with legal experts, practitioners and other 
stakeholders the committee outlined the nature and scope of the concept of 
shared parenting in India and identified the provisions in the current law that 
need to be amended.  
         After several rounds of discussions and deliberations, the views of the 
Commission centred around (i) strengthening the welfare principle in the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and emphasize its relevance in each aspect of 
guardianship and custody related decision -making; (ii) providing for equal legal 
status of both parents with respect to guardianship and custody; (iii) providing 
detailed guidelines to he lp decision -makers assess what custodial and 
guardianship arrangement serves the welfare of the child in specific situations; 
and (iv) providing for the option of awarding joint custody to both parents, in 
certain circumstances conducive to the welfare of the child.   
contd….2/- 
 


iii 
 
- 2 - 
         The above recommendations of the Commission are put in the form of its 
Report No.257 titled “ Reforms in Guardianship and Custody Laws in India ”, 
and is enclosed herewith for consideration by the Government.  
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
 
Sd/-  
 
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
Mr. D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi   

iv 
 
Report No.257 
Reforms in Guardianship and Custody 
Laws in India 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter  Title Pages 
I BACKGROUND TO THE REPORT 1-11 
A. “Welfare of the Child”: Historical Evolution 3-4 
B. “Best Interest of the Child” in International 
Human Rights Law 
5-6 
C. Joint Custody 7-8 
D. Summary of Responses received by the 
Commission 
8-10 
E. The Present Report 10-11 
II LEGAL FRAMEWORK GOVERNING 
CUSTODY AND GUARDIANSHIP IN 
INDIA 
12-25 
A. Statutory Law 12-19 
(i) Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 12-15 
(ii) Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 15-17 
(iii) Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 17-18 
(iv) Islamic Law 18 
(v) Parsi and Christian Law 18-19 
B. Judicial Interpretations 19-25 
(i) Superior Position of the Father 21-23 
(ii) Indeterminacy of the Welfare Standard 23-25 
III THE CONCEPT OF JOINT CUSTODY 26-34 
A. International Approaches to Joint Custody 26-30 
B. Joint Custody in India 30-32 
C. Reasons for Adopting Joint Custody in 
India 
32-34 
IV MEDIATION IN CHILD CUSTODY 
CASES 
35-40 
A. Current Legal Framework for Mediation in 
India 
35-37 
B. International Approaches to Mediation in 
Child Custody 
37-40 

v 
 
V CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECIDING 
CHILD CUSTODY CASES 
41-50 
A. Factors to consider for the Best Interest 
Standard 
41-42 
B. Determining the Preference of the Child 42-43 
C. Access to Records of the Child 43-44 
D. Grand-parenting Time 44 
E. Mediation 44-45 
F. Relocation 45-46 
G. Decision Making 46-47 
H. Parenting Plan 47 
I. Visitation 47-50 
VI SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 51-66 
A. Amendments to the Hindu Minority and 
Guardians Act, 1956 
52-55 
B. Amendments to the Guardians and Wards 
Act, 1890 
55-66 
 Annexure I : The Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship (Amendment) Bill, 2015 
67 
 Annexure II: The Guardians and Wards 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015 
68-80 

 1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
BACKGROUND TO THE REPORT 
 
1.1  This report of the Law Commission of India 
recommends a number of legislative amendments to 
emphasize the “welfare of the child” as the paramount 
consideration in adjudicating custody and guardianship 
matters. The worst affected in proceedings of divorce 
and family breakdowns are the children. Maintaining 
the central importance of the welfare of the child in 
proceedings of custody will help ensure that the child’s 
future is safe and pr otected, regardless of changing 
familial circumstances. The courts in India have also 
arrived at similar conclusions. For instance, the 
Bombay High Court held that for determining the final 
decree, the child’s welfare was the supreme 
consideration, irrespective of the rights and wrongs that 
the parents contend.1 The Supreme Court has said that 
the welfare of a child is not to be measured merely by 
money or physical comfort, but the word welfare must 
be taken in its widest sense that the tie of affection 
cannot be disregarded. 2  Over the years, the non -
negotiable principle on the basis of which cases of 
custody of children are decided is that of the ‘best 
interest and welfare of the child’ which attempts to 
enable each child to survive and reach his or her ful l 
potential.3 
 
1.2  Despite its widespread recognition as a 
relevant consideration, the manner in which the welfare 
principle occurs in our legal and judicial framework, has 
                                                        
1 Carla Gannon v. Shabaz Farukh Allarakhia, Bombay High Court, Criminal Writ Petition No. 
509 of 2009. 
2 Nil Ratan Kundu v. Abhijit Kundu AIR 2009 SC (Supp) 732. 
3 Principle 4, Rule 3, Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007.  

 2 
certain problems, which need legislative redressal. 
First, there is disparity in the relevance accorded to this 
principle by different legislations regulating custody and 
guardianship. Second, there is uncertainty and lack of 
judicial consensus on what exactly constitutes welfare 
of the child, as a result, in fiercely fought custody 
battles, there are no ways to ensure that the interests of 
the child are actually protected. Third, the legal 
framework is silent on how should custody issues be 
handled, what factors should be relevant in decision -
making, and what should be the process of di spute 
resolution between parents over children, among 
others. Fourth, although there are no codified rules 
governing custody, decision -making in this area is 
based on the presumption that welfare of the child 
essentially lies in custody being awarded to an y one of 
the parents, assessed comparatively. 
 
1.3  This report of the Law Commission reviews 
the current laws dealing with custody and 
guardianship, namely, the Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890 and the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 
1956, and recommends legislative amendments to 
achieve the following objectives: 
 
 Strengthen the welfare principle in the Guardians 
and Wards Act, 1890 and emphasize its relevance 
in each aspect of guardianship and custody 
related decision-making 
 Provide for equal legal status of both parents with 
respect to guardianship and custody 
 Provide detailed guidelines to help decision -
makers assess what custodial and guardianship 
arrangement serves the welfare of the child in 
specific situations. 

 3 
 Provide for the option of awarding joint custody to 
both parents, in certain circumstances conducive 
to the welfare of the child. 
 
A. “Welfare of the Child”: Historical Evolution 
 
1.4.1  Traditionally at Common law, the father was 
considered the sole guardian of the person and property 
of the child. The authority of the father in every aspect 
of the child’s life, including his/her conduct, education, 
religion and maintenance, was considered absolute and 
even the courts refused to interfere with the same. 
Mothers did not have any authority over children, since 
mothers did not have independent legal status; their 
identities being forged with that of their husbands upon 
marriage. As divorce became possible and mothers 
began to have independent legal existence and 
residence, their claim, if not right, to have custody of the 
children began to be recognized by the courts. However, 
despite a series of legislations – starting with the 
Custody of Infants Act, 1839, in the UK – that enabled 
the mother to claim custody over minor children, the 
rights of the father continued to remain supreme. 
 
1.4.2  Two developments aided in the dismantling 
of paternal authority over children under English law. 
First, in a number of judicial decisions, the courts 
claimed the parens patriae jurisdiction – an even higher 
parental authority of the state – to supersede the 
natural guardianship of the father and award custody 
depending on what promoted the welfare of the child. 4 
Second, through a series of legislations, the British 
Parliament shifted the emphasis from paternal rights to 
the welfare of the child and conferred equal legal status 
to the father and the mother in determining 
                                                        
4 In re, O’Hara, (1990) 2 IR 232 

 4 
guardianship and custody. The Custody of Infants Act, 
1873, allowed the mother to have custody of the child 
till the age of sixteen and rem oved the restriction on 
petitions made by mothers who had committed 
adultery. The Guardianship of Infants Act, 1886, 
recognized equal rights of the mother over custody, 
access and appointment of testamentary guardian, and 
allowed the court to appoint and r emove guardians in 
certain circumstances. The Guardianship of Infants Act, 
1925, put the claims of the mother and the father in a 
custody dispute on an equal footing and provided that 
welfare of the infant shall be the “first and paramount 
consideration”. Finally, the Guardianship of Minors Act, 
1973, conferred the same rights to the mother that the 
common law gave to the father; the mother was allowed 
to exercise these rights without the concurrence of the 
father. If the parents failed to reach an agreement, then 
the court is authorized to decide the matter based on 
the principle of welfare of the child. 
 
1.4.3  In India, the Guardians and Wards Act was 
enacted in 1890 by the colonial state, which continued 
the legacy of Common law, of the supremacy of the 
paternal right in guardianship and custody of children. 
While Sections 7 and 17 of the Act provided that courts 
should act in furtherance of the welfare of the minor, 
Sections 19 and 25 of the original Act, subordinated the 
same to the supremacy of the father. It is only the Hindu 
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, enacted by the 
independent Indian state that provides that welfare of 
the minor shall be the paramount consideration 
superseding all other factors. This legal framework is 
discussed in detail in Chapter 2 of this report. 
 
 
 

 5 
B. “Best Interest of the Child” in International 
Human Rights Law 
 
1.5.1  While the “welfare of the child” principle 
dominates the domestic legal framework, a comparable 
legal standard is found in international human rights 
law. According to the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Child (hereinafter, CRC), “in all actions 
concerning children, whether undertaken by public or 
private social welfare institutions, courts of law, 
administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best 
interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.”5 
The Convention directs the State Parties to ensure that 
“both parents have common responsibilities for the 
upbringing and development of the child.” 6 The CRC 
provides that a child should be separated from his or 
her parents if there is “abuse or neglect of the child by 
the parents, or where the parents are living separately 
and a decision must be made as to the child’s place of 
residence.” 7  Welfare of the child, as a criterion for 
decision, is generally flexible, adaptable and reflective of 
contemporary attitudes regarding family within 
society.8  
 
1.5.2  The Committee on the Rights of the Child has 
provided additional guidance regarding the best interest 
standard in its General Comment 14. 9 The Committee 
stated that it is “useful to draw up a non-exhaustive and 
non-hierarchical list of elements that could be included 
in a best -interests assessment by any decision -maker 
having to determine a child' s best interests.” 10  The 
                                                        
5 Convention on the Rights of the Child, Art. 3, (1989).   
6 Id., at Art. 18. 
7 Id., at Art. 9. 
8 Gilmore, Stephen, Great Debates: Family Law, Palgrave Macmillian, (2014) pp. 76 -83.   
9 Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 14 on the Right of the Child to 
Have His or Her Best Inter ests Taken as a Primary Consideration (art. 3, para. 1), U.N. Doc. 
CRC/C/GC/14 (May 29, 2013). 
10 General Comment 14, at ¶ 50. 

 6 
Committee suggested that the following considerations 
can be relevant: the child’s views; the child’s identity 
(such as sex, sexual orientation, national origin, religion 
and beliefs, cultural identity, and personality); 
preservation of the family environment and maintaining 
relations (including, where appropriate, extended family 
or community); the care, protection and safety of the 
child; any situation of vulnerability (disability, minority 
status, homelessness, victim of abuse, et c.); and the 
child’s right to health and right to education.11 However, 
there are two main criticisms of the best interest 
standard when applied to custody issues.  
 
1.5.3  First, it is unpredictable and information 
intensive. Parents who are divorcing are left guessing as 
to how the courts will make custody decisions; this can 
lead to unnecessary pre -court bargaining that may be 
harmful to both the child and the parents.12 This could 
be resolved by a more predictable rule-based standard, 
which delineates the  content of the best interest 
standard. On the other hand, a rule -based standard is 
likely to be rigid and not consider the individual 
circumstances of each case.13 Second, the best interest 
of the child standard primarily focuses on the 
predicaments of the child alone and does not take into 
consideration the feelings and interests of the parents. 
The parents are also actors within the family who have 
rights and any legal framework must account for their 
welfare as well. 14 Thus, it is an open question whether  
the best interest of the child standard is an adequate 
legal tool to resolve child custody decisions, or whether 
it needs to be supplemented with further legislative 
guidelines. 
                                                        
11 General Comment 14, at ¶¶ 52–79. 
12 Id. 
13 Id. 
14 Id. 

 7 
 
C. Joint Custody 
 
1.6.1  The face of child custody arrangements is 
changing. A number of countries across the globe have 
adopted a preference for shared parenting systems over 
sole custody as a post-divorce arrangement with respect 
to children. In the West, this trend has arisen largely in 
response to changing familial roles (male ca re takers 
taking on more child rearing responsibilities) as well 
psychological studies revealing that the involvement of 
both parents in child rearing is preferable to sole 
custody arrangements.15 Studies indicate that children 
generally fare better when pa rents share custody, and 
some jurisdictions in some countries have a legally 
prescribed presumption of joint custody. 16  However, 
scholars and courts also caution that a presumption of 
joint custody can run contrary to the “best interests of 
the child” stand ard, especially in cases of domestic 
violence, where battered women may agree to joint 
custody out of fear of further violence.17 
 
1.6.2  In November 2014, the Law Commission of 
India (hereinafter, the Commission) issued a 
Consultation Paper on Adopting a S hared Parenting 
System in India (hereinafter, the Consultation Paper).18 
The Consultation Paper surveyed shared parenting 
                                                        
15 Glover, R. & Steel, C., Comparing the Effects on the Child of Post-Divorce Parenting 
Arrangements, Journal of Divorce, Vol. 12 No. 2–3 (1989).   
16 Several states in the U.S. have this. See, e.g., Idaho Code Ann. § 32 -717B(4) (“Except as 
provided in subsection (5), of this section, absent a preponderance of the evidence to the 
contrary, there shall be a presumption that joint custody is in the best interests of a minor child 
or children.”); Minn. Stat. Ann. § 518.17(2)(b) (“The court shall use a rebuttable presumption 
that upon request of either or both parties, joint legal custody is in the best interests of the 
child.”). 
17  DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES, CHILD CUSTODY: BACKGROUND AND POLICY 
IMPLICATIONS OF A JOINT CUSTODY PRESUMPTION 6 (2011) (“Advocates for victim s of 
domestic violence argue vehemently against placing a presumption of joint custody in the 
law.”). 
18  The paper is available at 
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/Consultation%20Paper%20on%20Shared%20Parentage.p
df. 

 8 
systems in several countries, including the United 
States, Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom, South 
Africa, Netherlands, Thailand, Singapore, and Kenya. 
The systems studied in the Consultation Paper 
represented a wide variety of approaches to post-divorce 
custodial arrangements. The Consultation Paper also 
reviewed the existing law in India regarding child 
custody, including the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 
and the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, as 
well as relevant Supreme Court and High Court 
decisions, and concluded that the law on custody in 
India had evolved to a point where it was appropriate to 
initiate a discussion on the idea of shared parenting. To 
that end, the Consultation Paper posed a set of 
questions pertaining to shared parenting and invited 
comments from the public. 
 
D. Summary of Responses received by the 
Commission 
 
1.7.1  Of the 125 responses, most were in favour of 
shared custody. Some of the reasons for this were:  
 
 Children need both their mother and father—they 
seek advice from each parent in different 
situations.  
 Children need adequate opportunities to bond 
with each parent. 
 Shared physical custody with out shared legal 
custody will lead a child to believe that the parents 
do not have equal moral authority. Shared legal 
custody without shared physical custody will 
prevent a child from bonding with both parents. 
 Shared custody can reduce acrimony between the 
parents. 

 9 
 Some women misuse the protections in Protection 
of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 and 
Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code, to take 
children away from their fathers. However, in 
shared custody arrangements, parental contact 
would be withheld only for child abuse, neglect, or 
mental illness. Children should have contact with 
both parents regardless of whether the parents 
reconcile. 
 Gender-based stereotypes —e.g., that a girl child 
should be raised by the mother and a boy child by 
the fath er—are outdated. Both parents have 
valuable contributions to make in the lives of 
children of either gender. 
 
1.7.2  A few reasons were given against a shared 
parenting law: 
 
 During divorce proceedings, husbands use child 
custody to force their wives to give up maintenance 
or withdraw criminal complaints.  
 It is not healthy for a child to move between two 
homes. A stable, anchored home is the best option. 
 In a patriarchal society where women and children 
are often harassed, ensuring the child’s safety 
could be a problem. 
 Where parents have unresolved issues, they will 
not be able to agree on joint decisions for the child. 
 India does not have the necessary supportive 
measures, su ch as: laws for division of 
matrimonial property; the right to reside in the 
matrimonial home; a financial plan for the future 
security of the caretaker spouse; and foster homes 
for the children. 
 It could be used to harass women. 
 

 10 
1.7.3  Several respondents had suggestions on how 
to implement a shared parenting system in India: 
 
 Courts are not well suited to adjudicate custody 
disputes. Instead, mediation centres should be set 
up, staffed by people trained in advising parties on 
issues pertaining to childre n and relationships. 
Lawyers will just make the situation worse. 
 Parents should have to submit a “Parenting Plan” 
which provides the personal profile, educational 
qualification, residence, and income of both 
parties.  
 Parents should open a joint bank account that can 
only be used for the child’s expenses. 
 
E. The Present Report 
 
1.8  After receiving a large number of responses 
to the Consultation Paper, the Commission formed a 
sub-committee comprising the Chairman, Justice A.P. 
Shah; Prof. Moolchand Sharma, Me mber, Law 
Commission of India; Prof. Yogesh Tyagi and Mr. R. 
Venkataramani, Part-Time Members, Law Commission 
of India; Ms. Dipika Jain, Associate Professor and Mr. 
Saptarshi Mandal , Assistant Professor, Jindal Global 
Law School. The committee surveyed legal provisions 
pertaining to shared custody in both developing and 
developed countries, focusing in particular on the 
circumstances in which joint custody is granted or 
avoided; pare nting plans; and mediation. Further, 
through a series of meetings with legal experts, 
practitioners and other actors involved in child custody 
disputes, the committee outlined the nature and scope 
of the concept of shared parenting in India and 
identified the provisions in the current law that need to 
be amended. The committee was assisted by Ms. 

 11 
Sumathi Chandrashekaran, Consultant, Law 
Commission of India; Mr. Brian Tronic; Ms. Upasana 
Garnaik and Ms. Kimberly Rhoten, Assistant 
Professors, Jindal Global La w School; and Ms. 
Madhuvanti Rajkumar, Ms. Smriti Sharma and Mr. 
Pranay Lekhi, Researchers , Law Commission of India. 
The C ommittee also acknowledges the valuable 
suggestions and inputs ma de by Justice (Mrs) Manju 
Goel, Retired Judge, Delhi High Court  and M s Laila 
Ollapally of Centre for Advanced Mediation Practice, 
Bangalore.  
 
  

 12 
CHAPTER II 
 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK GOVERNING CUSTODY AND 
GUARDIANSHIP IN INDIA 
 
2.1  The law governing custody of children is 
closely linked with that of guardianship. Guardianship 
refers to a bundle of rights and powers that an adult has 
in relation to the person and property of a minor, while 
custody is a narrower concept relating to the upbringing 
and day-to-day care and control of the minor. The term 
‘custody’ is not defined in any Ind ian family law, 
whether secular or religious. The term ‘guardian’ is 
defined by the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 
(hereinafter, GWA) as a “person having the care of the 
person of a minor or of his property or of both his person 
and property.” 19  Another term  used by the law is 
‘natural guardian,’ who is the person legally presumed 
to be the guardian of a minor and who is presumed to 
be authorized to take all decisions on behalf of the 
minor. The legal difference between custody and 
guardianship (or natural gu ardianship) can be 
illustrated by the following example: under some 
religious personal laws, for very young children, the 
mother is preferred to be the custodian, but the father 
always remains the natural guardian. 
 
A. Statutory Law 
 
(i) Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 
 
2.2.1  The GWA is a secular law regulating 
questions of guardianship and custody for all children 
within the territory of India, irrespective of their religion. 
It authorizes the District Courts to appoint guardians of 
                                                        
19 § 4(2), GWA. 

 13 
the person or property of a min or, when the natural 
guardian as per the minor’s personal law or the 
testamentary guardian appointed under a Will fails to 
discharge his/her duties towards the minor. The Act is 
a complete code laying down the rights and obligations 
of the guardians, proce dure for their removal and 
replacement, and remedies for misconduct by them. It 
is an umbrella legislation that supplements the 
personal laws governing guardianship issues under 
every religion.20 Even if the substantive law applied to a 
certain case is the personal law of the parties, the 
procedural law applicable is what is laid down in the 
GWA.21  
 
2.2.2  Section 7 of the GWA authorizes the court to 
appoint a guardian for the person or property or both of 
a minor, if it is satisfied that it is necessary for  the 
‘welfare of the minor.’22 Section 17 lays down factors to 
be considered by the court when appointing 
guardians.23 Section 17(1) states that courts shall be 
guided by what the personal law of the minor provides 
and what, in the circumstances of the case,  appears to 
be for the ‘welfare of the minor.’24 Section 17(2) clarifies 
that in determining what is for the welfare of the minor, 
courts shall consider the age, sex and religion of the 
minor; the character and capacity of the proposed 
guardian and how closely related the proposed guardian 
is to the minor; the wishes, if any, of the deceased 
parents; and any existing or previous relation of the 
proposed guardian with the person or property of the 
                                                        
20 For instance, Section 2 of the HMGA states that its provisions are ‘supplemental’ to and ‘not 
in derogation’ of the GWA. 
21 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 6 (“In the case of a minor, nothing in this Act shall 
be construed to take away or derogate from any power to appo int a guardian of his person or 
property or both, which is valid by the law to which the minor is subject.”).  
22 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 7. 
23 Guardians and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 17. 
24 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 17(1). 

 14 
minor.25 Section 17(3) states that if the minor is old 
enough to form an intelligent opinion, the court ‘may’ 
consider his/her preference.26 
 
2.2.3  Section 19 of the GWA deals with cases where 
the court may not appoint a guardian. 27 Section 19(b) 
states that a court is not authorized to appoint a 
guardian to the person  of a minor, whose father or 
mother is alive, and who, in the opinion of the court, is 
not unfit to be a guardian. 28 The earlier Section 19(b) 
prevented the court from appointing a guardian in case 
the father of the minor was alive. This clause was 
amended by the Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2010 
and was made applicable to cases where even the 
mother was alive, thus r emoving the preferential 
position of the father.29  
 
2.2.4  Section 25 of the GWA deals with the 
authority of the guardian over the custody of the ward.30 
Section 25(1) states that if a ward leaves or is removed 
from the custody of the guardian, the court ca n issue 
an order for the ward’s return, if it is of the opinion that 
it is for the ‘welfare of the ward’ to be returned to the 
custody of the guardian.31  
 
2.2.5  Reading the above provisions together, it can 
be concluded that, in appointing a guardian to t he 
person or property of a minor under the GWA, courts 
are to be guided by concern for the welfare of the 
minor/ward. This is evident from the language of 
Sections 7 and 17. At the same time, the implication of 
                                                        
25 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 17(2). 
26 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 17(3). 
27 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 19. 
28 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 19(b). 
29 Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, No. 30 of 2010, § 2. 
30 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 25. 
31 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 25(1). 

 15 
Section 19(b) is that, unless the court finds  the father 
or mother to be particularly unfit to be a guardian, it 
cannot exercise its authority to appoint anyone else as 
the guardian. Thus, power of the court to act in 
furtherance of the welfare of the minor must defer to the 
authority of the parent to act as the guardian.  
 
(ii) Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 
 
2.2.6  Classical Hindu law did not contain 
principles dealing with guardianship and custody of 
children. In the Joint Hindu Family, the Karta was 
responsible for the overall control of all dependents and 
management of their property, and therefore specific 
legal rules dealing with guardianship and custody were 
not thought to be necessary. 32  However, in modern 
statutory Hindu law, the Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship Act, 1956 (hereinafter, HM GA) provides 
that the father is the natural guardian of a minor, and 
after him, it is the mother. Section 6(a) of the HMGA 
provides that: 
 
(1) in case of a minor boy or unmarried minor girl, 
the natural guardian is the father, and ‘after’ him, 
the mother; and 
(2) the custody of a minor who has not completed 
the age of five years shall ‘ordinarily’ be with the 
mother (emphasis added).  
 
2.2.7  In Gita Hariharan v. Reserve Bank of India,33 
the constitutional validity of Section 6(a) was challenged 
as violating the guarantee of equality of sexes under 
Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The Supreme 
Court considered the import of the word ‘after’ an d 
                                                        
32 Paras Diwan, LAW OF ADOPTION, MINORITY, GUARDIANSHIP & CUSTODY (2012), Universal 
Law Publishing Co.: New Delhi, P. xv. 
33 (1999) 2 SCC 228. 

 16 
examined whether, as per the scheme of the statute, the 
mother was disentitled from being a natural guardian 
during the lifetime of the father. The Court observed 
that the term ‘after’ must be interpreted in light of the 
principle that the welfare of the minor is the paramount 
consideration and the constitutional mandate of 
equality between men and women. The Court held the 
term ‘after’ in Section 6(a) should not be interpreted to 
mean ‘after the lifetime of the father,’ but rather that it 
should be taken to mean ‘in the absence of the father.’ 
The Court further specified that ‘absence’ could be 
understood as 
 
temporary or otherwise or total apathy of the father 
towards the child or even inability of the father by 
reason of ailment or otherwise.34 
 
2.2.8  Therefore, in the above specific situations, 
the mother could be the natural guardian even during 
the lifetime of the father.  
 
2.2.9  Section 13 of the HMGA declares that, in 
deciding the guardianship of a Hindu minor, the welfare 
of the minor shall be the ‘paramount consideration’ and 
that no person can be appointed as guardian of a Hindu 
minor if the court is of the opinion that it will not be for 
the ‘welfare’ of the minor.35 
 
2.2.10 The following can be concluded with respect 
to guardianship under the HM GA. First, the father 
continues to have a preferential position when it comes 
to natural guardianship and the mother becomes a 
natural guardian only in exceptional circumstances, as 
the Supreme Court explained in Gita Hariharan. Thus, 
                                                        
34 Gita Hariharan v. Reserve Bank of India, (1999) 2 SCC 228, ¶ 25. 
35 Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, No. 32 of 1956, § 13. 

 17 
even if a mother has custody of the minor since birth 
and has been exclusively responsible for the care of the 
minor, the father can, at any time, claim custody on the 
basis of his superior guardianship rights. Gita 
Hariharan, therefore, does not adequately address the 
original problem in Section 6(a) of the HMGA. Second, 
all statutory guardianship arrangements are ultimately 
subject to the principle contained in Section 13, that the 
welfare of the minor is the ‘paramount consideration.’ 
In response to the stronger guardianship  rights of the 
father, this is the only provision that a mother may use 
to argue for custody/guardianship in case of a dispute. 
 
2.2.11 The point of difference between the GWA and 
the HMGA lies in the emphasis placed on the welfare 
principle. Under the GWA, parental authority 
supersedes the welfare principle, while under the 
HMGA, the welfare principle is of paramount 
consideration in determi ning guardianship. Thus, for 
deciding questions of guardianship for Hindu children, 
their welfare is of paramount interest, which will 
override parental authority. But for non -Hindu 
children, the court’s authority to intervene in 
furtherance of the welfare  principle is subordinated to 
that of the father, as the natural guardian.36 
 
(iii) Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 
 
2.2.12 Section 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act 
authorizes courts to pass interim orders in any 
proceeding under the Act, with respect to custody, 
maintenance and education of minor children, in 
consonance with their wishes. The Section also 
                                                        
36 Guardian and Wards Act, No. 8 of 1890, § 17(1) (“In appointing or declaring the guardian of 
a minor, the court shall . . . be guided by what, consistently with the law to which the minor is 
subject, appears in the circumstances to be for the welfare of the minor.”) (emphasis added).  

 18 
authorizes courts to revoke, suspend or vary such 
interim orders passed previously. 
 
(iv) Islamic Law 
 
2.2.13 In Islamic law, the father is the natural 
guardian, but custody ve sts with the mother until the 
son reaches the age of seven and the daughter reaches 
puberty. Islamic law is the earliest legal system to 
provide for a clear distinction between guardianship 
and custody, and also for explicit recognition of the right 
of the  mother to custody. 37  The concept of Hizanat 
provides that, of all persons, the mother is the most 
suited to have the custody of her children up to a certain 
age, both during the marriage and after its dissolution. 
A mother cannot be deprived of this right unless she is 
disqualified because of apostasy or misconduct and her 
custody is found to be unfavorable to the welfare of the 
child.38 In judicial decisions under the GWA involving 
Muslim children, courts have sometimes upheld the 
mother’s right to custody over children under Islamic 
law and on other occasions have given custody to the 
mother out of concern for the welfare of the child. These 
cases are discussed below. 
 
(v) Parsi and Christian Law 
 
2.2.14 Similar to Section 26 of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955, under Section 49 of the Parsi Marriage and 
Divorce Act, 193639 and Section 41 of the Indian Divorce 
Act, 1869, 40  courts are authorized to issue interim 
orders for custody, maintenance and education of minor 
children in any proceeding under these Acts. 
                                                        
37 Paras Diwan, LAW OF ADOPTION, MINORITY, GUARDIANSHIP & CUSTODY (2012) Universal 
Law Publishing Co.: New Delhi, at P. xvi. 
38 Id., at P. xvii. 
39 Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, No. 3 of 1936, § 49. 
40 Indian Divorce Act, No. 4 of 1869, § 41. 

 19 
Guardianship for Parsi and Christian children is 
governed by the GWA. 
 
B. Judicial Interpretations 
 
2.3.1  The Supreme Court of India 41 and almost all 
of the High Courts have held that, in custody disputes, 
the concern for the best interest/welfare of the child 
supersedes even the statutory provisions on the subject 
outlined above. While the older cases under the GWA 
unequivocally hold that the father can be deprived of his 
position as the natural guardian only if he is found to 
be unfit for guardianship, there are many cases where 
the courts have made exceptions to this notion.  
 
2.3.2  Some illustrative examples are as follows. In 
a 1950 decision under the GWA, the Madras High Court 
awarded custody to the mother based on the welfare 
principle, even though the father was not found unfit to 
be a guardian. 42  Courts have held that in deciding 
custody, children should not be uprooted from their  
familiar surroundings just to give effect to the father’s 
right to natural guardianship. 43 In a case where the 
child was brought up by the maternal grandparents 
after the death of the mother, the Andhra Pradesh High 
Court held that, in view of Article 21 of the Constitution, 
children cannot be treated as chattel and the father’s 
unconditional right to the custody over children and 
their property cannot be enforced, even if the father was 
not unfit to act as the guardian. 44 Where both parents 
of the child wer e dead and the paternal relations 
claimed custody of the child who was residing with the 
maternal relations, the Calcutta High Court held that 
                                                        
41 Mausami Ganguli v. Jayant Ganguli, (2008) 7 SCC 673. 
42 Soora Beddi v. Cheema Reddy, AIR 1950 Mad 306. 
43 Vegesina Venkata Narasiah v. Chintalpati, AIR 1971 AP 134. 
44 L. Chandran v. Venkatalakshmi, AIR 1981 AP 1. 

 20 
welfare of the minor was the paramount concern, and 
the paternal relations did not have a preferential 
position i n matters of custody. 45  There are similar 
examples from other High Courts as well. 
 
2.3.3  In deciding cases involving Muslim children, 
High Courts have decided in favor of the mother only 
when her right to custody was supported by Muslim 
law. In Suharabi v. D. Mohammed ,46 where the father 
objected to the mother’s custody of the one -and-a-half 
year-old daughter on the ground that she was poor, the 
Kerala High Court held that the mother was authorized 
to have custody of a daughter of that age under Islamic 
law. In similar vein, in Md. Jameel Ahmed Ansari v. 
Ishrath Sajeeda , 47  the Andhra Pradesh High Court 
awarded the custody of an eleven -year-old boy to the 
father, on the ground that Muslim law allowed the 
mother to have exclusive custody only until the age of 
seven in case of male children, and there was nothing 
to prove that the father was unfit to be a guardian in 
this case. In another case, the Madhya Pradesh High 
Court interpreted Mahomedan Law to allow custody for 
the mother.48 
 
2.3.4  Two problems can be noted with the legal and 
judicial framework described above. The first is the 
superior position of the father in case of guardianship, 
though not necessarily in case of custody. The second 
is the indeterminacy of the welfare of the child principle, 
despite its widespread usage. 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
45 Satyandra Nath v. B. Chakraborthy, AIR 1981 Cal 701. 
46 AIR 1988 Ker 36. 
47 AIR 1983 AP 106. 
48 Mumtaz Begum v. Mubarak Hussain, AIR 1986 MP 221. 

 21 
(i) Superior Position of the Father 
 
2.3.5  We have noted above, that under the GWA, 
the discrimination between the mother and the father 
in terms of guardianship has been removed by the 2010 
amendment to Section 19(b). But discriminat ion 
between the parents continues under the HMGA. As far 
back as 1989, regarding the preferential position given 
to the father under Section 6(a) of the HMGA, the Law 
Commission of India had stated that: 
 
Thus, statutory recognition has been accorded to 
the objectionable proposition that the father is 
entitled to the custody of the minor child in 
preference to the mother. Apart from the fact that 
there is no rational basis for according an inferior 
position in the order of preference to the mother vis-
à-vis the father, the proposition is vulnerable to 
challenge on several grounds. In the first place, it 
discloses an anti -feminine bias. It reveals age -old 
distrust for women and feeling of superiority for 
men and inferiority for women. Whatever may have 
been the justification for the same in the past, 
assuming there was some, there is no warrant for 
persisting with this ancient prejudice, at least after 
the ushering in of the Constitution of India which 
proclaims the right of women to equality and 
guarantees non-discrimination on the ground of sex 
under the lofty principle enshrined in Article 15. In 
fact, clause (3) of Article 15, by necessary 
implication, gives a pre -vision of beneficial 
legislation geared to the special needs of women 
and children with a pr o-women and pro -children 
bias. It is indeed strange that in the face of the said 
constitutional provision, the discrimination against 

 22 
women has been tolerated for nearly four 
decades.49 
 
2.3.6  The Commission had recommended 
amending Section 6(a) to “constitute both the father and 
the mother as being natural guardians ‘jointly and 
severally,’ having equal rights in respect of a minor and 
his property.”50  
 
2.3.7  The problem is further highlighted by the 
inconsistency between the superior position of the 
father in statutory law and recent judicial thinking on 
parental roles. In Padmaja Sharma v. Ratan Lal 
Sharma,51 the Supreme Court held that the mother was 
equally responsible to pay towards the maintenance of 
the child. While pursuing the goal of equality in parental 
responsibility is laudable, the decision leads to an ironic 
result—the mother is not deemed a natural guardian 
and therefore does not have a say in sig nificant 
decisions affecting the child, but she has equal financial 
responsibility towards the child. Similarly, in a 2004 
judgment, commenting on a judgment of the Karnataka 
High Court that reversed a Family Court order and 
allowed the mother to retain cu stody of the minor 
daughter, the Supreme Court noted, 
 
We make it clear that we do not subscribe to the 
general observations and comments made by the 
High Court in favour of mother as parent to be 
always a preferable to the father to retain custody 
of the child. In our considered opinion, such 
                                                        
49 Law Commission of India, 133rd Report, August (1989), ¶ 4.1, available at: 
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/101-169/Report133.pdf 
50 Law Commission of India, 133rd Report, August (1989), ¶ 4.3, available at: 
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/101-169/Report133.pdf 
51 AIR 2000 SC 1398. 

 23 
generalisation in favour of the mother should not 
have been made.52 
 
2.3.8  Equality between parents is a goal that needs 
to be pursued and, indeed, the law should not make 
preferences between parents based on gender 
stereotypes. However, such equality cannot be only in 
terms of roles and responsibilities, but must also be in 
terms of the rights and legal position of the parents. 
Thus, the first step towards reform in this area is to 
dismantle the preferential position of the father in the 
HMGA, and make both the mother and the father 
natural guardians. 
 
(ii) Indeterminacy of the Welfare standard 
 
2.3.9  While the welfare principle is used 
extensively by appellate courts dealing with custody 
issues, there is no evidence of th e extent of its use by 
the lower courts. Based on a study of Family Court 
orders, legal academician Asha Bajpai notes,  
 
The best interest of the child may have been 
considered by the courts, but there was no mention 
of this standard in the orders. The cou rts did not 
give any information regarding the factors that they 
considered or their reasons for awarding custody. 
The orders just mentioned to whom custody was 
awarded in a particular case.53 
 
2.3.10 The problem with respect to the welfare 
principle is tha t, despite its extensive invocation, the 
appellate judicial decisions do not illuminate the legal 
                                                        
52 Kumar v. Jahgirdar v. Chethana Ramatheertha , SLP (Civil) 4230 -4231/ 2003, Supreme 
Court of India, Judgment dated 29 January, 2004. 
53  Asha Bajpai, Custody and Guardianship of Children in India , 39(2) FAMILY LAW 
QUARTERLY 441, 447 (2005). 

 24 
content of this principle. Family Law scholars note that 
while there are illustrations galore, no principled basis 
can be found in the manner in which courts use the 
welfare of the child standard. Legal academician 
Archana Parashar analyzed Supreme Court judgments 
from 1959 to 2000 that used the best-interest principle 
in custody disputes. Parashar concluded that, in the 
absence of legislative guidance regardin g what factors 
should be used to assess the best interest of a minor, 
courts give varied interpretations based on their 
personal ideas about what is best for the children and 
notions of ideal parenthood. 54 For instance, there are 
contradictory judgments on whether the financial 
capacity of a parent is a relevant factor in deciding 
custody.55 Indeed, a large number of judgments have 
established precedents in favour of the mother. But as 
Parashar rightly notes , these decisions are also based 
on the judges’ perceptions of who is a ‘good’ mother. 
Consequently women who do not fit such criteria would 
have difficulty claiming custody of children. 
 
2.3.11 The wide discretion available to judges under 
the welfare principle also means that certain issues that 
should merit consideration are not treated seriously 
while determining custody. Allegations of sexual abuse 
against female children by fathers, grandfathers or 
other male relatives are brushed aside without any 
investigation, if they appear improbable to the judge. 56 
Legal scholar and activist Flavia Agnes notes in this 
                                                        
54 Archana Parashar, Welfare of Child in Family Laws —India and Australia , 1(1) NALSAR 
LAW REVIEW 49, 49 (2003).  
55 In Rosy Jacob v. Jacob A Chakramakkak  [AIR 1973 SC 2090] the Supreme Court gave 
custody of the children to the mother because she was economically well off and hence, would 
be able to take care of the children. In Bhagya Lakshmi v. Narayan Rao [AIR 1983 Mad 9], the 
Madras High Court gave custody to the father, since he had the means to provide the best 
comfort and education to the children. In  Ashok Samjibhai Dharod v. Neeta Ashok Dharod  [II 
(2001) DMC 48 Bom] the Bombay High Court held that affluence of the father or his relatives 
is not a factor in his favor for giving him custody. 
56 Flavia Agnes, Family Law II: Marriage, Divorce and Matrimonial Litigation (2011), Oxford 
University Press:  New Delhi, Pp. 257-259. 

 25 
regard that “the courts must exercise their power with 
great prudence and caution, so that it does not result in 
violation of the basic human right of children, the right 
to life, which includes the right to live without fear and 
trauma.”57 The determinants of the welfare standard 
should therefore be clearly laid down so as to prevent 
judges from disregarding certain issues while 
determining custody and access. 
 
2.3.12 This chapter has reviewed the legal 
framework governing guardianship and custody in 
India, and has identified two areas that require 
legislative reform. The next chapter discusses the 
concept of shared custody based on examples from 
other jurisdictions. 
  
                                                        
57 Id., at 259. 

 26 
CHAPTER III 
 
THE CONCEPT OF JOINT CUSTODY 
 
A. International Approaches to Joint Custody 
 
3.1.1  Joint custody systems vary widely across the 
globe. A comparative review of different countries 
reveals a vast diversity of approaches. The term “joint 
custody” can refer to several different things: joint legal 
custody, joint physical custody, or a combination of 
both. The definition in the State of Virginia recognizes 
this: 
 
“Joint custody” means (i) joint legal custody where 
both parents retain joint responsibility for the care 
and control of the child and joint authority to make 
decisions concerning the child even though the 
child's primary residence may be with only one 
parent, (ii) joint physical custody where both 
parents share physical and c ustodial care of the 
child, or (iii) any combination of joint legal and joint 
physical custody which the court deems to be in the 
best interest of the child.58 
 
3.1.2  Similarly, the State of Georgia defines joint 
custody as “joint legal custody, joint phys ical custody, 
or both joint legal custody and joint physical custody.”59 
 
3.1.3  There is a similar distinction between sole 
legal custody and sole physical custody, although some 
States (including Virginia) combine them together. 60  
The State of California has the following definitions: 
                                                        
58 VA Code Ann. § 20-124.1. 
59 Ga. Code Ann., § 19-9-6(4). 
60 VA Code Ann. § 20 -124.1 (“‘Sole custody’ means that one person retains responsibility for 
the care an d control of a child and has primary authority to make decisions concerning the 
child.”). 

 27 
“Sole legal custody” means that one parent shall 
have the right and the responsibility to make the 
decisions relating to the health, education, and 
welfare of a child.61 
 
“Sole physical custody” means that a child shall 
reside with and be under the supervision of one 
parent, subject to the power of the court to order 
visitation.62 
 
3.1.4  One of the unifying themes across the 
different shared parenting systems is the importance 
given to the best interest of the child. 63  However, 
jurisdictions differ on how they apply this standard. 
Some have a presumption that shared parenting is in 
the best interest of the child —Australia’s Family Law 
Act, for example, states that, “[W]hen making a 
parenting order in relation to a child, the cour t must 
apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the 
child for the child's parents to have equal shared 
parental responsibility for the child.” 64  Other 
jurisdictions allow for shared parenting but do not 
contain this presumption. Minnesota law  explicitly 
states that “[T]here is no presumption for or against 
joint physical custody,” with certain exceptions. 65 
Canada, South Africa, the U.K., and Kenya also have no 
presumption for or against joint custody.66 
                                                        
61 West's Ann. Cal. Fam. Code § 3006. 
62 West's Ann. Cal. Fam. Code § 3007. 
63 See, e.g., Canada Divorce Act, 1985, § 16(8) (“In making an order under this section, the 
court shall take into consideration only the best interests of the child . . . .”); Australia Family 
Law Act, 1975, § 65AA (as amended 2006) (“[I]n deciding whether to make a particular 
parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best i nterests of the child as the 
paramount consideration.”); South Africa Children’s Act, No. 38 of 2005, § 9; U.K. Children’s 
Act, 1989, § 1(1). 
64 Australia, Family Law Act, 1975 § 61DA (as amended); see also Idaho Code Ann. § 32 -
717B(4) (“[T[here shall be a presumption that joint custody is in the best interests of a minor 
child or children.”). 
65 M.S.A. § 518.17(2)(a). 
66 Canada Divorce Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.), § 16(4), (8); South Africa Children’s 
Act, No. 38 of 2005, §§ 22, 23, 30; U.K. Children’ s Act, 1989, §§ 8, 11(4); Kenya Children’s 
Act §§ 82(1), 83(1). 

 28 
 
3.1.5  Many countries that allow (or eve n have a 
statutory preference for) shared parenting do not allow 
it in some cases. Where there is domestic violence or 
any sort of abuse, most jurisdictions have a 
presumption against shared parenting. 67  Shared 
parenting is also disfavoured where parents ha ve a 
particularly contentious relationship. As a US Court of 
Appeals noted in Braiman v Braiman: 
 
Joint custody is encouraged primarily as a 
voluntary alternative for relatively stable, amicable 
parents behaving in mature civilized fashion. As a 
court-ordered arrangement imposed upon already 
embattled and embittered parents, accusing one 
another of serious vices and wrongs, it can only 
enhance familial chaos.68  
 
3.1.6  Practical considerations are also relevant. 
Some jurisdictions consider geographical proximity 
when deciding an award of shared parenting. 69 Family 
courts in South Africa, for example, do not frequently 
award joint physical custody of children on the basis 
that such an arrangement would be disruptive for the 
child, particularly in cases whe re the parents live far 
apart.70 Also, the de facto living situation of child can be 
relevant—in the United Kingdom, shared residence 
orders “may be regarded as appropriate where it 
                                                        
67 Id. St. 32-717B(5) (“There shall be a presumption that joint custody is not in the best interests 
of a minor child if one (1) of the parents is found by the court to be a habitual perpetrator of 
domestic violence . . . .”) (Idaho); Australia Family Law Act, 197 (as amend ed), § 61DA(2) 
(presumption that equal parental responsibility is in the best interest of the child does not apply 
if there are reasonable ground to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse or family violence). 
68 Braiman v. Braiman, 44 N.Y.2d 584 (1978) (citations omitted); see also Padgen and Padgen 
(1991) FLC 92 -231 (Austr.) (setting preconditions for shared custody, including compatible 
parenting, mutual trust, co-operation, and good communication). 
69 Padgen and Padgen (1991) FLC 92-231 (Austr.). 
70 A Barrat and S Burman,“Deciding the Best Interests of the Child” 118 South African Law 
Journal (2001). 

 29 
provides legal confirmation of the factual reality of a 
child's life.”71 
 
3.1.7  A number of jurisdictions recognize the 
distinction between legal custody (the right to make 
major decisions for a child, such as decisions involving 
education, medical and dental care, religion, and travel 
arrangements) 72  and physical custody (the rig ht to 
provide routine daily care and control of the child). 73  
This distinction parallels the distinction between 
guardianship and custody in India. Some jurisdictions 
use other terms for this distinction. In Australia, for 
example, “parental responsibility ”—defined as “ the 
duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by 
law, parents have in relation to children” —is distinct 
from the amount of time the child spends with each of 
the parents.74  Similarly in France, “parental authority,” 
which refers to “a set of rights and duties whose finality 
is the welfare of the child,” 75 is distinct from a parent’s 
                                                        
71 In re A, [2008] EWCA Civ 867, ¶ 66. 
72 See V.A.M.S. 452.375(1)(2) (“‘Joint legal custody’ means that the parents share the 
decision-making rights, responsibilities, and authority relating to the health, education and 
welfare of the child, and, unless allocated, apportioned, or decreed, the parents shall confer 
with one another in the exercise of decision-making rights, responsibilities, and authority . . . 
.”); 15 V.S.A. § 664(1)(A) (“‘Legal responsibility’ means the rights and responsibilities to 
determine and control various matters affecting a child's welfare and upbringing, other than 
routine daily care and control of the child. These matters include but are not limited to 
education, medical and dental care, religion and travel arrangements. Legal responsibility may 
be held solely or may be divided or shared.”). 
73 See VA Code Ann. § 20-124.1 (“‘Joint custody’ means . . . (ii) joint physical custody where 
both parents share physical and custodial care of the child . . . .”); 15 V.S.A. § 664(1)(B) 
(“‘Physical responsibility’ means the rights and responsibilities to provide routine daily care 
and control of the child subject to the right of the other parent to have contact with the child.  
Physical responsibility may be held solely or may be divided or shared.”); Ga. Code Ann., § 
19-9-6(3) (“‘Joint physical custody’ means that physical custody is shared by the parents in 
such a way as to assure the child of substantially equal time and contact with both parents.”). 
74 Compare Austrl. Family Law Act 1975 § 61B (“In this Part, parental responsibility, in 
relation to a child, means all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, 
parents have in relation to children.”), with Austrl. Family Law Act 1975 § 61DA (the 
presumption that parents have equal responsibility “does not provide for a presumption about 
the amount of time the child spends with each of the parents”). 
75 France Civil Code Art. 371-1. 

 30 
right of access and lodging. 76  Kenya distinguishes 
between “legal custody” and “actual custody.”77 
 
B. Joint Custody in India 
 
3.2.1  Although joint custody is not specifically 
provided for in Indian law, it is reported by lawyers that 
Family Court judges do use this concept at times to 
decide custody disputes. Two examples of attempts to 
institutionalize shared parenting in India in recent 
times are noted bel ow. A set of guidelines on ‘child 
access and child custody,’ prepared by the Child Rights 
Foundation, a Mumbai -based NGO, understands joint 
custody in the following manner: 
 
child may reside alternately, one week with the 
custodial parent and one week with  non-custodial 
parent, and that both custodial and non -custodial 
parent share joint responsibility for decisions 
involving child’s long term care, welfare and 
development.78 
 
3.2.2  Although the guidelines state that this 
understanding of joint custody is consistent with the 
CRC, it must be noted that there can be no straitjacket 
formula that can be applied universally to all cases of 
custody.  
 
3.2.3  The second example of joint custody is found 
in a 2011 judgment of the Karnataka High Court, which 
used the concept to resolve a custody dispute involving 
                                                        
76 France Civil Code Art. 373-2-1 (“Where the welfare of the child so requires, the judge may 
commit exercise of parental authority to one of the parents. The exercise of the right of access 
and lodging may be refused to the other parent only for serious reasons.”). 
77 Kenya Children’s Act, § 81(c)–(d). 
78  Child Rights Foundation, Child Access and Custody Guidelines  (2011), available at 
http://www.mphc.in/pdf/ChildAccess-040312.pdf, p. 24. 

 31 
twelve-year old boy. In KM Vinaya v. B Srinivas,79 a two-
judge bench ruled that both parents are entitled to get 
custody “for the sustainable growth of the minor child.” 
Joint custody was effected in the following manner: 
 
 The minor child was directed to be with the father 
from 1 January to 30 June and with the mother 
from 1 July to 31 December of every year. 
 The parents were directed to  share equally the 
education and other expenditures of the child. 
 Each parent was given visitation rights on 
Saturdays and Sundays when the child was living 
with the other parent. 
 The child was to be allowed to use telephone or 
video conferencing with each  parent while living 
with the other. 
 
3.2.4  In addition to the above examples, there has 
been a growing demand to institute shared custody in 
India, from ‘father’s rights’ groups, who argue that the 
Indian family laws, including the law of custody, are 
biased towards the mothers. Consequently, these 
groups demand that fathers must have ‘equal rights’ 
over custody of children. This assertion about the law 
being biased towards the mothers is not only factually 
incorrect, but the demand is also based on a fau lty 
understanding of equality in our constitutional and 
legal framework. As we have discussed below, the father 
is still deemed the natural guardian under both 
religious and secular family laws, while the mother is 
not. Further, in our society, equality in  conjugal and 
family life is still a distant dream. A large number of 
women continue to disproportionately bear the burden 
of housework and childcare, even when they have a paid 
employment outside the home. Thus, when during the 
                                                        
79 MFA No. 1729/ 2011, Karnataka High Court, Judgment dated Sept. 1 3, 2013. 

 32 
subsistence of marriage, there is no equality in parental 
and caregiving responsibilities, then on what ground 
can one claim equality in parental rights over children 
after the dissolution of the marriage? Our Constitution 
and the legal framework direct the state to pursue 
substantive equality. Substantive equality recognizes 
the difference in the socio -economic position of the 
sexes within the home and outside of it, and aspires to 
achieve equality of results. We therefore reject the 
position of the father’s rights groups on shared 
parenting based on the rhetoric of equal rights over 
children. 
 
3.2.5  Having said that, however, we feel it is 
important to consider the potentials of the shared 
parenting model in India for several other reasons, 
discussed below. 
 
C. Reasons for Adopting Joint Custody in India 
 
3.3.1  First, with rapid social and economic change, 
conjugal and familial relationships are becoming more 
complex and so are the conditions of their dissolution. 
As these social changes that affect family life escalate, 
we need to update the laws governing the family 
relationships, during and after the marriage. At present, 
our legal framework for custody is based on the 
assumption that custody can be vested with either one 
of the contesting parties and suitability is determined in 
a comparative manner. 80  But, just as the basis for 
dissolving marriage has shifted over time, from fault -
based divorce to mutual consent divorce, we need to 
think about custody differently and provide for a 
                                                        
80 Swati Deshpande, Divorced Dads Unite for Custody Rights , Times of India (Sept. 9, 2009), 
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Divorced-dads-unite-for-custody-
rights/articleshow/4988614.cms (“Their experience is that family courts often swing totally one 
way or the other as child -custody battles usually end with one parent getting full control over 
the minor; the other parent is allowed only partial access during weekends or school holidays.”). 

 33 
broader framework within which divorcing parents and 
children can decide what custodial arrangement works 
best for them. 
 
3.3.2  Second, the judicial attitude towards custody 
matters has evolved considerably. As legal scholar and 
activist, Flavia Agnes notes, 
 
In modern day custody battles, neither the fa ther, 
as the traditional natural guardian, nor the mother, 
as the biologically equipped parent to care for the 
child of tender age, are routinely awarded custody. 
The principle, best interest of the child takes into 
consideration the existing living arrangements and 
home environment of the child. … Each case will be 
decided on its own merit, taking into account the 
overall social, educational and emotional needs, of 
the child.81 
 
3.3.3  But despite this development in judicial 
attitude, we have ignored the i dea that under certain 
favourable circumstances, the best interest of the child 
could also result from simultaneous association with 
both the parents. Since there is no inherent 
contradiction between pursuing the best interest of the 
child and the concept of shared custody, the law needs 
to provide for this option, provided certain basic 
conditions are met. 
 
3.3.4  Third, as already mentioned, a number of 
institutions, including the judiciary, have already 
started engaging with the idea of shared custody. W e 
have referred to some of these recent developments 
above. But currently this idea is being put into practice 
                                                        
81 Flavia Agnes, Family Law II: Marriage, Divorce and Matrimonial Litigation (2011), Oxford 
University Press:  New Delhi, p. 255. 

 34 
in a haphazard manner. There are several components 
to the idea of shared custody, such as clear 
determinants of the best interest of the child s tandard, 
the role of judges and mediators, parenting plans and 
so on. These must be laid down in the law, in order for 
shared custody to be a viable option that facilitates 
divorcing parents to mutually agree on the preferred 
custodial arrangement, without  compromising on the 
welfare of the child.  
 
3.3.5  In the legal systems of several Western 
countries that we have reviewed in this chapter, there is 
a presumption in favor of joint custody, and sole 
custody is awarded only in exceptional circumstances. 
We have already referred to the inequalities in parental 
roles, responsibilities and expectations that exists in 
our country. Therefore, we are not in favor of the law 
placing a presumption in favour of joint custody. As 
opposed to the case of guardianship, where we have 
recommended shared and equal guardianship for both 
parents, in this case, we are of the view that joint 
custody must be provided as an option that a decision-
maker can award, if the decision -maker is convinced 
that it shall further the welfare of the child. 
 
  

 35 
CHAPTER IV 
 
MEDIATION IN CHILD CUSTODY CASES 
 
4.1 Mediation refers to a method of non -binding 
dispute resolution with the assistance of a neutral third 
party who tries to help the disputing parties to arrive at 
a negotiated settlement. 82  In the context of child 
custody, the focus of mediation is not to determine who 
is right or wrong, but rather to establish a solution that 
meets a family’s needs and is in the best interest of the 
child. 83  The benefits of mediating a child custody 
dispute are that both parents have input in determining 
custody and access arrangements for their children; the 
children feel more secure knowing that their parents are 
willing to continue working together to resolve family 
problems; parents are in the best positi on to decide 
what their children need; it helps parents develop some 
trust in each other, which allows for future negotiation 
on issues that arise; it is easier to work with a plan that 
parents have formulated themselves, rather than one 
that is imposed by  the court; and it can help avoid a 
long and costly court battle. 84  Mediation reportedly 
produces better outcomes for children after divorce.85 
 
A. Current Legal Framework for Mediation in 
India 
 
4.2.1  Section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 provides that a court can formulate terms of a 
settlement and give them to the parties for their 
                                                        
82 Afcons Infra. Ltd. v. Cherian Varkey Constn., (2010) 8 SCC 24, ¶ 8. 
83 Terri Garner, Child Custody Mediation: A Proposed Alternative to Litigation , 1989 J. DISP. 
RES. 139, 139–40. 
84 Family Conciliation Services —Frequently Asked Questions , MANITOBA FAMILY SERVICES, 
http://www.gov.mb.ca/fs/childfam/family_conciliation_faq.html (last visited Mar. 23, 2015).  
85  Danielle Gauvreau, Mediation versus Litigation: Examining Differences in  Outcomes 
amongst the Children of Divorce , RIVERDALE MEDIATION, 
http://www.riverdalemediation.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/07/Gauvreau-Mediation-vs-
litigation.pdf (last visited Mar. 23, 2015).  

 36 
observation and, after receiving the observation of the 
parties, reformulate the terms and refer the same for 
arbitration, conciliation, judicial settlement (including 
settlement through Lok Adalat), or mediation. Rule 3 of 
Order XXXIIA of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 states 
that, in suits or proceedings relating to matters 
concerning the family, where it is p ossible to do so 
consistent with the nature and circumstances of the 
case, the court has a duty to assist the parties in 
arriving at a settlement. Also, if at any stage, it appears 
to the Court that there is a reasonable possibility of a 
settlement between the parties, the Court may adjourn 
the proceeding for such period as it thinks fit to enable 
attempts to be made to effect such a settlement.  
 
4.2.2  Additionally, Section 9 of the Family Courts 
Act, 1984, lays down the duty of the Family Courts to 
assist and persuade the parties, at first instance, in 
arriving at a settlement in respect of subject matter. The 
Family Courts have also been conferred with the power 
to adjourn the proceedings for any reasonable period to 
enable attempts to be made to effect settlement if there 
is a reasonable possibility.  
 
4.2.3  There is a growing need of mediation for 
matrimonial disputes in India. In K. Srinivas Rao v. D.A. 
Deepa,86 the Supreme Court stated that,  
Quite often, the cause of the misunderstanding in a 
matrimonial dispute is trivial and can be sorted. 
Mediation as a method of alternative dispute 
resolution has got legal recognition now. We have 
referred several matrimonial disputes to mediation 
centres. Our experience shows that about 10 to 15% 
of matrimonial disputes get settled in this Court 
through various mediation centres. We, therefore, 
                                                        
86 AIR 2013 SC 2176. 

 37 
feel that at the earliest stage i.e. when the dispute 
is taken up by the Family Court or by the court of 
first in stance for hearing, it must be referred to 
mediation centres. Matrimonial disputes 
particularly those relating to custody of child, 
maintenance, etc. are preeminently fit for 
mediation. 
 
4.2.4  Furthermore, the Mediation Training 
Manual,87 circulated by the Mediation and Conciliation 
Project Committee of the Supreme Court, states that all 
cases arising from strained or soured relationships —
including disputes relating to matrimonial causes, 
maintenance, and custody of children —are normally 
suitable for Alternative Dispute Resolution processes.88 
 
B. International Approaches to Mediation in Child 
Custody 
 
4.3.1  Despite many differences in the law 
regulating divorce and child custody worldwide, there is 
a broad awareness that the best way to reorganize a 
family aft er separation involves a 
consensual/extrajudicial solution that minimizes 
conflict and encourages collaborative parenting.89 
 
4.3.2  Virginia law specifies that, “Mediation shall 
be used as an alternative to litigation where 
appropriate.” 90  The goals of medi ation “may include 
development of a proposal addressing the child's 
                                                        
87  The Manual is available at 
http://supremecourtofindia.nic.in/MEDIATION%20TRAINING%20MANUAL%20OF%20I
NDIA.pdf 
88  Mediation Training Manual , at p. 67, available at 
http://supremecourtofindia.nic.in/MEDIATION%20TRAINING%20MANUAL%20OF%20I
NDIA.pdf 
89 Giancarlo Tamanza et al, Separation and Divorce in Italy: Parenthood, Children’s Custody, 
and Family Mediation, 51(4) FAMILY COURT REV. 557, 557 (2013). 
90 VA Code Ann. § 20-124.2(A). 

 38 
residential schedule and care arrangements, and how 
disputes between the parents will be handled in the 
future.”91 However, in assessing the appropriateness of 
a referral for mediation, the court shall ascertain upon 
motion of a party whether there is a history of family 
abuse.92 The fee paid to a mediator is set by statute and 
is paid by the government. 93 Although the statutory 
scheme does not expressly say so, it appears that courts 
have the obligation to ensure that a mediated agreement 
is in the best interest on the child.94 
 
4.3.3  South Africa law also encourages mediation. 
It states that, in any matter concerning a child, “an 
approach which is conducive to conciliation and 
problem-solving should be followed and a 
confrontational approach should be avoided.” 95 More 
specifically, a children’s court may order mediation 
before deciding an issue, but it must consider several 
factors before doing so: the vulnerability of the child, the 
ability of the child to participate in the proceedings, the 
power relationships within the family, and the nature of 
any allegations made by the parties.96 Mediation cannot 
be used in a matter involving the alleged abuse of a 
child. 97  Where parents reach an agreement through 
mediation, the court must confirm that the agreement 
is in the best interests on the child. 98  Also, when 
divorced parents who are co -holders of parental rights 
                                                        
91 VA Code Ann. § 20-124.2(A). 
92 VA Code Ann. § 20-124.4. 
93 VA Code Ann. § 20 -124.4 (“The fee of a mediator appointed in any custody, support or 
visitation case shall be $100 per appointment and shall be paid by the Commonwealth from the 
funds appropriated for payment of appointments made pursuant to subsection B of § 16.1 -
267.”). 
94 See Va. Prac. Family Law § 15:14(i) (2014 ed.) (citing a case where “a trial judge concluded 
that it would be contrary to public policy to simply enforce an arbitrator's award without 
determining whether the award is in the best interests of the child, and, while the arbitrator's 
decision could be giv en weight, it could not be used to deprive the court of its jurisdiction to 
determine the child's best interests.”). 
95 Children’s Act, No. 38 of 2005, § 6(4). 
96 Children’s Act, No. 38 of 2005, § 49. 
97 Children’s Act, No. 38 of 2005, § 71(2). 
98 Children’s Act, No. 38 of 2005, § 72. 

 39 
and responsibilities are experiencing difficulties in t he 
exercise of their rights, they must attempt to agree on a 
parenting plan before seeking the court’s assistance. 99 
In developing a parenting plan, the parents must either 
seek assistance from certain specified people (e.g., a 
social worker) or go through mediation.100 
 
4.3.4  In China, a court dealing with a divorce case 
“shall carry out mediation.” 101  However, mandatory 
mediation has been criticized as problematic in cases of 
domestic violence—mediated agreements in such cases 
will not be the product of negot iations between parties 
of equal bargaining power.102 
 
4.3.5  In Canada, family mediation is widely 
promoted as an alternative to litigation. 103 The Divorce 
Act, 1985 requires every lawyer or advocate acting on 
behalf of a divorcing spouse to discuss with the spouse 
the advisability of negotiating the matters that may be 
the subject of a support order or a custody order and to 
inform the spouse of  mediation facilities that might be 
able to assist with this. 104 A lawyer must submit a 
certification to the court that he or she has discussed 
this with the client.105 In addition, Canadian family law 
provides that parents that cannot agree must attend a 
mediation information session before appearing before 
a judge. 106  The session provides information on the 
                                                        
99 Children’s Act, No. 38 of 2005, § 33(2). 
100 Children’s Act, No. 38 of 2005, § 33(5). 
101 Marriage Law of the People's Republic of China (1980), art. 32. 
102 Charlotte Germane et al, Mandatory Custody Mediation and Joint Custody Orders in 
California: The Danger for Victims of Domestic Violence, 1(1) BERKELEY J. GENDER L. & 
JUST.  175, 176 (2013); see generally DENNIS P. SACCUZZO ET AL, MANDATORY CUSTODY 
MEDIATION: EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE OF INCREASED RISK FOR DOMESTIC VIOLENCE VICTIMS 
AND THEIR CHILDREN (2003), available at 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/195422.pdf. 
103 Francine Cyr et al, Family Life, Parental Separation, and Child Custody in Canada: A Focus 
on Quebec, 51(4) FAMILY COURT REV. 522, 528 (2013). 
104 Divorce Act, 1985, § 9(2). 
105 Divorce Act, 1985, § 9(3). 
106 Francine Cyr et al, Family Life, Parental Separation, and Child Custody in Canada: A Focus 
on Quebec, 51(4) FAMILY COURT REV. 522, 528 (2013). 

 40 
mediation process, including the nature and objectives 
of mediation, the steps involved in the process, the role 
of the mediator, and the roles played by the spouses.107 
After attending this session, the spouses can proceed 
with mediation or continue legal proceedings. Provincial 
laws also provide for mediation. 108 In the province of 
Quebec, for example, divorcing couples that have 
children can obtain the service s of a professional 
mediator during the negotiation and settlement of their 
application for separation, divorce, dissolution of the 
civil union, child custody, spousal or child support, or 
the review of an existing decision.109 Five hours are paid 
by the Family Mediation Service and another 2.5 hours 
can be added when a revision of an existing court 
judgment is needed. 110  Some provincial laws also 
specify the duties of dispute resolution professionals111 
and the required qualifications for family mediators.112 
 
4.3.6  This chapter set forth the existing law 
in India regarding mediation in family matters and how 
such mediation is implemented in other countries. The 
following chapter will discuss other important 
considerations for deciding child custody cases. 
  
                                                        
107 Id. 
108 Id. 
109 Id. 
110 Id. 
111 See, e.g., British Columbia Family Law Act, § 8, available at 
http://www.bclaws.ca/EPLibraries/bclaws_new/document/ID/freeside/00_11025_01.  
112 See, e.g., British Columbia Family Law Act Regulations, B.C. Reg. 347/2012, §§ 4 –5, 
available at http://www.bclaws.ca/civix/document/id/complete/statreg/331105891. 

 41 
CHAPTER V 
 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECIDING CHILD 
CUSTODY CASES 
 
5.1  As discussed earlier, the guiding principle in 
child custody cases is the welfare of the child. However, 
it can be difficult to determine, in a given case, what 
specific custody or visitation  arrangement would be in 
the welfare of the child —this standard gives little 
practical guidance.113 Because of this, it is important to 
have guidelines for judges and other decision makers on 
how to implement this standard. Several organizations 
have published standards and guidelines for conducting 
child custody evaluations. 114 The following analysis is 
based primarily on states in the U.S. because they were 
found to have the most fully developed guidelines.115 
 
A. Factors to Consider for the Best Interest 
Standard 
 
5.2  A number of jurisdictions have statutes that 
enumerate specific factors to guide courts when they 
consider the best interests of a child. Generally, these 
factors relate to: the physical and mental condition of 
the child; the physical and mental con dition of each 
parent; the child’s relationship with each parent; the 
needs of child regarding other important people 
(siblings, extended family members, peers, etc.); the role 
each parent has played and will play in the child’s care; 
each parent’s ability to support the child's contact and 
relationship with the other parent; each parent’s ability 
                                                        
113 Laura Woodward Tolle et al, IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF CHILD CUSTODY EVALUATIONS : 
A SYSTEMATIC MODEL 2 (Springer 2012) (noting “the lack of clarity and explication of the key 
standards underlying these [cases]—the best interests of the child”).   
114 Laura Woodward Tolle et al, IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF CHILD CUSTODY EVALUATIONS : 
A SYSTEMATIC MODEL 15 (Springer 2012). 
115 A number of other countries do not have written guidelines at all (at least, not in an easily 
accessible form). Guidelines from U.S. states were readily available and found to address all 
the major issues and challenges that might arise during child custody disputes. 

 42 
to resolve disputes regarding the child; the child’s 
preference; any history of abuse; and the health, safety, 
and welfare of the child. 116 However, these factors a re 
not exhaustive, and some statutes expressly indicate 
that courts should consider “other factors as the court 
deems necessary and proper to the determination.”117 
 
B. Determining the Preference of the Child 
 
5.3.1  A child’s preference in matters of custody i s 
generally taken into consideration if the child is 
sufficiently intelligent and mature. 118 The preference 
must also be reasonable—the child’s wishes will not be 
considered by the court if, e.g., it is based on which 
parent’s home has better toys. 119 In determining the 
preference of the child, some courts will interview the 
child in court chambers (after asking for each parent’s 
permission to do so outside their presence). 120  The 
attorneys may be present, but they may or may not be 
allowed to ask questi ons during the interview. 121 The 
                                                        
116 See VA. CODE ANN. § 20-124.3; COLO. REV. STAT. ANN. § 14-10-124(1.5)(a); WEST'S 
ANN. CAL. FAM. CODE § 3011. 
117 VA. CODE ANN. § 20-124.3(10); see also 15 V.S.A. § 665 (“[T[he Court shall be guided by 
the best interests of the chi ld, and shall consider at least the following factors:”) (emphasis 
added); COLO. REV. STAT. ANN. § 14-10-124(1.5)(a) (“In determining the best interests of the 
child for purposes of parenting time, the court shall consider all relevant factors, including .  . . 
.”). 
118 VA. CODE ANN. § 20-124.3(8) (courts should consider the “reasonable preference of the 
child, if the court deems the child to be of reasonable intelligence, understanding, age and 
experience to express such a preference”); COLO. REV. STAT. ANN. § 14-10-124(1.5)(a)(II) 
(courts should consider the “wishes of the child if he or she is sufficiently mature to express 
reasoned and independent preferences as to the parenting time schedule”); South Africa 
Children’s Act, No. 38 of 2005, § 10 (“Every child that is of such an age, maturity and stage 
of development as to be able to participate in any matter concerning that child has the right to 
participate in an appropriate way and views expressed by the child must be given due 
consideration.”). 
119  Aaron Tho mas, A Child's Preference in Arizona Custody Proceedings , DIVORCENET, 
http://www.divorcenet.com/resources/a-childs-preference-arizona-custody-proceedings.html  
(last visited May 5, 2015). 
120 Aaron Thomas, A Child's Preference in Maryland Custody Proceedings, DIVORCENET, 
http://www.divorcenet.com/resources/a-childs-preference-maryland-custody-proceedings.html 
(last visited May 5, 2015); Slepkow, Slepkow & Associates, Inc., Child's Preference and 
Awarding Custody in Rhode Island, HG.ORG LEGAL RESOURCES, 
http://www.hg.org/article.asp?id=18641 (last visited May 5, 2015). 
121 Id. 

 43 
judge will usually make a record of the interview (e.g., 
by using a court reporter), 122 but the judge can also 
order that the interview be kept confidential if doing so 
would be in the best interest of the child.123  
 
5.3.2  Alternatively, instead of an interview, the 
court can appoint a guardian ad litem to represent the 
child’s interests.124 The guardian ad litem can submit a 
report regarding what is in the child’s best interests, 
including the child’s wishes for custody. 125  The 
guardian ad litem  can also testify about the child’s 
preferences.126 The court can also have a social worker 
or other mental health professional testify about the 
child’s opinion.127  
 
C. Access to Records of the Child 
 
5.4  Both parents are generally allowed access to 
a child’s records (medical, educational, etc.). 128 
However, where disclosure of information (for example, 
the present address of a parent or the child) could 
                                                        
122 Slepkow, Slepkow & Associates, Inc., Child's Preference and Awarding Custody in Rhode 
Island, HG.ORG LEGAL RESOURCES, http://www.hg.org/article.asp?id=18641 (last visited May 
5, 2015). 
123  Aaron Thomas, A Child's Preference in Arizona Custody Proceedings , DIVORCENET, 
http://www.divorcenet.com/resources/a-childs-preference-arizona-custody-proceedings.html  
(last visited May 5, 2015). 
124 Aaron Thomas, A Child's Preference in Maryland Custody Proceedings, DIVORCENET, 
http://www.divorcenet.com/resources/a-childs-preference-maryland-custody-proceedings.html 
(last visited May 5, 2015); Slepkow, Slepkow & Associates, Inc., Child's Preference and 
Awarding Custody in Rhode Island , HG.ORG LEGAL RESOURCES, 
http://www.hg.org/article.asp?id=18641 (last visited May 5, 2015). 
125 Id. 
126 Aaron Thomas, A Child's Preference in Maryland Custody Proceedings , DIVORCENET, 
http://www.divorcenet.com/resources/a-childs-preference-maryland-custody-proceedings.html 
(last visited May 5, 2015). 
127 Id. 
128 See, e.g., N.C.G.S.A. § 50-13.2(b) (“Absent an order of the court to the contrary, each 
parent shall have equal access to the records of the minor child involving the health, 
education, and welfare of the child.”); W. Va. Code, § 48-9-601; M.G.L.A. 208 § 31 (“The 
entry of an order or judgment relative to the custody of minor children shall not negate or 
impede the ability of the non-custodial parent to have access to the academic, medical, 
hospital or other health records of the child . . . .”). 

 44 
present a risk of harm, the court may prevent disclosure 
of the information.129 
 
D. Grand-parenting Time 
 
5.5 When evaluating the best interest of a child for a 
custody order, courts are generally empowered to 
consider the child’s relationship to friends, extended 
family members (including grandparents), and other 
important persons. In many jur isdictions, such 
relationships are expressly listed in the statutory factors 
for the best interest of a child standard. Virginia state 
law, for example, requires a court to consider “[t]he 
needs of the child, giving due consideration to other 
important relationships of the child, including but not 
limited to siblings, peers and extended family 
members.”130 Thus, courts can provide legal visitation 
rights to grandparents where appropriate. 
 
E. Mediation 
 
5.6  As discussed earlier in the report, mediation 
is the widely preferred method for resolving custody and 
other parenting disputes, 131  and many jurisdictions 
provide guidelines as to when and how mediation 
should be employed in such disputes. In cases involving 
abuse or other mistreatment, for instance, mediation is 
not seen as appropriate. 132  Some jurisdictions provide 
free mediation (at least to a point) for divorcing couples, 
                                                        
129 M.G.L.A. 208 § 31 (“[I]f nondisclosure of the present or prior address of the child or a party 
is necessary to ensure the health, safety or welfare of such child or party, the court may order 
that any part of such record pertaining to such address shall not be disclosed to such non -
custodial parent.”). 
130 VA. CODE ANN. § 20 -124.3; COLO. REV. STAT. ANN. § 14 -10-124(1.5)(a)(III) (a court 
must consider “The interaction and interrelationship of the child with his or her parents, his or 
her siblings, and any other person who may significantly affect the child's best interests”); 15 
V.S.A. § 665(b)(7) (a court must consider “the relationship of the child with any other person 
who may significantly affect the child”). 
131 See supra Ch. IV. 
132 Id. 

 45 
which can further encourage collaborative resolution 
(as an alternative to costly litigation).133 
 
F. Relocation  
 
5.7  When both parents have legal rights 
regarding a child, relocation disputes can present a 
challenge. On the one hand, in today’s highly mobile 
society, parents should be allowed to relocate for job 
opportunities or other important considerations. On the 
other hand, such relocation can interrupt the other 
parent’s visitation schedule with the child. Court s 
generally solve such disputes by resorting to several 
principles. First, in some jurisdictions, a parent does 
not need permission (either from the court or the other 
parent) to relocate if it is only a local move or it would 
not affect the other parent’s  visitation schedule. 134 
Second, a parent who intends to relocate must give 
advance written notice to the other parent. Virginia, for 
example, requires thirty days advance written notice.135 
This gives the other parent time to contest the move in 
court. The ot her key consideration is whether the 
proposed relocation is in the best interest of the child.136 
A court may also consider: whether the relocation is for 
a legitimate purpose; each parent's reasons for seeking 
or opposing the relocation; the quality of the 
relationships between the child and each parent; the 
                                                        
133 Id. 
134 UTAH CODE ANN. § 30 -3-37(1) (“For purposes of this section, ‘relocation’ means moving 
150 miles or more from the residence of the other parent.”); COLO. REV. STAT. ANN. § 14-10-
129(1)(a)(II) (requiring court approval for relocations “that substantially change[] the 
geographical ties between the child and the other party”). 
135 VA. CODE ANN. § 20 -124.5; see also COLO. REV. STAT. ANN. § 14 -10-129(1)(a)(II) (“The 
party who is intending to relocate with the child to a residence that substantially changes the 
geographical ties between the child and the other party shall provide the other party with written 
notice as soon as practicable o f his or her intent to relocate . . . .”); UTAH CODE ANN. § 30-3-
37(2) (“The relocating parent shall provide 60 days advance written notice of the intended 
relocation to the other parent.”). 
136 Va. Prac. Family Law § 15:11 (2015 ed.) (discussing relocation standards in Virginia); UTAH 
CODE ANN. § 30 -3-37(4) (“In a hearing to review the notice of relocation, the court shall, in 
determining if the relocation of a custodial parent is in the best interest of the child, consider 
any other factors that the court considers relevant . . . .”). 

 46 
impact of the relocation on the quantity and the quality 
of the child's future contact with the non -relocating 
parent; the degree to which the relocating parent's and 
the child's life may be enhanced eco nomically, 
emotionally and educationally by the relocation; and the 
feasibility of preserving the relationship between the 
non-relocating parent and the child through suitable 
visitation arrangements.137 
 
G. Decision Making 
 
5.8  There are several key areas tha t should be 
addressed in a custody order or parenting plan —these 
are common areas of dispute, so it is best if there are 
clear rules specifying each parent’s role (i.e., which 
decisions may be made individually, and which must be 
made jointly): 
 
1. Medical: w hether the child is to be hospitalized, 
and whether a non-emergency surgical procedure 
is to be performed on the child.  
2. Education: the choice of school, enrichment 
classes, courses, and subjects, and whether the 
child is to attend a particular school trip or outing, 
or tuition. 
3. Religion: the religious instruction of the child, 
attendance at places of worship, undergoing 
religious ceremonies, etc.  
4. Extra-curricular activities: choice of extra -
curricular activities, taking into consideration the 
child’s interests and aptitude.  
5. Travelling with one parent: where the child will 
spend holidays, and information that the parent 
has to provide to the other parent (e.g., a detailed 
itinerary). 
                                                        
137 CONN. GEN. STAT. ANN. § 46b-56d(b). 

 47 
 
H. Parenting Plan 
 
5.9  A number of jurisdictions require divorcing 
parents (either jointly or individually) to submit a 
shared parenting plan to the court. The plan must 
address major areas of decision making, including: the 
child’s education; the child's health care; religious 
upbringing; procedures for resolving disputes betwe en 
the parties with respect to child -raising decisions and 
duties; and the periods of time during which each party 
will have the child reside or visit with him, including 
holidays and vacations, or the procedure by which such 
periods of time shall be deter mined. 138  Some 
jurisdictions provide additional guidance regarding 
communication (between parents and between the child 
and the non -custodial parent); transportation to and 
from the other parent’s residence; what to do if a parent 
wishes to relocate; how to change scheduled parenting 
time; and exchanging information about the child. 139 
The parenting plan itself is not a legal document; it must 
be approved by a court to have legal effect.140 
 
I. Visitation 
 
5.10.1 A number of jurisdictions have detailed 
visitation sc hedules that courts can use verbatim or 
modify as needed. These serve as templates so that the 
court does not have to start from scratch. Although 
these sample schedules vary across jurisdictions, there 
                                                        
138 MASS. GEN. LAWS ch. 208, § 31; WASH. REV. CODE § 26.09.184. 
139 See DOMESTIC RELATIONS COMMITTEE, INDIANA PARENTING TIME GUIDELINES (2013), § 1, 
available at http://www.in.gov/judiciary/rules/parenting/#_Toc348614670. 
140 MASS. GEN. LAWS ch. 208, § 31 (“At the trial on the merits, the court shall consider the 
shared custody implementation plans submitted by the parties. The court may issue a shared 
legal and physical custody order and, in conjunction therewith, may accept the shared custody 
implementation plan submitted by either party or by the parties jointly or may issue a plan 
modifying the plan or plans submitted by the parties. The court may also reject the plan and 
issue a sole legal and physical custody award to either parent.”); WASH. REV. CODE § 
26.09.187.  

 48 
are some common themes. Generally, the schedule will 
depend on the child’s age and the distance between the 
parents’ homes. 141 There must be a fair allocation of 
holidays, birthdays, and school vacations. A child must 
have time with his/her siblings and other important 
people in the child’s life (grandparents, etc.). A parent’s 
ability to care for a young child (especially infants) may 
be considered. Some basic options for scheduling 
parenting time are:  
 
 The child alternates between the parents on a 
regular basis (e.g., daily, weekly, or monthly) 
 The child lives with one parent when school is in 
session, and lives with the other parent during 
school vacations 
 The child lives primarily with one parent, but visits 
the other parent on alternating weekends and 1–2 
evenings per week (possibly including an overnight 
stay) 
 
5.10.2 Guidelines on scheduling have been provided 
by both Indiana and Michigan, which recommend that 
a child visit a non-custodial parent every other weekend 
and one weekday evening per week.142 The Indiana and 
Michigan guidelines also recommend dividing holidays 
(some are given to each parent) and then alternating 
them every year. 143 However, some holidays (such as 
winter school vacation) are not alternated, but rather 
                                                        
141 See DOMESTIC RELATIONS COMMITTEE, INDIANA PARENTING TIME GUIDELINES (2013), §§ 
2–4, available at http://www.in.gov/judiciary/rules/parenting/#_Toc348614670; STATE COURT 
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE, MICHIGAN PARENTING TIME GUIDELINE, available at 
http://courts.mi.gov/administration/scao/resources/documents/publications/manuals/focb/pt_g
dlns.pdf; TATA INSTITUTE OF SOCIAL SCIENCES, CHILD ACCESS & CUSTODY GUIDELINES 
(2011), available at http://www.mphc.in/pdf/ChildAccess-040312.pdf; COLORADO 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT, CONNECTING WITH KIDS (2004), available at 
https://www.courts.state.co.us/userfiles/file/self_help/co_parenting_time_book2004.pdf (last 
visited April 2nd 2015). 
142  INDIANA PARENTING TIME GUIDELINES at § 2(D)(1); MICHIGAN PARENTING TIME 
GUIDELINE at 7.  
143 INDIANA PARENTING TIME GUIDELINES at § 2(F)(2); MICHIGAN PARENTING TIME GUIDELINE 
at 7–9. 

 49 
shared equally by the parents every year (i.e., the child 
spends the first half of the vacation with one parent, and 
the second half with the other).144 Both states also have 
additional guidelines for parents that live far away from 
each other145 and for young children.146 
 
5.10.3 In India, visitation rights have been defined 
by the Supreme Court in Roxann Sharma  v. Arun 
Sharma147 as “a non-custodial parents or grandparent's 
Court ordered privilege of spending time with a child or 
grandchild who is living with another person, usually 
the custodial parent.” In a number of cases, the 
Supreme Court has granted visitation rights to the non-
custodial parent and grandmothe rs, adoptive parents, 
maternal uncles and aunts. The prime consideration for 
visitation rights is the welfare of the child and the 
proximity of the child to the relation concerned. 
 
5.10.4 For example, in Prabhat Kumar v. Himalini,148 
the Court held that the welfare of the child is determined 
by the benefit of care and affection the minor would 
receive in granting visiting rights to such family 
members of the hostile family. The onus of proving such 
benefit is upon the family member claiming the right. 
Another important consideration is the nearness of the 
child to the family member. Here, the Court upheld the 
order for interim visitation for the father and his 
relatives, due to a reinforced relationship between the 
child and father on account of regular visits ordered by 
the guardianship Judge. 
 
                                                        
144  INDIANA PARENTING TIME GUIDELINES at § 2(F)(2)(B).  MICHIGAN PARENTING TIME 
GUIDELINE at 8–9. 
145 INDIANA PARENTING TIME GUIDELINES at § III; MICHIGAN PARENTING TIME GUIDELINE at 
23–34. 
146  INDIANA PARENTING TIME GUIDELINES at § II(C) (discussing infants and toddlers); 
MICHIGAN PARENTING TIME GUIDELINE at 24–25. 
147 Roxann Sharma v. Arun Sharma MANU/SC/0165/2015. 
148 Prabhat Kumar v. Himalini MANU/DE/0016/201. 

 50 
5.10.5 The Commission believes it is necessary and 
useful to lay down broad guidelines on visitation rights, 
such that they are conducive to the welfare of the child, 
and to ensure that both parents are able to spend time 
with the child. 
 
  

 51 
CHAPTER VI 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
6.1  The recommendations of the Law 
Commission in this report are captured in the Hindu 
Minority and Guardianship (Amendment) Bill, 2015, 
and the Guardians and Wards (Amendment) Bill, 2015, 
which are appended to the report. The Bills, 
respectively, amend the Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship Act, 1956, and the Guardians and Wards 
Act, 1890. In this regard, the Law Commission also 
makes incidental reference to some of the 
recommendations of the 83rd report (1980) of the Law 
Commission, entitled ‘The Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890 and certain provisions of the Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship Act, 1956,’149 as well as the 133 rd report 
(1989) of the Law Commission, entitled ‘Removal of 
discrimination a gainst women in matters relating to 
guardianship and custody of minor children and 
elaboration of the welfare principles.’150  
 
6.2  The Commission provides detailed legislative 
text by recommending the insertion of a new chapter IIA 
dealing with ‘Custody, Child Support and Visitation 
Arrangements’. The Commission also provides specific 
guidelines to assist the court in deciding such matters, 
including processes to determine whether the welfare of 
the child is met; procedures to be followed during 
mediation; and factors to be taken into consideration 
when determining grants for joint custody. The 
recommendations are discussed in detail i n the 
following pages.  
                                                        
149  Law Commission of India, 83 rd Report, April (1980), available at 
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/51-100/Report83.pdf 
150  Law Commission of India, 13 3rd Report, August (1989) , available at 
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/101-169/Report133.pdf  

 52 
 
A. Amendments to the Hindu Minority and 
Guardians Act, 1956 
 
6.3  The Law Commission recommends the 
following amendments to this Act: 
 
1. Section 6(a) : This section lists the natural 
guardians of a Hindu minor, in respect of the 
minor’s person and property (excluding his or her 
undivided interest in joint family property). In the 
case of a boy or an unmarried girl, this section 
clearly states that the natural guardian of a Hindu 
minor is the father, and after him the mother. Even 
after the Supreme Court’s judgment in Gita 
Hariharan v Reserve Bank of India ,151 the mother 
can become a natural guardian during the lifetime 
of the father only in exceptional cir cumstances. 
This is required to be changed to fulfil the 
principles of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the 
Constitution. 
  Accordingly, the Law Commission 
recommends that this superiority of one parent 
over the other should be removed, and that both 
the mother and the father should be regarded, 
simultaneously, as the natural guardians of a 
minor. This also follows from the recommendation 
of the Commission that the welfare of the minor 
must be the paramount consideration in every 
circumstance. This conce pt of welfare being 
paramount is already captured in Section 13 of the 
1956 Act. In recommending such an amendment 
to Section 6, the Commission reaffirms the 
recommendations of its 133rd report, to give equal 
rights to both the mother and father in respect  of 
                                                        
151 (1999) 2 SCC 228 

 53 
a minor and his/her property. 152 It also reaffirms 
the recommendations of the 83rd report of the Law 
Commission, in intending the two provisions 
(Sections 6 and 13) to be read together. 153 Such a 
reading will necessarily imply that neither the 
father nor the mother of a minor can, as of a right, 
claim to be appointed by the court as the guardian 
unless such an appointment is for the welfare of 
the minor.  
 
  The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 has also 
undergone similar legislative changes, moving 
away from an absolute and natural right of a father 
to be the guardian. 154 The 1890 law was enacted 
at a time when women had limited rights in law, 
and it was in need of reform. According to the older 
version of Section 19(b) of the 1890 Act, the court 
could not appoint a guardian of a minor (other 
than a married female), if the minor’s father was 
living and not unfit to be the guardian. The 
Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2010 amended 
this clause to refer also to the mother in the same 
vein as the father, thereby making the law more 
equitable. 155  The recommendations of the 
Commission, in context of the changes to the 1890 
Act, therefore, are merely removing anomalies in 
one law that have a lready been remov ed in 
another. 
 
  The proviso to section 6(a) presently provides 
that the custody of a minor below 5 years of age 
                                                        
152 Law Commission of India, 133rd Report, August (1989), ¶ 4.3, available at: 
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/101-169/Report133 
153  Law Commission of India, 83 rd Report, April 1980, ¶6.44, p. 30, available at 
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/51-100/Report83.pdf 
154 Venkata Narasiah v. Peddiraju, 1970 (1) ALT 25; Kumarswami Mudaliar v. Rajammal AIR 
1957 Mad. 563. 
155 Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, No. 30 of 2010, chapter II. 

 54 
will ordinarily be with the mother. The 
Commission believes that this position should be 
allowed flexibility in cases where the court decides 
to grant joint custody, and the text of the provision 
is amended accordingly.  
 
2. Section 7: This section provides that the natural 
guardianship of an adopted son who is a minor 
passes, on adoption, to the adoptive father and 
after him to the adoptive mother. The language of 
this section is incongruous in that it refers only to 
the natural guardianship of an adopted son, and 
does not refer to an adopted daughter. The Hindu 
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 came into 
force at a time when the general Hindu la w as 
administered by the courts did not recognise the 
adoption of a daughter. Thus, at the time of 
passing of the Act, the adoption of daughters was 
only allowed under custom and not under codified 
law. This explains the reason why the drafters of 
the Act included the guardianship of only adopted 
sons and ignored the adoption of daughters. 156 It 
was also enacted before the Hindu Adoptions and 
Maintenance Act, 1956, which corrected the legal 
position of adoption of a daughter statutorily. 157 
The effect of the later law is that the adoptive father 
and the adoptive mother would be regarded as the 
natural guardians of the adopted child. 158  It 
follows that the Hindu Minority and Guardianship 
Act, 1956 should also include both an adopted son 
and an adopted daughter with in the scope of 
natural guardianship. The Commission merely 
corrects this by amending the Hindu Minority and 
                                                        
156 Paras Diwan, LAW OF ADOPTION, MINORITY, GUARDIANSHIP & CUSTODY, 3rd edn., 2000, p. 
226. 
157 Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, No. 78 of 1956, § 10.  
158 MULLA HINDU LAW, ed. Satyajeet A. Desai, 21st edn., 2010, p 1258.70  

 55 
Guardianship Act, 1956 to be in consonance with 
the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956. 
Further, the Commission recommends that the 
natural guardians of an adopted child should 
include both the adoptive parents, in keeping with 
its recommendations to Section 6(a) provided 
above, and previous legislative changes such as 
the Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2010. 
Accordingly, the Commission recomm ends that 
Section 7 be amended to refer to the natural 
guardianship of an adopted child who is a minor, 
which will pass, upon adoption, to the adoptive 
mother and father. 
 
B. Amendments to the Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890 
 
6.4  The Law Commission recommends the 
following amendments to this Act: 
 
1. Section 17: This section provides for matters to be 
considered by the court in appointing the guardian 
of a minor, and requires the welfare of a minor to 
be consistent with the laws to which the minor is 
subject. In t he past, Section 17 was read with 
Section 19 of this Act (which deals with the 
preferential right of natural guardianship). 159 
Before being amended by the Personal Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2010, Section 19 offered a 
preferential right to the husband (of a minor  girl), 
or the father (in all other cases) to be the guardian 
of the minor, if neither were unfit to be appointed 
guardian. The 2010 Act included the mother along 
                                                        
159  Law Commission of I ndia, 83 rd Report, April (1980), ¶6.40, available at 
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/51-100/Report83.pdf  

 56 
with the father as a natural guardian of the child, 
and changed the position of the law sligh tly.160 
However, the welfare of the child was still not, 
under law, truly the paramount consideration in 
such matters.  
 The Law Commission recommends that the 
possibility of any alternate reading be corrected in 
statute, and reaffirms, in this context, the general 
recommendations made by the 83 rd report of the 
Law Commission. Thus, in the appointment or 
declaration of a guardian, the welfare of the minor 
must be paramount, and everything else must be 
secondary to this consideration. In determining 
welfare, however, the court may give due regard to 
the laws to which the minor may be subject. As the 
83rd report observed, “such an amendment will 
settle the position for all times to come,”  161 and 
will remove the possibility of the appointment of a 
guardian without first assessing welfare.  
 
2. Section 19 : This section provides for the 
preferential right of certain persons to be regarded 
as natural guardians. It provides that the court 
may not appoint a guardian, if the husband of a 
minor who is a married female is not  unfit to be 
the guardian of her person, or if the father or 
mother (who are living) of a minor other than a 
married female is similarly not unfit to be the 
guardian. Here, too, the Commission reaffirms the 
83rd report regarding the importance of the welfare 
principle, and recommends that in determining 
whether a person is unfit to be a guardian in these 
                                                        
160 Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, No. 30 of 2010, chapter II. 
161  Law Commission of India, 83 rd Report, April (1980), ¶6.40, available at 
http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/51-100/Report83.pdf  

 57 
circumstances, the welfare of the minor under 
Section 17 shall be the paramount consideration.  
3. Section 25: This section provides for the arrest of 
a ward if the ward leaves or is removed from the 
custody of his guardian, if such arrest is for the 
welfare of the ward. As with its recommendations 
above, the Law Commission concurs with its 83 rd 
report, in various aspects. 162 First, the concept of 
arrest of a min or is an archaic one, and needs to 
be amended to reflect modern social 
considerations. Therefore, the Law Commission 
recommends a substitute section, replacing 
‘arrest’ with the requirement to return the ward to 
the custody of his or her guardian. Again, t he 
Commission reiterates the necessity of placing the 
welfare of the minor as the paramount 
consideration.  
Second, the present text of the law is unclear 
as to whether a guardian who has never had 
custody of a minor is entitled to the relief under 
this se ction. This needs to be clarified, and 
accordingly, the Law Commission reiterates the 
recommendations of the 83 rd report163 as regards 
the language of the provision to specifically state 
that it applies in cases where the child is not in the 
custody of the g uardian, though the latter is 
entitled to such custody. 
 
Third, it recommends that the court must not 
make an order under this section in respect of a 
child of fourteen years of over, without taking into 
consideration the wishes of the child. 164 This is in 
consonance with the provisions of Section 17 of 
                                                        
162 Id, ¶7.18  
163 Id, ¶7.14-7.17 
164 Id, ¶7.20  

 58 
this Act, which allows the court to consider the 
stated preference of a minor, if the minor is old 
enough to form an intelligent preference. In a 
scenario where the minor of over fourteen years of 
age has left or been removed from the custody of 
his or her guardian, the Commission recommends 
that the court must take into consideration the 
preference of the child.  
 
4. Insertion of new Chapter IIA: This chapter deals 
with custody, child support and visitation issues, 
covering a range of topics as discussed below. 
a. Section 19A: Objectives of the chapter. 
This section lays down the principal 
objectives of this chapter, by way of guidance to 
the court as to what the chapter seeks to 
achieve. Children are the most vulnerable 
persons in a matrimonial dispute, and the 
trauma that they face during and after the legal 
determination of such disputes is 
immeasurably harsh. Children often become 
pawns in such matters, and are used by their 
parents for their own purposes, to strike 
bargains that rarely take into consideration the 
emotional, social and mental upheavals that the 
children themselves may be facing. The 
Commission believes this imbalanced situation 
can be addressed in some measure through 
legislative changes that will place a duty upon 
the court to uphold the child’s welfare in each 
and every circumstance, regardless of the 
individual interests of the parties involved.  
 
These objectives, therefore, embody the 
fundamental and most important 
recommendation of the Law Commission, 

 59 
regarding the welfare of the child being of 
utmost consideration. A court is bound to bear 
in mind these objectives in making an order 
under this chapter, and will therefore be 
required to comprehensively assess the 
consequences of any order it makes in light of 
these objectives. 
 
The objectives require that the welfare of a 
child is met by ensuring various other aspects, 
such as recognising the changing emotional, 
intellectual and physical needs of the child; 
maintaining a healthy and continuing 
relationship with both parents, society and 
siblings; recognising the prior and future ability 
and commitment of the parents to participate in 
the growth of the child; protecting the child from 
violence of any kind, and so on. 
 
b. Section 19B: Applicability of this chapter. 
Custody issues are dealt with in three personal 
laws, which are, the Indian  Divorce Act, 1869 
(Sections 41 and 43), the Parsi Marriage and 
Divorce Act, 1936 (Section 49), and the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955 (Section 26). In general 
terms, these sections grant the court the power 
to pass decree/ order regarding the custody, 
maintenance and education of minor children, 
whose parents are parties to a suit for divorce 
or separation.  
 
The new chapter IIA as recommended by the 
Law Commission provides for detailed 
considerations in custody matters, and in that 
regard, is in addition to the powers of the court 
as listed in the three personal laws. This new 

 60 
section clarifies that the provisions of this new 
chapter will apply to all proceedings related to 
custody and child support, including under the 
three laws. This cross-reference to the personal 
laws is provided in the statute to clarify that the 
recommendations of the Commission are 
intended to be secular, and applicable to all 
persons, regardless of the personal laws they 
may be governed by. 
 
c. Section 19C: Definitions. 
This section offers two key definitions, i.e., 
joint custody and sole custody. Joint custody is 
where both parents share physical custody of 
the child (in such proportion as the court 
determines to be for the welfare of the child), 
and also equally share the responsibility for the 
care and control of the child, and decision -
making authority. Sole custody is a situation 
where one parent retains the physical care and 
control of a child. However, these rights may be 
subject to the power of the court to grant 
visitation rights to the other parent.  
 
The introduction of joint custody as a defined 
term is to recognise the possibility, in law, of a 
court issuing an order of joint custody, if it is for 
the welfare of the child. However, the definition 
of joint custody, and the substantive provisions 
that follow, must always be read in light of the 
objectives that open the chapter, which seek to 
ensure that the custody arrangement eventually 
granted is always subject to the welfare of the 
child being met.  
 
 

 61 
d. Section 19D: Award of custody. 
This section gives powers to the court to 
make different kinds of custody orders. 
However, it also requires the court to consider 
the detailed guidelines contained in the 
schedule in this regard. The court retains the 
power to modify the orders so made, provided 
such modifications remain in the welfare of the 
child, and the reasons for such modification are 
recorded.  
 
e. Section 19E: Power to pass additional orders. 
This is an additional power granted to the 
court, necessary to effectuate or enforce any 
order relating to the custody of the child under 
the chapter.  
 
f. Section 19F: Mediation. 
Many disputes arising out of divorce 
proceedings (child custody, child support, etc.) 
could be solved through mediation. This would 
promote better outcomes for both parents and 
children, as well as reduce the strain on the 
overburdened court system. Before engaging 
directly with the court system, the Commission 
recommends that parties to a custody matter 
must ordinarily consider mediation before the 
proceedings actually begin, or when the court 
so orders. The court will usually refer the 
parents to the court-annexed mediation centre. 
However, in case there is no such centre, the 
court may appoint an individual mediator.  
 
At present, Family Courts take assistance 
from marriage counsellors in settling disputes. 
Counsellors are different from mediators in 
terms of their approach. Counselling usually 

 62 
requires identifying behavioural issues of the 
individual parties and tends t o involve 
professionals trained in areas of mental health, 
psychology and sociology, unlike mediation, 
which requires identifying conflict behaviour 
and tends to involve professionals trained in 
dispute resolution. 165  Therefore, the 
Commission recommends tha t parties should 
be given the opportunity to participate in 
mediation with a trained mediator. Mediators 
should have appropriate background and 
training, including in family disputes. Further, 
High Courts, District Courts and Family Courts 
should maintain a list of court -annexed 
mediation centres and individual mediators. 
These will be identified and paid remuneration 
in accordance with a scheme designed by the 
concerned High Court in consultation with the 
respective state governments. 
 
As the legislation repeatedly emphasises, it is 
the duty of the court to ensure that the final 
custody order is for the welfare of the child. For 
this purpose, the Commission recommends that 
the court should have the power to obtain an 
independent psychological evaluation of the 
child, in order to determine various related 
issues (e.g., the child’s preference, influence of 
and relationships with the parents, etc.). 
Further, as in the case of mediation, 
professional assistance may be required, as 
neither the court nor mediators  may be 
qualified to understand child psychology.  
 
                                                        
165 Maritalmediation Staff, What is the Difference between Marital Mediation and Marital 
Counseling?, February 22, 2013, available at http://www.maritalmediation.com/faqs/what -is-
the-difference-between-marital-mediation-and-marital-counseling-2/ (Last visited on April 22, 
2015). 

 63 
 
Time-bound resolution is also a key factor to 
achieve the ultimate objective of ensuring that 
the welfare of the child is met. The Supreme 
Court has recognized that Family Courts should 
ensure that a reasonable time limit is prescribed 
for the completion of the entire mediation 
process so as to not delay the resolution of 
family disputes any further.166 The Commission 
recommends that any mediation under this 
section must be time -bound, and must 
conclude within sixty days of being so ordered. 
In the absence of such a requirement, there is a 
risk that mediation may continue indefinitely 
and adversely affect the child in question. 
However, the court can extend this period, 
where necessary.  
 
g. Section 19G: Child support. 
Personal laws in India deal with the concept 
and idea of child support to some extent 
through the concept of custody of children in 
codified Hindu Law167 and Parsi Law,168 and the 
Indian Divorce Act. 169  However, these 
provisions do not list the reasons for which such 
child support is required. The Hindu Adoptions 
and Maintenance Act, 1956 has a provision for 
maintenance of children,170 but merely casts an 
obligation of maintenance on the father 171 as 
well as the mother.172 Maintenance here means 
the provision for food, clothing, residence, 
                                                        
166 Baljinder Kaur v. Hardeep Singh, AIR 1998 SC 764. 
167 Hindu Marriage Act, No. 25 of 1955, § 26. 
168 Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, No. 3 of 1936, § 49. 
169 Indian Divorce Act, No. 4 of 1869, § 41 and § 43. 
170 Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, No. 78 of 1956, § 20. 
171 Krishnakumari v. Varalakshmi AIR 1976 AP 365. 
172 MULLA HINDU LAW, ed. Satyajeet Desai, 21st edn. 2010, p. 1378. 

 64 
education and medical attendance and 
treatment.173 This definition of maintenance is 
generally worded so as to be applicable to all 
persons entitled to claim maintenance under 
the various provisions of the 1956 Act. 174 The 
Law Commission believes that child support in 
custody matters entails much more than the 
concept of maintenance as captured by the 
1956 Act. Accordingly, it empowers the court to 
specifically pass orders for the maintenance of 
children. It elaborates that such a n order will 
involve fixing an amount that is “reasonable or 
necessary” to meet the living expenses of the 
child, including food, clothing, shelter, health 
care, and education.  
 
However, terms such as “reasonable” and 
“necessary” may be construed as vague , and 
can be abused or wrongly interpreted when 
fixing amounts for child support. The 
Commission, therefore, qualifies these terms by 
recommending certain factors that courts must 
keep in mind when calculating child support. 
These include the financial res ources of the 
parents, the standard of living of the child, 175 
the physical and emotional condition of the 
child, his or her educational and healthcare 
needs or any other factor that the court deems 
fit for the child’s welfare. 
 
Following the general principle of majority 
being attained at the age of 18, the Commission 
recommends that child support must continue 
till such age of majority. There are cases where 
                                                        
173 Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, No. 78 of 1956, § 3(b). 
174 MULLA HINDU LAW, ed. Satyajeet Desai, 21st edn. 2010, p. 1294. 
175 Sayali Pathak v. Vasant Pathak 110 (2004) DLT 637. 

 65 
the court has advised an increase in the age of 
maintenance from eighte en to twenty -one and 
asked the Commission for its advice. 176  The 
Commission is of the view that the court should 
have the power to continue child support even 
after a child attains the age of 18, and wherever 
appropriate, this period may extend till the child 
reaches the age of 25, and not thereafter. 
 
The Commission also recognises special 
treatment for children wi th mental or physical 
disability. 177  The Hindu Adoption and 
Maintenance Act, 1956, applies to persons with 
disability, but the benefits cease at the  age of 
eighteen. The Commission recommends 
correcting the provision of law to provide child 
support beyond such time as the child reaches 
25 years of age, in case of a child with mental or 
physical disability.  
 
The Commission recommends that courts 
should have the power to order for the liability 
of the estate of a parent who dies during or after 
an order for child support is passed, to ensure 
that the welfare of the child remains the key, 
even after the lifetime of the parent. 
 
h. Schedule: Guidelines 
The Commission also recommends various 
guidelines to accompany the main body of the 
law, in the Schedule to the Bill. The guidelines 
discuss the following issues: factors to be taken 
                                                        
176 The Times of India, Raise Age  for Child Maintenance to 21: Court , August 12 (2011), 
available at http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Raise -age-for-child-maintenance-to-
21-Court/articleshow/9573821.cms (Last visited on April 23, 2015). 
177 Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, No. 56 of 2000, § 2(d). 

 66 
into consideration when granting joint custody, 
determining the preference of a child, access to 
a child’s records, parenting plan, grand -
parenting time, mediation, visitation, decision 
making, and relocation. 
 
 
Sd/- 
[Justice A.P. Shah] 
Chairman 
 
 
  
Sd/- 
 [Justice S.N. Kapoor] 
Member 
Sd/- 
[Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma] 
Member 
 
 
Sd/- 
[Justice Usha Mehra] 
Member 
Sd/- 
[P.K. Malhotra] 
Ex-officio Member 
Sd/- 
[Dr. Sanjay Singh] 
Ex-officio Member 
 
Sd/- 
[Dr. G. Narayana Raju] 
Member-Secretary 
  
Sd/- 
[R. Venkataramani] 
Member (Part Time) 
Sd/- 
[Prof. (Dr.) Yogesh Tyagi] 
Member (Part Time) 
 
 
  

 67 
Annexure I 
 
  
THE HINDU MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015 
 
A Bill  
further to amend the Hindu Minority and Guardianship 
Act, 1956 
 
Be it enacted in the Sixty-sixth year of the Republic 
of India:- 
 
SHORT TITLE  1. This Act may be called the Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship (Amendment) Act, 2015. 
 
AMENDMENT OF 
SECTION 6 
 
2. In the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) in section 
6, 
(1) f or clause (a), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:--  
“(a) in  the case of a boy or an unmarried girl – the 
mother and the father;”; 
(2) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation 
1, and after the Explanation as so numbered, the 
following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-- 
“Explanation 2.-- For the purpose of clause (a), unless 
joint custody is granted by the court under Chapter 
IIA of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, the custody 
of a minor who has not completed the age of five years 
shall ordinarily be with the mother.” 
 
 
SUBSTITUTION OF 
NEW SECTION 
FOR SECTION 7 
 
3. In the principal Act, for section 7 , the following 
section shall be substituted, namely:-- 
“(7) Natural guardianship of adopted child. – The 
natural guardianship of an adopted child who is a 
minor passes, on adoption, to the adoptive mother and 
father.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 68 
Annexure II 
 
  
THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2015 
A Bill  
further to amend the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890  
 
Be it enacted in the Sixty-sixth year of the Republic 
of India:- 
 
SHORT TITLE  
 
1. This Act may  be called the Guardians and Wards 
(Amendment) Act, 2015. 
 
AMENDMENT OF 
SECTION 17 
 
2. In the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in section 17,  
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub -section shall 
be substituted, namely:--  
“(1) In appointing or declaring the guardian of a minor, 
the welfare of the minor shall be the paramount 
consideration.”; 
(ii) after sub -section (1), the following sub -section  
shall be inserted, namely:-- 
“(1A) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (1), the 
court shall have due regard to the law to which the 
minor is subject, in appointing or declaring the 
guardian of that minor.” 
 
AMENDMENT OF 
SECTION 19 
 
3. In the princip al Act, in section 19, after clause (c), 
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:--  
“Provided that in determining whether a person is 
unfit to be a guardian under clause (a) or clause (b), 
the welfare of the minor as required under sub-section 
(1) of section 17 shall be the paramount 
consideration.” 
 
SUBSTITUTION OF 
NEW SECTION 
FOR SECTION 25 
 
4. In the principal Act, for section 25, the following 
section shall be substituted, namely:--  
“25. Proceedings for custody of ward. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
19, i f a ward leaves or is removed from the 
custody of a guardian of his person, or is not in 
the custody of the guardian entitled to such 
custody, the court, if it is of the opinion that it 
will be for the welfare of the ward  to return to 
the custody of his guardian or to be placed in 
his custody, may make an order for his return, 
or for his being placed in the custody of the 
guardian, as the case may be. 
 

 69 
(2) For the purpose of enforcing the order, the court 
may exercise the power  conferred on a 
Magistrate of the first class by section 97 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(3) The residence of a ward against the will of his 
guardian with a person who is not his guardian 
does not of itself terminate the guardianship. 
(4) In making an order under this section, the court 
shall have regard to the welfare of the ward as 
the paramount consideration. 
(5) The court shall not make an order under this 
section in respect of a child of fourteen years or 
over, without taking into consider ation the 
preference of the child.”  
INSERTION OF 
NEW CHAPTER 
5. In the principal Act, after Chapter II, the following 
Chapter IIA shall be inserted, namely:-- 
“Chapter IIA: Custody, Child Support and Visitation 
Arrangements 
19A. Objectives of the Chapter. 
The objectives of this Chapter are to ensure that the 
welfare of a minor is met by:--  
(a) ensuring that the child has the benefit of both 
parents having a meaningful involvement in 
his life, to the maximum extent consistent 
with the welfare of the child;  
(b) ensuring that the child receives adequate and 
proper parenting to help achieve his full 
potential;  
(c) ensuring that the parents fulfil their duties, 
and meet their responsibilities concerning the 
care, welfare and development of the child; 
(d) giving due co nsideration to the changing 
emotional, intellectual and physical needs of 
the child; 
(e) encouraging both the parents to maintain a 
close and continuing relationship with the 
child, and to cooperate in and resolve disputes 
regarding matters affecting the child;  
(f) recognising that the child has the right to 
know and be cared for by both the parents, 
regardless of whether the parents are married, 
separated, or unmarried; and 
(g) protecting the child from physical or 
psychological harm or from being subjected to, 
 

 70 
or exposed to, any abuse, neglect or family 
violence. 
 
19B. Applicability of this Chapter. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all 
proceedings involving parents related to custody and 
child support, including such proceedings arising 
under the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, the Parsi Marriage 
and Divorce Act, 1936, and the Hindu Marriage Act, 
1955. 
 
19C. Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter:-- 
(a) "Joint custody" is where both the parents:-- 
i. share physical custody of the child, which 
may be equally shared, or in such 
proportion as the court may determine for 
the welfare of the child; and  
ii. equally share the joint responsibility for 
the care and control of the child and joint 
authority to take decisions concerning the 
child; and 
(b) "Sole custody" is where one parent retains 
physical custody and responsibility for the care 
and control of the child, subject to the power of 
the court to grant visitation rights to the other 
parent. 
19D. Award of custody. 
(1) In a proceeding to which this Chapter applies, 
the court may order joint custody or sole 
custody consistent with the welfare of the child. 
(2) In determining whether an order  under this 
section will be for the welfare of the child, the 
court shall have regard to the guidelines 
specified in the Schedule. 
(3) Subject to the welfare of the child being the 
paramount consideration , the court may 
modify an order under this section, and record 
the reasons for doing so. 
 
19E. Power to pass additional orders. 

 71 
The court shall have the power to pass any additional 
or incidental orders necessary to effectuate and 
enforce any order relating to the custody of the child.  
 
19F. Mediation. 
(1) The court will ordinarily refer the parents to the 
court-annexed mediation centre or, in the 
absence thereof, to such person as the court 
may appoint as mediator, either at the 
commencement of, or at any stage during, the 
proceedings under this Chapter.  
(2) A mediator to which parents are referred to 
under sub -section (1) must possess relevant 
professional qualifications or training in 
mediation, and sufficient skill and experience 
in mediation relating to family disputes.  
(3) For the purpose of this section, eve ry High 
Court and District Court and Family Court 
shall maintain a list of court -annexed 
mediation centres or individual mediators. 
(4) The court -annexed mediation centres or 
individual mediators shall be identified and 
paid remuneration in accordance with a 
scheme prepared for this purpose by the 
concerned High Court, in consultation with the 
respective State Governments. 
(5) For the purpose of ordering or performing any 
mediation under this section, the court and the 
appointed mediator shall have regard to the 
guidelines specified in the Schedule. 
(6) The court may, where it considers appropriate 
or necessary, seek assistance from a trained 
and experienced professional to undertake an 
independent psychological evaluation of the 
child.  
(7) A mediation ordered by the court under this 
section must ordinarily conclude not later than 
sixty days from the date of such order, unless 
extended by the court, where necessary.  
19G. Child support. 
(1) A court may pass appropriate orders for the 
maintenance of children, and fix an amount 
that is reasonable or necessary to meet the  

 72 
living expenses of the child, including food, 
clothing, shelter, healthcare, and education.  
(2) For the purpose of determining reasonableness 
or necessity, the court may take into 
consideration the following factors, namely:--  
(a) the financial resources of each of the 
parents; 
(b) the standard of living that the child would 
have had if the marriage had  remained 
intact;  
(c) the physical and emotional condition of the 
child;  
(d) the particular educational and healthcare 
needs of the child; and 
(e) any other factors that the court considers fit. 
(3) An order of the court under this section must 
subsist till the child reaches 18 years of age. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
sections (1), (2) and (3), the court may make 
such further orders as it considers fit, 
including:-- 
(a) requiring the payment of a sum greater than 
the sum determined under sub-section (1); 
(b) requiring the subsistence of an order for a 
duration longer than as provided under sub-
section (3), but such order shall not subsist 
in any case beyond such time as the child 
reaches 25 years of age; 
(c) requiring the subsistence of an order under 
sub-section (3) beyond such time as the child 
reaches 25 years of age in case of a child with 
mental or physical disability; and  
(d) making the estate of a parent , who dies 
during or after the conclusion of proceedings 
under this section , liable for obligations 
under the order passed by the court.”  
INSERTION OF 
SCHEDULE 
6. In the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be 
inserted at the end, namely:-- 
 
“SCHEDULE 
GUIDELINES FOR CUSTODY, CHILD SUPPORT AND 
VISITATION ARRANGEMENTS 
 

 73 
 
I. FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED FOR GRANT OF 
JOINT CUSTODY 
 
(1) In making an order for joint custody under 
Chapter IIA, the court shall have regard to the 
following, namely:-- 
a. whether the parents will be able to 
cooperate and generally agree concerning 
important decisions affecting the welfare 
of the child;  
b. whether each of the parents is willing and 
able to facilitate, and encourage, a close 
and continuing relationship between the 
child and the other parent;  
c. whether the parents are able to jointly 
design and implement a day -to-day care 
plan that fosters stability; 
d. the maturity, lifestyle and background 
(including culture and traditions) of the 
child and parents, and any other 
characteristics that the court thinks are 
relevant;  
e. the extent to which each parent has 
fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, his 
responsibilities as a parent; 
f. the extent to which the parents are able 
or unable to find a reasonable way of 
working together; 
g. the extent to which the higher income 
parent is willing to support in creating 
similar standards of living in each 
parental home;  
h. the child’s existing relationship with each 
parent, siblings, and other persons who 
may significantly affect the child’s 
welfare; 
i. the needs of the child, giving due 
consideration to other important 
relationships of the child, including but 
not limited to s iblings, peers and 
extended family members; 

 74 
j. any family violence involving the child or 
a member of the child’s family;  
k. whether the child is capable of forming an 
intelligent preference; and 
l. any other fact or circumstance that the 
court thinks is relevant. 
(2) The court shall direct the parents to conduct an 
annual review of the welfare of the child and the 
income of each parent, and to file the same 
before the court.  
 
II. DETERMINING PREFERENCE OF THE CHILD 
 
(1) In determining the preference of the child for 
any purpose under this Act, the court shall take 
the following matters into consideration , 
namely:-- 
a. whether the child is of an age and 
maturity to indicate intelligent 
preference;  
b. the extent to which the child has an 
understanding of the circumstances 
surrounding the court proceedings; 
c. whether the child has had a history of 
expressing an intelligent preference; 
d. whether any preference of the child so 
expressed was based on the fact that the 
child recently spent an extended period of 
time with either parent; and 
e. whether the child understands the 
consequences of the preference that he 
has expressed. 
(2) In conducting an interview with the child, the 
court may, if it considers fit in the 
circumstances:-- 
a. decide who will be present when the court 
interviews the child, and if necessary, 
speak to the child alone, in the absence of 
the parents or their legal representatives; 
or 

 75 
b. request the presence of a child 
psychologist, a mediator, or any other 
specific person identified by the court. 
(3) The court shall make a record of th e interview 
with the child, and may keep such record 
confidential if the court determines that it is in 
the welfare of the child.  
(4) The court or any other person shall not, in any 
circumstance, require or compel the child to 
express his views in relation to any matter. 
 
III. ACCESS TO RECORDS OF THE CHILD 
 
(1) Unless limited by an order of the court, or any 
other provision of law, neither parent, 
regardless of whether such parent has custody 
of the child or not, shall be denied access to any 
information about their minor child, including 
medical, dental, and school records.  
(2) The court may, in exceptional circumstances, 
after an opportunity of being heard, order 
specific information to be withheld from a 
parent. 
(3) In the case of medical records, the court may, if 
it considers fit, deny access to a parent if the 
physician or child psychologist treating the 
child makes a written statement that any such 
access by the requesting parent would cause 
substantial harm to the child or another person.  
 
IV. GRAND-PARENTING TIME 
 
(1) A child's grandparent may apply to the court for 
a grand-parenting time order under one or more 
of the following circumstances, namely:--  
a. the parents of the child are divorced or 
have separated, or proceedings for divorce 
or separation are pending before the 
court; or 
b. the child’s parent, who is the daughter or 
son of the grandparent, is deceased; or 
c. the grandparent has, in the past, provided 
an established custodial environment for 

 76 
the child, whether or not the grandparent 
had custody under a court order.  
(2) An order for grandparenting time may be issued 
only after giving due notice, and an opportunity 
of being heard, to both the parents.  
(3) Before issuing an order for grand -parenting 
time, the court shall determine whether such an 
order is required for the welfare of the child.  
(4) In determining the welfare of the child under 
this part, the court shall consider the following, 
namely:--  
a. the love, affection, and other emotional 
ties existing between the grandparent and 
the child;  
b. the grandparent's mental and physical 
health;  
c. the child's intelligent preference;  
d. the willingness of the grandparent, except 
in the case of abuse or neglect, to 
encourage a close relationship between 
the child and the parent or parents of the 
child; and 
e. any other factor relevant to the welfare of 
the child.  
 
V. MEDIATION 
 
(1) The objective of mediation under Chapter IIA is 
to assist the parties to arrive at an agreement 
regarding the welfare of the child, and designing 
an implementation plan to ensure the welfare of 
the child. 
(2) Where there are undecided issues in 
proceedings under Chapter IIA, a court may 
direct the parties to undergo mediation, resolve 
the issues, and then seek approval of the court. 
(3) It is the role of the mediator to-- 
a. encourage the parties to co-operate; 
b. assist the parents in realising their 
responsibilities and duties towards the 
welfare of the child; and 

 77 
c. in case a joint custody order is likely to be 
issued, work with the parties to resolve, 
in a mutually acceptable manner, related 
issues, including, but not limited to, 
shared parenting time and shared 
responsibilities for decision making.  
(4) If either party applies to the court to modify an 
order issued under Chapter IIA, the court may 
direct the parties to undergo mediation, to arrive 
at an arrangement that will work for the 
concerned parties.  
VI. RELOCATION 
(1) A parent intending to relocate shall give thirty 
days advance written notice to the other parent. 
(2) In case the relocation is opposed, the court must 
determine if the proposed relocation is for the 
welfare of the child. 
(3) In determining the welfare of the child in cases 
of relocation, the court shall take into 
consideration the following factors, namely:-- 
a. whether the relocation is for  a legitimate 
purpose;  
b. each parent's reasons for seeking or 
opposing the relocation;  
c. the quality of the relationships between 
the child and each parent;  
d. the impact of the relocation on the 
quantity and the quality of the child's 
future contact with the non -relocating 
parent;  
e. the degree to which the relocating 
parent's and the child's life may be 
enhanced economically, emotionally and 
educationally by the relocation; and  
f. the feasibility of preserving the 
relationship between the non -relocating 
parent and the child through suitable 
visitation arrangements. 
 
VII. DECISION MAKING 
(1) An order for custody of a child made by the 
court under Chapter IIA shall clear ly address 
the following issues, amongst others:-- 

 78 
a. the religious instruction of the child, 
attendance at places of worship, 
undergoing religious ceremonies, and 
related matters; 
b. the choice of school, subjects, classes, 
courses, and tuition, and whether the  
child is to attend a particular school trip 
outside the local area; 
c. whether the child is to be hospitalized, 
and whether a non -emergency surgical 
procedure is to be performed on the child;  
d. the choice of extra -curricular activities, 
taking into considerat ion the child’s 
interests and aptitude; and 
e. where the child will spend holidays, and 
in cases where required, the information 
that one parent has to provide to the other 
parent. 
(2) The court can either make a specific decision 
(e.g., the child will attend a g iven school) or 
allocate decision -making responsibility for a 
given issue to one parent or both together.  
 
VIII. PARENTING PLAN 
 
(1) The objectives of a parenting plan are to-- 
(a) minimise the child’s exposure to harmful 
parental conflict; and 
(b) encourage parents to mutually agree on 
the division of responsibilities of the 
child’s upbringing through agreements in 
the parenting plan, rather than by relying 
on court intervention.  
(2) In designing a parenting plan, the parents must 
ensure that it is for the welfare of the child, and 
that-- 
a. the day-to-day needs of the child are met; 
b. any special needs that the child may have 
are met; 
c. the child gets to spend sufficient time with 
each parent so as to get to know each 
parent, as far as possible;  

 79 
d. there is minimal disruption to the child’s 
education, daily routine and association 
with family and friends; and  
e. transitions from one parental home to 
another are carried out safely  and, 
effectively.  
(3) A parenting plan may deal with one or more of 
the following, namely:--  
a. the parent or parents with whom the child 
is to live;  
b. the time the child is to spend with the 
other parent;  
c. the allocation of parental responsibility 
for the child;  
d. the manner in which the parents are to 
consult with each other about decisions 
relating to parental responsibility;  
e. the communication the child is to have 
with other persons;  
f. maintenance of the child;  
g. the process to be used for resolving 
disputes about the terms or operation of 
the plan;  
h. the process to be used for changing the 
plan to tak e account of the changing 
needs or circumstances of the child or the 
parties to the plan;  
i. any aspect of the care, welfare or 
development of the child or any other 
aspect of parental responsibility for the 
child.  
(4) The parenting plan must be voluntarily and  
knowingly arrived at by each parent. 
(5) The court shall not ordinarily interfere with the 
division of responsibilities between parents 
reflected in the parenting plan, unless they are 
ex facie inequitable. 
(6) If the initial parenting plan does not cover 
certain issues, the parents may approach the 
court to modify the terms of the plan to address 
new subjects of decision-making. 
 

 80 
IX. VISITATION 
 
(1) An order made by the court regarding visitation 
must ensure that-- 
a. a child has frequent and continuing 
contact with both parents, when 
appropriate, and also with extended 
family and friends; and  
b. both parents have equal opportunites to 
spend quality time with the child, 
including during holidays and vacations. 
(2) For the purpose of determining visitation rights 
and times, the court may take the following 
factors into consideration, namely:-- 
a. the age of the child; 
b. the distance between the parental homes; 
c. any holidays, including weekends, 
festivals and religious occasions, as w ell 
as longer school vacations; and 
d. any other commitments of the parents, 
which might affect their ability to spend 
quality time with their child. 
(3) The court may decide the time, manner and 
place to exercise visitation rights, and may take 
into consideration any visitation rights plan that 
has been submitted to the court by the parents. 
(4) A court may limit, suspend, or otherwise 
restrict, the visitation rights granted to a parent, 
if the court has reasonable basis to believe that 
circumstances make such restriction necessary 
for the welfare of the child, or if there is serious 
or repeated breach by a parent of any duties 
imposed by the court in this regard.”  
 
 