 i 
     
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
Report No.258 
 
Prevention of  
Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and  
Officials of Public International 
Organisations—A Study and Proposed 
Amendments 
 
 
 
August 2015 
  


 ii 
 
 
D.O. No.6(3)/286/2015-LC(LS)                              27 August, 2015 
 
Dear Shri Sadananda Gowda ji, 
  
         The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of 
Public International Organizations Bill, covering requirements of Article 6 
of the United Nations Convention Against Corruption,  was introduced in 
the 15 th Lok Sabha and was referred to the Department Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
& Justice.  On expiry of the term of the 15th Lok Sabha, the Bill lapsed and 
now, the Department of Personnel and Training proposes to introduce a 
fresh Bill. On the advice of the Prime Minister’s Office, the proposed Bill 
has been referred to Law Commission of India in July this year, to submit 
its views / recommendations. 
 
           The Commission undertook extensive deliberations, discussions 
and in-depth study of the draft bill and the issues relating to it to give shape 
to its Report No.25 8 titled “Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public 
Officials and Officials of Public International Organizations – A Study 
and Proposed Amendments” , which is enclosed herewith for 
consideration by the Government. 
 
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
 
 Sd/-    
 
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi   


 iii 
Report No.258 
 
Prevention of  
Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and  
Officials of Public International 
Organisations—A Study and Proposed 
Amendments 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapt
ers 
Title Pages 
I INTRODUCTION 1-5 
II THE SCOPE AND APPLIC ATION 
OF THE UNITED NATION S 
CONVENTION AGAINST 
CORRUPTION 
6-17 
III BRIBERY LAWS IN OTHE R 
JURISDICTIONS 
18-39 
A.  Australia 18-20 
B.  Austria 20-22 
C.  Canada 22-24 
D.  El Salvador 24-26 
E.  Malaysia 26-28 
F.  Republic of Korea (South Korea) 29-30 
G.  South Africa 30-32 
H.  Switzerland 32-33 
I.  United States 33-36 
J.  United Kingdom 36-39 
IV CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF  THE 
PREVENTION OF BRIBER Y OF 
FOREIGN PUBLIC OFFIC IALS 
AND OFFICIALS OF PUB LIC 
INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2015  
40-72 

 iv 
 Clause – by - Clause Analysis of 
the Prevention of Bribery of 
Foreign Public Officials and 
Officials of Public International 
Organisations Bill, 2015 
42 
A.  Preamble 42-43 
B.  Clause 1 43-45 
C.  Clause 2 45-49 
D.  Clause 3 49-51 
E.  Clause 4 51-58 
F.  Clause 5 59 
G.  Clause 6 59-60 
H.  Clause 7 60-61 
I.  Clause 8 61-62 
J.  Clause 9 62-63 
K.  Clause 10 63-65 
L.  Clause 11 65-66 
M.  Clause 12 66-67 
N.  Clause 13 67 
O.  Clause 14 67 
P.  Clause 15 67 
Q.  Clause 16 67 
R.  Clause 17 68 
S.  Clause 18 68-69 
T.  Clause 19 69 
U.  Clause 20 69-70 
V.  Clause 21 70 
W.  Clause 22 70 
X.  Schedule 70-72 
 Annexure 73-86 

 1 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1  Corruption as an offence connotes the abuse 
of public office for private gain. Although actions that 
further corruption are condemned universally, nations 
have lacked consensus on the meaning and scope of 
corrupt conduct. To resolve this, the United Nation s 
Convention Against Corruption, 2003 (“UNCAC”) was 
introduced to bring about clarity on the criminalisation 
of corrupt conduct that had a comparable impact for all 
nations. As of today, 176 countries have signed and 
ratified the UNCAC and pledged to incor porate its 
provisions into their domestic law. India is one such 
country.  
 
1.2  Under Article 16 of the UNCAC, States Parties 
are required to penalise the offer and acceptance of an 
undue advantage to, and by, a foreign public official or 
an official of a public international organisation for acts 
and omissions that are contrary to his official duties. 
Currently India does not have domestic law in 
pursuance of Article 16. The Prevention of Corruption 
Act, 1988 (“PCA”) penalises the acceptance of bribes by 
domestic public officials, while the Prevention of Money 
Laundering Act, 2002 (“PMLA”) criminalises the illegal 
flow of money through the attachment and confiscation 
of property. Accordingly, a Group of Ministers felt it 
necessary to enact a law on foreign  bribery in order to 
comply with requirements of Article 16 of the UNCAC. 
Pursuant to this, The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign 
Public Officials and Officials of Public International 
Organisations Bill, 2011 (“the 2011 Bill”) was 
introduced in the Lok Sab ha on 25th March 2011. 
Under the 2011 Bill, the offer and acceptance of an 
undue advantage by a foreign public official or an official 

 2 
of a public international organisation was specifically 
penalised. Thereafter on 1st April 2011, the Lok Sabha 
referred t he Bill to the Department -Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievance, Law and Justice (“Standing 
Committee”) for its examination and report.  
 
1.3  On 29th March 2012 the Standing 
Committee presented its fiftieth Report on the 2011 
Bill.1 The Report analysed the provisions of the 2011 
Bill and made several recommendations for its 
improvement. Consequently, a proposal was moved for 
giving effect to the recommendations of the Standing 
Committee which was then approved by the Cabinet on 
17th August, 2012. Owing to various reasons, however, 
the 2011 Bill could not be passed. 
 
1.4  In the meantime, the Parliament also 
amended the PMLA in 2012 in order to make changes 
to the structure of its Schedule that contained 
predicated offences.  This necessitated the need to 
amend the 2011 Bill since its provisions made 
references to the Schedule of the PMLA. Having taken 
note of this, the Cabinet gave its approval to a set of 
amendments to the 2011 Bill on 18th March 2013. 
Thereafter, a consolid ated notice that discussed the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee and the 
amendments arising out of the amendment of the PMLA 
was sent to the Lok Sabha for its consideration on 4th 
April 2013. However due to various reasons, the 2011 
Bill could not be taken up for consideration in 
subsequent sessions of the Parliament and eventually 
lapsed with the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha. 
                                                        
1 Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice, ‘Fiftieth Report on The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and 
Officials of Public International Organisations Bill, 2011’, available at 
<http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/Bribery/SCR%20Prevention%20of%20Bribery%20Bill
.pdf>, last visited on 4th August, 2015. 

 3 
 
1.5  A new proposal has now been made to re -
introduce the 2011 Bill with certain suggested 
amendments and recommendati ons as the Prevention 
of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of 
Public International Organisations Bill, 2015 (“the 2015 
Bill”). During the examination of this proposal, a 
suggestion was received from the Minister of Law to 
consider including exceptions (defences) into the 2011 
Bill in line with international experience. In this context 
it was noted that in the latest draft of the 2011 Bill there 
existed no exceptions to the offence of foreign bribery. 
The laws on foreign bribery in the UK and  the USA 
however provided for such exceptions. Accordingly, it 
was proposed that similar exceptions/defences to the 
offence of foreign bribery must also be introduced under 
Clause 4 of the 2015 Bill. In this context, as per a letter 
dated 14th July 2015 from the Additional Secretary, the 
Minister for Law and Justice, Government of India, the 
Department of Personnel and Training now proposes to 
introduce the 2015 Bill in the next session of the 
Parliament to demonstrate India’s commitment towards 
the implementation of its obligations under the UNCAC. 
The following defences have been proposed to be 
included under clause 4 of the 2015 Bill - (a) “local law 
defence”, (b) “reasonable expenses directly related to the 
promotion, demonstration, or explanation of pro ducts 
or services or the execution or performance of a 
contract” and (c) “defence of adequate safeguards”. 
 
1.6  The Ministry of Law and Justice has 
requested the 20th Law Commission of India (“the 
Commission”) to give its views and recommendations on 
the text of the 2015 Bill. Consequently, the Commission 
under the Chairmanship of Justice (Retd.) A.P. Shah 
has decided to undertake the present study titled 
“Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and 

 4 
Officials of Public International Organisations —A 
Study and Proposed Amendments”  to review the 
provisions of the 2015 Bill and recommend appropriate 
amendments.  
 
1.7  In the Report, the Commission proposes to 
undertake an analytical study of municipal, 
comparative and international law provisions pertaining 
to bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations. This is undertaken with a 
view to recommend amendments to the 2015 Bill 
thereby ensuring India’s compliance with Article 16 of 
the UNCAC. Accordingly this re port is split into five 
Chapters. After the introduction (Chapter 1), Chapter 2 
discusses the object and purpose of the UNCAC, 
specifically the drafting intent underlying Article 16. 
Other articles relevant to the offences contained under 
Article 16 are al so analysed. Chapter 3 examines 
bribery legislations in other jurisdictions that are States 
Parties to the UNCAC. A cross-section of such countries 
is selected to demonstrate the various approaches taken 
to secure compliance. Chapter 4 contains a summary of 
the provisions of the 2015 Bill and a critical analysis of 
the same. Chapter 5 then makes recommendations on 
how the 2015 Bill ought to be amended in order to 
secure India’s compliance with Article 16 of UNCAC.  
 
1.8  In order to prepare this Report, the  
Commission formed a sub -committee comprising the 
Chairman, Justice (Retd.) Ajit Prakash Shah, Mr. 
Sidharth Luthra (Senior Advocate), Mr. Siddharth 
Aggarwal (Advocate), Dr. Arghya Sengupta (Vidhi Centre 
for Legal Policy) and Ms Sumathi Chandrashekaran 
(Consultant, Law Commission). Ms. Ritwika Sharma, 
Ms. Yashaswini Mittal (advocates) and Mr. Rahul Bajaj 
(law student) provided research assistance. 

 5 
1.9  Thereafter, upon extensive deliberations, 
discussions and in -depth study, the Commission has 
given shape to the present Report. 
  

 6 
CHAPTER II 
THE SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS CONVENTION AGAINST CORRUPTION 
2.1  The heightened consciousness across 
nations of the growing and indiscriminate threat of 
corruption necessitated an international convention  to 
tackle it.2 Negotiations for such a convention started in 
the first quarter of 2002 and were conducted over the 
course of seven negotiating sessions, between January 
21 2002 and October 1 2003. 3 The UNCAC was finally 
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 58/4 
of 31st October 2003 and entered into force on 14th 
December 2005. 4  In subsequent years, 176 nations 
signed and ratified the UNCAC in order to tackle 
corruption within their territory on the basis of a set of 
uniform rules.5 
2.2  According to Article 1 of the UNCAC, the 
main objectives of enacting an international treaty 
against corruption include the promotion and 
strengthening of measures to prevent and combat 
corruption, promotion and facilitation of international 
cooperation and technical assistance in the fight against 
corruption, and promotion of integrity, accountability 
and proper management of public affairs and public 
property. The key measures for tackling corruption as 
enumerated under the UNCAC include preventive 
                                                        
2  Travaux Préparatoires of the negotiations for the elaboration of  the United Nations 
Convention A gainst Corruption, United Nations  Office on Drugs And Crime (2010); see also 
‘Background of the United Nations Convention against Corruption’, website of the United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, available at 
<https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/treaties/CAC/>, last visited on 4th August, 2015. 
3 Ibid. 
4 Ibid. 
5 Ibid. 

 7 
measures, cr iminalisation of conduct, international 
cooperation, and asset recovery. The States Parties to 
the UNCAC have also established a mechanism to 
review its implementation through a peer review process 
that promotes international cooperation and the 
sharing of good practices.6 
 
2.3  While there exist a wide array of opinions on 
what constitutes public corruption, the act of bribery is 
considered to be the most identified form of corruption 
that constitutes a penal offence in a large number of 
jurisdictions.7 The offence of bribery or the use of undue 
influence have not been specifically defined in the text 
of the UNCAC and are left to individual formulations 
under the domestic laws of States Parties.8 Nonetheless, 
the definitional clauses under Article 2 of the UNCAC 
serve as an important guide in interpreting Articles 15 
and 16 of the Convention, which call upon States 
Parties to criminalise the offer and acceptance of 
bribery. The supply side of bribery concerns the act of 
offering a bribe (active bribery), whi le the demand side 
refers to the acceptance or solicitation of a bribe (passive 
bribery).9 Under the UNCAC, the States Parties have an 
obligation to criminalise active and passive bribery of its 
national public officials under Article 15 and that of 
foreign public officials and officials of public 
                                                        
6 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mechanism for the Review of Implementation of  
the United Nations Convention Against Corruption—Basic Documents (2011). 
7 Ophelie Brunelle -Quraishi, ‘Assessing The Relevancy And Effic acy Of The United Nations 
Convention Against Corruption: A Comparative Analysis’, 2 Notre Dame J. Int'l & Comp. L. 101 
(2011-2012); See also Michael Kubiciel, ‘Core Criminal Law Provisions in the United Nations 
Convention Against Corruption’, 9 Int'l Crim. L. Rev. 139 (2009). 
8 Division for Treaty Affairs United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Legislative Guide for 
the implementation of  the United Nations Convention A gainst Corruption (Second revised 
edition, 2012) (“Legislative Guide on the UNCAC”). 
9 Ophelie Brunelle-Quraishi (n 7). 

 8 
international organisations under Article 16. Thus the 
definitions of a public official, a foreign public official 
and an official of a public international organisation 
under Article 2 of the UNCAC are relevant in construing 
the penal provisions under Article 16 of the UNCAC.  
2.4  The UNCAC defines a public official as any 
person who either (i) holds a legislative, executive, 
administrative or judicial office of a State Party, whether 
appointed or elected, whether permanent or temporary, 
whether paid or unpaid, irrespective of that person’s 
seniority; (ii) performs a public function, including for a 
public agency or public enterprise, or provides a public 
service, as defined in the domestic law of the State Party 
and as applied in the pertinent area of law of that State 
Party; or (iii) any other person as defined as a “public 
official” in the domestic law of a State Party.10 A foreign 
public official is defined as any person holding a 
legislative, executive, administrative or judicial office of 
a foreign country, whether appointed or elected; and/or 
any person exercising a public function for a foreign 
country, including for a public agency or public 
enterprise, while an official of a public international 
organisation is defined as an international civil servant 
or any person who is authorised by such an 
organisation to act on behalf of that organisation. 11 
States Parties can opt for broader or more inclusive 
definitions than the minimum required by Article 2.12 
2.5 Article 15 of the UNCAC on ‘Bribery of national 
public officials’ states that: 
                                                        
10 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 
11 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 
12 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 

 9 
Each State Party shall adopt such legislative 
and other measures as may be necessary to 
establish as criminal offences, when 
committed intentionally:  
(a) The promise, offering or giving, to a public 
official, directly or indirectly, of an undue 
advantage, for the official himself or herself or 
another person or entity, in order that the 
official act or refrain from acting in the exercise 
of his or her official duties;  
(b) The soli citation or acceptance by a public 
official, directly or indirectly, of an undue 
advantage, for the official himself or herself or 
another person or entity, in order that the 
official act or refrain from acting in the exercise 
of his or her official duties.  
2.6  Therefore, as per the text of Article 15, States 
Parties are required to penalise active and passive 
bribery of their national public officials through 
legislative or other measures in order to comply with 
their obligations under the UNCAC. The dis tinction 
between the active and passive sides of the offence 
allows for the prosecution of corrupt conduct more 
effectively and is intended to introduce a stronger 
dissuasive effect.13 The offences under Article 15 cover 
all instances of bribery that are ei ther tangible or 
intangible, pecuniary or non-pecuniary.14  
2.7  Article 16 on ‘Bribery of foreign public 
officials and officials of public international 
organisations’ states that: 
1. Each State Party shall adopt such legislative 
and other measures as may be necessary to 
                                                        
13 Michael Kubiciel (n 7). 
14 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 

 10 
establish as a criminal offence, when 
committed intentionally, the promise, offering 
or giving to a foreign public official or an official 
of a public international organization, directly 
or indirectly, of an undue advantage, for the 
official himself or herself or another person or 
entity, in order that the official act or refrain 
from acting in the exercise of his or her official 
duties, in order to obtain or retain business or 
other undue advantage in relation to the 
conduct of international business. 
 
2. Each State Party shall consider adopting such 
legislative and other measures as may be 
necessary to establish as a criminal offence, 
when committed intentionally, the solicitation 
or acceptance by a foreign public official or an 
official of a pu blic international organization, 
directly or indirectly, of an undue advantage, 
for the official himself or herself or another 
person or entity, in order that the official act or 
refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her 
official duties. 
2.8  As evidenced by the text above, paragraph 1 
of Article 16 mirrors clause (a) of Article 15, wherein 
States Parties are required to criminalise the active 
bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations. 15  However, con trary to 
Article 15, the scope of Article 16 only extends to those 
acts of bribery that take place during international 
business transactions, including in the context of 
international aid. 16  Further in distinction to the 
corresponding provision under Artic le 15, paragraph 2 
                                                        
15 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8); See also Travaux Préparatoires (n 2). 
16 Ibid. 

 11 
of Article 16 only insists upon States Parties to consider 
criminalising the solicitation or acceptance of bribes by 
foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations. 17  As per the travaux 
préparatoires of the UNCAC, paragraph 2 under Article 
16 was formulated in this manner not because any 
delegation condoned or was prepared to tolerate the 
solicitation or acceptance of bribes by foreign public 
officials or officials of public international organisations 
but was rather due to the fact that the conduct under 
paragraph 2 was already covered in essence under 
Article 15, which called upon States Parties to 
criminalise the solicitation and acceptance of bribes by 
their own officials. 18 As a result, the obligation to pa ss 
a law pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 16 is not a 
mandatory requirement under the UNCAC but rather a 
directory provision that requires consideration by States 
Parties. However in the event a State Party chooses not 
to criminalise passive bribery unde r Paragraph 2, it is 
encouraged to consider providing assistance and 
cooperation with respect to the investigation and 
prosecution of the offence by another State Party that 
has criminalised it in accordance with the UNCAC.19 In 
this regard, insofar as their laws permit, States Parties 
are encouraged to avoid allowing technicalities (e.g., 
lack of dual criminality 20) get in the way of exchanging 
information with another State that is attempting to 
prosecute a corrupt official under its laws, which are 
compliant with the UNCAC.21 It is pertinent to mention 
                                                        
17 Travaux Préparatoires (n 2). 
18 Travaux Préparatoires (n 2). 
19 Travaux Préparatoires (n 2). 
20 Under the principle of dual criminality, an accused can only be extradited if the alleged 
criminal conduct in question is considered criminal under the laws of both the surrendering 
and requesting States. 
21 Travaux Préparatoires (n 2). 

 12 
that immunities enjoyed by foreign public officials and 
officials of public international organisations under 
international law are not affected by the provisions of 
Article 16.22 In fact as indicated in the Legislative Guide 
to the UNCAC, public international organisations are 
encouraged to waive such immunities in appropriate 
cases.23  
2.9  The understanding of Article 16 is incomplete 
without reference to certain other Articles of the 
UNCAC. Specifically, Arti cle 42 of the UNCAC which 
requires States Parties to exercise jurisdiction over 
offences that are (a) committed in their territory; or (b) 
committed on board a vessel that is flying their flag or 
an aircraft that is registered under its laws at the time 
of the commission of the offence. Subject to Article 4, 
States Parties are also encouraged under Article 42 to 
consider establishing jurisdiction over offences that are 
(a) committed against its nationals; (b) committed by its 
national or by a stateless pers on who has his or her 
habitual residence in its territory; (c) established in 
accordance with Article 23 of this Convention (that 
deals with money laundering and proceeds of crime) and 
committed outside its territory but has implications 
within its territory; or (d) committed against itself, as a 
State. This provision therefore attempts to curb trans -
national corruption and plug key jurisdictional gaps 
that enable fugitives to find safe havens to evade the 
process of law. 24  However, as noted previously, 
paragraph 2 of Article 42 is specifically contingent upon 
the principles underlying Article 4 (Protection of 
sovereignty) of the UNCAC, which states that: 
                                                        
22 Travaux Préparatoires (n 2). 
23 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 
24 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 

 13 
1. States Parties shall carry out their obligations 
under this Convention in a manner consistent 
with the pr inciples of sovereign equality and 
territorial integrity of States and that of non -
intervention in the domestic affairs of other 
States.  
 
2. Nothing in this Convention shall entitle a State 
Party to undertake in the territory of another 
State the exercise of  jurisdiction and 
performance of functions that are reserved 
exclusively for the authorities of that other 
State by its domestic law. 
2.10.  Therefore, while extending the application of 
domestic laws under Article 42 to international borders, 
States Parties need to keep in mind the aforementioned 
principles of territorial integrity and sovereign equality 
under Article 4. A violation of any of these principles 
would not only violate the UNCAC but also the UN 
Charter considering that both principles are base d on 
Article 2 of the Charter. 25 Consequently, Articles 4 and 
42 have to be read in conjunction while interpreting the 
scope of application of any law under paragraph 1 and 
2 of Article 16 in order to ensure compliance with all 
provisions of the UNCAC.  
2.11  Articles 26 (Liability of legal persons), 27 
(Participation and attempt), 28 (Knowledge, intent and 
purpose as elements of an offence), 29 (Statute of 
limitations) and 30 (Prosecution, adjudication and 
sanctions) contain procedural and substantive elements 
of establishing and penalising an offence under the 
UNCAC. 26 Recourse to these provisions is also relevant 
                                                        
25 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 
26 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 

 14 
in the interpretation for effective prosecution under 
Article 16. Specifically, Article 26 of the UNCAC codifies 
the liability for legal entities (for e.g. companies) that is 
consistent with the legal principles under the domestic 
law of States. The application of this liability is without 
prejudice to the criminal liability applicable to natural 
persons.27 It extends to criminal, civil or administrative 
penalties. 28  Article 27 calls upon States Parties to 
criminalise not only the conduct but also the actions 
undertaken in furtherance of such conduct (i.e. aiding 
and abetting) under the UNCAC. Under Article 28 of the 
UNCAC, the elements of an offence, namely knowledge, 
intent and purpose must be established in a manner 
that takes into account inferences from the objective 
factual circumstances as well. Under Article 29, States 
Parties are also required to put in place long statutes of 
limitation for the offences establ ished in accordance 
with the UNCAC. Finally, Article 30 in essence lays 
down the framework for prosecution, punishment and 
reintegration of convicted persons back into society. 
Some of the key issues covered include procedural 
safeguards, immunities and the extent of punishment.29 
Paragraph 9 of Article 30 is specifically relevant in this 
context as it permits States Parties to apply legal 
defences or other legal principles controlling the 
lawfulness of conduct as codified under their domestic 
law. Therefore, defences and exceptions to the offence of 
foreign bribery under domestic legislation flow from this 
provision.  
2.12  The provisions under Chapter IV on 
International Cooperation also provide assistance to 
                                                        
27 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 
28 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 
29 Legislative Guide on the UNCAC (n 8). 

 15 
States Parties in establishing contact with one another 
for the purpose of information exchange, mutual 
assistance and such other measures that endeavour to 
tackle trans-national bribery under Article 16 through 
collaborative efforts. In this context, Article 44 on 
Extradition is of particular significa nce since it 
discusses the scope, procedure and conditions that 
operationalise extradition under the UNCAC. In 
summary, the key provisions under Article 44  require 
States Parties to (1) establish extraditable offences in 
accordance with the UNCAC, provided the requirement 
of dual criminality is fulfilled; (2) consider granting 
extradition, where their domestic law permits, for 
offences under the Convention  even  without  dual  
criminality; (3) consider applying Article 44 in respect 
several separate offen ces, where at least one of the 
offences is extraditable under Article 44 and some of 
those offences which are not extraditable by reason of 
their period of imprisonment but are related to offences 
established in accordance with the UNCAC; (4) not 
consider corruption offences under the UNCAC as 
political offences, in instances where such States 
Parties use the Convention as a basis for extradition; (5)   
conclude treaties on extradition with other States 
Parties, if the UNCAC does not constitute a legal basi s 
for the purpose of extradition; (6) consider expediting 
extradition procedures and simplifying evidentiary 
requirements relating to corruption offences under the 
Convention; and (7) ensure fair treatment  for persons 
facing extradition proceedings  under  article  44. In the 
context of a refusal of an extradition request under 
Article 44, States Parties are also required to (1) submit 
the case for domestic prosecution, ensure that the 
decision to prosecute and any subsequent proceedings 
are conducted with the required diligence and cooperate 
with  the  requesting  State  Party, if the  extradition  
request  is denied on  the  ground  that  the person  is  

 16 
a  national; (2) consider enforcing  sentences  imposed  
under  the domestic law  of  the  requesting State, in 
instances where the extradition is denied for 
enforcement of sentences on grounds of nationality; and 
(3) consult, where appropriate, the requesting  State  
Party  in order to  provide  it  with  the  opportunity  to  
present  information and  vi ews  on  the  matter, prior 
to the refusal of an extradition request.  
2.13  India signed the UNCAC in 2005 and 
subsequently ratified it 2011 . However, at the time of 
ratification, India also declared, by way of a Notification, 
that “international cooperat ion for mutual legal 
assistance under Articles 45 and 46 of the Convention 
shall be afforded through applicable bilateral 
Agreements”, and in cases where a bilateral agreement 
does not cover the mutual legal assistance sought  by 
the requesting State, it sh all be provided under the 
Convention “on reciprocal basis”.  By signing and 
ratifying the UNCAC, India has pledged to uphold its 
obligations under the Convention through the 
enactment of various laws on corruption. 30  In this 
regard, Article 253 of the Consti tution of India 31 vests 
the Parliament of India with the requisite competence to 
enact laws in order to operationalise its obligations 
under the UNCAC. Further, Article 51, a directive 
principle, lists India’s obligation to promote 
international peace and e ndeavours to uphold its 
international obligations and commitments.  
                                                        
30  For more details on the list of signatories, please see 
<https://treaties.un.org/doc/publication/mtdsg/volume%20ii/chapter%20xviii/xviii-
14.en.pdf>, last visited on 8th August, 2015. 
31 Article 51 of the Directive Principles on State Policy under Part IV of the Constitution of 
India; Article 253 under Part XI of the Constitution, contains a non-obstante clause that vests 
the Parliament with the power to make laws for implementing India’s  international 
obligations. 

 17 
2.14  Compliance with Article 16 and penalising 
bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations is the rationale for the 
present Bill. While giving shape to such a Bill, three key 
questions need to be considered: first, will the Bill only 
penalise offences contained in Article 16 (1) which is 
mandatory, or also offences contained in Article 16(2), 
which is directory? Second, to what extent will the Bi ll 
be extra -territorial in operation thereby necessitating 
co-operation with foreign countries? And third, what 
legal defences or other legal principles controlling the 
lawfulness of conduct should be codified under the Bill? 
In order to understand various  approaches taken to 
answering these questions as well as to develop a 
comparative perspective in this regard, the relevant laws 
of 10 selected jurisdictions are analysed briefly in the 
next Chapter.  
  

 18 
CHAPTER III 
BRIBERY LAWS IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS 
3.1  Several jurisdictions have enacted domestic 
legislations in pursuance of the UNCAC. The application 
of these legislations extends to national public officials, 
citizens, foreign citizens and in limited number of 
circumstances, to foreign public officials and officials of 
public international organisations. While a number of 
countries have enacted new comprehensive legislations 
covering corruption of national and foreign public 
officials as well as private corruption, others have 
incorporated these offences into existing laws. Most 
countries have not enacted law pursuant to paragraph 
2 of Article 16 of the UNCAC, which is a directory 
provision. Bribery laws in 10 jurisdictions are discussed 
below for a better understanding of the scope of Article 
16 of the UN CAC. Countries have been chosen in a 
manner that provides a representative sample — major 
common law jurisdictions, sub-continental nations, and 
other jurisdictions with notable approaches towards 
compliance with Article 16 for which authoritative 
country reports are available.  
A. Australia32 
3.2.1  The UNCAC was signed by Australia in 2003 
and subsequently ratified in 2005. Australia has a 
federal system of governance with three layers of 
government: federal, state and local. The agencies 
involved in tackling corruption in Australia include the 
Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity, 
                                                        
32 The information on Australia has been taken from the Executive summary on Australia, Note 
by the Secretariat, Third Session of the Implementation Review Group, Conference of the 
States Parties to  the United Nations Convention Against Corruption, UN Doc. No. 
CAC/COSP/IRG/I/2/1 (2012); see also page on ‘Foreign bribery’, website of the Attorney -
General's Department, Australian Government, available at 
<http://www.ag.gov.au/CrimeAndCorruption/Foreignbribery/Pages/default.aspx>, la st 
visited on 8th August, 2015. 

 19 
the Australian Crime Commission and the 
Commonwealth Ombudsman and the Australian 
Federal Police. In addition to these agencies, the 
Australian government also attempts to address corrupt 
conduct in an overarching manner. 
3.2.2  For implementing its obligations under 
clause (a) of Article 15 of the UNCAC, section 141.1 of 
the Australian Criminal Code outlaws the bribery of a 
Commonwealth public official and covers a wide array 
of officials at the federal level  and a wide range of 
conduct including the giving of benefits, obtaining gains 
or causing losses. In consonance with clause (b) of the 
Article 15, section 141.1 also criminalises the 
acceptance of an undue advantage by a public official in 
exchange for inf luence, either actual or perceived, on 
the exercise of his official’s duties. 
3.2.3  Division 70 of Chapter 4 of the Australian 
Criminal Code covers bribery of foreign public officials 
and officials of public international organisations in the 
context of A rticle 16. However, only active bribery of 
foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations as discussed under 
paragraph 1 of Article 16 of the UNCAC is penalised 
under Division 70. Passive bribery of such officials 
under paragraph 2 of Article 16 does not constitute a 
criminal offence under the Australian Criminal Code..  
3.2.4  In the context of jurisdiction under Article 42 
read in conjunction with Article 4 of the UNCAC, the 
Australian anti -bribery law broadly applies to all 
conduct within Australia, and to the conduct by 
Australian citizens, residents and companies overseas. 
While all payments are covered under the foreign 
bribery statute in Australia, facilitation payments made 
to expedite or to secure the performance of a r outine 
governmental action by a foreign official, political party 

 20 
or party official are exempt from penalisation. For 
identifying a transaction as a facilitation payment and 
not bribery, the Australian law requires the benefit 
received to be ‘of a minor value’ and to be offered ‘for the 
sole or dominant purpose of expediting or securing 
performance of a routine government action of a minor 
nature’. The proceedings of the transaction are also 
required to be recorded. In addition to this, Australian 
law also exempts those gifts and advantages that are 
specifically permitted under the written law governing 
the foreign public official and the official of a public 
international organisation in question. 
B. Austria33 
3.3.1  Austria signed the UNCAC in 2003 and 
ratified it in 2006. The legal framework against 
corruption in Austria mainly includes provisions from 
the Constitution, the Penal Code and the Criminal 
Procedure Code. Austrian law complies fully with all 
provisions of the UNCAC. The authorities involved 
include the Federal Ministry of Justice, the Federal 
Ministry of Interior and its Federal Bureau of Anti -
Corruption, the Central Office for Prosecuting Economic 
Crimes and Corruption and the Criminal Police Office. 
3.3.2  For the implementation of its obligations 
under clause (a) of Article 15, Austrian law penalises the 
offence of active bribery of national public officials 
through sections 307 (active bribery involving a breach 
of duties), 307a (granting of advantages), 307b (granting 
of advantages for the purpose of exercising influence) 
and 302 (abuse of official authority) of the Penal Code. 
                                                        
33 The information on Austria has been taken from the ‘Country Review Report of Austria’, 
Review by Israel and Vietnam for the review cycle 2010 -2015, United Nations Office on Drugs 
and Crime. See also Executive summary on Au stria, Note by the Secretariat, Fifth Session of 
the Implementation Review Group, Conference of the States Parties to  the United Nations 
Convention Against Corruption, UN Doc. No. CAC/COSP/IRG/I/3/1/Add.11(2014). 

 21 
Passive bribery of domestic public officials, which is 
covered under clause (b) of Article 15, is implicated 
under sections 304 (passive bribery involving a breach 
of duties), 305 (acceptance of advantages), 306 
(acceptance of advantages for the purpose of exercising 
influence) and 302 (as discussed previously) of the Penal 
Code.  
3.3.3  In the context of paragraph 1 of Article 16, 
Austria penalises the active bribery of foreign public 
officials and officials of public international 
organisations through the same provisions as the one 
used to implement its obligations under clause (a) of 
Article 15. In this regard, the offences under section 307 
to 307b do not specifically differentiate between 
domestic or foreign public officials or officials of public 
international organisations thereby implying their 
application to both (which has been confirmed by 
Austria in its Country Review Repo rt). Further the 
definition of a “public official” under section 74 of the 
Penal Code, specifically includes any person who as an 
organ or as an employee discharges tasks of legislation, 
administration or justice for another state or for an 
international o rganisation (paragraph 1(4a) of section 
74). Section 302 of the Penal Code however is only 
applicable to national public officials and not to others. 
In relation to paragraph 2 of Article 16, the Austrian law 
does not differentiate between national and for eign 
public officials and officials of public international 
organisations in the context of the offence of passive 
bribery with the exception of section 302 that only 
applies to national officials. Sections 304, 305, 306 of 
Penal Code are relevant for the offence of passive bribery 
of foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations.  

 22 
3.3.4  In respect of the implementation of Article 42 
read in conjunction with Article 4 of the UNCAC, section 
64 of the Austrian Penal Code allows for the exercise of 
national jurisdiction without the dual criminality 
requirement for criminal acts committed against an 
Austrian official abroad, and for criminal acts 
committed by an Austrian official abroad. For other 
offences, jurisdiction is establi shed subject to dual 
criminality requirement, in the instance that the 
offender is an Austrian citizen or a foreigner, who was 
arrested in Austria and cannot be extradited to a foreign 
State for other reasons than the nature or other 
characteristics of the  offence (section 65, Penal Code). 
Consequently, the Austrian legislation not only provides 
for the jurisdiction to prosecute when extradition is 
denied due to nationality but also covers situations of 
the denial of extradition for reasons unrelated to the  
nature of the offences. 
C. Canada34 
3.4.1  Canada signed the UNCAC in 2004 and 
ratified it in 2007. The laws that implement the 
obligations of Canada under the UNCAC include 
Criminal Code, Corruption of Foreign Public Officials 
Act, Proceeds of Crime (Money L aundering) and 
Terrorist Financing Act, and the Mutual Legal 
Assistance in Criminal Matters Act. The body 
responsible for checking corrupt conduct is the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police (“RCMP”).  
                                                        
34 The information on Canada has been taken from the Executive summary on Canada, Note by 
the Secretariat, Fifth Session of the Implementation Review Group, Conference of the States 
Parties to the United Nations Convention Against Corruption, UN Doc. No. 
CAC/COSP/IRG/I/3/1/Add.8 (2014); see also Rep ort of Transparency International Canada 
Inc., ‘UNCAC Implementation Review: Civil Society Organization Report’ (2013), available at 
<https://www.bennettjones.com/uploadedFiles/Publications/Articles/UNCAC_Review_TI-
Canada.pdf>, last visited on 8th August, 2015. 

 23 
3.4.2  In the context of clauses (a) and (b) of Article 
15, s ections 119 (bribery of judicial officers), 120 
(bribery of officers), 121 (frauds on the government), 122 
(breach of trust by public officer), 123 (municipal 
corruption), 124 (selling or purchasing office), 125 
(influencing or negotiating appointments or dealing in 
offices) and 426 (secret commissions) of the Canadian 
Criminal Code outlaw the offer and acceptance of 
bribery by Canadian officials. As noted in the Country 
Review Report on Canada, the legal framework on 
bribery under the Criminal Code is comp liant with 
Canada’s obligations under Article 15.  In this regard, 
the definition of an official under section 118 is broad 
in scope, and includes all persons who perform public 
duties. 
3.4.3  In the context of paragraph 1 of Article 16, 
Canada penalises a ctive bribery of foreign public 
officials and officials of public international 
organisations under section 3 of the Corruption of 
Foreign Public Officials Act (“CFPOA”). In fact, under the 
provisions of CFPOA, it is also possible to prosecute an 
individual for conspiracy or attempt to commit bribery, 
along with aiding and abetting in the commission of 
bribery, an intention in common to commit bribery, and 
counselling others to commit bribery. Passive bribery of 
foreign public officials and officials of pub lic 
international organisations as mentioned under 
paragraph 2 of Article 16 is not penalised under the 
CFPOA. However, the manipulation, falsification, or 
destruction of “books and records” to conceal or 
facilitate bribery constitutes an offence under the  
CFPOA (section 4).  
3.4.4  In terms of jurisdiction and territoriality 
under Article 4 and 42 of the UNCAC, the CFPOA 
exercises jurisdiction over the offences that are 

 24 
committed in whole or in part on the territory of Canada. 
In addition, CFPOA also covers the conduct of Canadian 
companies and individuals based on their nationality, 
regardless of where the alleged bribery took place. Prior 
to an amendment in 2013, the CFPOA required the 
existence of “a real and substantial link” between the 
offence and Can ada in order to exercise jurisdiction 
beyond its territory. However, this requirement has now 
been removed. Sub -section 7(4) of the Criminal Code 
also extends jurisdiction to acts and omissions by 
public service employees under the Public Service 
Employment Act even though such acts and omissions 
may have been committed outside Canada. This is done 
only in the instance where the conduct in question is an 
offence in the place where it is committed and is also an 
indictable offence in Canada (principle of dua l 
criminality). In terms of exceptions, prior to its 
amendment in 2013, the CFPOA provided for the 
defence of facilitation payments where payments made 
to expedite or secure the performance by a foreign 
public official or an official of a public internatio nal 
organisation of any act of a routine nature that forms a 
part of the official’s duties or functions were exempt 
from penalisation. With the amendments to 2013, this 
requirement has now been repealed. 
D. El Salvador35 
3.5.1  El Salvador signed the UNCAC in 2003 and 
ratified it in 2004. On ratification, international treaties 
become a part of the domestic law of El Salvador and 
are directly applicable. The anti-corruption institutions 
in the country include the Office of the Under-Secretary 
for Transparency and Prevention of Corruption which is 
                                                        
35 The information on El Salvador has been taken from the Executive summary on El Salvador, 
Note by the Secretariat, Fifth Session of the Implementation Review Group, Conference of the 
States Parties to  the United Nations Convention A gainst Corruption , UN Doc. No. 
CAC/COSP/IRG/I/2/1/Add.22 (2013). 

 25 
attached to the Office of the President of the Republic, 
the Office of the Attorney General that houses a unit 
that specialises in the combating of corruption, the 
Financial Investigation Unit, which is attached to the 
Office of the Attorney General, the Government Ethics 
Tribunal, the Court of Audit, the Office of the 
Superintendent of the Financial System, the 
Coordinating Commission for the Judiciary and lastly 
the Executive Technical Unit of the Judiciary. 
3.5.2  The offence of active bribery of national 
public officials under clause (a) of Article 15 of the 
UNCAC is penalised under article 335 (on active bribery) 
and article 310 (on malfeasance) of the Criminal Code 
of El Salvador. Persons who serve in legislative or  
judicial entities are not included within the definition of 
a “public official” as set out under article 39 of the 
Criminal Code. These provisions also do not mention 
any advantage or benefit for third parties. 
3.5.3  In the context of passive bribery of national 
public officials under clause (b) of Article 15 of the 
UNCAC, the Criminal Code criminalises the acceptance 
of a bribe in exchange for malfeasance (article 330), 
acceptance of a bribe in exchange for abuse of functions 
(article 331) and extortion (article 327). Advantages to 
third parties are again excluded from the purview of this 
offence.   
3.5.4  Active bribery of foreign public officials and 
officials of public international organisations under 
paragraph 1 of Article 16 of the UNCAC are covered  
under article 335A of the Criminal Code that deals with 
transnational bribery. Till date there have been no 
prosecutions for transnational bribery in El Salvador. 
The offence of passive bribery under paragraph 2 of 
Article 16 of the UNCAC is not covered u nder any 
legislation in the country.  

 26 
3.5.5  In the context of jurisdiction, El Salvador 
exercises its jurisdiction over most of the circumstances 
referred under Article 42 of the UNCAC. However there 
exists a lack of clarity on the exercise of its jurisdiction 
over (1) offences of corruption committed by one of its 
nationals abroad, (2) participation, preparation, attempt 
and other acts committed outside its territory in 
pursuance of money-laundering, (3) offences committed 
against a State Party to the UNC AC, and (4) offences 
committed by a foreign national who is present in its 
territory. The domestic laws of El Salvador also do not 
provide for a mechanism for consultation with the 
competent authorities of other States Parties as 
required under Article 42 of the UNCAC. The dual 
criminality is required for the purpose of extradition.  
E. Malaysia36 
3.6.1  Malaysia signed the UNCAC in 2003 and 
subsequently ratified it in 2008. The anti -corruption 
bodies in Malaysia include the Malaysian Anti -
Corruption Commission, the Attorney General’s 
Chambers, the Royal Malaysia Police, the Royal 
Customs and Excise Department, the Financial 
Intelligence Unit of the Central Bank of Malaysia, the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Public Service 
Department and the Judiciary. 
3.6.2  In respect of clause (a) of Article 15 of the 
UNCAC, Malaysia has adopted measures to penalise 
active bribery of its national public officials under 
sections 16 (b), 17 (b) and 21 of the Malaysian Anti -
Corruption Commission Act (“MACCA”). Furthe rmore, 
                                                        
36 The information on Malaysia has been taken from the ‘Country Review Report of Malaysia’, 
Review by the Philippines and Kenya for the review cycle 2012-2013, United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime. See also Executive summary on Malaysia, Note by the Secretariat, Resumed 
fourth Session of the Implementation Review Group, Conference of the States Parties to  the 
United Nations Convention A gainst Corruption, UN Doc. No. CAC/COSP/IRG/I/3/1/Add.1 
(2013). 

 27 
sections 214 and 161 to 165 of the Penal Code along 
with section 137 of the Customs Act are also relevant 
for the purpose of active bribery of national public 
officials. In this regard, if the conduct is question is 
punishable under MACCA and any ot her law, the 
offender will be charged only under MACCA. Further, 
the Country Review Reports on Malaysia also point out 
that all gifts received by national public officers must be 
reported in accordance with section 25(1) and (3) of 
MACCA. In the instance a  gift is received and not 
reported, it is deemed to have been received corruptly.  
3.6.3  Passive bribery under clause (b) of Article 15 
of the UNCAC is covered under sections 16(a), 17(a) and 
21 of MACCA. The various forms of passive bribery 
covered include soliciting, receiving, agreeing to receive, 
agreeing to accept, and attempting to obtain any 
gratification for oneself or another. The corresponding 
offences on passive bribery of national public officials 
are also covered under sections 161, 162, 163, 165 and 
215 of the Penal Code. Section 161 of the Penal Code 
outlaws the taking of gratification, other than legal 
remuneration, in respect of an official act by a public 
servant and is also applicable to “someone expecting to 
be a public servant”. 
3.6.4  Paragraph 1 and paragraph 2 of Article 16 on 
active and passive bribery of foreign public officials and 
officials of public international organisations  are 
implemented under section 22 of MACCA. The offence 
of bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations was introduced in 2009 in 
order to ensure compliance with Article 16 of the 
UNCAC. MACCA contains definitions of “foreign public 
officials” and “officer of a public international 
organization” which reflect the cor responding 
definitions under Article 2 of the UNCAC. In Malaysia, 

 28 
the legislature has also provided a compelling 
presumption under section 50 of MACCA in order to 
ease the prosecution of cases involving the 
aforementioned offences. The presumption comes in to 
operation only when the essential ingredients of the 
offence have been established by the prosecution. Under 
this presumption, once it has been shown that 
gratification has been received by a national or foreign 
public official or an official of a publi c international 
organisation, it shall be presumed that it was corruptly 
received, unless the contrary is proved. It is pertinent to 
mention that in relation to paragraph 2 of Article 16, 
Malaysia has made a request for technical assistance 
under its Count ry Review Report submitted to the 
UNCAC for reconciling the provisions of MACCA with its 
obligations under the Diplomatic Privileges Act and the 
International Organizations Act.  
3.6.5  In the context of jurisdiction under Articles 4 
and 42 of the UNCAC, s ections 2, 3 and 4 of the Penal 
Code, section 66 of MACCA and section 82 of Anti -
Money Laundering and Anti -Terrorism Financing Act 
are of relevance. In the instance an offence is committed 
by a citizen or permanent resident outside Malaysia, 
jurisdiction m aybe exercised over the offence as if it 
were committed in the territory of Malaysia. Jurisdiction 
also extends to offences committed by any person 
against the property of any citizen or the Government of 
Malaysia. Principle of dual criminality is recognis ed in 
Malaysia and is applied in the context of extraditable 
offences. 
 
 

 29 
F. Republic of Korea (South Korea)37 
3.7.1  The Republic of Korea  signed the UNCAC in 
2003 and ratified it in 2008. Articles 133, 129 and 130 
of the Criminal Act of the Republic of Korea  penalise 
both active and passive bribery of national public 
officials as required under clauses (a) and (b) of Article 
15 of the UNCAC. The term “public official” as defined 
under Article 2 of the State Public Officials Act and 
Article 2 of the Local Public Officials Act covers a broad 
range of individuals including appointed and elected 
officials, members of the judiciary and prosecutors. 
3.7.2  Korean law also criminalises active bribery of 
foreign public officials and officials of public 
international or ganisations as required under 
paragraph 1 of Article 16 of the UNCAC. Under the Act 
on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in 
International Business, Articles 2 and 3 cover all 
elements of active bribery as envisaged under 
paragraph 1 of Article 16 of the UNCAC. However, the 
offence of passive bribery under paragraph 2 of Article 
16 of the UNCAC is not specifically outlawed. 
Nevertheless, the Republic of Korea can prosecute 
passive bribery of foreign public officials and officials of 
public international organisations under the Criminal 
Act through its provision on the “breach of trust”. Such 
officials can also be subject to prosecution for money -
laundering operations. 
3.7.3  In the context of Articles 4 and 42 of the 
UNCAC, Articles 2, 3, 4, 6 of the Criminal Act 
adequately discuss the instances where jurisdiction can 
be exercised including under the principle of 
                                                        
37 The information on the Republic of Korea has been taken from the Executive summary on 
South Korea, Note by the Secretariat, Fourth Session of the Implementation Review Group, 
Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention Against Corruption, UN Doc. 
No. CAC/COSP/IRG/I/3/1/Add.7 (2013). 

 30 
territoriality. In addition, the Republic of Korea  also 
exercises jurisdiction over its nationals who commit 
crimes outside its territory , and over offences against 
itself and its nationals outside its borders. 
3.7.4  In March 2015, the Republic of Korea 
promulgated a new Anti -Corruption Law. However on 
account of strong criticism on several counts, the law 
was challenged before the Constitutional Court and has 
therefore not been brought into force.38 
G. South Africa39 
3.8.1  South Africa signed and ratified the UNCAC 
in 2004. The institutions that fight against corruption 
in South Africa include the Anti-Corruption Task Team, 
Directorate of Prio rity Crime Investigation, National 
Prosecution Authority, Specialised Commercial Crimes 
Unit, Special Investigation Unit, National Anti -
Corruption Forum and the Public Protector.  
3.8.2  Clauses (a) and (b) of Article 15 of the UNCAC 
are codified under sec tion 3 of the Prevention and 
Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 2004 (“PRECCA”), 
which criminalises the offence of corruption in general, 
namely, the offer (clause (b)) or acceptance (clause (a)) 
of gratification, directly or indirectly, to any person, 
whether for the benefit of that person or for another 
person, in order to act, personally or by influencing 
another person, in a manner that is unlawful or 
                                                        
38Jeyup S. Kwaak, ‘ South Korea Lawmakers Approve Anticorruption Law’, The Wall Street 
Journal (March 3, 2015), available at <http://www.wsj.com/articles/south-korea-lawmakers-
approve-anticorruption-law-1425387240>, last visited on 8th August, 2015; see also South 
Korea: Controversial Anti -Corruption Law Promulgated, available at 
<http://www.loc.gov/lawweb/servlet/lloc_news?disp3_l205404377_text,>, last visited on 8th 
August, 2015. 
39 The information on South Africa has been taken from the ‘Country Review Report of South 
Africa’, Review by Mali and Senegal for the review cycle 2010 -2015, United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime; see also Executive summary on South Africa, Note by the Secretariat, Fourth 
Session of the Implementation Review Group, Conference of the States Parties to the United 
Nations Convention Against Corruption, UN Doc. No. CAC/COSP/IRG/I/2/1/Add.9 (2012). 

 31 
amounts to an abuse of power or breach of trust. A 
“public officer” is defined under section 1 but do es not 
specifically include legislators, judicial officers and 
prosecutors. Nevertheless, the actions of such officials 
are covered within the scope of the PRECCA under 
sections 7, 8 and 9. 
3.8.3  In the context of paragraph 1 of Article 16 of 
the UNCAC, s ection 5 of PRECCA read in conjunction 
with section 3 criminalises the offence of active bribery 
of foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations. Passive bribery of such 
officials under paragraph 2 of Article 16 is not 
specifically penalised under PRECCA. However, through 
the general prohibition under section 3 of PRECCA 
which applies to “any person”, it is possible to penalise 
the acceptance of a bribe by a foreign public official or 
an official of a public international organisation. 
3.8.4  In the context of jurisdiction, section 90 of 
the Magistrates’ Court Act, 1944 and section 35 of 
PRECCA allows for the exercise of jurisdiction over all 
criminal offences that are committed within the territory 
of South Africa. Under sect ion 35(1) of PRECCA, 
jurisdiction is exercisable over all offences covered 
under the Act, regardless of the act constituting an 
offence at the place of its commission in the instance 
the alleged offender is a citizen, or is an ordinary 
resident or has been  arrested in the territory of the 
South Africa. Under section 35(2), jurisdiction can also 
be exercised over offences that occur outside South 
Africa, notwithstanding the act constituting an offence 
in the place of its commission, if (a) such an act affects 
or is intended to affect a public body, a business or any 
other person in South Africa, (b) the alleged offender is 
found in the territory of South Africa, and (c) the 
offender is not extradited by South Africa. Citizens of 

 32 
South Africa who commit crimes in foreign jurisdictions 
but are not extradited abroad can also be prosecuted 
under section 35(2) of PRECCA. 
H. Switzerland40 
3.9.1  Switzerland signed the UNCAC in 2003 and 
ratified it in 2009. An Inter -departmental (inter -
ministerial) Working Group against Corruption has 
been established in the country to prevent corruption, 
although the Group has no powers to engage in 
administrative enquiries or criminal investigations. The 
Attorney-General’s Office is responsible for criminal 
investigations and prosecutio ns against the federal 
government. Issues surrounding mutual legal 
assistance are also addressed by the Attorney-General’s 
Office. The Money -laundering Reporting Office plays a 
significant role in (1) collecting and analysing 
suspicious facts reported by f inancial intermediaries, 
and (2) in instances where the facts are well -founded, 
forwarding the necessary information to the criminal 
prosecution authorities of the Confederation. 
3.9.2  In the context of the offences under Articles 
15 and 16 of the UNCAC respectively, article 322 of the 
Swiss Criminal Code covers all the offences of active and 
passive bribery of national officials, foreign public 
officials and officials of public international 
organisations within its scope. The bribery provision 
also penalises the incitement of a national public official 
to perform an action that is not contrary  to his or her 
duties. While indirect bribery is not specifically 
criminalised, the interpretation and application of the 
                                                        
40 The information on Switzerland has been taken from the ‘Country Review Report of 
Switzerland, Review by Algeria and Finland for the review cycle 2010 -2015, United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime; see also Executive summary on Switzerland, Note by the 
Secretariat, Reconvened Third Session of the Implementation Review Group, Conference of 
the Stat es Parties to  the United Nations Convention A gainst Corruption, UN Doc. No. 
CAC/COSP/IRG/I/2/1/Add.2 (2012). 

 33 
national anti-corruption laws allows for the prosecution 
of bribery committed through intermediaries.  
3.9.3  Swiss courts have established their 
jurisdiction in accordance with Article 42 of the UNCAC 
and recognise the principles of active and passive 
personality for the exercise of such jurisdiction. U nder 
article 7(1) of the Swiss Criminal Code, felonies and 
misdemeanors committed outside Swiss territory by or 
against a person of Swiss nationality also come under 
Swiss criminal jurisdiction insofar as dual criminality is 
satisfied. Swiss courts also exercise jurisdiction in cases 
referred to in sub-paragraph (b) and sub-paragraph (d) 
of Article 42(2) of the UNCAC. Under exceptional 
circumstances, criminal jurisdiction can also be 
established in relatio n to crimes committed abroad 
where the alleged offender and the victim are both 
foreign nationals. These circumstances may relate to 
crimes that are condemned by the international 
community or cases where due to the application of the 
principle of non -refoulement, the extradition request 
cannot be operationalised. 
  
I. United States41 
3.10.1 The United States of America (“US”) signed 
the UNCAC in 2003 and ratified it in 2006. The primary 
enforcement body for anti -corruption efforts in the US 
is the Department of Justice (“DOJ”), which checks the 
bribery of domestic public officials, foreign public 
officials and officials of public international 
organisations. The Federal Bureau of Investigations 
                                                        
41 The information on United States has been taken from the ‘Country Review Report of the 
United States of America’, Review by Sweden and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
for the review cycle 2010-2015, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; See also ‘A Resource 
Guide to the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act’, Criminal Division of the U.S. Department of 
Justice and the Enforcement Division of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2012), 
available at <http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/criminal -
fraud/legacy/2015/01/16/guide.pdf>, last visited on 8th August, 2015. 

 34 
(“FBI”), International Anticorruption Unit and the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) assist the 
DOJ as necessary. The Federal Bribery Statute (18 US 
Code § 201) under the US Criminal Code and the 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (“FCPA”) cover the 
relevant bribery offences. 
3.10.2 In the context of clause (a) of Article 15 of the 
UNCAC, active bribery of national public officials is 
penalised under section 201(b)(1) of the Federal Bribery 
Statute under the US Code. All the elements of clause 
(a) of Article 15 are covered under the Federal Bribery 
Statute including “giving, offering or promising anything 
of value”, “directly or indirectly with intention”, “any 
other person or entity”, and “to do or omit to do any act 
in violation of the lawful duty”. Different States in the 
US have enacted their own laws prohibiting co rrupt 
conduct as described under clause (a) of Article 15. 
3.10.3 Passive bribery of national public officials as 
mentioned under clause (b) of Article 15 is penalised 
under various laws including 18 U.S.C. § 201(b)(2) &18 
U.S.C. § 201(c) (bribery of publi c officials and 
witnesses), 18 U.S.C. § 1346 (definition of “scheme or 
artifice to defraud" another of the intangible right to 
honest services), 18 U.S.C. § 1951 (interference with 
Commerce by Threats or Violence – the Hobs Act), 18 
U.S.C. § 1952 (Intersta te of Foreign Travel in Aid of 
Racketeering Enterprises) of the US Code. The requisite 
elements under clause (b) of Article 15 are adequately 
covered under these laws. Different States have again 
enacted their own laws to implement the offence under 
paragraph 2. 
3.10.4 Active bribery of foreign public officials and 
officials of public international organisations under 
paragraph 1 of Article 16 of the UNCAC is penalised 
under the FCPA, Title 15, US Code. Additionally, US 

 35 
federal law enforcement authorities, depending upon 
the facts and circumstances, can also resort to other 
federal laws to punish the conduct in question. These 
laws include Title 18 of United States Code, sections 
371 (conspiracy to commit an offence against the United 
States), 1341 (mail fra ud), 1343 (wire fraud), 1952 
(interstate and foreign travel or transportation in aid of 
racketeering enterprises), and 1956 (money 
laundering). Keeping a check on active bribery under 
the FCPA is a significant priority for the DOJ, the FBI 
and the US SEC. Prosecutions conducted so far under 
the FCPA involve both individuals and foreign and 
domestic companies. In the context of foreign nationals, 
the FCPA applies to a particular transaction only in 
instances where a portion of the transaction involving 
misconduct occurs within the territorial jurisdiction of 
the United States. The FCPA also applies to companies 
listed on the US stock exchange, as well as the officers, 
directors, employees, and agents of a listed company, 
regardless of their nationality.  
3.10.5 In the context of paragraph 2 of Article 16 of 
the UNCAC, the FCPA does not explicitly penalise 
passive bribery of foreign public officials and officials of 
public international organisations. This is due to certain 
policy and jurisdictional concerns. Nevertheless, the US 
can and has prosecuted foreign officials for money 
laundering and employees of public international 
organisations for corruption pursuant to the wire fraud 
statute.   
3.10.6 In the context of Articles 4 and 42 of the 
UNCAC, US law allow s for the exercise of jurisdiction 
over all acts that violate US law and are committed 
within US territory. In the context of the offence of active 
bribery, the FCPA specifically allows for the exercise of 
jurisdiction over actions committed by US nationals and 

 36 
businesses abroad. In addition, acts committed in 
furtherance of a bribe by foreign nationals and foreign 
businesses within the territory of the U.S. are also 
covered within the territorial jurisdiction of the US. Dual 
criminality is recognised and r equired for extraditing 
alleged offenders from the US. The defences applicable 
to a charge of bribery as mentioned under the Securities 
and Exchange Act of 1934 include (1) the payment, gift, 
offer, or promise of anything of value that was made, 
was lawful under the written laws and regulations of the 
foreign official; (2) the payment, gift, offer, or promise of 
anything of value that was made, was a reasonable and 
bona fide expenditure, such as travel and lodging 
expenses, incurred by or on behalf of a for eign official, 
and was directly related to (A) the promotion, 
demonstration, or explanation of products or services; 
or (B) the execution or performance of a contract with a 
foreign government or agency thereof. 
J. United Kingdom42 
3.11.1 The United Kingdom of  Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland (“UK”) signed the UNCAC in 2003 and 
subsequently ratified it in 2006. As noted in its Country 
Review Report, UK demonstrates an exemplary system 
of curbing bribery and corruption. The institutional 
framework for checking  corruption in the UK mainly 
consists of the international anti-corruption Champion 
that is housed in the Cabinet, the office of the Attorney 
General for England and Wales, the Crown Prosecution 
Service (“CPS”) and the Serious Fraud Office (“SFO”) and 
                                                        
42 The information on the United Kingdom has been taken from the ‘Country Review Report of 
the United Kingdom’, Review by Greece and Israel for the review cycle 2011 -2012, United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; See also ‘Self -Assessment for United Nations Convention 
Against Corruption - Chapters III and IV’, Justin Williams, Policy Adviser, Anti -Corruption, 
Department for International Development, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2011). 

 37 
the Serious and Organised Crime Division within the 
Crown Office. 
3.11.2 Both active and passive bribery of national 
public officials as mentioned under clauses (a) and (b) 
of Article 15 of the UNCAC, are penalised under sections 
1, 2, 3, 5 and 11 of the UK Bribery Act. The Act does not 
use the concept of a “public official” to describe the 
beneficiary of the undue and unlawful advantage, 
thereby dispensing with the need for a definition similar 
to the one under Article 2 (a) of the UNCAC. 
Consequently, the Act focuses instead on the “function 
or activity” to which the bribe relates. This “function or 
activity” holds relevance for the purpose of applying the 
Bribery Act to unlawful conduct that is performed 
outside the UK, thus covering all public servants (such 
as military of diplomatic staff) within its scope. The 
elements of the offences of active and passive bribery 
are discussed in great detail under the relevant 
provisions of the Bribery Act. They also cover instances 
where no gift or other benefit is actua lly given or 
received. The improper performance of an official 
function in anticipation or as a consequence of a bribe 
also constitutes an offence under the Bribery Act. Both 
tangible and intangible benefits are of relevance for the 
purpose of the corrupt conduct. 
3.11.3 In the context of paragraph 1 of Article 16, 
the requisite elements of the offence of active bribery are 
covered under section 6 of the Bribery Act. The conduct 
implicated includes instances where no gift or other 
benefit is actually given or received. In contrast to the 
active and passive bribery of national public officials, 
section 6 also includes offerings to third parties that are 
made at the request of a foreign public official or an 
official of a public international organisation or with his 
“assent or acquiescence”. Socially adequate gifts and 

 38 
offerings can be interpreted to not constitute bribery 
only in the instance where it is determined that they 
were not intended to influence their recipient. Sanctions 
for active and passive bribery of national public officials, 
foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations  are the same under the 
Bribery Act. UK law also does not specifically require the 
bribery of foreign public officials to constitute an offence 
under the domestic  law of the concerned foreign 
country.  
3.11.4 In the context of paragraph 2 of Article 16 of 
the UNCAC, UK penalises the passive bribery of foreign 
public officials and officials of public international 
organisations under section 2 of the Bribery Act. Under 
section 2, the acceptance of bribe by any person 
including a foreign public official or an official of a 
public international organisation constitutes a criminal 
offence under the Bribery Act. Thus, while there is no 
specific offence of passive bribery  by foreign public 
officials and officials of public international 
organisations, the general offence covering passive 
bribery is applicable to all such officials.   
3.11.5 In relation to the jurisdictional clauses under 
the UNCAC, all acts of corruption committed within the 
territory of the UK are punishable under the UK 
criminal law. In addition, jurisdiction is also exercisable 
over offences committed on board UK ships. In the 
context of the offence of bribery in particular, section 12 
of the Bribery Act  also lists out the extended active 
nationality principle wherein all persons who have “a 
close connection with the United Kingdom”, including 
British citizens, individuals ordinarily resident in the 
UK, bodies incorporated under UK law (including UK 
subsidiaries of foreign companies) and Scottish 
partnerships are covered within the scope of application 

 39 
of the provisions on bribery. The defences applicable to 
a charge of bribery include (1) the written law that are 
applicable in the country or territory con cerned, (2) 
bona-fide expenditure including travel, which is related 
to promotional activities and (3) due diligence by 
companies that ensures that none of its employees, 
agents or any other associated persons are involved in 
the act of bribery.  
3.11.6 In the light of the above discussion, it can be 
inferred that legislations in various jurisdictions that 
attempt to penalise active and passive bribery under 
Article 16 of the UNCAC, do so with caution in order to 
preserve harmonious diplomatic ties. The 10 countries 
surveyed have criminalised active bribery of foreign 
public officials and officials of public international 
organisations under paragraph 1 of 16 of the UNCAC. 
However, in the context of paragraph 2 of Article 16, 
only two countries (Malaysia and  Switzerland) have a 
specific provision under its bribery law on paragraph 2 
of Article 16. Of the remaining 8 countries, three 
(Australia, Canada, and El Salvador) do not penalise 
passive bribery of foreign public officials and officials of 
public interna tional organisations under any 
circumstances, while five (Austria, South Africa, South 
Korea, UK and USA) have general provisions applicable 
to all persons which can be construed to cover passive 
bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations. Principles of nationality 
and territoriality under Article 42 read with Article 4 of 
the UNCAC are followed in all countries except El 
Salvador, where the overall application of these 
principles is not clear.  
 
  

 40 
CHAPTER IV 
CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF THE PREVENTION OF 
BRIBERY OF FOREIGN PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND 
OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2015  
 
4.1  The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public 
Officials and Officials of Public International 
Organisations Bill,  2015 (“the 2015 Bill”) has been 
enacted in pursuance of Article 16 of the UNCAC which 
India signed on 9 December 2005 and ratified on 9 May 
2011. The intention of the 2015 Bill is to serve as a 
composite legislation that contains provisions in 
pursuance of both Article 16(1) [active bribery] as well 
as Article 16(2) [passive bribery] of the UNCAC. By 
clause 1(2), it establishes applicability both on the basis 
of the territorial principle as well as the nationality 
principle. It has three key parts— 
 
4.2  First, the offences established under the Bill; 
second, the processes for investigation and prosecution 
of such offences; third, the inter-relation of the Bill with 
other legislations and miscellaneous matters.  
 
4.3  Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill contain it s main 
offences. Clause 3, enacted in pursuance of Article 
16(2), broadly stated, makes bribe -taking by a foreign 
public official or official of a public international 
organisation punishable. Clause 4, enacted in 
pursuance of Article 16(1), makes giving o f bribes to a 
foreign public official or official of a public international 
organisation punishable. However, an exception to the 
operation of clause 4 is carved out for commercial 
organisations if the expenses were reasonable and 
related to promotion, per formance of a contract or the 

 41 
organisation had adequate procedures to prevent 
persons from engaging in such conduct.  
 
4.4  The key requirement to establish both 
offences is the existence of an undue advantage. In 
clause 3, the foreign public official or official of a public 
international organisation must obtain an undue 
advantage from what he accepts; analogously, in clause 
4, the bribe -giver must give an undue advantage to a 
foreign public official or official of a public international 
organisation. Further, in clause 4, the bribe must be 
given to obtain an advantage relating to the conduct of 
international business. Attempts to take or give bribes 
as well as abetment of the commission of such offences 
are punishable under clause 5.  
 
4.5  Clauses 6 to 12 deal with the processes that 
will be followed in prosecuting offences under the Bill. 
They are premised on the understanding that the Bill 
will have extra -territorial application and thus require 
agreements with foreign countries for enforcement. 
Accordingly, clause 6 empowers the Central 
Government to enter into such agreements for 
enforcement as well as exchange of information. Clause 
7 deems offences under this Bill to be extraditable in all 
extradition treaties signed by India. Clauses 8 to 12 deal 
with processes pertaining to exchange of information 
and international co -operation pertaining to a 
particular case.  
 
4.6  Clauses 13 to 19 and 22 provide for the inter-
relation between the Bill and other legislations, 
including any consequent amendments tha t are 
provided in the Schedule to the Bill. Additionally, clause 
16 provides for appellate and revisional powers of the 
High Court from decisions of the Special Judge who is 
the adjudicating authority under this 2015 Bill. Clauses 

 42 
20 and 21 deal with the s cope and procedure for 
delegated legislation under the 2015 Bill. 
 
4.7  A clause-by-clause analysis of the 2015 Bill 
has been conducted hereafter. Each provision of the 
proposed 2015 Bill is also tested against relevant 
provisions of UNCAC, and wherever ne cessary, 
compared with similar laws in other jurisdictions. 
 
5.   Clause-by-Clause Analysis of the 
Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and 
Officials of Public International Organisations Bill, 
2015 
 
A. Preamble 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.1.1  The Preamble of the 2015 Bill is unduly long, 
and repeats the text of Resolution 58/4 of 31st October, 
2003 that was adopted by the UN General Assembly (to 
which the UNCAC was annexed). This repetition is not 
necessary. Instead, it will be sufficient to capture India’s 
main obligations under the UNCAC in brief.  
 
5.1.2  Suggested draft: 
A 
BILL 
to prevent corruption in relation to bribery of foreign 
public officials and officials of public international 
organisations and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS India has signed the United Nations 
Convention Against Corruption on 9th December, 2005, 
and ratified the same on 9th May, 2011; 
 

 43 
AND WHEREAS this Convention expresses concern about 
the seriousness of problems and threats posed by 
corruption to the stability and security of societies, 
undermining the institutions and values of democracy, 
ethical values and justice and jeopardising sustainable 
development and the rule of law; and about cases of 
corruption that involve vast quantities of assets, which 
may constitute a substantial portion of the resources of 
States, and that threaten the political stability and 
sustainable development of those States; 
 
AND WHEREAS in terms of Article 16 of this Convention, 
each State Party is require d to adopt such legislative 
and other measures, as may be necessary to establish 
the bribery of foreign public officials and officials of 
public international organisations, as a criminal 
offence. 
 
B. Clause 1 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.2.1  Clauses 1(1) and 1(3) may be retained as they 
are.  
 
5.2.2  However, there are concerns with clause 1(2). 
In particular, clause 1(2)(c), which attempts to extend 
the jurisdiction of this law to “persons on an aircraft or 
ship registered outside India but for the time being in or 
over India”, is extremely broad in its application, and 
may not be consistent with the principles of sovereignty 
envisaged by Article 4 (‘Protection of Sovereignty’) of the 
UNCAC. Article 4(1) of the UNCAC requires that States 
Parties to the UNCAC w ill carry out their obligations 
under the Convention “in a manner consistent with 
principles of sovereign equality and territorial integrity 
of States and that of non -intervention in the domestic 

 44 
affairs of other States”. Article 4(2) further clarifies that 
under the UNCAC, a State Party cannot exercise 
jurisdiction or perform functions that are “reserved 
exclusively for the authorities of another State by its 
domestic law”. In light of these provisions, clause 1(2) 
must be redrafted to clarify the circumstances in which 
the conduct constituting an offence under this Act may 
fall under the jurisdiction of Indian law. 
 
5.2.3  Further, clause 1(2)(d)(ii) contains two terms 
that are unclear and not defined, i.e., “place of 
business” and “ordinary residence in India”, which can 
lead to concerns during interpretation and applicability.  
 
5.2.4  Suggested draft:  
 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
(1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Bribery of 
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public 
International Organisations Act, 2015. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and applies – 
(a) when the conduct constituting the offence under 
the Act occurs: 
(i) wholly or partly in India; or 
(ii) wholly or partly on board an aircraft or ship 
registered in India at the time of the 
commission of the offence; 
(b) when the conduct constituting the offence under 
the Act occurs wholly outside India, and the 
offence is committed by:  
(i) a person who is an Indian citizen;  
(ii) a person who is a permanent resident of 
India; or 

 45 
(iii) a person that is a body corporate 
incorporated by or under the laws of India. 
Explanation 1:  For the purposes of clause (b), the 
expression “permanent resident” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it under the Income Tax Act, 
1961 (43 of 1961). 
Explanation 2:  When the conduct constituting an 
offence occurs wholly outside India, no proceedings 
under this Act shall commence without the previous 
sanction of the Central Government. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint; and different 
dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Act and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a 
reference to the coming into force of that provision. 
 
C. Clause 2 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.3.1  The definition of an “agent” under clause 
2(1)(a) now appears once in the redrafted Bill as 
recommended by the Commission (see comment on 
clause 4). Accordingly, this definition should be deleted 
from here and instead incorpo rated in the appropriate 
location.  
 
5.3.2  Clause 2(1)(b) may be retained as it is. 
 
5.3.3  Clause 2(1)(c) “contracting State”: This 
definition is unnecessary, and may be deleted. The term 
“contracting State” is used in multiple clauses of the 
2015 Bill. If this term is retained, it will imply that any 
proceeding under this law will not be able to proceed 
until a reciprocal arrang ement with the State in 

 46 
question is entered into. Retaining this definition, thus, 
may entail undue procedural delays. Instead, it is 
recommended that the term be replaced by the term 
“concerned State” in the relevant clauses, which will be 
interpreted appropriately as required by the 
circumstances.  
 
5.3.4  Clause 2(1)(d) “foreign country”: This 
definition seems deficient and incomplete. It proceeds to 
define a foreign country only on the basis of 
government, without having any reference whatsoever 
to territory. Guidance may be taken from other statutes, 
such as the Canadian Corruption of Foreign Public 
Officials Act 1998, to provi de, firstly, that foreign 
country means “any country other than India”, and 
thereafter, include sub-divisions of government. 
 
5.3.5  Clause 2(1)(e) “foreign public official”: This is 
a verbatim reproduction of the definition of the term in 
Article 2(b) of the UNCAC. However, the terms “public 
agency” and “public enterprise” are rather vague and 
not defined. The Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, 
Law and Justice, in its Fiftieth Report on the 2011 
version of the 2013 Bill, presented to the Rajya Sabha 
on 29 March 2012, had raised similar concerns. The 
Standing Committee pointed out (in para 5.22A of its 
Report) that phrases like “public agency” and “public 
enterprise” are “vital definitional variables”. The 
absence of definitional clarity in these provisions could 
potentially lead to “confusion in interpretation and 
application”, and recommended that these phrases be 
defined further. The redrafted version of this definition 
will address these concerns of the Standing Committee 
as well. 
 

 47 
5.3.6  There is also no need to include “official or 
agent of a public international organisation” in this 
definition, as that term is defined separately in clause 
2(1)(g).   
 
5.3.7  Clause 2(1)(f) and 2(1)(g) may be retained as 
they are. 
 
5.3.8  Clause 2(1)(h) “public international 
organisation”: This definition is a reproduction of the 
Australian Criminal Code Amendment (Bribery of 
Foreign Public Officials) Act 1999. However, a shorter 
and more focused definition can be used, as  based on 
the UK Bribery Act 2010.  
 
5.3.9  Clause 2(1)(j) “undue advantage”: This 
definition per se is adequate. However, clauses 2(1)(j)(i) 
and (ii) attempt to incorporate the offence itself into the 
definition, which is inappropriate. Therefore, clauses  
2(1)(j)(i) and (ii) should be deleted. Instead, an 
explanation may be added to clarify the concept of “legal 
remuneration” consistent with the meaning assigned to 
it under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. 
 
5.3.10 Suggested draft:  
 
Clause 2(1)(a) should be deleted. 
Clause 2(1)(c) should be deleted. 
Clause 2(1)(d): “foreign country” means a country 
other than India, and includes: 
(i) any political subdivision of that 
country; 
(ii) the government, and any department or 
branch of government, of that country 
or of a political subdivision of that 
country; and 

 48 
(iii) any agency of that country or of a 
political subdivision of that country; 
Clause 2(1)(e): “foreign public official” means:  
(i) a person who holds a legislative, 
executive, administrative or judicial 
position of a foreign country; or 
(ii) a person who performs public duties or 
public functions for a foreign country, 
including a person employed by a 
board, commission, corporation or 
other body or authority that is 
established to perform such duty or 
function on behalf o f the foreign 
country, or is performing such duty or 
function;  
Explanation: For the purpose of this definition: 
(A) “public duty” means a duty in the 
discharge of which the State, the public 
or the community at large has an 
interest; and  
(B) “public function” means an act or 
duty of a foreign public official in his 
capacity as such;  
Clause 2(1)(h): “public international organisation” 
means an organisation whose members are any of 
the following: 
 
(i) countries or territories;  
(ii) governments of countries or territories;  
(iii) other public international 
organisations; or 
(iv) a mixture of any of the above.  

 49 
Clause 2(1)(j): “undue advantage” means any 
gratification, benefit or advantage, property or 
interest in such property, reward, fee, valuable 
security or gift or any other valuable thing (other 
than legal remuneration), whether pecuniary or 
non-pecuniary, tangible or intangible. 
 
Explanation: For the purpose of this definition, 
“legal remuneration” is not restricted to 
remuneration paid to a foreign public off icial or 
official of a public international organisation, but 
includes all remuneration which he is permitted to 
receive by the foreign country or the public 
international organisation which he serves. 
 
D. Clause 3 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.4.1  This clause addresses the offence of passive 
bribery as provided under Article 16(2) of the UNCAC. It 
is relevant to recall the discussion in chapters 2 and 3 
of this Report, where it is pointed out that Article 16(2) 
merely requires States Parties to the UNCAC to consider 
criminalising the solicitation or acceptance of bribes by 
foreign public officials and officials of public 
international organisations. In this regard, Article 16(2) 
is not a mandatory requirement but a directory 
provision. Of the countri es surveyed by us, no other 
country, besides Malaysia and Switzerland, has passed 
a law pertaining to Article 16(2).  
 
5.4.2  It is also relevant to consider the principles of 
sovereignty laid down in Article 4 of the UNCAC, under 
which a domestic law cannot be applicable outside the 
territory of the country where it is enacted. In this case, 
in light of the redrafted clause 1(2) recommended by the 

 50 
Commission above, a foreign public official or an official 
of a public international organisation accused of passive 
bribery would be prosecuted in India under clause 3 
only if the offence is committed wholly or partly in India. 
This would be further subject to the waiver of diplomatic 
immunities by the concerned foreign country or public 
international organisatio n. Even the relevant laws in 
Malaysia and Switzerland do not contain any specific 
provision to prosecute foreign public officials or officials 
of public international organisations when the offence 
has taken place outside their country.  
 
5.4.3  Accordingly, the necessity of retaining clause 
3 may be reconsidered. In the alternative, as suggested 
above, in light of the proposed redraft of clause 1(2), 
clause 3 will be applicable only to an act of passive 
bribery that has taken place wholly or partly in India, or 
on board an aircraft or ship registered in India at the 
time of the commission of the offence.  
 
5.4.5  Further, clause 3 as presently drafted makes 
the offence of “attempt” to obtain undue advantage 
punishable with the same duration of imprisonment as 
the offence itself. However, the offence of “attempt” is 
now captured in a separate provision in the redrafted 
version of the 2015 Bill (see comment on clause 5), with 
a lesser duration of imprisonment. Therefore, the words 
“or attempts to obtain” may be deleted from here. 
 
5.4.6  Suggested draft:  
 
3. Prohibition for accepting gratification by 
foreign public officials or officials of public 
international organisations. 
 
Whoever, being a foreign public official or official 
of public international organis ation, intentionally 

 51 
accepts or obtains or agrees to accept from any 
person, for himself or for any other person or 
entity, any undue advantage other than legal 
remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing or 
forbearing to do any official act or for showi ng or 
forbearing to show, in the exercise of his official 
functions, favour or disfavour to any person or 
entity for rendering or attempting to render any 
service or disservice to any person or entity, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment which shall not 
be less than three years but which may extend to 
seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 
 
E. Clause 4 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.5.1  Clause 4(1) may be retained as it is. However, 
there are several concerns with the remainder of the 
provision. 
 
5.5.2  In the first place, the proviso to clause 4(1) 
seeks to carve out defences/exceptions to an offence 
under clause 4(1). Therefore, it should not be in the form 
of a proviso, but should be a substantive provision in its 
own right. 
 
5.5.3  The proviso is draf ted to suggest that this 
defence/exception is only available to a commercial 
organisation and not to any person generally. That is 
not a desired position, and in fact, this 
defence/exception should apply to every “person”, the 
meaning of which term include s a commercial 
organisation.  
 
5.5.4  Further, the proviso, in being attached to 
clause 4(1), also suggests that the defence/exception is 

 52 
applicable only to an offence under clause 4, whereas it 
ought to be a general defence/exception for all offences 
under this law, including the abetment or attempt of 
any such offence.  
 
5.5.5  Expressions such as “adequate procedures” 
used in the proviso to clause 4(1), and “guidelines” used 
in clause 4(2), appear to have been borrowed from the 
scheme recommended by the Commission in its 254th 
Report43 on the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) 
Bill, 2013 (“the 2013 Bill”). As per the proviso to clause 
8 of the 2013 Bill, where an offence relating to bribing a 
public servant has been committed by a commercial 
organisation, such commercial organisation is 
punishable with a fine. Clause 9 of the 2013 Bill further 
provides that a commercial organisation may also be 
guilty and punishable with fine, if any person 
associated with the commercial organisation offers, 
promises or g ives an undue advantage to a public 
servant. However, when such an associated person is 
guilty, the commercial organisation may not be liable if 
it can prove that it had in place adequate procedures 
designed to prevent persons associated with it from 
undertaking such conduct. Clause 10 of the 2013 Bill 
further provides that where an offence is proved to have 
been committed with the consent or connivance of any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
commercial organisation, such officer shall a lso be 
guilty of the offence, punishable with imprisonment and 
fine. Clause 9(5) of the 2013 Bill additionally requires 
the Central Government to prescribe guidelines about 
adequate procedures that can be adopted by 
commercial organisations in connection with preventing 
such bribery.  
 
                                                        
43 254th Report, p. 35.  

 53 
5.5.6  Merely transferring selected provisions from 
this scheme recommended by the Commission for the 
2013 Bill will not be workable in this case in the 2015 
Bill, unless the entire scheme of the 2013 Bill is fully 
incorporated in the present 2015 Bill. In fact, in the 
existing draft contained in clause 4 of the 2015 Bill, it 
would mean that a commercial organisation would be 
free from liability merely by showing that adequate 
procedures were put in place. This would not be in  
compliance with the requirements of Article 16 of the 
UNCAC.  
 
5.5.7  The Commission, therefore, recommends 
that the entire scheme as recommended in its 254 th 
Report in connection with the Prevention of Corruption 
(Amendment) Bill, 2013, should be incorpo rated into 
the 2015 Bill as well. This is provided as a new clause 8 
of the redrafted Bill.  
 
5.5.8  The explanation in proviso (b) to clause 4(1) 
clarifying the expression “undue advantage” is unclear 
and not properly worded. Instead, it is recommended 
that the explanation be redrafted as a 
defence/exception. 
 
5.5.9  A comprehensive list of defences/exceptions 
under this law must also necessarily include a provision 
for “routine government function”, which will take into 
account payments made in the course of routine duties 
or functions of foreign public officials or officials of 
public international organisations for the purpose of 
issuing permits or licenses, processing official 
documents, and similar services. This 
defence/exception is available and ackn owledged in 
most other jurisdictions, and a version of the same may 
be included here. 
 

 54 
5.5.10 Accordingly, there should be a separate 
provision on defences/exceptions available against any 
offence listed in the law. This separate provision may be 
placed after all the offences are listed out. Based on the 
recommendations of the Commission regarding clause 
5, this new provision on defences will appear as clause 
7 of the redrafted Bill. 
 
5.5.11 Suggested draft:  
 
4. Prohibition for giving gratification to foreign 
public official or officials of public 
international organisations. 
Whoever, in relation to the conduct of 
international business in order to obtain or retain 
business or to obtain any advantage relating 
thereto, intentionally, offers or promises t o offer, 
gives or promises to give, directly or indirectly, any 
undue advantage, to any foreign public official or 
official of public international organisation, for 
himself or herself or for another person or entity, 
in order that such official, act or re frain from 
acting in the exercise of his or her official duties, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than three years but which 
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
7. Persons not guilty of offenc e in certain 
circumstances.  
(1) No person is guilty of an offence under this Act 
if the offer, promise or giving of any advantage, 
which was made to a foreign public official or 
official of a public international organisation, was 
a reasonable and bona fi de expenditure, such as 
travel and lodging expenses, incurred by or on 
behalf of such foreign public official or official of a 

 55 
public international organisation and was directly 
related to: 
(a) the promotion, demonstration, or 
explanation of products or services; or 
(b) the execution or performance of a 
contract with a foreign country or public 
international organisation. 
(2) No person is guilty of an offence under this Act 
if the offer, promise or giving of any advantage is 
permitted under the laws of the foreign country or 
public international organization for which the 
foreign public official or official of a public 
international organisation performs duties or 
functions. 
(3) No person is guilty of an offence under this Act 
if the offer, promise or giving o f any advantage, is 
made to expedite or secure the performance by a 
foreign public official or official of a public 
international organisation of any act of a routine 
nature that is part of the duties or functions of the 
foreign public official or official  of the public 
international organisation, such as:  
 
(a) the issuance of a permit, licence or 
other document to qualify a person to 
do business;  
(b) the processing of official documents, 
such as visas and work permits;  
(c) the provision of services normally 
offered to the public, such as mail pick-
up and delivery, telecommunication 
services and power and water supply; 
and  

 56 
(d) the provision of services normally 
provided as required, such as police 
protection, loading and unloading of 
cargo, the protection of perishable 
products or commodities from 
deterioration or the scheduling of 
inspections related to contract 
performance or transit of goods.  
Explanation: For removal of doubts, it is clarified 
that a decision about whether to  award new 
business; or to continue exist ing business with a 
particular person; or the terms of such new or 
existing business; shall not be regarded as any act 
of a routine nature for the purpose of sub -section 
(3). 
8. Liability of commercial organisations for 
offences under this Act. 
 
(1) When a n offence under this Act has been 
committed by a commercial organisation, such 
commercial organisation shall be punishable with 
fine. 
(2) Where an offence under this Act is committed 
by a commercial organisation, and such offence is 
proved to have been com mitted with the consent 
or connivance of any director, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the commercial organisation, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and pun ishable with 
imprisonment which shall not be less than the 
punishment prescribed for such offence under this 
Act.  
(3) When an offence under this Act is committed 
by any person associated with the commercial 
organisation, the commercial organisation shall be 

 57 
guilty of an offence and shall be punishable with 
fine: 
Provided that it shall be a defence for the 
commercial organisation to prove that it had in 
place adequate procedures designed to prevent 
persons associated with it from undertaking such 
conduct.  
(4) The Central Government may, with a view to 
enhancing compliance with this section by 
commercial organisations, prescribe such 
guidelines about adequate procedures as may be 
necessary, following a consultation process in 
which the views of all the inter ested stakeholders 
are obtained through public notice.  
(5) For the purposes of this section: 
 
(a) “commercial organisation” means: 
(i) a body which is incorporated in 
India and which carries on a 
business, whether in India or 
outside India;  
(ii) any other body which is 
incorporated outside India and 
which carries on a business, or a 
part of a business, in any part of 
India;  
(iii) a partnership firm or any 
association of persons formed in 
India and which carries on a 
business, whether in India or 
outside India; or 
(iv) any other partnership or 
association of persons which is 
formed outside India and which 
carries on a business, or part of a 
business, in any part of India;  

 58 
(b) “business” includes a trade or 
profession or providing service 
including charitable service; 
(c) a person is said to be associated with 
the commercial organisation if, 
disregarding any conduct constituting 
an offence under this Act, such person 
is a person who performs services for or 
on behalf of the commercial 
organisation.  
Explanation 1: The capacity in which the person 
performs services for or on behalf of the 
commercial organisation shall not matter 
irrespective of whether such person is an employee 
or agent or subsidiary of such commercial 
organisation.  
Explanation 2: For the purpose of this section, the 
term “agent” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it under section 182 of the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872). 
Explanation 3:  Whether or not the person is a 
person who performs services for or on behalf of 
the commercial organi sation is to be determined 
by reference to all the relevant circumstances and 
not merely by reference to the nature of the 
relationship between such person and the 
commercial organisation.  
Explanation 4: If the person is an employee of the 
commercial orga nisation, it shall be presumed 
unless the contrary is proved that such person is 
a person who performs services for or on behalf of 
the commercial organisation.  
 
 
 
 

 59 
F. Clause 5 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.6.1  The language of this provision is confusing, 
as it combines the offences of “abetment” and “attempt”. 
Since the ingredients for these offences differ, it is 
recommended that this provision be split into two 
separate provisions, detailing each offence separately. 
Further, the penalty for the offence of a ttempt must be 
less than the penalty for the offence itself. 
 
5.6.2  Suggested draft:  
 
5. Abetment. 
Whoever abets the commission of an offence under 
section 3 or section 4 of this Act shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be les s than three years but which may 
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
6. Attempt. 
Whoever attempts to commit an offence under 
section 3 or section 4 of this Act shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less tha n one year but which may 
extend to three years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
 
G. Clause 6 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.7.1  This provision has been inserted in context of 
India’s declaration regarding the applicability of Articles 
45 and 46 of the UNCAC (see discussion in chapter 2 of 
this Report). At the time of ratification of the UNCAC, 

 60 
India declared, by way of a Notification, that 
“international cooperation for mutual legal assistance 
under Articles 45 and 46 of the Convention shall be 
afforded through applicable bilateral Agreements”, and 
in cases where a bilateral agreement does not cover the 
mutual legal assistance sought by the requesting State, 
it shall be provided under the Convention “on reciprocal 
basis”. Clause 6(1) captures this situation. However, 
clause 6(2) is not required, and may be deleted. The 
provision will also be renumbered, in accordance with 
the revised draft. 
 
5.7.2  Suggested draft:  
 
9. Agreements with foreign countries 
The Central Government may enter into an 
agreement with the Government of any country 
outside India for— 
(a) enforcing the provisions of this 
Act; 
(b) exchange of information for the 
prevention of any offence under 
this Act or under the 
corresponding law in force in that 
country or investigation of cases 
relating to any offence under this 
Act, and may, by notification, 
make such provisions as may be 
necessary fo r implementing the 
agreement (including mutual 
assistance).  
 
 
H. Clause 7 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.8.1  This provision attempts to unilaterally 
amend all extradition treaties that India has entered 

 61 
into with other countries, to deem offences under this 
law as extraditable offences. This is in violation of Article 
39 of the Vienna Convention of the Law on Treaties 
which provides that a treaty may be amended only by 
agreement between the parties to the treaty (and not by 
domestic legislation).  
 
5.8.2  Further, Paragraphs (4), (5) and (7) of Article 
44 of the UNCAC (“Extradition”) already deem all 
offences under the UNCAC to be offences that are 
extraditable. The Indian law makes the offences under 
the UNCAC punishable under domestic law, and in 
context of the same, this provision is redundant, and 
not required.  
 
5.8.3  Suggested draft:   
This provision should be deleted. 
 
I. Clause 8 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.9.1  The Commission has recommended that the 
definition of the term “contracting State” be deleted from 
clause 2(1)(c) (see clause 2). For the purpose of this 
provision, therefore, the term “contracting State” should 
be replaced with “concerned State”, which will be 
interpreted appropriately as requi red by the 
circumstances. The provision will also be renumbered, 
in accordance with the revised draft. 
 
5.9.2  Suggested draft:  
 
10. Letter of request to a concerned State in 
certain cases. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act 
or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974), if, in the course of an investigation into an 
offence or other proceedings under this Act, an 
application is made to a Special Judge by the 
Investigating Officer or any officer superior in rank 
to the Investigating Officer that any evidence is 

 62 
required in connection with investigation into an 
offence or proceedings under this Act and he is of 
the opinion that such evidence may be available in 
any place in  a concerned State, and the Special 
Judge, on being satisfied that such evidence is 
required in connection with the investigation into 
an offence or proceedings under this Act, may 
issue a letter of request to a court or an authority 
in the concerned State  competent to deal with 
such request to— 
(i) examine facts and circumstances of the 
case,  
(ii) take such steps as the Special Judge may 
specify in such letter of request, and 
(iii) forward all the evidence so taken or 
collected to the Special Judge issuin g such 
letter of request. 
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in 
such manner as the Central Government may 
specify in this behalf. 
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing 
received under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to 
be the evidenc e collected during the course of 
investigation. 
 
J. Clause 9 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.10.1 The Commission has recommended that the 
definition of the term “contracting State” be deleted from 
clause 2(1)(c) (see clause  2). For the purpose of this 
provision, therefore, the term “contracting State” should 
be replaced with “concerned State”, which will be 
interpreted appropriately as required by the 
circumstances. The provision will also be renumbered, 
in accordance with the revised draft. 
 
5.10.2 Suggested draft:  
 

 63 
11. Assistance to a concerned State in certain 
cases. 
Where a letter of request is received by the Central 
Government from a court or an authority in a 
concerned State requesting for investigation into 
an offence or proceedings under this Act and 
forwarding to such court or authority any evidence 
connected therewith, the Central Government may 
forward such letter of request to the Special Judge 
or to any authority under the Act, as it thinks fit, 
for execution of such request in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act or, as the case may be, 
any other law for the time being in force. 
 
K. Clause 10 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.11.1 The Commission has recommended that the 
definition of the term “contracting State” be deleted from 
clause 2(1)(c) (see clause 2 above). For the purpose of 
this provision, therefore, the term “contracting State” 
should be replaced with “concerned State”, which will 
be interpreted appropriately as required by the 
circumstances. The provision will also be renumbered, 
in accordance with the revised draft. 
 
5.11.2 Suggested draft:  
 
12. Reciprocal arrangements for processes and 
assistance for transfer of accused persons. 
(1) Where a Special Judge, in relation to an offence 
punishable under section 3 or section 4, desires — 
(a) a summons to an accused person; or 
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused 
person; or 
(c) a summons to any person requiring him 
to attend and produce a document or other 
thing or to produce it; or 
(d) a search warrant, 

 64 
issued by it shall be served or exe cuted at any 
place in any concerned State, it shall send such 
summons or warrant in duplicate in such form, to 
such court, Judge or Magistrate through such 
authorities, as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf and that court, 
Judge or Magistrate, as the case may be, shall 
cause the same to be executed. 
(2) Where a Special Judge, in relation to an offence 
punishable under section 4 has received for 
service or execution— 
(a) a summons to an accused person; or 
(b) a warrant for th e arrest of an accused 
person; or 
(c) a summons to any person requiring him 
to attend and produce a document or other 
thing, or to produce it; or 
(d) a search warrant, 
issued by a court, Judge or Magistrate in a 
concerned State, it shall, cause the same to  be 
served or executed as if it were a summons or 
warrant received by it from another court in the 
said territories for service or execution within its 
local jurisdiction; and where— 
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the 
person arrested shall be d ealt with in 
accordance with the procedure specified 
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974); 
(ii) a search warrant has been executed, the 
things found in this search shall, so far as 
possible, be dealt with in accordance with the 
procedure specified under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974): 
Provided that in a case where a summon or 
search warrant received from a concerned 
State has been executed, the documents or 

 65 
other things produced or things found in the 
search shall be forwarded to the court issuing 
the summon or search warrant through such 
authority as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf. 
(3) Where a person transferred to a concerned 
State pursuant to sub -section (2) is a prisoner in 
India, t he Special Judge or the Central 
Government may impose such conditions as that 
court or Government deems fit. 
(4) Where the person transferred to India pursuant 
to sub -section (1) is a prisoner in a concerned 
State, the Special Judge in India shall ensure that 
the conditions subject to which the prisoner is 
transferred to India are complied with and such 
prisoner shall be kept in such custody subject to 
such conditions as the Central Government may 
direct in writing. 
 
L. Clause 11 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.12.1 The Commission has recommended that the 
definition of the term “contracting State” be deleted from 
clause 2(1)(c) (see clause  2). For the purpose of this 
provision, therefore, the term “contracting State” should 
be replaced with “concerned State”, w hich will be 
interpreted appropriately as required by the 
circumstances. The provision will also be renumbered, 
in accordance with the revised draft. 
 
5.12.2 Suggested draft:  
 
13. Procedure in respect of letter of request. 
Every letter of request, summons or warrant, 
received by the Central Government from, and 
every letter of request, summons or warrant, to be 
transmitted to a concerned State under this 
Chapter shall be transmitted to a concerned State 

 66 
or, as the case may be, sent to the concerned court 
in India in such form and in such manner as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify 
in this behalf. 
 
M. Clause 12 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.13.1 The Commission has recommended that the 
definition of the term “contracting State” be deleted from 
clause 2(1)(c) (see clause  2 above). For the purpose of 
this provision, therefore, the term “contracting State” 
should be replaced with “concerned State”, which will 
be interpreted appropriately as required by the 
circumstances. The provision will also be renumbered, 
in accordance with the revised draft. 
 
5.13.2 Suggested draft:  
 
13. Attachment, seizure and confiscation, etc. 
of property in a concerned State or India. 
(1) Where the property is suspected to be in a 
concerned State, the Special Judge, on an 
application by an officer authorised by the Central 
Government, may issue a letter of request to a 
court or an authority in the concerned State for 
execution of attachment or confiscation of the 
property in the concerned State. 
(2) Where a letter of request is received by the 
Central Government from a court or an authority 
in a concerned State requesting attachment or 
confiscation of the property in India, derived or 
obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person from 
the commission of an offence under section 3 or 
section 4 committed in that concerned State, the 
Central Government may forward such letter of 
request to the Special Judge for execution in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 

 67 
(3) The Special Judge shall, on receipt of a letter of 
request under sub-section (2), direct any authority 
to take all steps necessary for tracing and 
identifying such property. 
(4) The steps referred to in sub -section (3) may 
include any inquiry, investigation or survey in 
respect of  any person, place, property, assets, 
documents, books of account in any bank or 
public financial institutions or any other relevant 
matters.  
(5) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to 
in sub -section (4) shall be carried out by an 
authority ment ioned in sub -section (3) in 
accordance with such directions issued in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
 
N. Clause 13 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.14  This provision may be retained as it is. The 
provision will also be renumbered, in accordance with 
the revised draft. 
 
O. Clause 14 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.15  This provision may be retained as it is. The 
provision will also be renumbered, in accordance with 
the revised draft. 
 
P. Clause 15 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.16  This provision may be retained as it  is. The 
provision will also be renumbered, in accordance with 
the revised draft. 
 
Q. Clause 16 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 

 68 
5.17  This provision may be retained as it is. The 
provision will also be renumbered, in accordance with 
the revised draft. 
 
R. Clause 17 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.18.1 The latter part of this provision, which states 
that “nothing contained herein shall exempt any foreign 
public official or official of public international 
organisation from any proceeding which might, apart 
from this Act, be i nstituted against him”, is 
unnecessary, and may be deleted. The provision will 
also be renumbered, in accordance with the revised 
draft. 
 
5.18.2 Suggested draft:  
 
19. Act to be in addition to any other law. 
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, 
and not in derogation of, any other law for the time 
being in force. 
 
S. Clause 18 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.19.1 This provision will apply only if the conduct 
constituting the offence takes place wholly or partly in 
India, and in this regard, its presence is guided by the 
necessity of clause 3 of the 2015 Bill. If clause 3 is 
deleted (see clause 3), this provision may also be 
deleted. In any event in light of the recommendation of 
the Commission to delete the definition of the term 
“contracting State” from clause 2(1)(c) (see clause 2), the 
term “contracting State” should be replaced with 
“concerned State”, which will be interpreted 
appropriately as required by the circumstances. The 
provision will also be renumbered, in accordance with 
the revised draft. 
 
5.19.2 Suggested draft:  
 

 69 
If retained the suggested draft would be as follows: 
 
20. Proceedings under this Act to be taken in 
consultation with concerned State against 
foreign public official to whom privileges and 
immunities under any law or Conve ntion or 
treaty apply. 
In case any foreign public official or official of 
public international organisation is alleged to have 
committed an offence under this Act to whom 
certain privileges and immunities applies under 
the United Nations (Privileges and Im munities) 
Act, 1947 or the International Finance Corporation 
(Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1958, or 
the International Development Association 
(Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1960, or 
the Diplomatic Relations (Vienna Convention) Act, 
1972, or under any other law for the time being in 
force or under any Convention or treaty, the 
Central Government shall, in consultation with the 
concerned State or public international 
organisation, as the case may be, take adequate 
measures for proceeding under this Act against 
such public official. 
 
T. Clause 19 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.20  This provision may be retained as it is. The 
provision will also be renumbered, in accordance with 
the revised draft. 
 
U. Clause 20 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.21.1 This provision will be retained as it is, except 
that the reference to clause 4(2) will be corrected to refer 
to the (new) clause 8(4). The provision will also be 
renumbered, in accordance with the revised draft 
 

 70 
5.21.2 Suggested draft:  
 
 
22. Power to make rules. 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matter s, 
namely: 
(a) framing of guidelines to enhance 
compliance with the provisions of section 8 
by the commercial organizations under sub -
section (4) of section 8;  
(b) any other matter which is to be, or may 
be, prescribed, or in respect of which 
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules. 
 
V. Clause 21 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.22  This provision may be retained as it is. The 
provision will also be renumbered, in accordance with 
the revised draft. 
 
W. Clause 22 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.23  This provision may be retained as it is. The 
provision will also be renumbered, in accordance with 
the revised draft. 
 
X. Schedule 
 
Analysis and comment:  
 
5.24.1 The reference to the relevant provision 
dealing with the amendment of certain enactments 
should be corrected to refer to the correct provision as 
renumbered and provided in the recommended draft of 
the Commission.  

 71 
 
5.24.2 Part II of the Schedule dealing w ith the 
Amendment of the Schedule of the Prevention of Money-
Laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003), will change in 
accordance with the revised scheme for offences, 
separating the offence for abetment and attempt, as 
recommended by the Commission.  
 
5.24.3 Suggested draft:  
 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See Section 24) 
AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS 
PART I 
THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988 
(49 of 1988) 
 
Amendment to Section 3 
 
In section 3, in sub -section (1), in clause (a), for 
the words “any offence punishable under this Act”, 
the words and figures “any offence punishable 
under this Act or the Prevention of Bribery of 
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public 
International Organisations Act, 2015” shall be 
substituted. 
PART II 
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2002 
(15 of 2003) 
 
Amendment of Schedule  
In the Schedule, in Part A, after paragraph 8, the 
following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- 
“Paragraph 8A” 
The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public 
Officials and Officials of Public International 
Organisations Act, 2015. 

 72 
 
Section  Description of Offences 
3 Prohibition for accepting gratification by a 
Foreign Public Official or an Official of a 
Public International Organisation 
4 Prohibition for giving gratification to a 
Foreign Public Official or  an Official of a 
Public International Organisation 
5 Abetment  
6 Attempt 
 
Sd/- 
 [Justice A.P. Shah] 
Chairman 
Sd/-     Sd/-          Sd/- 
 [Justice S.N. Kapoor] 
Member 
[Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma] 
Member 
 
[Justice Usha Mehra] 
Member 
Sd/- 
[P.K. Malhotra] 
Member (Ex-officio) 
Sd/- 
[Dr. Sanjay Singh] 
Member (Ex-officio) 
 
[Dr. G. Narayana Raju] 
Member-Secretary 
  

 73 
  
Annexure 
REVISED DRAFT OF THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY OF FOREIGN PUBLIC 
OFFICIALS AND OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS 
BILL, 2015 
 
 
Having regard to the discussion and amendments proposed to 
the 2015 Bill, the Commission suggests the following revised 
draft of the Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and 
Officials of Public International Organisations Bill, 2015. 
 
THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY OF FOREIGN PUBLIC 
OFFICIALS AND OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2015 
A 
BILL 
to prevent corruption in relation to bribery of foreign public officials 
and officials of public international organisations and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
WHEREAS India has signed the United Nations Convention Against 
Corruption on 9 th December, 2005 and ratified the same on 9 th 
May, 2011; 
 
AND WHEREAS this Convention expresses concern about the 
seriousness of problems and threats posed by corruption to the 
stability and security of societies, undermining the institutions 
and values of democracy, ethical values and justice and 
jeopardising sustainable development and the rule of law; and 
about cases of corruption that involve vast quantities of assets, 
which may constitute a substantial portion of the resources of 
States, and that threaten the political stability and sustainable 
development of those States; 
 
AND WHEREAS in terms of Article 16 of this Convention, each State 
Party is required to adopt such legislative and other measures, 
as may be necessary to establish the bribery of foreign public 
officials and officials of public international organisations, as a 
criminal offence. 
 

 74 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:- 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
(1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Bribery of Foreign 
Public Officials and Officials of Public International 
Organisations Act, 2015. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and applies – 
(a) when the conduct constituting the offence under the Act 
occurs: 
(i) wholly or partly in India; or 
(ii) wholly or partly on board an aircraft or ship 
registered in India at the time of the commission of 
the offence; 
(b) when the conduct constituting the offence under the Act 
occurs wholly outside India, and the offence is committed 
by:  
(i) a person who is an Indian citizen;  
(ii) a person who is a permanent resident of India; or 
(iii)a person that is a body corporate incorporated by or 
under the laws of India. 
Explanation 1:  For the purposes of clause (b), the expression 
“permanent resident” shall have the same meaning as assigned 
to it under the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961). 
Explanation 2: When the conduct constituting an offence occurs 
wholly outside India, no proceedings under this Act shall 
commence without the previous sanction of the Central 
Government. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint; and different dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act 
shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that 
provision. 
2. Definitions. 
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
(a) “Convention” means the United Nations Convention 
Against Corruption adopted by the Resolutions 58/4 of 

 75 
31st October, 2003 of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations; 
 
(b) “foreign country” means a country other than India, and 
includes: 
(i) any political subdivision of that country; 
(ii) the government, and any department or branch of 
the government, of that country or of a political 
subdivision of that country; and 
(iii)any agency of that countr y or of a political 
subdivision of that country; 
 
(c) “foreign public official” means:  
(i) a person who holds a legislative, executive, 
administrative or judicial position of a foreign 
country; or 
(ii) a person who performs public duties or public 
functions for a fore ign country, including a person 
employed by a board, commission, corporation or 
other body or authority that is established to perform 
such duty or function on behalf of the foreign 
country, or is performing such duty or function;  
Explanation: For the purpose of this definition: 
(A) “public duty” means a duty in the discharge of 
which the State, the public or the community 
at large has an interest; and  
(B) “public function” means an act or duty of a 
foreign public official in his capacity as such;  
 
(d) “notification” means a notification published in the 
Official Gazette; 
 
(e) “official of a public international organisation” means an 
international civil servant or any person who is 
authorised by such an organisation to act on behalf of 
that organisation; 
 
(f) “public international organisation” means an 
organisation whose members are any of the following: 

 76 
(i) countries or territories;  
(ii) governments of countries or territories;  
(iii)other public international organisations; or 
(iv) a mixture of any of the above; 
(g) “Special Judge” means  the Special Judge appointed 
under section 3 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 
1988 (49 of 1988);  
 
(h) “undue advantage” means any gratification, benefit or 
advantage, property or interest in such property, 
reward, fee, valuable security or gift or any oth er 
valuable thing (other than legal remuneration), whether 
pecuniary or non-pecuniary, tangible or intangible; 
 
Explanation: For the purpose of this definition, “legal 
remuneration” is not restricted to remuneration paid to a 
foreign public official or off icial of a public international 
organisation, but includes all remuneration which he is 
permitted to receive by the foreign country or the public 
international organisation which he serves. 
 (2) The words and expressions used under this Act but not 
defined and defined under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 
(49 of 1988) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them under that Act.  
CHAPTER II 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES OF BRIBERY OF FOREIGN OFFICIALS AND 
OFFICIALS OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS 
3. Prohibition for accepting gratification by foreign public 
officials or officials of public international organisations. 
Whoever, being a foreign public official or official of public 
international organisation, intentionally accepts or obtains or 
agrees to accept from any person, directly or indirectly, for 
himself or for any other person or entity, any undue advantage 
other than legal remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing or 
forbearing to do any official act or for showing or forbearing to 
show, in the exercise of his official functions, favour or disfavour 
to any person or entity for rendering or attempting to render any 
service or disservice to any person or entity, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment which shall not be less than three ye ars but 
which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 

 77 
4. Prohibition for giving gratification to foreign public official 
or officials of public international organisations. 
Whoever, in relation to the conduct of international business i n 
order to obtain or retain business or to obtain any advantage 
relating thereto, intentionally, offers or promises to offer, gives or 
promises to give, directly or indirectly, any undue advantage, to 
any foreign public official or official of public inter national 
organisation, for himself or herself or for another person or entity, 
in order that such official, act or refrain from acting in the 
exercise of his or her official duties, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years 
but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
5. Abetment.  
Whoever abets the commission of an offence under section 3 or 
section 4 of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less  than three years but which may 
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 
6. Attempt. 
Whoever attempts to commit an offence under section 3 or 
section 4 of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend 
to three years and shall also be liable to fine. 
7. Persons not guilty of offence in certain circumstances.  
(1) No person is guilty of an offence under this Act if the offer, 
promise or giving of any advantage, which was made to a foreign 
public official or official of a public international organisation, 
was a reasonable and bona fide expenditure, such as travel and 
lodging expenses, incurred by or on behalf of such foreign public 
official or official of a public internation al organisation and was 
directly related to: 
(a) the promotion, demonstration, or explanation of 
products or services; or 
(b) the execution or performance of a contract with a 
foreign country or public international organisation. 
(2) No person is guilty of an offe nce under this Act if the offer, 
promise or giving of any advantage is permitted under the laws of 
the foreign country or public international organization for which 
the foreign public official or official of a public international 
organisation performs duties or functions. 

 78 
(3) No person is guilty of an offence under this Act if the offer, 
promise or giving of any advantage, is made to expedite or secure 
the performance by a foreign public official or official of a public 
international organisation of any a ct of a routine nature that is 
part of the duties or functions of the foreign public official or 
official of the public international organisation, such as:  
(a) the issuance of a permit, licence or other document 
to qualify a person to do business;  
(b) the processing of official documents, such as visas 
and work permits;  
(c) the provision of services normally offered to the 
public, such as mail pick -up and delivery, 
telecommunication services and power and water 
supply; and  
(d) the provision of services normally provid ed as 
required, such as police protection, loading and 
unloading of cargo, the protection of perishable 
products or commodities from deterioration or the 
scheduling of inspections related to contract 
performance or transit of goods.  
Explanation: For removal of doubts, it is clarified that a decision 
about whether to  award new business; or to continue existing 
business with a particular person; or the terms of such new or 
existing business; shall not be regarded as any act of a routine 
nature for the purpose of sub-section (3). 
8. Liability of commercial organisations for offences under 
this Act.  
(1) When an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
commercial organisation, such commercial organisation shall be 
punishable with fine. 
(2) Where an offence under this Act is committed by a commercial 
organisation, and such offence is proved to have been committed 
with the consent or connivance of any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the commercial organisation, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than the 
punishment prescribed for such offence under this Act.  
(3) When an offence under this Act is  committed by any person 
associated with the commercial organisation, the commercial 

 79 
organisation shall be guilty of an offence and shall be punishable 
with fine: 
Provided that it shall be a defence for the commercial 
organisation to prove that it had in p lace adequate procedures 
designed to prevent persons associated with it from undertaking 
such conduct.  
(4) The Central Government may, with a view to enhancing 
compliance with this section by commercial organisations, 
prescribe such guidelines about adequate procedures as may be 
necessary, following a consultation process in which the views of 
all the interested stakeholders are obtained through public 
notice.  
(5) For the purposes of this section: 
(a) “commercial organisation” means: 
(i) a body which is incorporated in India and 
which carries on a business, whether in India 
or outside India;  
(ii) any other body which is incorporated outside 
India and which carries on a business, or a 
part of a business, in any part of India;  
(iii) a partnership fir m or any association of 
persons formed in India and which carries on 
a business, whether in India or outside India; 
or 
(iv) any other partnership or association of 
persons which is formed outside India and 
which carries on a business, or part of a 
business, in any part of India;  
(b) “business” includes a trade or profession or 
providing service including charitable service; 
(c) a person is said to be associated with the commercial 
organisation if, disregarding any conduct 
constituting an offence under this Act, such pe rson 
is a person who performs services for or on behalf of 
the commercial organisation.  
Explanation 1:  The capacity in which the person performs 
services for or on behalf of the commercial organisation shall not 
matter irrespective of whether such person is an employee or 
agent or subsidiary of such commercial organisation.  

 80 
Explanation 2: For the purpose of this section, the term “agent” 
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under section 182 
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872). 
Explanation 3:  Whether or not the person is a person who 
performs services for or on behalf of the commercial organisation 
is to be determined by reference to all the relevant circumstances 
and not merely by reference to the nature of the relationship 
between such person and the commercial organisation.  
Explanation 4: If the person is an employee of the commercial 
organisation, it shall be presumed unless the contrary is proved 
that such person is a person who performs services for or on 
behalf of the commercial organisation. 
9. Agreements with foreign countries. 
The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the 
Government of any country outside India for— 
(a) enforcing the provisions of this Act; 
(b) exchange of information for the prevention of any 
offence under this Act or under the corresponding 
law in force in that country or investigation of cases 
relating to any offence under this Act, and may, by 
notification, make such provisions as may be 
necessary for implementing the agreement (including 
mutual assistance). 
10. Letter of request to a concerned State in certain cases. 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), if, in the course of an 
investigation into an offence or other proceedings under this Act, 
an application is made to a Special Judge by the I nvestigating 
Officer or any officer superior in rank to the Investigating Officer 
that any evidence is required in connection with investigation into 
an offence or proceedings under this Act and he is of the opinion 
that such evidence may be available in any place in a concerned 
State, and the Special Judge, on being satisfied that such 
evidence is required in connection with the investigation into an 
offence or proceedings under this Act, may issue a letter of 
request to a court or an authority in the conc erned State 
competent to deal with such request to— 
(i) examine facts and circumstances of the case,  
(ii) take such steps as the Special Judge may specify in 
such letter of request, and 
(iii) forward all the evidence so taken or collected to the 
Special Judge issuing such letter of request. 

 81 
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as 
the Central Government may specify in this behalf. 
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under 
sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be the evidence collected 
during the course of investigation. 
11. Assistance to a concerned State in certain cases. 
Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government 
from a court or an auth ority in a concerned State requesting for 
investigation into an offence or proceedings under this Act and 
forwarding to such court or authority any evidence connected 
therewith, the Central Government may forward such letter of 
request to the Special Judge  or to any authority under the Act, 
as it thinks fit, for execution of such request in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act or, as the case may be, any other law 
for the time being in force. 
12. Reciprocal arrangements for processes and assistance for 
transfer of accused persons. 
(1) Where a Special Judge, in relation to an offence punishable 
under section 3 or section 4, desires — 
(a) a summons to an accused person; or 
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or 
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and 
produce a document or other thing or to produce it; or 
(d) a search warrant, 
issued by it shall be served or executed at any place in any 
concerned State, it shall send such summons or warrant in 
duplicate in such form, to such court, Judge or Magistrate 
through such authorities, as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf and that court, Judge or 
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the same to be 
executed. 
(2) Where a Special Judge, in relation  to an offence punishable 
under section 4 has received for service or execution— 
(a) a summons to an accused person; or 
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or 
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and 
produce a document or other thing, or to produce it; or 
(d) a search warrant, 
issued by a court, Judge or Magistrate in a concerned State, it 
shall, cause the same to be served or executed as if it were a 
summons or warrant received by it from another court in the said 
territories for service or execution within its local jurisdiction; 
and where— 

 82 
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person 
arrested shall be dealt with in accordance with the 
procedure specified under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974); 
(ii) a search warrant has been executed, the things found 
in this search shall, so far as possible, be dealt with in 
accordance with the procedure specified under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974): 
Provided that in a case where a summon or search warrant 
received from a concerned State has been executed, the 
documents or other things produced or things found in the 
search shall be forwarded to the court issuing the summon 
or search warrant through such authority as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 
(3) Where a person transferred to a concerned State pursuant to 
sub-section (2) is a prisoner in India, the Special Judge or the 
Central Government may impose such conditions as that court 
or Government deems fit. 
(4) Where the person transferred to India pursuant to sub-section 
(1) is a prisoner in a concerned State, the Special Judge in India 
shall ensure that the conditions subject to which the prisoner is 
transferred to India are complied with and such prisoner shall be 
kept in such custody subject to such conditions as the Central 
Government may direct in writing. 
13. Procedure in respect of letter of request. 
Every letter of request, summons or warrant, received by the 
Central Government from, and every letter of request, summons 
or warrant, to be transmitted to a concerned State under this 
Chapter shall be transmitted to a concerned State or, as the case 
may be, sent to the concerned court in India in such form and in 
such manner as the Central Government may, by notification, 
specify in this behalf. 
14. Attachment, seizure and confiscation, etc. of property in 
a concerned State or India. 
(1) Where the property is suspected to be in a concerned State, 
the Special Judge, on an application by an officer authorised by  
the Central Government, may issue a letter of request to a court 
or an authority in the concerned State for execution of 
attachment or confiscation of the property in the concerned State. 
(2) Where a letter of request is received by the Central 
Government from a court or an authority in a concerned State 
requesting attachment or confiscation of the property in India, 
derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person from the 

 83 
commission of an offence under section 3 or section 4 committed 
in that c oncerned State, the Central Government may forward 
such letter of request to the Special Judge for execution in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(3) The Special Judge shall, on receipt of a letter of request under 
sub-section (2), direct any aut hority to take all steps necessary 
for tracing and identifying such property. 
(4) The steps referred to in sub -section (3) may include any 
inquiry, investigation or survey in respect of any person, place, 
property, assets, documents, books of account in an y bank or 
public financial institutions or any other relevant matters.  
(5) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub-section 
(4) shall be carried out by an authority mentioned in sub-section 
(3) in accordance with such directions issued in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act. 
15. Provisions of Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1994 
to apply to attachment under this Act. 
Save as otherwise provided under this Act, or the Prevention of 
Money-laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003) the provision s of the 
Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance 1944 (Ord. 38 of 1944), as 
amended by section 29 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 
(49 of 1988), shall, as far as may be, apply to the attachment, 
administration of attached property and execution of order of 
attachment or confiscation of the property under this Act. 
16. Certain provisions of Act 49 of 1988 to apply 
Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and the rules made 
thereunder, (including th ose relating to appointment of Special 
Judges under Chapter II and investigation into the cases and 
inspection of bankers books under Chapter IV of that Act), shall, 
so far as may be, apply in relation to the offence under this Act 
as they apply in relatio n to the offence under the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988. 
17. Military, Naval and Air Force or other laws not to be 
affected. 
(1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exercisable by, 
or the procedure applicable to, any court or other authority under 
the Army Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), the Air force Act, 1950 (46 of 
1950), the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), the Border Security Force 
Act, 1968 (47 of 1968), the Coast Guard Act, 1978 (30 of 1978) 
and the National Security Guard Act, 1986 (47 of 1986). 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the 
purposes of any such law as is referred to in sub-section (1), the 

 84 
court of a Special Judge shall be deemed to be a court of ordinary 
criminal justice. 
 
 
18. Appeal and Revision. 
Subject to the provisions of this Act, the High Court may exercise, 
so far as they may be applicable, all the powers of appeal and 
revision conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974) on a High Court as if the court of the Special Judge were a 
Court of Session trying cases within the local limits of the High 
Court. 
19. Act to be in addition to any other law. 
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in 
derogation of, any other law for the time being in force. 
20. Proceedings under this Act to be taken in consultation 
with concerned State against foreign public official to whom 
privileges and immunities under any law or Convention or 
treaty apply 
In case any foreign public official or official of public international 
organisation is alleged to have committed an offence under this 
Act to whom certain privileges and immunities applies under the 
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 or the 
International Finance Corporation (Status, Immunities and 
Privileges) Act,  1958, or the International Development 
Association (Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1960, or the 
Diplomatic Relations (Vienna Convention) Act, 1972, or under 
any other law for the time being in force or under any Convention 
or treaty, the Central Government shall, in consultation with the 
concerned State or public international organisation, as the case 
may be, take adequate measures for proceeding under this Act 
against such public official. 
22. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to apply subject to  
certain modifications 
Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), as amended by 
section 22 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988) 
shall have effect in their application in relation to any proceeding 
in relation to an offence punishable under this Act. 
22. Power to make rules. 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 

 85 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to th e generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: 
(a) framing of guidelines to enhance compliance with the 
provisions of section 8 by the commercial organizations 
under sub-section (4) of section 8;  
(b) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, 
or in respect of which provision is to be, or may be, mad e 
by rules. 
23. Rules and notification to be laid before Parliament. 
Every rule made by the Central Government, or notification 
issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making an y 
modification in the rule, or notification or both Houses agree that 
the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule, or 
notification shall thereafter have effect  only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
notification.  
24. Amendment of certain enactments. 
The enactments specified in the Schedule to this Act shall be 
amended in the manner specified therein and such amendments 
shall take effect on the date of commencement of this Act. 
 
 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See Section 24) 
AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS 
PART I 
THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988 
(49 of 1988) 
Amendment to Section 3 
In section 3, in sub -section (1), in clause (a), for the words “any 
offence punishable under this Act”, the words and figures “any 
offence punishable under this Act or the Prevention of Bribery of 
Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public Internat ional 
Organisations Act, 2015” shall be substituted. 
PART II 

 86 
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2002 
(15 of 2003) 
Amendment of Schedule  
In the Schedule, in Part A, after paragraph 8, the following 
paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- 
“Paragraph 8A” 
The Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials 
of Public International Organisations Act, 2015. 
Section  Description of Offences 
3 Prohibition for accepting gratification by a Foreign 
Public Official or an Official of a Public 
International Organisation 
4 Prohibition for giving gratification to a Foreign 
Public Official or an Official of a Public 
International Organisation 
5 Abetment 
6 Attempt 
 
 
 
 
 
 