  
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
Report No.259 
 
  Early Childhood Development  
and Legal Entitlements 
 
 
August 2015 
 
  


ii 
 
U;k;ewfrZ vftr izdk'k 'kgk 
HkwriwoZ eq[; U;k;k/kh'k] fnYyh mPp U;k;ky; 
v/;{k 
Hkkjr dk fof/k vk;ksx 
Hkkjr ljdkj 
14ok¡ ry] fgUnqLrku VkbZEl gkÅl] 
dLrwjck xk¡/kh ekxZ 
ubZ fnYyh&110 001 
 
Justice Ajit Prakash Shah 
Former Chief Justice of Delhi High court 
Chairman 
Law Commission of India 
Government of India 
14th Floor, Hindustan Times House 
Kasturba Gandhi Marg 
New Delhi – 110 001 
 
D.O. No.6(3)272/2014-LC(LS)                           27 August 2015 
 
Dear Mr. Sadananda Gowda ji, 
  
              The development of young children is nowadays recognized as a 
development and human rights issue of critical national importance.  Early 
childhood development spanning from birth to the age of six years is the 
period that sees the most rapid growth and development of the entire human 
lifespan.  It is during this period that the foundation of cognitive, physical 
and socio-emotional development, language and personality are laid.   
 
In November 2014, some of the representatives of Alliance for Right to 
Early Childhood Care & Development and Mobile Crèches met the 
Commission to highlight the issue relating to the rights of children under the 
age of six years. Recognizing the importance and relevance of ECD from the 
perspective of national and human resource dev elopment, the Commission 
decided to take up the study. The Commission formed a Sub -Committee 
under the chairmanship of Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma, Member, which,  
after several rounds of discussions and deliberations, came up with a draft 
Report on the issue.  This draft was discussed further by the Commission 
and finalized as Report No.259 titled “Early Childhood Development and 
Legal Entitlements”, which is enclosed herewith for consideration by the 
Government. 
 
With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
Sd/-  
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
Mr. D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi   


iii 
 
Report No.259 
  Early Childhood Development and 
Legal Entitlements 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
Chapter Title Page 
I CONCEPT AND IMPORTANCE 
 
1-5 
II INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS, 
TREATIES AND DECLARATIONS 
 
6-18 
A.  International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, 1966. 
9 
B.  Health for All Declaration, 1978. 9-10 
C.  Maternity Protection Convention, 2000. 10-11 
D.  Education for All Declaration, 1990. 11-12 
E.  Dakar Framework for Action – Education 
for All: Meeting Our Collective 
Commitments, 2000. 
12-13 
F.  Moscow World Conference on Early 
Childhood Care and Education, 2010. 
13 
G.  UN Millennium Declaration, 2000 and 
Millennium Development Goals, 2000. 
14 
H.  Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(CRC), 1989. 
14-17 
I.  Zero Draft: Sustainable Development 
Goals 
17-18 

iv 
 
III CONSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT 
 
19-26 
A.  Fundamental Rights and Rights of Children 
under Six 
 
19-21 
B.  Directive Principles of State Policy 
 
21-23 
C.  Perspectives from other jurisdictions 23-26 
IV NATIONAL POLICIES AND SCHEMES 
 
27-32 
V HEALTH AND NUTRITION  
 
33-51 
A. Central Legislative Enactments  
 
34-41 
B. State Legislation Enactments 
 
41-43 
C.  National Schemes relating to Health and 
Nutrition 
43-47 
D.  Perspectives from other jurisdictions 47-51 
VI CARE AND EDUCATION 
 
52-64 
VII CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
 
65-69 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
 
CONCEPT AND IMPORTANCE 
 
1.1  The development of young children is now 
increasingly recognised as a development and human 
rights issue of critical national importance. The 
statistics on the malnutrition and neglect  of young 
children in India today cannot be ignored, and their 
significance for the nation’s overall human resources 
cannot be overemphasized. However, the State’s 
response to the problem has been slow so far. It was in 
response to rising voices demanding greater attention 
from the State on the issue of ‘Early Childhood 
Development (ECD)’ that the Government came out with 
a comprehensive ‘Nation Early Childhood Care and 
Education (ECCE) Policy, 2013’.  
 
1.2  The National ECCE Policy, 2013, defines 
early chi ldhood as ‘the formative stage of the first six 
years of life’ .  According to the globally and nationally 
held view, the ‘Right to Early Childhood Development 
(ECD)’ means the right of the child to survival, growth 
and holistic development, and the right t o inputs that 
will make such development possible – care, love, 
nurturing, protection, health, nutrition, stimulation, 
play and learning.  
 
1.3  Early childhood, spanning from birth to the 
age of six years, is the period that sees the most rapid 
growth and development of the entire human lifespan. 
It is during this period that the foundations of cognitive, 
physical and socio -emotional development, language 
and personality are laid. Brain development is most 
rapid during this phase - 90% of brain growth take s 

2 
 
place before the age of 5 years 1. It is also the phase of 
maximum vulnerability as deprivation can seriously 
impact a child’s health and learning potential. Research 
has shown high risks of impaired development of young 
children due to malnutrition, disease, poverty, social 
exclusion and the lack of a conducive environment.  
 
1.4  This critical period up to the age of six years 
is a ‘window of opportunity’, i.e., if the child receives 
favourable environmental inputs of health, nutrition, 
learning and psychosocial development, the chances of 
the child’s brain developing to its full potential are 
considerably enhanced. If the environmental 
experiences are unfavourable and the child faces 
deprivation or emotional or physical abuse, the brain’s 
development is negatively affected and the ‘windo w of 
opportunity’ is lost, often irrevocably. The concept of a 
right to Early Childhood Development (ECD) 
emphasizes that young children need simultaneous 
inputs of care, nutrition and health as well as 
opportunities for psychosocial development, play and 
learning in an enabling and protective environment. 2 
Since development is interdependent and synergistic in 
nature, these inputs need to be provided to the child 
simultaneously across all stages of early childhood as 
the level of development in each stage affects the level of 
development in the next.  
 
1.5  As per the 2011 Census, India has 158.7 
million children in the age group of 0 -6 years, 
comprising about 16% of the total Indian population. In 
the period 2008-2013, 43% of India’s children under 5 
were underweight and 48% had stunted growth. 
                                                        
1 Giedd, Jay, N (2004), “Structural Magnetic Resource Imaging of the Adolescent 
Brain”, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1021 (1)77-85, 
doc:0:1196/Annals, 1308.009 
2See Sections 3.4, 5.2.3 and 10.9 of the National Policy for Early Childhood Care and 
Education, 2013. 

3 
 
According to a World Bank Report published in 2013, 
the mortality rate of children under 5 years of age is 53 
per 1000 live births 3 and according to a 2013 UNICEF 
Report4, more than 60 million children under 5 are 
stunted. Less than half the women in the country are 
provided any form of support during their pregnancies, 
deliveries and lactation, which has a significant impact 
on a child’s health and growth during the early part of 
its life. Moreover, a quarter or less  of children in India 
receive adequate health care.  
 
1.6  Despite these alarming figures, there is no 
clear legal articulation of the entitlements of these 
young children. The present legal framework remains 
wanting and weak as far as ECD is concerned, even 
though Article 45 of the Constitution directs that “the 
State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care 
and education for all children until they complete the age 
of six years.” 
 
1.7  It has been more than two and a half decades 
since India signed and ratified the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child, 19 89, but the idea of justiciable 
rights for children, especially young children, has yet 
not taken shape. Until now, the State has addressed the 
needs of children through a fragmented approach based 
on targeted interventions, even though the Integrated 
Child Development Services (ICDS), conceptualized in 
1972, had kept the integrated needs of children in mind 
and was designed as a programme to provide health, 
nutrition and early childhood care and education. Some 
of the current policies concerning young chil dren are: 
                                                        
3 Available at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.DYN.MORT 
42013 UNICEF Report:Improving Child Nutrition: The achievable imperative for global 
progress  based on National Family Health Survey, 2005–2006, and UNICEF 
Global Databases  available at 
http://www.unicef.org/gambia/Improving_Child_Nutrition_-
_the_achievable_imperative_for_global_progress.pdf 

4 
 
National Nutrition Policy, 1993, National Plan of Action 
for Children, 2005, National Early Childhood Care and 
Education (ECCE) Policy of 2013, and the National 
Policy for Children, 2013. These are undoubtedly well -
intentioned and relevant polici es/schemes, but being 
politico-executive initiatives they lack the status of law 
and don’t create any justiciable rights in favour of 
beneficiaries. They only articulate promises. 
 
1.8  Keeping in view the aforesaid, and 
recognizing the importance and rele vance of ECD from 
the perspective of national and human resource 
development, the Commission has suo-moto undertaken 
the present study, ‘Early Childhood Development and 
Legal Entitlements’.  The Commission feels that during 
a time when the world is debatin g the Post 2015 
Sustainable Development Goals 5, which include the 
guarantee of early childhood development 6, the time is 
ripe to position the rights of young children within the 
development agenda and create appropriate legal 
entitlements with respect to ECD . It is hoped that 
suggestions and recommendations resulting from this 
study will go a long way in securing the constitutional 
objective of ensuring a healthy early childhood resulting 
into creating a rich national human resources.   
 
1.9  The Report consists of seven Chapters. While 
Chapter I introduces the issue at hand, Chapter II 
                                                        
5http://unsdsn.org/resources/goals-and-targets 
6Proposed Goals and Targets - Target 3a. All children under the age of 5 reach their 
developmental potential through access to quality early childhood development 
programs and policies. 
Target 3b. All girls and boys receive quality primary and secondary education that 
focuses on learning outcomes and on reducing the dropout rate to zero.  
Target 4c. Prevent and eliminate violence against individuals, especially women and 
children. 
Target 5b. End preventable deaths by reducing child mortality to [20] or fewer deaths 
per 1000 births, maternal mortality to [40] or fewer deaths per 100,000 live births, and 
mortality under 70 years of age from non-communicable diseases by at least 30 
percent compared with the level in 2015. 
 

5 
 
captures various International Conventions, Treaties 
and Declarations that concern the issue of ECD.  
Chapter III focuses on the constitutional context and its 
vision with regard to children including children below 
six years.  Attempt has been made in Chapter IV to 
briefly examine the scope and nature of various policies 
and schemes in existence that deal with different 
nuances involved in ECD.  This Report makes an 
attempt to suggest as to what kind of legal measures 
and binding entitlements be created dealing with ECD 
especially in respect of ‘Health and Nutrition’ and ‘Care 
and Education’ in Chapter V and VI , respectively.  
Towards the end, Chapter VII incorporates some of the 
suggestions and recommendations emerging from the 
Study. The Commission believes that acting on these 
suggestions would not only serve the cause of 
developing young children but would also go a long way 
in developing the nation’s human capital. 
 
1.10  In order to prepare this report, the 
Commission formed a sub -Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma , Full 
Time Member of the Commission and comprising : Ms. 
Archana Mishra, Dr. Arun Sagar and Ms. Mandavi 
Jayakar from Jindal Global Law School; Dr. Bharti 
Kumar, Ms. Neha Singhal and Dr. Sophy K.J. from 
National Law University, Delhi; Ms. Sudeshna 
Sengupta, Ms. Devika Singh and Ms. Nikita Agarwal 
from Alliance for Right to Early Childhood Development. 
 
1.11  Thereafter, upon detailed deliberations and 
discussions, the Commission has given shape to the 
present Report.   
 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS, TREATIES AND 
DECLARATIONS 
 
2.1  International Conventions and D eclarations 
have been effective in mobilizing world communities on 
various social, economic, political, civil rights and 
human rights issues. Early Childhood Development 
(ECD) has gained international attention only in the 
recent past, although most conven tions in the past 
being of a general nature applied to all people including 
children. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR) (1948), which represents the first global 
expression of universally protecting fundamental 
human rights, pronounced the special rights of the child 
for the first time by providing that “Motherhood and 
childhood are entitled to special care and assistance. All 
children, whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy 
the same social protection .” 7The United Nations has 
played a prominent role in evolving ECD.  In a General 
Discussion in 2004 dedicated to the theme of 
‘implementing child rights in early childhood’, the 
General Assembly stated: “ having reviewed since 1993 
the situation of child rights in almost all countries of th e 
world, the rights of babies and young children are too 
often overlooked. This is so although it is widely 
recognized that early childhood is a crucial period for the 
sound development of young children and that missed 
opportunities during these early yea rs cannot be made 
up at later stages of the child’s life.”8 This chapter gives 
                                                        
7Article 25(2) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 available at 
https://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/ (accessed 9 June 2015). 
8 A Guide to General Comment 7: ‘Implementing Child Rights in Early Childhood’ 
United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child, United Nations Children’s Fund 
and Bernard van Leer Foundation, 2006, available at 
http://www.unicef.org/spanish/earlychildhood/files/Guide_to_GC7.pdf (accessed on 9 
June 2015). 

7 
 
an overview of a few relevant international conventions 
and declarations which have promoted ECD. 
 
2.2  The period after the First World War posed 
new challenges to several coun tries to protect society 
from the violence and upheaval in the society. The newly 
formed League of Nations (LON) established a 
Committee on the Child Welfare in 1919.In 1924, the 
LON adopted the Geneva Declaration, a historic 
document that recognized and affirmed for the first time 
the existence of rights specific to children and the 
responsibility of adults towards children.9It established 
a five -point declaration which emphasized the basic 
requirements a society should meet in order to provide 
adequate protection and care for its children. The five 
points were:(i) child must be given the means needed for 
its normal development, both materially and spiritually; 
(ii) hungry child should be fed; sick child should be 
helped; erring child should be reclaimed; a nd the 
orphan and the homeless child should be sheltered and 
succoured; (iii) child must be the first to receive relief in 
times of distress; (iv) child must be put in a position to 
earn a livelihood and must be protected against every 
form of exploitation; and (v) child must be brought up 
in the consciousness that its best qualities are to be 
used in the service of its fellow men.10 
 
2.3  However, the United Nations took over the 
Geneva Declaration in 1946 after the Second World 
War, and with the adoption o f the UDHR several 
shortcomings of the Geneva Declaration were revealed. 
Thus, a specialized agency of the UN – UNICEF (present 
nomenclature - United Nations Children’s Fund) was 
                                                        
9http://www.humanium.org/en/childrens-rights-history/references-on-child-
rights/declaration-rights-child/ (accessed on July 15, 2015) 
10Geneva Declaration of the Rights of the Child adopted 26 September, 1924, League 
of Nations, available at http://www.un-documents.net/gdrc1924.htm 

8 
 
established to promote care for the world’s children. The 
Declaration of the Rights of the Child, which reaffirmed 
the notion that “mankind owes to the Child the best that 
it has to give” was unanimously by all 78 Member States 
of the United Nations General Assembly in 1959.11 This 
Declaration expanded the five principles of the Gen eva 
Declaration to ten – (i) non-discrimination; (ii) special 
protection, opportunities and facilities to develop 
physically, mentally, morally, spiritually and socially in 
a healthy and normal manner and in conditions of 
freedom and dignity; (iii) the rig ht to a name and 
nationality; (iv) the right to social security, adequate 
nutrition, housing, recreation and medical services; (v) 
the differently-abled child to be given special treatment, 
education and care; (vi) the need for love and 
understanding so that the child grows in the care and 
responsibility of his/her parents, and in an atmosphere 
of affection and moral and material security; (vii) 
entitlement to education, which should be free and 
compulsory, at least in the elementary stages: (viii) the 
child should be among the first to receive protection and 
relief in all circumstances; (ix) protection against all 
forms of neglect, cruelty and exploitation, including that 
associated with employment; and (x) protection from 
practices that may foster racial, religious and other 
forms of discrimination. Although the Declaration 
reflected the best intentions, it did not have any binding 
force on the Member States, who were not very effective 
in putting principles into practice. Further, the biggest 
drawback of b oth the  Geneva Declaration (1924)  and 
the Declaration of the Rights of the Child (1959) was 
that they failed to define ‘child’, which left uncertainty 
as to when childhood began and ended. Recognizing the 
significance of child welfare and development, the year 
                                                        
11 Ibid 

9 
 
1979 was designated as the International Year of the 
Child (IYC). 
 
A. International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, 1966. 
 
2.4  One of the earliest instruments to have 
recognised the child’s right to protection was the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
(ICCPR) 12 , adopted by the United Nations General 
Assembly in 1966. The child’s right to live peacefully 
and to be protected from violence, mistreatment, 
exploitation or neglect, is an indispensable part of ECD. 
Under the ICCPR , the responsibility of providing 
protection to the child has been assigned to the family, 
society and also the state. Article 24(1) of  ICCPR reads 
that ‘every child shall have, without any discrimination 
as to race, colour, sex, language, religion, natio nal or 
social origin, property or birth, the right to such measures 
of protection as are required by his status as a minor, on 
the part of his family, society and the State.’ India ratified 
the ICCPR in 1979.  
 
B. Health for All Declaration, 1978. 
 
2.5  World Health Organization’s Health for All 
(HFA) Declaration, 1978 (or Alma Ata Declaration) 
expressed the need to address improvement in nutrition 
of both the mother and the child, to impart knowledge 
about nutrition, in particular, proper feeding of children 
and nutrition of mothers during pregnancy and 
lactation 13  and the need for urgent action by all 
                                                        
12 ICCPR, 1966 available at 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CCPR.aspx (accessed 9 June 
2015). 
13 Primary Health Care, Report of the International Conference on Primary Health 
Care, Alma-Ata, USSR, 6-12 September 1978, available at; 

10 
 
governments, health workers and the world community 
to protect and promote health for all. It had several goals 
set out for its member countries, of which one  was to 
provide plentiful supplies of clean water and help to 
decrease mortality and morbidity, in particular among 
infants and children. 14 Even though many of its goals 
remain unachieved, this Declaration was an important 
move in the development of ECD and  it beckoned 
towards a new route for global health. 
 
C. Maternity Protection Convention, 2000. 
 
2.6  The General Conference of the International 
Labour  Organisation adopted the Maternity Protection 
Convention, 2000 15 in order to promote equality of all 
women in the workforce and the health and safety of the 
mother and child. Taking into account the 
circumstances of women workers and the need to 
provide protection for pregnancy, it recognizes the 
shared responsibility of government and society. It 
direct States to adopt appropriate measures to ensure 
that pregnant or breastfeeding women are not obliged to 
perform work which is prejudicial to the health of the 
mother or the child.  Maternity leave is to include a 
period of six weeks' compulsory leave after childbirth 
having regard to the protection of the health of the 
mother and that of the child and a woman has to be 
provided with the right to one or more daily breaks or a 
daily reduction of hours of work to breastfeed her child.  
In case of dismissal of pregnant women, the burden of 
proof rests on the employer to prove that the reasons of 
                                                        
http://www.hauora.co.nz/assets/files/PHO%20Info/Alma_Ata_conference_1978_repor
t%20and%20declaration.pdf (accessed 9 June 2015). 
14Ibid. 
15Available at 
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_C
ODE:C183 

11 
 
dismissal were unrelated to pregnancy or childbirth and 
its consequences or to nursing. 
 
D. Education for All Declaration, 1990.  
 
2.7.1  Along with healthy development, there 
emanates a need for learning, which is an essential 
stage of growth for a child to develop healthy cognitive 
skills. UNESCO’s Education for All (EFA) Declaration, 
1990 considered education as a tool for developmen t. 
EFA Declaration, 1990 sponsored by the UNESCO, 
UNDP UNFPA, UNICEF, the World Bank and NGOs at 
the World Conference on Education in Jomtien, 
Thailand aimed for global commitment to provide 
quality basic education for all children, youth and 
adults and pledged to reduce illiteracy by the end of the 
decade. It was under Article V - Broadening the Means 
and Scope of Basic Education that the notion of 
‘learning begins at birth’  was acknowledged 16, which 
shows a shift in the traditional approach to education 
wherein education was equated to formal training at 
school. Care and education during early childhood 
could be provided through family or community -based 
arrangements, or institutional programs , such as day 
care centres. The Framework for Action to Meet Basic 
Learning Needs (1990) offered guidelines to individual 
countries and groups of countries, as well as 
international, regional and national organizations in 
formulating their own specific pla ns of action and 
programmes for implementing the goals enumerated 
under EFA Declaration. It recognized the importance of 
identifying the traditional learning systems which exist 
in the society and identifying actual demand for basic 
education services. It clearly defined basic learning 
                                                        
16World Declaration on Education For All, World Education Forum available at 
http://www.unesco.org/education/wef/en-conf/Jomtien%20Declaration%20eng.shtm 
(accessed on July 15, 2015) 

12 
 
needs of all to include early childhood care and 
development opportunities; relevant, quality primary 
schooling or equivalent out -of-school education for 
children; and literacy, basic knowledge and life skills 
training for youth and adults together with capitalizing 
on the use of traditional and modern information media 
and technologies to educate the public on matters of 
social concern and to support basic education activities. 
The Jomtien Framework of Action called for an 
‘expansion of early childhood care and development 
activities, including family and community interventions, 
especially for poor, disadvantaged and disabled 
children’17 which gave legitimacy to ECCE in a way that 
it had not enjoyed previously. 
 
2.7.2  The Amman Affirmation (1996) reviewed the 
progress made toward the goals set in Jomtein and 
looked into ways to overcome persistent problems. It 
emphasized the need for re -examining the goals and 
adding new areas and means of action; responding to 
new challenges by promoting learning in all aspects of 
life through all the institutions of society; responding by 
including local content in basic education and 
acknowledging the essential role of the mother tongue 
for initial instruction. 
 
E. Dakar Framework for Action  – Education 
for All: Meeting Our Collective 
Commitments, 2000. 
 
2.8  In 2000 a decade after the EFA Declaration  
1990, the international community met again at the 
World Education Forum in Dakar, Senegal and agreed 
                                                        
17 Early Childhood Regional Capacity-Building Initiative, available at 
http://www.unesco.org/education/efa/know_sharing/flagship_initiatives/early_childhoo
d.shtml (accessed 9 June 2015). 
 

13 
 
on the Dakar Framework for Action – Education for 
All: Meeting Our Collective Commitments (2000),  
which apart from reaffirming the commitment to 
achieve Education for All by the year 2015 identified six 
key measurable education goals to meet the learning 
needs of all children, youth and adults by 2015. Some 
of the goals affecting children are – expanding and 
improving comprehensive early childhood care and 
education, providing access to complete, free and 
compulsory primary education for all, improving all 
aspects of the quality of education and eliminating 
gender disparities in primary and secondary education 
and achieving gender equality in education.  
 
F. Moscow World Conference on Earl y 
Childhood Care and Education, 2010. 
 
2.9  Moscow World Conference on Early 
Childhood Care and Education (2010) also reaffirmed 
the commitment to ECD. The  Moscow Framework for 
Action called upon the governments to mobilize stronger 
commitment to ECD, which should also be expressed in 
legislation, policies and strategies. 18  Specifically, the 
Framework recommended that States “develop legal 
frameworks and enforcement mechanisms that are 
conducive to the implementation of the rights of children 
to ECCE from birth;” 19  and “adopt and promote an 
approach to ECCE that is both holistic and multi-sectoral 
to ensure good birth outcomes (prenatal stage), neonatal 
health and nutritional well being, care and 
education…”20 
 
                                                        
18 Moscow Framework for Action and Cooperation, World Conference on Early 
Childhood Care and Education, Moscow, 2010. 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0018/001898/189882e.pdf 
19Ibid., Article 11(i)(a) 
20Ibid., Article 11(i)9b) 

14 
 
G. UN Millennium Declaration, 2000 and 
Millennium Development Goals, 2000. 
 
2.10  UN Millenni um Declaration (UN General 
Assembly, 2000) stresses the observance of 
international human rights law and international 
humanitarian law by urging observance of  values of 
freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance; development 
and poverty eradication; peace,  security and 
disarmament; human rights, democracy and good 
governance etc. Following the adoption of UN 
Millennium Declaration, international development 
goals collectively termed as Millenniu m Development 
Goals (MDGs), 2000  which emphasized on investment 
in economic and social development were set with a 
target to be achieved by 2015. Some of the goals under 
MDGs affecting children are - to achieve universal 
primary education, to reduce child mortality, to improve 
maternal h ealth, to eradicate extreme poverty and 
hunger.  
 
H. Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(CRC), 1989. 
 
2.11.1 The first legally binding international 
document concerning child rights was the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child (CRC), 1989. The CRC is t he 
most widely ratified human rights treaty, and also 
ratified by India in 1992. It is one of the clearest and 
most comprehensive expressions of what the world 
community wants for its children. 21It includes the 10 
principles of the 1959Declaration of the Ri ghts of the 
Child, including non- discrimination and best interests 
                                                        
21Pia Rebello Britto, Nurper Ulkuer, William P. Hodges and Michael F. McCarthy , 
‘Global policy landscape and early childhood development’ in Pia Rebello Britto, 
Patrice L. Engle and, Charles M. Super (eds), Handbook of Early Childhood 
Development Research and Its Impact on Global Policy, Oxford University Press, 
2013. 

15 
 
of the child, and stretches to 54 articles covering almost 
every aspect of the child’s life, thus creating 
interdependent rights for children. It covers four major 
categories of child righ ts: the right to life, the right to 
development, the right to protection and the right to 
participation. It recognizes the importance of family and 
casts responsibility on all duty bearers beginning with 
the family up to state to provide for the protection  and 
harmonious development of child and to uphold 
standards for all children. Rights include protection 
from discrimination on grounds of gender, race or 
minority status as well as from sexual and other forms 
of exploitation. This Convention laid down a s eries of 
rights for children in a legally binding form and brought 
forward basic human rights for children worldwide. 
 
2.11.2 Articles of CRC provides that the State is 
responsible to “…ensure to the maximum extent possible 
child survival and development” (Article 6) ,  “…render 
appropriate assistance to parents and legal guardians in 
the performance of their child rearing responsibilities and 
shall ensure the development of institutions, facilities 
and services for the care of children (Article 18.2) and 
“….children of working parents have the right to benefit 
from child care services and facilities for which they are 
eligible” (Article 18.3). 
 
2.11.3 CRC further advocates for providing for 
comprehensive programmes for ECD when it urges “ in 
guaranteeing righ ts to the youngest children, States 
parties are urged to develop rights -based, 
multidimensional and multi -sectoral strategies that 
promote a systematic and integrated approach to law 
and policy development and provide comprehensive and 
continuous programmes in early childhood development, 
taking into consideration children’s evolving capacity in 
light of article 5 of the Convention. In view of the crucial 

16 
 
importance of early childhood programmes for the sound 
development of children, the Committee calls on States 
parties to ensure that all children are guaranteed access 
to these programmes, especially the most vulnerable.” 
The Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child 
Prostitution and Child Pornography, 2000 to the 
CRC, ratified by India in 2005, is i ntended to achieve 
certain purposes of the CRCs by requiring the States to 
take measures to guarantee the protection of the child 
from the sale of children, child prostitution and child 
pornography. It requires the ratifying States to take all 
possible measures to criminalize offences of child sale, 
prostitution and pornography and prosecute offenders 
domestically.  The Optional Protocol to the 
Convention on the Rights of the child on the 
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, 2000, 
ratified by India in 2005, is a milestone in the campaign 
to end the recruitment and use of child soldiers, 
strengthen the legal protection of children and in 
helping to prevent their use in armed conflict. It requires 
ratifying States to ban compulsory recruitment below 
the age of 18 and to take all measures to ensure that 
members of their armed forces under the age of 18 are 
exempted from taking direct part in hostilities. 
 
2.11.4 Although rights to health and nutrition, 
education and learning, care and protection, and play 
were included in the CRC, they were not incorporated 
adequately to endorse ECD. Due to ambiguity regarding 
the rights of young children and a narrow interpretation 
of ECD that restricted it to child survival, registration of 
birth and the right to name and  nationality, General 
Comment (GC7), 200522 was added to the CRC to deal 
                                                        
22Convention on the Rights of Child, General Comment No. 7 (2005), Implementing 
child rights in early childhood, CRC/C/GC/7/Rev.1, 20 September 2006, available at 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/AdvanceVersions/GeneralComment7
Rev1.pdf (accessed 9 June 2015) 

17 
 
with implementation of all rights for ECD. The Comment 
strongly recommends that special plans of action be 
adopted for the identification of goals, the allocation of 
resources and the determination of time limits to 
achieve the goals under CRC. 23  The Comment 
underlines the truth that governments, public services 
and persons who live and work with children all share 
the duty to establish the proper conditions so that 
children can realize their potential. It clarifies that the 
young children are not only formally entitled to the 
rights that are vicariously claimed for them by parents 
or guardians, but should already begin to exercise those 
rights on their own in a practical sense through th eir 
actions and interactions, as well as through the 
concerns they express both for themselves and for 
others. Every attempt to find out the best interests of 
the child must be confirmed by paying attention to the 
child so as to capture the views and feeli ngs the child 
expresses in verbal and non -verbal ways. Thoughtful, 
sensitive persons must listen to and seek to 
comprehend and respond to the demands and 
emotional states of the child because the survival, well-
being and development of the child depend on the 
child’s integration through interaction with others. 
 
I. Zero Draft: Sustainable Development 
Goals. 
 
2.12.1 The Co-Chairs of the Open Working Group on 
Sustainable Development Goals of UN Millennium 
Campaign have released their much anticipated Zero 
Draft, which contains a proposal for goals and targets 
to succeed 24 the Millennium Development Goals in 
2015.  Among other ambitious objectives it also aims to 
                                                        
23Supra note 2. 
24Post 2015 Development Agenda – available at 
https://www.worldwewant2015.org/node/442161 

18 
 
end hunger, achieve food security and adequate 
nutrition for all, and promote sustainable agriculture, 
attain healthy life for all at all ages, provide equitable 
and inclusive quality education and life -long learning 
opportunities for all.25 
 
2.12.2  These global proclamations encourage States 
to form a comprehensive framework of policies and laws 
to ensure that rights of children are promoted and 
implemented. From the point of view of the right to ECD, 
these conve ntions and declarations do not adopt a 
specific definition of the word ‘child’ that would focus on 
very young children. However, their conceptualization 
and objectives set standards for our nation to achieve 
for a healthier overall development of our children.  This 
must include a focus on early childhood development, 
which is particularly lacking in our legal system. 
  
                                                        
25Targets under Zero Draft: Sustainable Development Goals -  
Target 2.2 - End malnutrition in all its forms, including under nutrition, micronutrient 
deficiencies and obesity and overweight, with special attention to reducing stunting by 
40% and wasting to less than 5% in  children less than 5 years of age by 2025, and 
address the nutritional needs of pregnant and lactating women 
Target 3.1- By 2030 reduce the maternal mortality ratio to less than 40 per 100,000 
live births 3.2 by 2030 end preventable newborn, infant and under-five deaths 
Target 4.1 - By 2030 ensure all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality 
primary and secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes  
Target 4.2 - By 2030 ensure equal access for all to affordable quality tertiary education 
and life-long learning 
Target 5.3 - Eliminate all harmful practices, including child, early and forced marriage 
and female genital mutilations 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
CONSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT 
 
 
3.1  Recognizing the significance of child-care and 
development in realizing the goal of national progress, 
the Founding Parents enacted several provisions 
concerning welfare and development of children, 
especially in Parts III and IV of the Constitution. The 
Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State 
Policy have provided an inspiration to al l legislations 
concerning child welfare, education and development.  
 
A. Fundamental Rights and Rights of Children 
under Six 
 
3.2.1  Article 15(3) provides for affirmative action 
for women and children and is of great significance 
under which several beneficial laws and programmes 
have been passed. Jurisprudence developed around 
Article 21 of the Constitution by the Supreme Court of 
India underlies the primary importance of early 
childhood developments. As right to food, nutrition and 
health26 have been judicially crafted as being part and 
parcel of the Right to Life to which every citizen, 
including a child is entitled to.  It is taking this approach 
that right to free education up to the age of 14 years was 
read into Article 21 by the Supreme Court of India in 
Unni Krishnan v. State of Andhra Pradesh  (1993 AIR 
2178). The Court while creating such right made an 
important observation that Right to Life has to be read 
in light of Directive Principles of State Policies, viz. 
Articles 41, 45 and 46.Eventually,given the specificity of 
the needs of children under six, and the value of having 
                                                        
26 People’s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India & Others (Civil) no. 196/2001  

20 
 
a positive right ensuring to the child the right to full 
development, Art. 21 -A was inserted through the 86 th 
Amendment Act, 2002 within the Constitution, 
recognising the fundamentality of the right to education 
for children between the age group of six to fourteen.  
Although the 86th Amendment brought a Directive 
Principle of State Policy, ignored until now, wit hin the 
folds of Part III of the Constitution, it excluded children 
below the age of six, thus denying them education for 
proper growth and development.  
 
3.2.2  The Report of the National Commission to 
Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) 
published in 2002 27 was of the view that the Right to 
Free and Compulsory Education should be extended to 
all children up to the age of 14 years, and not only from 
the age of 6 onwards. The NCRWC recommended the 
inclusion of the following provision in Part III of  the 
Constitution: “30-C. Every child shall have the right to 
free education until he completes the age of fourteen 
years; and in the case of girls and members of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, until they 
complete the age of eighteen years. ”  Recognizing that 
interests involved in early childhood development are 
complex and interwoven and cannot be taken care of by 
enacting Right to Education alone, the NCRWC went 
further and recommended insertion of Article 24 -A in 
Part-III of the Constitution.  The new provision of Article 
24-A was to read as, “Every child shall have the 
right to care and assistance in basic needs and 
protection from all forms of neglect, harm and 
                                                        
27  The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution, also known 
as the Justice Venkatachaliah Commission, was set up by a Government 
Resolution dated 22 February, 2000.  The Commission was set up to examine as to 
how best the Constitution could respond to the changing needs of modern 
India within the framework of Parliamentary democracy, and to recommend changes 
to the Constitution without interfering with its basic structure or features.  
Available at http://lawmin.nic.in/ncrwc/finalreport/volume1.htm 

21 
 
exploitation” This insertion was based on translating 
Directions of Article 3 9(f) into an enforceable right.  
Expanding reach of Article 21-A to cover children under 
six and creating a new right as suggested by NCRWC 
were very positive steps towards creating a legal regime 
responsive to the needs of ECD. 
 
3.2.3  However, these reco mmendations did not 
make their way into the Constitution, and as it stands 
today, issues relating to interests and welfare of young 
children remains locked in Part IV of the Constitution 
that incorporates Directive Principles of State Policy.  
 
B. Directive Principles of State Policy 
 
3.3.1  The Founding Parents were cognizant of the 
importance of development of young children as an 
essential feature for national development and their 
concerns were amply reflected in the enactment of 
Articles 39 (e) and (f) of the Constitution.  These two 
provisions provide for health, care and protection of its 
citizens, including children. While Article 39(e) 
stipulates that the State shall direct its policy towards 
securing  “that the health and strength of workers, men 
and women and the tender age of children are not 
abused” and “that the citizens are not forced by 
economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their 
age or strength”, Article 39 (f) requires the State to 
ensure that “the children are given opportunities and 
facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in 
conditions of freedom and dignity and that the 
childhood and youth are protected against exploitation 
and against moral and material abandonment.” 
 
3.3.2  Further, giving specific expression to their 
intention to promote the cause of early childhood 
development, the Founding Parents provided in Article 

22 
 
45 that “the State shall endeavour to provide early 
childhood care and education for all children until they 
complete the age of six years.”  This provision makes the 
right to early childhood care and education an explicit 
Constitutional Objective.  The Right of Children to Free 
and Compulsory Education Act (RTE), which came into 
effect from April 1, 2010 incorporated this 
Constitutional Objective through  Section 11 of the Act 
which states, “with a view to prepare children above the 
age of three years for elementary education and to 
provide early childhood care and education for all 
children until they complete the age of six years, the 
appropriate Governmen t may make necessary 
arrangement for providing free pre-school education for 
such children”. 
 
3.3.3  Article 42 - “Provision for just and humane 
conditions of work and maternity relief -  The State shall 
make provision for securing just and humane conditio ns 
of work and for maternity relief.”  The Constitution 
mandates the provision for maternity relief, which 
assumes importance from the perspective of the child 
as it contributes to a healthy birth and nurturing of the 
child. Article 47  states that the State  shall work 
towards raising the level of nutrition and the standard 
of living of its people and the improvement of public 
health as among its primary duties. It is essential for 
the State to read Articles 42, 45 and 47 together 
whenever any policies relati ng to children are 
introduced.  
 
3.3.4  Though the Directive Principles of State 
Policy are supplementary to Fundamental Rights, and 
provide direction to governance, they are however, non-
justiciable in themselves and require legal sanction for 
realisation.  This reduces any idea of ECD into a 
promise instead of creating a binding obligation on the 

23 
 
State. It is therefore suggested that as per the 
recommendation of the NCRWC, Article 24-A, reading 
“Every child shall have the right to care and assistance 
in basic needs and protection from all forms of neglect, 
harm and exploitation” should be inserted to Part III of 
the Constitution to ensure a child’s right to basic care 
and assistance becomes an enforceable right. 
 
C. Perspectives from other jurisdictions 
 
3.4.1  It is important to note that constitutions in 
many developing countries have specific provisions 
dealing exclusively with children and cast express 
obligations on the State to provide for care and 
development of its children including children under six 
years age.  
 
3.4.2  Chapter two of the Constitution of South 
Africa that deals with a Bill of Rights for the people of 
South Africa considers ‘children’ as any child below the 
age of 18 years. Article 28  expressly provides for rights 
of children. Article 28 provides for the rights of the child 
to basic nutrition, health services, shelter and social 
services. By making right of the child to alternate care, 
basic nutrition, basic education, health services, shelter 
and social services constitutional righ ts, South Africa 
makes rights of children the primary responsibility of 
the State.  These rights have also been made enforceable 
against the State.  Article 28(1)(b) specifically upholds 
that every child has the right to family care or parental 
care or app ropriate alternate care when the child is 
removed from the family environment. By this provision, 
the primary obligation of care is cast upon the family or 
parents and in situations where such parental care is 

24 
 
lacking, the Constitution casts an express obligation on 
the State.28 
 
3.4.3  In somewhat similar approach, Article 6 of its 
Constitution of Brazil determines, inter alia,  that 
education, health and food are social rights; and that it 
is the duty of the family, the society and the State to 
ensure to children and adolescents, with absolute 
priority, the right to life, health, nourishment, 
education, leisure, professional training, culture, 
dignity, respect, freedom, and family and community 
life, as well as to guard them from all forms of 
negligence, d iscrimination, exploitation, violence, 
cruelty, and oppression.29  In addition, article 229 of the 
Constitution dictates that it is the duty of the parents to 
assist, raise, and educate their underage children. 
Paragraph 1 of article 227 of the Constitution  further 
establishes that the State must promote full health 
assistance programs for children and adolescents and 
allows the participation of non -governmental entities, 
and determines that the State must allocate a 
percentage of public health care funds to  mother and 
child assistance. This provision also ensures special 
care for children who suffer from physical, sensorial or 
mental handicap.  Health in Brazil is considered to be a 
right of all and duty of the State. 30Article 198 of the 
Constitution determines that health actions and public 
services are to be integrated in a regionalized and 
hierarchical network and constitute a single system 
(SistemaÚnico de Saúde ) organized according to the 
directives established in the Constitution to ensure 
better health care for all citizens inclusive of children. 
 
                                                        
28 Government of the RSA v Grootboom, 2001 1 SA 46 (CC) par 77. 
29 Article 227, Constitution of the Federal Republic of Brazil. 
30 Article 196, Constitution of the Federal Republic of Brazil. 

25 
 
3.4.4  Cuba is another interesting model, whereby 
Article 9(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Cuba 
creates a wide obligation on the State. It provides that 
the state will makes provisions to ensure that  no child 
lacks schooling, food and clothing. Article 44 makes it a 
state responsibility to provide day -care services to the 
children and Article 51 requires the state to provide free 
education to all, children or adults.   
 
3.4.5  In nutshell what emerges  from foregoing is 
that there exists a culture that creates constitutionally 
created obligation in states and parents for protecting 
and fostering ECD. 
 
3.4.6  No doubt that the Constitution of India in its 
entirety espouses a welfare approach towards chil dren 
wherein the child under six is provided a safe and 
healthy environment for full growth and development to 
its human potential. However, most of this, especially in 
relation to young children, remains only a promise. The 
Directive Principles of State Policy give insights into the 
intent of the constitution framers—that there must be a 
progressive realisation of the right in favour of children 
under six.  But after sixty -five years of the 
Constitution’s working, the time has come to translate 
some of these principles into justiciable rights.  In this 
regard, it is suggested and as would be discussed in 
later chapters of this work that towards creating such 
justiciable rights in favour of under -sixes, lights could 
be drawn from South African, Brazilian and  Cuban 
Constitutional law and constitutional practices.  Also, 
taking cue from these jurisdictions the need may be 
considered for introducing a provision in Fundamental 
Duties in Article 51A of the Constitution reading as, “to 
foster a spirit of family val ues and responsible 
parenthood in the matter of education, physical and 

26 
 
moral wellbeing of children”.  A similar suggestion was 
made by the NCRWC as well. 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
NATIONAL POLICIES AND SCHEMES 
 
4.1.  The Indian State has been aware of the 
pressing need for action to improve the situation of 
young children in India by providing them better access 
to health, nutrition and education and by creating an 
environment more conducive to their proper 
development. However, no direct legislative initiatives 
have taken shape in this regard. Successive 
governments have relied instead on a range of executive 
policies and schemes, the most important of which are 
discussed in this Chapter. 
 
4.2  The National Policy for Children  1974 - 
later reaffirmed by the National Charter for Children, 
2003, and the National Policy for Children, 2013 - 
recognised that programmes for children should find 
prominent place in national plans for the development 
of human resources. It laid down that the State shall 
provide adequate services towards children, both before 
and after birth and during the growing stages for their 
full physical, mental and social development. The 
measures suggested include a comprehensive health 
programme and supplementary nutrition for mothers 
and children, f ree and compulsory education for all 
children up to the age of 14 years, promotion of physical 
education and recreational activities protection of 
children from neglect, cruelty and exploitation, etc. The 
Policy was an extremely important step forward in t he 
protection of children’s interests, leading for example to 
the creation of the Integrated Child Development 
Services scheme (see below). 
 
4.3  However, as the Policy document did not 
have binding legal status, it was not always effectively 

28 
 
implemented. For example, although the Policy provided 
for formulation of programmes for crèches and other 
facilities for the care of children of working or ailing 
mothers, the Government did not attempt to formulate 
any such programmes to operationalize crèches for over 
a decade after the adoption of the Policy. The National 
Policy for Education, 1986 , specially emphasized 
investment for the holistic development of young 
children and gave priority to Early Childhood Care and 
Development amongst Child Development Services. The 
Policy also stressed the importance of establishing Day-
Care centres for pre -school education to enable young 
girls engaged in taking care of siblings to attend school 
and women from poor families to earn additional 
income. This Policy also provided for child-oriented play 
that fosters individuality, and discouraged any formal 
method of learning around the ‘3Rs’ (Reading, wRiting 
and aRithmetic). It thus tried to break the patriarchal 
notion of keeping the girl child at home as care giver of 
siblings and considered crèches as an alternative to 
enable the girl child to attend school. Here again, the 
fact that these provisions did not have legislative 
authority resulted in long delays in implementation. It 
was only after the adoption of the National Pl an of 
Action for Children, 2005 , which reiterated the 1986 
Policy in relation to crèches, that the Rajiv Gandhi 
National Crèche Scheme for Children of Working 
Mothers (RGNC) was formulated in 2006. Thus, it took 
more than 30 years to formulate a programme on 
crèches after the National Policy for Children was laid 
down in 1974. 
 
4.4  The Integrated Child Development 
Services (ICDS) scheme, launched in 1975 pursuance 
of the National Policy for Children, 1974,is the chief 
public policy programme aimed at young  children. The 
basic premise of ICDS, which is a centrally sponsored 

29 
 
and state administered nationwide scheme, is the 
assertion that early childhood education and care are 
inseparable issues and must be considered as one. It 
thus adopts the holistic philos ophy towards early 
childhood development that has been recognised both 
nationally and internationally. The scheme was 
established with the following objectives: (1) to improve 
the nutritional and health status of children in the age 
group of 0-6 years; (2) to lay the foundation for proper 
psychological, physical and social development of the 
child; (3) to reduce the incidence of mortality, morbidity, 
malnutrition and school dropout; (4) to achieve effective 
co-ordination of policy and implementation amongst the 
various departments to promote child development; and 
(5) to enhance the capability of the mother to look after 
the normal health and nutritional needs of the child 
through proper nutrition and health education.  The 
ICDS provides an integrated approa ch for converging 
several aspects of early childhood development by 
including supplementary nutrition, immunization, 
health check -ups, pre -school education, health and 
nutrition education for women, referred services to 
children below six years of age as well as expecting and 
nursing mothers. The execution of the programme 
includes delivery of integrated package of minimum 
basic services - health care, nutritional nourishment 
and early childhood educational nurturance to children 
so as to reach a multitude of objectives including 
development of school readiness competencies and 
various others psycho social domains. All services 
under ICDS converge at the Anganwadi, which is the 
main platform for delivering these services. 
 
4.5  The ICDS has suffered from pro blems of 
implementation, organisation and funding.  A 2005 
study found that the ICDS programme was not 
particularly effective in reducing malnutrition, largely 

30 
 
because of implementation problems and because the 
poorest states had received the least coverage  and 
funding.31 
 
4.6  The National Early Childhood Care and 
Education (ECCE) Policy, 2013  envisions a holistic 
and integrated development of the child with focus on 
care and early learning at each sub -stage of the 
development continuum, in order to promote all-round 
development. The Policy acknowledges multiple models 
of ECCE service delivery and is applicable to all ECCE 
programmes like crèches, play schools, pre-schools etc. 
The Policy envisages an effective institutional 
mechanism and structure for enabli ng the 
disbursement of ECCE. However, as is the case with the 
other national policies, the ECCE policy is an executive 
policy that requires legislative sanction to ensure its 
continued implementation. Furthermore, it envisions 
several care-providers including the public, private and 
civil society sectors, which serves to significantly dilute 
the responsibility on the state, who should emerge as 
the primary duty-bearer. The responsibility of providing 
ECCE services lies with the State and it should be the 
primary provider of these services. Responsive care, 
safety and protection, early stimulation, and play-based 
early education under a trained care -giver in a safe 
environment should be made legal entitlements for the 
child. 
 
4.7  The Rajiv Gandhi National Crèche (RGNC) 
for Working Mothers Scheme, 2013  provides 
assistance to NGOs for running crèches for babies (0 -6 
years) and provides for sleeping facilities and pre-school 
                                                        
31Michael Lokshin, Monica Das Gupta, Michele Gragnolati and Oleksiy Ivaschenko 
(2005). "Improving Child Nutrition? The Integrated Child Development Services in 
India" (PDF).Development and Change 36 (4): 613–640. 

31 
 
education for children.32 Government assistance in this 
programme is limited and it env isages participation of 
voluntary institutions. However, a study on RGNC 
reports that the infrastructural facilities, cooking 
facilities and sleeping facilities have been poor, and that 
the lack of proper flow of funds from government to 
implementing agenc ies has contributed to its low 
popularity.33 
 
4.8  The experience of most of these policies and 
schemes has shown that the problems arise at two 
levels.  At the first level problems arise due to lack of 
harmonising service standards and of delivery norms 
across different sectors and activities. The needs of 
children are multi-sectoral and indivisible in nature and 
most of these policies and schemes are fragmented. It 
has proved very difficult to ensure needed coordination 
between various ministries involved such as the 
Ministry for Women and Child Development, Ministry of 
Human Resource Development, Finance Ministry, 
Health Ministry. It has also been difficult to achieve 
convergence between regulatory, financial and 
operational wings of the Government to ensu re the 
effective implementation of various schemes and 
programmes. Implementation of the Government’s 
policies can be achieved if the legal framework lays 
down provisions for institutional mechanisms to ensure 
governance and convergence. The most direct method to 
achieve this would be to consolidate the different areas 
of early childhood development into a single 
institutional framework with a legislative foundation.   
At the second level one problem which is formidable is 
that these being policies and prog rammes constitute 
                                                        
32Rajiv Gandhi National Crèche Scheme for Children of Working Mothers, 
Government of India, available at http://wcd.nic.in/rajivgandhicrechescheme.pdf, 27th 
July, 2015. 
33 Performance of Rajiv Gandhi National Crèche Scheme for Children of Working 
Mothers, Planning Commission, Government of India, 2013. 

32 
 
only promises or actions which may be pursued by the 
administration and thus lack legal enforceability.  In 
this context, it is important to note that a law is different 
from a government programme or scheme.  It is entirely 
within the le gitimate powers of any democratically 
elected government to make, amend or withdraw any 
scheme.  But once it becomes a law, this executive 
freedom is curtailed.  It can, however, choose to make 
more provisions than the law prescribes, but no less.  
This in deed is the rationale for creating a legal 
framework of enforceable social and economic rights.  
Just as constitution binds all governments, regardless 
of their ideologies and predilections to respect all 
political freedoms, socio -economic rights legislati ons 
and binding. 
 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
HEALTH AND NUTRITION 
 
 
5.1  Health and nutrition is the primary area of 
concern for the young child. For there to be any 
possibility of growth and of any kind of learning or 
psychosocial development, the basic requirement of 
access to healthcare and adequate nutrition needs to be 
fulfilled. The right to nutrition and healthcare in fact 
constitutes the most basic and foundational right of 
children. Millions of children die every year from 
preventable diseases and infections and lots are at risk 
of becoming malnourished. 34  Due to inadequate 
nutrition especially in the critical period of 0 -6 years, 
discrimination in food based schemes and restricted 
access to health facilities, many children are unable to 
realise their developme nt potential in terms of both 
physical and intellectual growth.  While the significance 
of health and nutrition for children and the problems 
and challenges involved on this front have found 
mention in numerous studies as well as in several 
government sche mes, there are not enough specific 
legal entitlements created in favour of young children.   
Absence of legally enforceable entitlements makes 
children especially under -sixes more vulnerable to 
neglect and discrimination.  As discussed earlier the 
constitutional and international framework as well as 
the current global context make it essential for India to 
remove this weakness and vagueness by creating legally 
binding entitlements in favour of children especially 
those under-sixes.   
 
 
                                                        
34http://www.childlineindia.org.in/child-health-and-nutrition-india.htm 

34 
 
A. Central Legislative Enactments  
 
5.2.1  Despite the constitutional mandate and 
desire as expressed in Articles 15(3), 39(f), 45 and 47, 
and also in various legislations specifically dealing with 
children such as the Prohibition of Child Marriages 
Act 2006, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection 
of Children) Act, 2000 , the Commissions for 
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005  and the 
Children Act, 1960, there is no fully entrenched legal 
right to ‘healthcare’ and ‘adequate nutrition’ for young 
children. Considerable progre ss has been made in 
several other fields, but much remains to be done in 
regard to health and nutrition so far as young children 
are concerned.  In Sheela Barse v. Union of India 35 the 
Supreme Court held that “ The nation's children are a 
supremely important asset. Their nurture and solicitude 
are our responsibility. Children's programme should find 
a prominent part in our national plans for the 
development of human resources, so that our children 
grow up to become robust citizens, physically fit, 
mentally al ert and morally healthy, endowed with the 
skill and motivations needed by society. Equal 
opportunities for development to all children during the 
period of growth should be our aim, for this would serve 
our large purpose of reducing inequality and ensuring  
social justice."  The Supreme Court further stated that 
“A child is a national asset and , therefore, it is the duty 
of the State to look after the child with a view to ensuring 
full development of its Personality ”. Despite this 
acknowledgement by the apex court, there is no Central 
statutory framework that expressly deals with child’s 
right to health.  No doubt there are some legislations 
have impact on health and nutrition status of young 
                                                        
35Sheela Barse v. Union of India, 1986 SCALE (2)230 

35 
 
children.  Following paragraphs are an attempt to look 
into and reflect upon some of these laws.    
 
5.2.2  Health, especially the reproductive health of 
the mother and the health of the infant child are closely 
related.  Recognizing this close relationship the Apex 
Court in a petition (popularly known as petition for right 
to food) filed by the PUCL held Central and State 
Government responsible for providing ICDS services 
including supplementary nutrition, nutrition and 
health, education, etc. not only to every child under the 
age of six but to pregnant women and lactating mothers 
as well – a clear endorsement of binding relation of 
mother and child’s health 36.  Further recognizing the 
special needs of pregnant and lactating mother and its 
relation to child’s health that in Section 4 of the 
National Food Security Act, 2013  has made 
provisions entitling such women to “meal, free of charge 
during pregnancy and six months after the child -birth, 
through local Anganwadi, so as to meet the nutritional 
standards specified in Schedule II of the Act.” 
 
5.2.3  The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961  is an 
important piece of legislation that relates to the issue at 
hand.  We will deal with this Act here very briefly as its 
detailed discussion appears in later chapter of this 
study.  One of the major objectives of this legislation is 
providing complete health care to the women and her 
child when she is not able to perform her duty due to 
her health condition. There is need for maternity 
benefits so that a woman is able to give quality time to 
her child without having to worry about whether she will 
lose her job and her source of income.  
 
                                                        
36 People’s Union for Central Liberties v. Union of India and Ors., Writ Petition No. 
196 of 2001 order dated 13th December, 2006 

36 
 
5.2.4  Section 2 of  the Act  provides maternity 
benefits to women working  in factories, mines, the 
circus industry, plantations and shops or 
establishments employing 10 or more persons except 
employees who are covered under the Employees' State 
Insurance (ESI). The Act provides for paid maternity 
benefits for a maximum of twelve weeks, i.e., of six 
weeks prepartum and six weeks postpartum. 37  The 
Maternity Benefit Act  makes it the responsibility of 
employers to provide for maternity benefits to the 
women in their employment. Oftentimes, employers 
avoid employing women in factories and other spaces, 
owing to these additional responsibilities that 
accompany such employments. This law only provides 
benefits to women employees working in certain 
specified establishments and completely exclude 
women in the unorganized sector.  
  
5.2.5  Consequent to the Sixth Central Pay 
Commission relating to Maternity Leave and Child Care 
Leave, the provisions of the Central Civil Services 
(Leave) Rules, 1972 (CCS Rules) was amended so as to 
provide for maternity leave for 180 days 38.  The CSS 
Rules also provide for paternity leave for 15 days during 
the confinement of the employee’s wife for  childbirth.39  
This is a progressive step taken by the Indian 
Government, but the Rules cover a very small section of 
people, i.e. Government servants appointed to the civil 
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the 
Union.40  There is need to  consider that the Maternity 
Benefit Act is amended in accordance with the forward 
looking provisions in the C entral Civil Services Rules, 
whereby maternity benefits should be increased from 
                                                        
37 Section 5(3), Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 
38 Rule 43 CSS Rules 
39 Rule 43-A CSS Rules 
40 Rule 2, CSS Rules 

37 
 
twelve weeks to 180 days. Provision of maternity 
benefits should be made obligatory on the State and not 
left to the will of the employers and should cover all 
women, including women working in the unorganized 
sector.   
 
5.2.6  The Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding 
Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, 
Supply and Distribution) Act, 1992 , is an important 
enactment from the point of view of protection of infant 
health. As stated in its preamble, the Act was adopted 
to regulate the production, supply and distribution of 
infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles and infant foods. 
In the statement of objectives presented in Parliament 
during the discussion of this Act, it was pointed out: 
“Inappropriate feeding practices lead to infant 
malnutrition, morbidity and mortality in our children. 
Promotion of infant milk substitutes and related products 
like feeding bottles and teats do constitute a health 
hazard…” 41 Acknowledging the importance of 
breastfeeding, the Act sought to prohibit any kind of 
promotion of infant milk substitute s, feeding bottles 
and infant foods to protect breastfeeding from 
commercial influences; educate pregnant women and 
lactating mothers about breastfeeding to create 
awareness about the benefits of breastfeeding. 42  In 
order to ensure effective implementation of this Act, as 
amended in 2003, the National Steering Committee on 
                                                        
41 Protecting IMS Act: Balancing  Trade Interest and Child Health, available at 
http://indianpediatrics.net/mar2005/mar-211-213.htm 
42Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, 
Supply and Distribution) Act, 1992,Section 7- Educational and other materials relating 
to feeding of infants to contain certain particulars. (1) Every educational or other 
material, whether audio or visual, dealing with pre-natal or post-natal care or with the 
feeding of an infant and intended to reach pregnant women or mothers of infants 
shall include clear information relating to-- 5 (a) the benefits and superiority of breast-
feeding; (b) the preparation for, and the continuance of, breastfeeding; (c) the harmful 
effects on breast-feeding due to the partial adoption of bottle feeding; (d) the 
difficulties in reverting to breast-feeding of infants after a period of feeding by infant 
milk substitute;... 

38 
 
Breastfeeding and Infant and Young Child Feeding was 
constituted in 2013 to review the progress on 
enforcement of the Act and suggest corrective measures 
for its effective implementation. 43  No doubt the Act 
constitutes a positive step in the direction of protection 
of health of children but the provisions are applicable to 
infant food for the 0 -2 years age group only while in 
practice even children above 2 and below 6 are given all 
kinds of products and thus resulting vulnerability to 
their health. 
 
5.2.7  In our context, the National Food Security 
Act (NFSA), 2013 constitutes one of the most important 
step in the positive direction. This Act significantly 
recognizes the different needs at di fferent stages of 
childhood and specifically uses the word “entitlements”. 
Under Section 5 of the Act, the entitlements for 
nutritional needs include the following: “(a) in the case 
of children in the age group of six months to six years, 
age appropriate meal, free of charge, through the local 
Anganwadi so as to meet the nutritional standards 
specified in Schedule II: Provided that for children below 
the age of six month s, exclusive breast feeding shall be 
promoted”. Section 6 provides that “The State 
Government shall, through the local Anganwadi, identify 
and provide meals, free of charge, to children who suffer 
from malnutrition, so as to meet the nutritional standards 
specified in Schedule II.”  The Act also recognizes the 
special needs of pregnant and lactating women. Section 
4 provides that these women shall be entitled to “ a) 
meal, free of charge, during pregnancy and six months 
after the child birth, through the loca l Anganwadi, so as 
to meet the nutritional standards specified in Schedule 
II”. The Supplementary Nutrition Rules, 2015, have 
                                                        
43 Press Information Bureau, Government of India, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food & Public Distribution http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=103199 

39 
 
made provision for different categories of beneficiaries 
under the ICDS, including children in the age group of 
six months to six years.  The Rules are primarily 
designed to bridge the gap between the recommended 
dietary allowance and the average daily intake, and also 
lay down rules for monitoring and enforcing quality 
standards for meals. 
 
5.2.8  No doubt above is a positive develo pment in 
regard to health of young children but those involved in 
field feel that there is need for clear and greater details 
of how the provisions are to be implemented. It is 
pointed that for instance, under Section 6 that provides 
that the State Governm ent shall, through local 
Anganwadi, identify and provide free of charge to 
children who suffer from malnutrition so as to meet the 
nutritional standards specified in Schedule-II.  There is 
need to make adequate provisions or guidelines for 
identification o f children suffering from malnutrition 
and proper mechanisms for referring children suffering 
from acute malnourishment to appropriate healthcare 
providers. Similarly, Section 4(b) that provides “that 
subject to such schemes as may be framed by the 
Central Government, every pregnant woman and 
lactating mother shall be entitled to maternity benefit of 
not less than rupees six thousand, in such instalment 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, 
however, those in regular employment of the Central 
Government or State Government or Public Sector 
Undertakings shall not be entitled to such benefits.  No 
doubt it is good intend law, but the modalities for 
putting this into practice have not been spelt out and 
thus it is needed to provide these modalities. Finally, it 
is recommended that there be a provision so that the 
nutrition recommendations in Schedule II could be 
regularly revised in keeping with the latest scientific 

40 
 
studies based on calorific value, age, sex and food items 
(grains, milk, fruit, vegetables). 
 
5.2.9  Further, as the above provisions of the NFSA 
are required to be implemented by the Centre and the 
States working together, and the political consensus to 
cooperate on this issue has not been fully manifest, 
neither level has taken sufficient responsibility for 
implementation, which has thus been inadequate. 
Another relevant aspect from the point of view of the 
right to ECD is that the provisions for the entitlements 
of young children figure in the same legislation as the 
entitlements for adult s. Keeping in mind that children 
up to the age of six form a distinct category in 
themselves, creating a separate regime of justiciable 
rights for them would not only bring more focused and 
effective implementation but would also ensure proper 
allocation of resources.  Half-hearted approach becomes 
more evident when one notes that only 11 States and 
Union Territories have implemented the NFS, 2013 and 
thus the beneficiaries and in our case young children 
have remained out of reach of whatever positive is 
created through this legislation.  
 
5.2.10  Just as is the case with food security 
laws, other existing laws that are applicable to young 
children approach them as a subset of another target 
group or as part of the general population. For instance, 
the Persons with Disabilities Act (PDA), 1995 , urges 
governments and local authorities to “take measures for 
pre-natal, parental and post -natal care of mother and 
child”.44 This is important because the right to ECD 
ought to be a universal right accorded to all chil dren, 
and children with disabilities require a special focus in 
order to make rights accessible to them. Here again, a 
                                                        
44 Section 25(f), Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995. 

41 
 
legislative enactment focusing on young children as a 
group with special provisions for children with 
disabilities and undernourished chi ldren would help 
ensure better protection for them. Just as in the case of 
the NFSA, the PDA has faced problems in 
implementation which have reduced its effectiveness 
across all of its target population, and its usefulness as 
a legal mechanism furthering t he rights of young 
children has suffered as a result. A legislative 
classification of young children under 6 years as a 
discrete group with specific entitlements deserves 
serious consideration. 
 
B. State Legislation Enactments 
 
 5.3.1  Among other State laws, the Assam 
Public Health Act, 2010 , specifically provides for a 
“right to health” (Section 5) -this is a general right that 
will also cover the rights of young children in the under-
6 years age -group. An example of a State level chil d 
welfare statute is the Goa Children's Act, 2003, which 
calls for the State to ensure that children are protected 
against any form of abuse, exploitation and neglect and 
children receive special attention with regard to 
education.45The Act defines “child” as someone under 
the age of 18 years. Section 3(4) states that ‘ raising the 
level of nutrition and the standard of living as well as the 
improvement of public health as among States primary 
duties’ is a ‘right of a child’. Further, Section 5 of this 
Act sp ecifically deals with Health & Nutrition and 
demands the state to universalize all vaccines and 
immunizations, to provide crèches and day care centres 
for infants and children of working mothers in all 
sectors of employment, to take preventive measures 
                                                        
45The Goa Children’s Act, 2003, available at; http://childlineindia.org.in/CP-
CRDownloads/Goa%20children%27s%20act%20and%20rules.pdf 

42 
 
against the spread of diseases such as AIDS and 
terminal illness such as cancer, and to strive to reach 
higher standards for children by protecting them from 
malaria and from all avoidable illness and diseases.46 It 
further instructs medical institutions, clinics, hospitals 
and nursing homes to not reject admission or treatment 
of a child or pregnant mother who has any illness or 
disease or ailment which has a social stigma attached 
with it, such as leprosy, AIDS, etc., and any 
contravention of this section is punishable with a fine 
which may extend to Rs. 50,000/-.47 
 
5.3.2  Even though Chapter VIII of the Madras 
Public Health Act, 1939  (MPHA), provides for 
Maternity and Child Welfare under S. 82 stating that 
“Every local authority shall be bound to carry out such 
measures pertaining to maternity and child welfare as 
may be prescribed”48, the State has not passed any rules 
to implement this Section. The only Rules the state 
enacted were the Rules for Vaccination in Rural Areas 
Under s. 81, 1964 (of MPHA), which defined "Child" as 
a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of 18 years 
and dealt specifically with vaccinations alone, side -
lining the subject of nutrition. Various other such state 
rules as the Himachal Pradesh Vaccination Rules, 1973, 
Maharashtra Vaccination Rules, 1966 etc., do mention 
vaccination of children, which is one of the most 
successful health interventions and can bring about 
significant reductions in infectious diseases and 
adverse health consequences and improve quality of 
                                                        
46http://childlineindia.org.in/Goa-Children-Act.htm 
47 Supra note 9.  
48 The Madras Public Health Act, 1939, available at 
http://www.sanchitha.ikm.in/sites/default/files/MadrasPublicHealth_%20Act1939..pdf  

43 
 
life 49 ; however , they do not deal with health and 
nutrition of young children as a legal right.  
 
5.3.3  Thus, very few States have enacted legislative 
provisions with regard to health and nutrition for 
children, and even these have not focused on the 
specific rights of younger children. There are no 
provisions at all in the laws of most States. The nation 
clearly faces a statutory vacuum at both the State and 
the Central level. 
 
 
C. National Schemes relating to Health and 
Nutrition 
 
5.4.1  As has been discussed earlier in this work the 
importance of children’s health and nutrition has 
indeed been recognised by the Central Government at 
the policy level. The National Policy for Children , 
1974 recognised that programmes for children should 
find prominent place in national plans for the 
development of human resources. It laid down that the 
State shall provide adequate services towards children, 
both before and after birth and during the growing 
stages for their full physical, mental and social 
development. The measures suggested include a 
comprehensive health programme and supplementary 
nutrition for mothers and children, free and compulsory 
education for all children up to the age of 14 years, 
promotion of physical education and recreational 
activities protection of children from neglect, cruelty 
and exploitation, etc.  The Integrated Child 
Development Services (ICDS) scheme, launched 
under the 1974 Policy, is a comprehensive scheme 
                                                        
49 National Vaccine Policy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of 
India, April 2011 available at 
http://www.nhp.gov.in/sites/default/files/pdf/NATIONAL_VACCINE_POLICY.pdf 

44 
 
showing India’s realisation of the importance of ECD. It 
adopted a holistic approach converging several aspects 
of early childhood development by including 
supplementary nutrition, immunization, health check -
ups, pre -school education, health and nutrition 
education to women, referred services to children below 
six years of age as well as expecting and nursing 
mothers. The National Policy for Children, 2013 was 
adopted to affirm the Government’s commitment to the 
rights based approach in addressing the continuing and 
emerging challenges in the situation of children. The 
key priorities and undeniable rights of every child under 
the policy of 2013 are survival, health, nutrition, 
development, education, protection and participation.  
 
5.4.2  The Draft National Health Policy, 201550 in 
Section 3.3.3, mentions among its objectives the 
provision of access to primary healthcare services as an 
“entitlement”: “Assure universal availability of free, 
comprehensive primary health care services, as an 
entitlement, for all aspects of re productive, maternal, 
child and adolescent health…” considering nutrition as 
one of the priorities the government has launched 
various initiatives relating to nutrition, such as the 
Applied Nutrition Programme, 1963-64 that was 
initiated to arrange nutritio us food for pre -school 
children, expectant and nursing mothers, and the 
Special Nutrition Programme, 1970 which provided 
for a high protein and nutritious diet to children below 
six years and pregnant and nursing mothers.  
 
5.4.3  The National Nutrition P olicy, 1993 
advocated a multi -sectoral strategy for eradicating 
malnutrition and achieving optimum nutrition for all. It 
affirmed that “nutrition affects development as much as 
                                                        
50 http://www.mohfw.nic.in/showfile.php?lid=3014 

45 
 
development affects nutrition ”.  It recognized children 
below 6 years as nutritionally vulnerable and one of the 
“high risk” groups and accorded highest priority to them 
through policy articulations and programmatic 
interventions. The problem of malnutrition was 
envisaged to be tackled through direct nutrition 
intervention and also t hrough conditions created for 
improved nutritional status 51 .  The Nutritional 
Programme of Nutritiona l Support to Primary 
Education, 1995 was initiated with the objective to 
promote universalization of primary education and also 
to improve the nutrition of children in primary classes 
where food grains (rice/wheat) at the rate of three kg per 
student per month was distributed subject to a 
minimum of 80 percent attendance in primary class. 
The National Population Policy, 2000 acknowledged 
the health of childre n as a dynamic medium for 
population stabilization. Thereafter, the National 
Health Policy, 2002 noted that: “Another area of grave 
concern in the public health domain is the persistent 
incidence of macro and micro nutrient deficiencies, 
especially among women and children. In the vulnerable 
sub-category of women and the girl child, this has the 
multiplier effect through the birth of low birth weight 
babies and serious ramifications of the consequential 
mental and physical retarded growth.” 52The Nat ional 
Charter for Children, 2003, adopted on 9th February 
2004, was to reiterate the commitment to the cause of 
the children in order to see that no child remains 
hungry, illiterate or sick.   It underlined the intent to 
secure for every child its inherent right to be a child and 
enjoy a healthy and happy childhood, to address the 
root causes that negate the healthy growth and 
                                                        
51http://portal.unesco.org/education/en/file_download.php/20bd37d284a34d514aef46
11b6b88ad8India.pdf 
52 Section 1.7, National Health Policy, 2002. 
http://www.nhp.gov.in/sites/default/files/pdf/NationaL_Health_Pollicy.pdf 

46 
 
development of children, and to awaken the conscience 
of the community in the wider societal context to protect 
children from all for ms of abuse, while strengthening 
the family, society and the nation. The Wheat Based 
Nutrition Programme , tied to ICDS, provides food 
grains for preparation of supplementary nutrition to be 
distributed among the beneficiaries of the ICDS. The 
National Food Security Mission has been launched 
in 2007 with the objectives of :1) to increase production 
of rice and pulses through area expansion and 
productivity enhancement in a sustainable manner; 2) 
to restore soil fertility and productivity at the individual 
farm level; 3) to create employment opportunities and; 
4) to enhance farm level economy. 
 
5.4.4  Several States have initiated their own 
schemes to deal with health and nutrition of young 
children. Maharashtra was the first state in the country 
to take a decision to tackle malnutrition in ‘Mission – 
mode’ under the Rajmata Jijau Mother -Child Health & 
Nutrition Mission in 2005, which aims at reduction of 
child malnutrition by focusing on the first 1000 days 
from conception, i.e. the period of -9 to 24 months.53In 
2012, the Government of Maharashtra commissioned 
the first -ever state -wide nutrition survey, 
Comprehensive Nutrition Survey, to assess progress of 
the mission. 54  Results indicated that there was a 
remarkable decrease in the percentage of stunting in 
children under the age of 2. Improvement was 
associated with changes in how children were taken 
care of and fed, the attention their mothers received and 
the surroundings in which they lived. However, the 
provisional results of the survey revealed that in spite of 
                                                        
53http://nutritionmissionmah.gov.in/Site/Home/Index.aspx 
54 Improving Child Nutrition - The Achievable Imperative For Global Progress, United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 2013, available at 
http://www.unicef.org/gambia/Improving_Child_Nutrition_-
the_achievable_imperative_for_global_progress.pdf 

47 
 
more frequent meals, very few received a minimal 
acceptable diet and few were fed an adequately diverse 
diet rich in essential nutrients to ensure their optimal 
physical growth and cognitive development.55 
 
5.4.5  It emerges from the above that the Central 
and State governments have been aware of the 
significance of health and nutrition for young children, 
but that this has only been recognised at the executive 
level through various schemes and in general policy 
objectives. Being so the approach towa rds ensuring 
needs relating to health and nutrition to young children 
as has been seen earlier in the Chapter dealing with 
National Policies and Schemes remain vague, weak and 
uncertain.  However, both the constitutional mandate 
and the international legal framework require legislative 
action that will create proper entitlements for the 0 -6 
age group. It is unfortunate that no concrete legislative 
provisions have been enacted so far.   
 
D. Perspectives from other jurisdictions 
 
5.5.1  A rights -based approac h has indeed been 
adopted by some other developing nations where - due 
to various social, cultural and economic reasons - the 
position of children in society and their access to basic 
amenities has been unsatisfactory. Article 227 of the 
Brazilian Constitu tion declares: “It is the duty of the 
family, the society and the State to ensure children and 
adolescents, with absolute priority, the right to life, 
health, nourishment, education, leisure, professional 
training, culture, dignity, respect, freedom and fa mily 
and community life, as well as to guard them from all 
forms of negligence, discrimination, exploitation, violence, 
cruelty and oppression.”  This emphatic constitutional 
                                                        
55 Ibid. 

48 
 
imperative has been given detailed shape through 
legislation. The Child and Adolescent Statute, 1990 is a 
unique example of a legislative initiative that treats all 
children as one group and grants them rights by virtue 
of their belonging to that group without any separate 
criteria of classification. Health, nutrition, care and 
education are all considered essential for the child’s 
well-being, and specific rights are provided for; special 
implementing policies and executive bodies to 
implement them have been created under the Statute. 
Further, later legislation reinforced several of the rights 
granted by the Statute and addressed issues that 
needed special attention. There was thus a concerted 
legislative and political effort to create a comprehensive 
system of children’s rights under an umbrella 
legislation and backed by efficient implem entation 
mechanisms.  
 
5.5.2  The Philippines ECCD Act, 2009 56 (now 
replaced: see below) provided an example of an 
integrated ECD statute focusing on the 0 -6 age-group. 
Section 3 of the Act listed its objectives, which are 
extremely comprehensive and cover all aspects that 
need to be covered in an ECD legislation: “(a) To achieve 
improved infant and child survival rates by ensuring that 
adequate health and nutrition programs are accessible to 
young children and their mothers from the prenatal 
period throughout the early childhood years; (b) To 
enhance the physical, soc ial, emotional, cognitive, 
psychological, spiritual and language development of 
young children; (c) To enhance the role of parents and 
other caregivers as the primary caregivers and educators 
of their children from birth onwards; (d) To facilitate a 
smooth transition from care and education provided at 
                                                        
56http://www.eccdcouncil.gov.ph/cmsms/uploads/downloads/RA%208980%20ECCD
%20Act.pdf 

49 
 
home to community or school -based setting and to 
primary school; (e) To enhance the capabilities of service 
providers and their supervisors to comply with quality 
standards for various ECCD programs; (f) To e nhance 
and sustain the efforts of communities to promote ECCD 
programs and ensure that special support is provided for 
poor and disadvantaged communities; (g) To ensure that 
young children are adequately prepared for the formal 
learning system and that both public and private schools 
are responsive to the developmental needs of these 
children; (h) To establish an efficient system for early 
identification, prevention, referral and intervention for 
developmental disorders and disabilities in early 
childhood; and (i) To improve the quality standards of 
public and private ECCD programs through, but not 
limited to, a registration and credential system for ECCD 
service providers.”  
 
5.5.3   It is significant to note that the Early 
Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) System under 
the Philippines ECCD Act, 2009 referees to the full 
range of health, nutrition, early education and social 
services programs that provide for the basic holistic 
needs of young children from birth to age six, to promote 
their optimum growt h and development. The Act 
declared the policy of the State to promote the rights of 
children to survival, development and special protection 
with full recognition of the nature of childhood and its 
special needs; and to support parents in their roles as 
primary caregivers and as their children's first teachers. 
It proposed to institutionalize a National System for 
Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) that 
was comprehensive, integrative and sustainable, and 
that involves multi -sectoral and inter -agency 
collaboration at the national and local levels among 
government; among service providers, families and 
communities; and among the public and private sectors, 

50 
 
non-government organizations, professional 
associations, and academic institutions. The strateg ies 
for ECCD include service delivery for children from 
conception to age six, educating parents and caregivers, 
encouraging the active involvement of parents and 
communities in ECCD programs, raising awareness 
about the importance of ECCD, and promoting 
community development efforts that improve the quality 
of life for young children and families.  
 
5.5.4  The National System was coordinated under 
an ECCD Council created by ordinance pursuant to the 
Act’s provisions. The Council was charged with 
implementing the Act, and was thus a centralised 
authority with a clear mandate, clear mechanisms for 
operation and funding, and a clear allocation of 
responsibilities in order to create accountability and 
transparency. The 2009 legislation was replaced by the 
Early Years Act, 2013 57, which expanded the overall 
focus to the 0 -8 age group while giving the Council a 
special role in the development of the 0 -4 group. Apart 
from this modification, the general goals and objectives 
under the two statutes are similar. 
 
5.5.5  The Philippines thus has a comprehensive 
and detailed legislative framework for ECD. It is 
suggested that this could be an effective model from 
which to seek inspiration for an Indian legislation, while 
retaining the focus on the 0-6 age-group. As seen above, 
the Philippines framework sets out in great detail the 
various implementing mechanisms and their powers 
and modes of operation for realising its objectives, and 
has created a central Council for ECCD to oversee the 
functioning of these mechanisms and to ensure that the 
regulatory objectives are achieved. Thus, just like in the 
                                                        
57http://www.gov.ph/2013/03/26/republic-act-no-10410/ 

51 
 
case of Brazil, there is a comprehensive legislative 
framework creating entitlements for young children 
combined with detailed provisions for implementation. 
The Philippines’ ECCD Council is a statutory authority 
that has both the power and the responsibility to ensure 
that the necessary steps are taken to promote the right 
to ECD. This is the ideal approach to take for 
entrenching the Right to ECD.  Taking cue from 
experiences of Philippines and Brazilian systems and 
adopting them in Indian context the time is ripe for 
India, rather it is needed to create a full range of legal 
entitlements with regard to health, nutrition, care, early 
education and social services in fav our of all children 
especially for children below six years.  
 
5.5.6  Also looking to integrated nature and 
complexities involved in the idea of ECD and more so 
keeping in view that various schemes operating in India 
represent fragmented approach making co ordination, 
monitoring and universality of quality and standards of 
services, a huge and formidable change  that an 
institution or council like in Philippines could  be 
constituted.  The Council may have representatives 
from Ministry of Health, Ministry of H uman Resources 
Development, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Industry 
apart from representatives of those working actively on 
the issues relating to child.  Professions like law, 
medical and other be also brought on the proposed 
Council.  One of the major task for such a Council could 
be to evolve Standards which could be universally 
applied, cutting across various schemes and 
programmes.  
  

52 
 
CHAPTER – VI 
 
CARE AND EDUCATION 
 
6.1  Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) 
refers to the simultaneous inputs of care and 
opportunities for psycho -social development and 
learning in an enabling environment for all children, 
from birth to six years of age.  It is important to focus 
on law and policy for this group, consideri ng mortality 
or malnutrition of children under six. The National 
Family Health Survey (2005 -06) indicates that 48% of 
children under five are stunted and 43% are 
underweight for their age. 58  Before proceeding it is 
important to stress right at the beginnin g that any 
project, scheme or law aimed at ensuring ECCE it needs 
to be based on the principle of equity, access for all 
children to quality services and State responsibility.  
 
6.2  The Supreme Court, in Unni Krishnan v. State 
of Andhra Pradesh 59 , held that the right to basic 
education is implied within the fundamental right to life 
(Article 21), when read in conjunction with the directive 
principle on education (Article 41). The Court held that 
the parameters of the right must be understood in the 
context of the Directive Principles of State Policy, 
including Article 45, which provides that the state is to 
endeavour to provide, within a period of ten years from 
the commencement of the Constitution, for free and 
compulsory education for all children under the age of 
14.The 165th Law Commission Report (1998) reaffirmed 
this principle , emphasizing the need for free and 
                                                        
58 Children in India, 2012- A statistical Appraisal, Social Statistics Division, Central 
Statistics Office, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government 
of India, p. 10 
59 1993 AIR 2178 

53 
 
compulsory education for all children up to the age of 
14 years. 
 
6.3  Even though the Law Commission and the 
Saikia Committee 60  recommended making education 
free and compulsory for all children upto the age of 14, 
the Secretary of Education, in its statement to the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee 61 stated that the 
Department thought that the right to education, as a 
justiciable fundamental right, could only be enforceable 
in the age-group of after 6 years, when one enters the a 
formal system. Prior to that, even though education is 
very essential, it is entirely a different exercise and 
unenforceable as a fundamental right. 
 
6.4  The Parliam entary Standing Committee 
stated that an infant’s education in the age group 0-6 is 
an enormously complicated one. Much of the education 
imparted in this age group is non -formal through the 
mother and it is difficult to standardise it and therefore 
difficult to make a justiciable Fundamental Right. The 
Committee recommended that it would be feasible only 
to provide for free education to children of 6 to 14 years 
as a fundamental right. They added a further 
recommendation that Article 45 should be seen as 
complimenting Article 21A and Directive Principles 
should be followed wherever possible.62 
 
6.5  Consequently, the 86th Constitutional 
Amendment (2002) amended Article 45 63  thereby 
                                                        
60 Report of the Committee of State Education Ministers constituted to examine 
implications of making the right to free and compulsory, elementary education a 
Fundamental Right dated 14th January, 1997. 
61 Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development Presented to both Houses of the Parliament on 24.11.97 at 
http://www.educationforallinindia.com/page144.html 
62 Id 
63The Constitution (Eighty-Sixth Amendment) Act, 2002: “Article 45. The State shall 
endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they 
complete the age of six years." 

54 
 
retaining right to early childhood care as a Directive 
Principle of State Policy. It created a further category of 
right to education for children between the ages of six 
to fourteen by introducing Article 21A, which provides 
that “ the state shall provide free and compulsory 
education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years 
in such a manner as State may by law determine ”. This 
Amendment, however, has resulted in a failure to 
address the need for education of children under six by 
leaving them out of the education fold under Art. 21A. 
It is recommended that Article 21A be amended to read 
as, “the state shall provide free and compulsory 
education to all children in such a manner as State may 
by law determine” 
 
6.6  The NCRWC had recommended inclusion of 
a new provision, which read as, “ to foster a spirit of 
family values and responsible parenthood in the matter 
of education, physical and moral well -being of children” 
to Article 51A of the Constitution so as to make it the 
responsibility of th e parents to discharge their 
fundamental duty to take care and provide for their 
children. Later, the same year, the 86th Amendment Act 
introduced Article 51 A (k) enjoining a parent or 
guardian to provide opportunities for education to a 
child or ward between ages of six – fourteen years. Even 
though the Constitution now considers it a citizen’s 
fundamental duty to provide educational opportunities 
for children under his/her care, this duty is limited to 
children between the ages of six to fourteen. It is 
recommended that this qualification for age may be 
removed and the Constitution be amended so Article 51 
A(k) can read as, It shall be the duty of every citizen of 
India “ who is a parent or guardian to provide 
opportunities for education to his child or, a s the case 
may be, ward under his care”. 
 

55 
 
6.7  The only existing central legislation, which 
deals with early learning, is The Right to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009 . Section 11 of the 
Act states, “with a view to prepare children above the 
age of three years for elementary education and to 
provide early childhood care and education for all 
children until they complete the age of six years, the 
appropriate Government may make necessary 
arrangement for providing free pre-school education for 
such chi ldren”. Although this is a laudable goal, the 
provision is not mandatory, and merely offers State 
Governments the option of providing education for 
children above the age of three years. Without a 
mandatory clause, there can be no accountability and 
clarity as to when and how the State Governments can 
be enjoined to make necessary arrangements and leaves 
education for children under six subject to the vagaries 
of political will.  Provisions in section 11 should be made 
mandatory and should read as “with a view to prepare 
children above the age of three years for elementary 
education and to provide early childhood care and 
education for all children until they complete the age of 
six years, the appropriate Government shall make 
necessary arrangement for providing free pre -school 
education for such children” 
 
6.8  Among the States, only Kerala explicitly 
provides for free and compulsory education for children 
under six years of age. Rule 6(11) of the Right of 
Children to Free and Compulsory Education R ules, 
2010. RTE Rules provides “The state government and 
the local authority shall provide free and appropriate 
pre-school education based on a Pre-primary Education 
policy that shall be formulated by the state government, 
to all children above the age of three years till they 
complete six years so as to prepare them for elementary 
education. For this, Pre -school Centres shall be 

56 
 
established in all government and aided schools in a 
phased manner within three years from the date of 
notification of the Rules.  A unified child -friendly 
curriculum shall be developed by the academic 
authority for these centres, which shall have linkages 
with the Anganwadies for providing ICDS services to all 
the children. The minimum academic and professional 
qualification of pre -primary teachers shall be as 
prescribed by the National Council for Teacher 
Education.” Rule 8(1)(e) requires the State Government 
to “ ensure quality in pre -primary teacher and 
elementary teacher training courses by revising the pre-
service pre -primary and  elementary teacher training 
curriculum in consonance with the pre -primary and 
elementary school curriculum every five years.” Rule  
8(3) further mandates, “The State Government shall in 
consultation with other academic authorities prepare 
Scheme(s) to provide pre-service and in-service training 
of teachers of pre-primary schools and functionaries of 
Anganwadi centres and of teachers in government, 
aided and unaided schools, including a monitoring 
mechanism designed in accordance with the standards 
of training.” 
 
6.9  Although all other states have adopted RTE 
Rules in accordance with section 38 of the Right to 
Education Act, 2009, little thought has been given to 
children under six years of age. It is clear the section 11 
of the RTE Act continues to be a mer e provision on 
paper. States have not attempted to realize the 
aspiration of the provision. Rules established by all 
States define Anganwadis as “an Anganwadi Centre 
established under the Integrated Child Development 
Services Scheme of the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development of the Government of India”, but these 
Rules have not elaborated on the minimum 
requirements applicable. Further, The Andhra Pradesh 

57 
 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
Rules 2010  define ECE, as  “Early Childhood Care 
Centres established by Sarva Siksha Abiyan in the 
premises of primary schools or elsewhere to provide pre-
school education to the children in the age group of 3-5 
years” without elaborating on ECE services or providing 
for minimum requirements for ECE services.  These 
Rules are silent on the quality of education and care to 
be provided by Pre -primary schools and Anganwadis. 
There should be a reference to quality  of education in 
the Rules. Education for children under six must mean 
quality education and care to prepare them for 
elementary school and anything less than that should 
not be called education. Therefore, it is worth 
considering that whether the Rules es tablished by all 
States should follow the Kerala model and prescribe for 
minimum standards applicable for Pre -primary 
education with an emphasis on the Anganwadi 
structure. 
 
6.10  Institutional care for children under six has 
been provided through the provisions of crèche facilities 
and day care. Crèches are important means for 
ensuring care to children while parents are at work or 
are unable to care for them due to illness or otherwise. 
Crèches are meant to ensure protection of children 
under an able care-provider and provide adequate age-
appropriate recreational facilities. In Finland, after the 
enactment of the Act on Children’s Day Care of 1973 , 
the obligation to organise day care for children under 
school age rests with the local authorities. The local 
authorities may provide day care either in day care 
centres or in the form of family day care. Since 1990, 
parents have enjoyed an unconditional right to day care 
for children under three years of age either in municipal 
day care or by receiving child home  care allowance in 
order to care for their children at home. Since August 

58 
 
1997, it has been possible for families to receive private 
child-care allowance for providing their children with 
private care. 64 The introduction of statutory right to 
childcare provi des equal opportunity for all young 
children to be in an institutional system of care by the 
state.  
 
6.11  Crèche facilities are, within the Indian 
context, provided through a range of legislations, which 
are sectoral, with little uniformity, and can only be 
availed by women employees working in the organized 
sector. These statutory provisions for crèche facilities 
under various legislations were added to reduce 
occupational segregation and encourage flexible 
working for women. But women workers in the 
unorganized sectors such as street vendors, rag pickers, 
head load workers, garment workers, agricultural 
labourers are not able to avail the statutory benefit of 
crèche facilities for their children.  
 
6.12  For example, The Factories Act, 1948 
mandates any establishment with more than 30 women 
workers to establish crèche facilities for care of children 
and infants. The onus of providing crèche facilities is on 
owners of such establishments, who are required to 
provide adequate clean and sanitary accommodation 
under a trained caregiver. 65The provisions relating to 
crèche are also given under Section 14 of the Beedi and 
Cigar Workers Act, 1966, Section 44 of the Inter State 
Migrant Workmen (RECS) Act, 1979 , Rule 25 (vi) of 
the Contract Labour (R&A) Central Rules, 
1971, 66 Section 35 ofthe Building And Other 
                                                        
64 Early Childhood Education and Care Policy in Finland, Background Report 
prepared for the OECD Thematic Review of Early Childhood Education and Care 
Policy, May, 2000  
65 Sec. 48, The Factories Act, 1948 
66 The required number of women workers is 20 or more both under the Inter State 
Migrant Workmen (RECS) Act, 1979 and Contract Labour (R&A) Central Rules, 1971  

59 
 
Construction Workers(RECS) Act, 1996  (the number 
of required women workers are fifty or more ), Section 8 
of the Plantation Labour Act, 1951 . 67 One of the 
detailed labour law regulations about crèche is the 
Mines Crèche Rules, 1966,68where rules elaborate on 
standards of crèche, including the structure of the 
room, ventilatio n, flooring, sanitation, latrines and 
bathrooms for children, provision of staff, medical 
arrangement, diet of children etc. The Rules also require 
the crèche to be open while the women are at work, 
irrespective of day or night, with adequate staff. The 
problem remains that these laws providing for crèche 
facilities are exclusive and limiting as they only provide 
facilities for children of women employees involved in 
certain specified establishments and the primary 
providers continue to be the owners of suc h 
establishments. 
 
6.13  Since women in unorganized sector are 
ousted from the benefit of statutory crèche facilities, the 
Rajiv Gandhi National Crèche Scheme for the Children 
of Working Mothers becomes important to consider.  
Under the Scheme, the state provides assistance to 
NGOs for running crèches for infants. This scheme was 
brought forth with the objective that working mothers 
from poor families re quires institutional support for 
young children and reach of child day care services for 
working women in the organized and unorganized 
sector should be addressed.  This scheme specifically 
provides for participation of 50% of children from BPL 
families. However, the scheme specifies users fee @ Rs. 
20/- per child per month to be collected from children 
from BP L families and Rs.  60/- per child per month 
                                                        
67 The number of required women workers are fifty or more both under the the 
Building And Other Construction Workers (RECS) Act, 1996 and the Plantation 
Labour Act, 1951 
68 This was enacted by the Central Government as per power conferred under 
Section 58 (d) of the Mines Act. 

60 
 
from other families. This provision must be 
reconsidered by the State as providing for young 
children shou ld be a state responsibility and the 
payment of this fee might be difficult for single mothers 
and widows of poor families, considering the abysmally 
low payment in unorganized sector and inflated cost of 
living, in the current scenario.  A statutory framework 
similar to that in Finland is recommended, to ensure a 
statutory right to childcare by the state for all young 
children. 
 
6.14  Internationally, Philippines has a good 
model for early child care and education.  In addition to 
the Philippines ECCD Act,  2009, Philippines provides 
for its children through the Early Years Act, 2013. This 
law recognises 0 -8 years of a child’s life as the first 
crucial stage of educational development. It mandates 
that the age from 0-4 years shall be the responsibility of 
the ECCD Council and the responsibility to help develop 
children in the formative years between age 5 to 8 years 
shall be with the Department of Education. 69 The Act 
requires the State to institutionalize a National system 
for ECCD that is comprehensive, inte grative and 
sustainable, involving multi -sectoral and inter -agency 
collaboration at national and local levels, family and 
communities, public and private sectors, NGOs, 
professional associations and academic 
institutions. 70 Inclusive models for early child 
development such as those found in Philippines should 
be encouraged in India to provide holistic care and 
education to children under six. 
 
6.15  Another legislation that is relevant from the 
point of view of “Care of Child” is the Maternity Benefit 
                                                        
69 Section 2, Declaration of Policy, Early Years Act, 2013. 
70 Id. 

61 
 
Act, 1961.  The Act is crucial with regard to health of 
the mother as well as the child, but it is no less 
important when one talks about ensuring care of child.  
We are conscious that many aspects of the Act have 
already been discussed in Chapter V dealing with “Early 
Childhood Development : Health and Nutrition”, yet it 
may not be irrelevant to reiterate some of the points 
already made there.  After birth of child during initial 
period when she is unable to perform her duty due to 
her health condition, the chil d’s care would become 
most vulnerable if appropriate maternity benefit is not 
extended to her.  If the woman is not able to give quality 
time to her child because of fear of losing job or a wage-
cut the real victim would be the child. Thus keeping in 
view the concerns about health and proper care of 
mother and child a provision was inserted in the 
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961  that entitles Indian 
women employed in factory, mine or plantation 
including those belonging to Government or an 
establishment wherein  10 or more persons are 
employed on any day preceding 12 months to avail the 
benefit of 12 weeks maternity leave.  
 
6.16  Taking a progressive step and acting on the 
recommendations of Sixth Pay Commission that the 
Central Government has recently authorized woman 
employee to avail maternity leave up  to 180 days 71.  
Significantly, the memorandum issued in this regard 
reads “recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay 
Commission relating to enhancement of the quantum of 
Maternity Leave and introduction of Child Care Leave in 
respect of Central Government employee”.  The 
amended rules thus provided further that women 
employees having minor children may be granted Child 
                                                        
71 Government of India, Department of Personnel & Training’s O.M. 
No.13018/2/2008-Estt(L) dated 11th September, 2008 

62 
 
Care leave for a maximum period of two years.  There is 
need for States also to follow the same p ractice.  
However, more important is to ensure that the Act is 
amended authorizing maternity leave up  to 180 days.  
Correspondingly, the private sector too needs to adopt 
these progressive measure.  Although the problem 
would continue to remain acute and persistent in case 
of those women who are engaged in unorganized sector.    
 
6.17  While 180 days of maternity leave is 
authorised for Central government most of the private 
organisation provides 90 days of maternity leave to its 
women employees. Women in the private sector are 
often hard -pressed for leave beyond the maternity 
break, besides the regular quota of earned, casual and 
medical leave. Maternity benefits are, thus open to 
interpretation by individual companies. There are no 
uniform rules for female employees in private 
organizations and they are treated by varying standards 
when it comes to essential benefits like maternity and 
child care leave (CCL). 
 
6.18  To an unstarred question as recent as August 
of 201572 in Rajya Sabha by a Member of Parliament on 
the future plan of government to formulate any policy or 
guidelines laying down minimum specifications for the 
provisions of paid maternity leave to women employed 
by organizations and companies in the private sector, 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment answered the 
query  by informing about the proposal which is under 
consideration to increase the existing maternity leave 
from twelve weeks to twenty four weeks under Maternity 
Benefit Act, 1961 but maintained silence on formulating 
                                                        
72 Unstarred question no.-2641 by Shri Avinash Pande answered by government of 
India, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Rajya Sabha on 12 th August 2015 
available on 
http://164.100.47.5/EDAILYQUESTIONS/sessionno/236/12.08.2015UE.pdf  

63 
 
governmental policy or guideline extending the benefits 
of Maternity Benefit Act to women employed in private 
sector.  Above clearly demonstrates the need to bring 
changes in Maternity law and Rules to ensure that 
women in private sectors are entitled to benefits at par 
with their counterpart in government service and public 
undertakings. 
 
6.19  To conclude discussion on ECCE it is 
suggested that the purpose of ensuring the right to 
ECCE as a universal justiciable right, it is imperative 
that special measures are incorporated within the 
framework to make ECCE available to all children and 
age groups. Proactive identification, outreach and 
special measures must be taken to provide for children 
with disabilities or illness, terminal or incurable 
disease; children with parents or guardians deemed 
unfit or unable to take care of the child; orphaned 
children; children belonging to marginalized families; 
children who have been victims of violence and/or 
trafficking etc. Further, every child under six should 
have an unconditional right to crèche and day care, 
which is provided, regulated and operated by the State 
as provided for in the Act on Children’s Day  Care of 
1973, Finland ; trained personnel for the purpose of 
ensuring care to children should be given parity with 
primary school teachers; States should lay down quality 
standards and norms for curriculum to be followed at 
pre-school and should conduct a periodic assessment of 
standards at crèches; users fee from single mothers, 
widows, tribal mothers of BPL families under the Rajiv 
Gandhi National Crèche for Working Mothers should be 
avoided so as to actually benefit mothers from 
unorganized sector; care for children under six at the 
hands of minors should be specifically prohibited and 
regulated. 
 

64 
 
6.20  With respect to education, in view of the 
Supreme Court judgment in Unni Krishnan v. State of 
Andhra Pradesh and the aspiration behind Article 45 of 
the I ndian Constitution, section 11 of the Right to 
Education Act should be made mandatory and should 
read as “with a view to prepare children above the age of 
three years for elementary education and to provide early 
childhood care and education for all childr en until they 
complete the age of six years, the appropriate 
Government shall make necessary arrangement for 
providing free pre -school education for such children ”; 
further, keeping the Kerala RTE Rules as a model, all 
states should provide for pre-primary education and the 
provision should read as follows: “The state government 
and the local authority shall provide free and appropriate 
pre-school education based on a Pre -primary Education 
policy that shall be formulated by the state government, 
to all chil dren above the age of three years till they 
complete six years so as to prepare them for elementary 
education. For this, Pre -school Centres shall be 
established in all government and aided schools in a 
phased manner within three years from the date of 
notification of the Rules. A unified child -friendly 
curriculum shall be developed by the academic authority 
for these centres, which shall have linkages with the 
Anganwadies for providing ICDS services to all the 
children. The minimum academic and professional  
qualification of pre -primary teachers shall be as 
prescribed by the National Council for Teacher 
Education.”; all states must also ensure quality teaching 
at the pre-primary level by adopting Rule 8 of the Kerala 
RTE Rules. 
 
  

65 
 
CHAPTER - VII 
 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
7.1  The current legal and constitutional rights 
framework in India does not place enough emphasis on 
the rights of young children. The protection of early 
childhood development in India thus depends on 
Policies and Schemes created an d run by the Central 
and State Governments. The Commission is of the 
opinion that the constitutional framework of 
fundamental rights and directive principles should 
reflect the special status and needs of children in the 
under-6 age group. Further, the Com mission believes 
that statutory backing should be given to the existing 
schemes and policies in order to create legal 
entitlements in favour of children. This should be 
coupled with an integrated and holistic approach to 
protecting the interests of the you ng child, keeping in 
mind the need for health, nutrition, care and education 
as the primary inputs for early childhood development. 
The following recommendations are intended to achieve 
these ends. 
 
 
i. It is suggested that, as per the recommendation of 
the NCRWC, a new Article 24A be inserted to Part 
III of the Constitution to ensure that the child’s 
right to basic care and assistance becomes an 
enforceable right. The Article should read as 
follows: “24A. Every child shall have the 
right to care and assistanc e in basic needs and 
protection from all forms of neglect, harm and 
exploitation” 
 

66 
 
ii. In order to extend the right to education to 
children in the under -6 age group as well, Article 
21A of the Constitution should be amended to read 
as follows: “ The State shal l provide free and 
compulsory education to all children in such a 
manner as the State may by law determine.” 
 
iii. Similarly, it is recommended that the fundamental 
duty of the parent or guardian to provide 
education should not be applicable only to 
children be tween the ages of six and fourteen. 
Article 51 A(k) of the Constitution should be 
amended so that the duty is placed on every citizen 
“who is a parent or guardian to provide 
opportunities for education to his/her child or, as 
the case may be, ward under his/her care.” 
 
iv. Section 11 of the Right to Education Act should be 
made mandatory and should read as follows: “with 
a view to prepare children above the age of three 
years for elementary education and to provide early 
childhood care and education for all children until 
they complete the age of six years, the appropriate 
Government shall make necessary arrangement for 
providing free pre -school education for such 
children.” 
 
v. It is suggested that the Maternity Benefit Act be 
amended in accordance with the for ward looking 
provisions in the CCS Rules, whereby maternity 
benefits should be increased from twelve weeks to 
180 days. Provision of maternity benefits should 
be made obligatory on the State and not left to the 
will of the employers and should cover all women, 
including women working in the unorganized 
sector. 
 

67 
 
vi. It is suggested that government formulates policy 
or guidelines laying down minimum specifications 
of paid maternity leave to women employed in 
private sector. 
 
 
vii. In order to ensure proper emphasis on  the 
promotion of early childhood development, 
especially keeping in view that the current 
approach towards ECD which is fragmented into 
different schemes and raises issues of lack 
universality in standards, monitoring and 
coordination (as pointed out in C hapter IV), it is 
suggested that a statutory authority or Council for 
Early Childhood Development (“the Council”) be 
created. The Council may be composed of officials 
from the Ministry of Women & Child Development, 
Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Labour and 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry and 
representatives from civil society active in the field 
of early childhood development, and other such 
members as may be specified. The powers and 
responsibilities of the Council should be specified 
by law.  Similar Councils to be established at State 
Level as well.  The Philippines’ ECCD (Early 
Childhood Care and Development) Council may be 
looked at as an example and adapted to the Indian 
context. 
 
viii. The Council must be made respon sible for laying 
down minimum universal standards for quality of 
services, facilities and infrastructure to be put in 
place across all schemes and provisions relating to 
early childhood. 
 
 

68 
 
ix. Clear provision should be made in the law creating 
the Council for the allocation of budgetary 
resources by the Central for the Central Council 
and by the State for State Council.  
 
 
x. With regard to Section 6 of NFSA, there is need for 
evolving guidelines or some methods for 
identification of children suffering from 
malnutrition and for referring such children to 
appropriate healthcare providers. It is suggested 
that some provision be brought so that the 
nutrition recommendations in Schedule II of the 
NFSA could be regularly revised in keeping with 
the latest scientific stu dies based on calorific 
value, age, sex and food items. The Council may be 
empowered to periodically commission such 
studies from the appropriate research institutes or 
organisations. 
 
xi. Provision should be made for the training of 
teachers to provide pre -school education, and 
there should be a budgetary allocation to fund 
training programs for the same to ensure quality 
standards and a proper implementation of the best 
methods of promoting play and learning. Teachers 
imparting pre -school instruction should b e 
considered at par with primary school teachers, 
and this should reflect in the terms and conditions 
of their employment. This institutional aspect is 
essential for ensuring that pre-school education be 
given sufficient importance. 
 
xii. It is suggested that e very child under six should 
have an unconditional right to crèche and day care 
provided, regulated and operated by the State, as 
found for example in the Act on Children’s Day 

69 
 
Care of 1973, Finland.  The provision of crèches 
should be made the responsibility of the State, not 
of the employer, especially in the unorganised 
sector.  
 
 
 
[Justice A.P. Shah] 
Chairman 
 
 
[Justice S.N. Kapoor] 
Member 
 
[Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma] 
Member 
 
 
 
[Justice Usha Mehra] 
          Member 
 
[P.K. Malhotra] 
Ex-officio Member 
 
[Dr. Sanjay Singh] 
Ex-officio Member 
 
 
[Dr. G. Narayana Raju] 
Member-Secretary 
  
  
 