LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
REPORT ON INSOLVENCY LAWS

February, 1964

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW


Confidential

CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION,
5, Jorbagh, New Delhi-3,
March 23, 1964.
Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My Dear MINISTER,
Ihave great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Twenty-sixth
Report of the Law Commission on Insolvency Laws.

2. This subject was referred by the Government to the Law
Commission and was taken up by the previous Law Commission
for consideration. A draft Bill with notes on Clauses was
prepared by Mr. Justice T. L. Venkatarama Aiyar, Chairman of
that Commission. It was circulated in April, 1961 to State
Governments, High Courts and other interested persons and
bodies for their comments.

3. The Commission held meetings to consider the draft
Report with the comments received. The first meeting was held
on the 2nd to 5th August, 1963 and the subsequent meetings
were held on the 20th to 31st August, 1963, 16th to roth
September, 1963, 26th September to st October, 1963 and 21st
and 22nd October, 1963. In the light of the discussions held at
those meetings, the Bill and notes were revised and a draft
Report was prepared.

4. The draft Bill and the Report were finalised at the meetings
held on 23rd to 28th December, 1963 and 6th to roth January,
1964. .

5. My colleagues and I wish to record our appreciation of the
assistance we have received from Mr. P. M. Bakshi, our Joint
Secretary and Draftsman, in the preparation of this Report.

Yours sincerely,
J. L. KAPUR.


CONTENTS

PARAGRAPH SuBJECT PAGE
I Genesis of Report . . . . . . I
2,3 Historical Background . . . . न I
4 Consolidation of the two Insolvency Acts into one. 3
5 Objects of Insolvency Law . . . . . 3
6 Insolvency jurisdiction of subordinate Courts and

appeals; - . पु . . . . . 3
7,8 Insolvency jurisdiction of High Courts in Presidency

Towns. 7
9 Official Assignees and Official Receivers. . . 8
10~12 Jurisdiction of Insolvency Courts. Claims arising in

bankruptcy . . . 9
13 Acts of insolvency . . . . . . 12
14, 15 Discharge . . . . . . . . 13
16, 17 Relation back . . . . . . . 14
18 Reputed ownership . . . . . + 15
19 Burden of proof regarding voluntary transfers . 17
20, 21 Fraudulent preference . . . . . . 18
22 “Void” and “voidable” —. . . . . 20
23 Period of limitation in case of fraudulent preferences. 21
24 Bona fide transactions . . . . . . 2r
25 Special protection to bankers . . . . 21
26 Transferees from donces . . . . . 22
27 Copyright. पु पु . . . . पु 22
28 Second bankruptcy . . . . . . 22
29 After-acquired property . . . . . 23
30 Priority of debts . पु पु . . . . 24
31 Penalties . पु . . पु . . . 25

32 Appendices . + .


(मे)

APPENDICES

APPENDIX I.—Showing the recommendations in the form of a

draft Bill
APPENDIX II.—Notes on Clauses .

APPENDIX III.—Comparative Tables

APPENDIX IV.—Figures of periods of discharge of insolvents in

the Presidency Towns

PaGE

27

iit

202

222


REPORT ON INSOLVENCY LAWS

1. The Law Commission has taken up the revision of Renesis of
the law of insolvency on a reference made to it by the
Government of India.’

2. The law of insolvency in this country, like most Historical
other laws, owes its origin to English law. Before the Background.
British came to this country there was no indigenous law
of insolvency in India*. The common law in England did
not deal with the subject of bankruptcy. The Bankruptcy
Law was purely a creature of Statute’. The earlier Sta-
tutes passed in the.16th century and subsequent years con-
tained only rudimentary provisions as to bankruptcy.

The important statutes on the subject are the Bankruptcy
Acts* passed by the British Parliament in 1849, 1869, 1883
and 1914.

In India, the necessity for an insolvency law was first
felt in the three Presidency-towns of Calcutta, Bombay
and Madras where the British carried on their trade. The
earliest rudiments of insolvency legislation can be traced
to sections 23 and 24 of the Government of India Act, 1800
(39 and 40 Geo. III_c. 79), which conferred insolvency
jurisdiction on the Supreme Court at Fort William and
Madras and the Recorder’s Court at Bombay. These courts
were empowered to make rules and orders for granting
relief to insolvent debtors on the lines intended by the
Act of the British Parliament called the Lord’s Act passed
in 1759 (32 Geo. II c. 28).

The next step was taken in 1828 when Statute 9 (Geo.
IV c. 73) was passed, which can be said to be the begin-
ning of the special insolvency legislation in India. Under
this Act, the first insolvency courts for relief of insolvent
debtors were established in the Presidency-towns.
Although the insolvency court was presided over by a
Judge of the Supreme Court, it had a distinct and separate
existence. The insolvency court was to sit and dispose of
insolvency matters as often as was necessary. But the
court at Calcutta was to sit at least once a month. The
Act of 1828 was originally intended to remain in force for
a period of four years, but subsequent legislation extended
its duration up to 1848 and also made certain amendments

erein®,

?Ministry of Law, under orders in File No. 22-V-50-L of the Legislative
Section.

*Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India (1958), pages 1, 2, para, 2.

°Cf. Jowitt, Dictionary of English Law (1959) Vol. I, page 205, right.

4566 Holdsworth, H.E.L. (1938), Vol. XI, pages 445-446 and Vol, VIII,
Pages 229—245,

5868 Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India (1958), page 16.


2

A further step in the development of insolvency law
was taken in 1848 when the Indian Insolvency Act, 1848
(11 and 12 Vict. c. 21) was passed. The Act preserved the
distinction between traders and non-traders in certain
respects on the lines of the corresponding Bankruptcy
statutes then in force in England. It continued the courts
for the relief of insolvent debtors established by the Act
of 1828 in the Presidency-towns. The Indian High Courts
Act, 1861 (24 and 25 Vic. c. 104) abolished the Supreme
Courts in the Presidency-towns and in their place the pre-
sent High Courts were set up. The insolvency jurisdiction
in the Presidency-towns was thus transferred from the
Supreme Court to the High Court.

The provisions of the Indian Insolvency Act, 1848, were,
however, found to be inadequate to meet the changing
conditions. In the seventies Sir James Fitzjames Stephen
proposed an Insolvency Bill for the whole of India model-
led on the Bankruptcy laws then in force in England. But
this proposal was dropped, as the conditions in the mofus-
sil were not favourable for a comprehensive legislation on
the subject. The Act of 1848 was in force in the Presi-
dency-towns until the enactment in 1909 of the present
Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909.

3. While there was special insolvency legislation for
the Presidency-towns, there was no insolvency law in the
mofussil. The main reason for this difference was the
absence of any flourishing trade and commerce in_ the
mofussil. In the mofussil for a considerable period the
ordinary principle of distributing the sale proceeds pro-
rata among decree-holders after satisfaction in full of the
amount due to the attaching decree-holder seems to have
prevailed. (See the Civil Procedure Code of 1859). The
first attempt to introduce insolvency law in the mofussil
was made in 1877. Some rules were incorporated in Chap-
ter 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1877, which confer-
red jurisdiction on the district courts to entertain insol-
vency petitions and grant orders of discharge. These
rules were re-enacted with certain modifications in Chap-
ter 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1882. The provi-
sions in the Civil Procedure Code of 1859 were described’-?
as the “germ and nothing more than a germ of an insol-
vency law” and this criticism was regarded as applicable®
to the subsequent codes also. They could be made use of
by those debtors only who were arrested or imprisoned in
the execution of a decree for money or against whose pro-
perty an order of attachment was passed in execution of
such a decree. In other words, the provisions were limit-
ed to cases in which legal proceedings were instituted and

7566 Lord Hobhouse’s observations cited in the speech of Sir Erle
Richard on leave for introduction of the Bill which Ted to the Provineial Act
of 1907.

286९ also Mulla (1958), page 19.

386९, ibid.


3

judgment obtained. Creditors of a debtor were not entitl-
ed to file an insolvency petition. These defects were re-
moved by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907 (3 of 1907).
This Act created a special insolvency jurisdiction laying
down the conditions under which a debtor could be adjudi-
cated on his own petition or on a petition by a creditor.
The Act of 1907 was repealed by the Provincial Insolvency
Act, 1920 (5 of 1920) which is the Act now in force in the
mofussil.

4. The Hon’ble Sir H. Erle Richards while moving the Consolidation
Bill in the Council which led to the enactment of the Insolvency
Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909, stated: Acts into

“The difference in the conditions between the ००९
Presidency-towns and the mofussil makes it inexpe-
dient to have one uniform Act for the whole of India
at the present time but there will be little difficulty in
bringing the two Acts into complete agreement if it be
thought wise to do so in the future.”

This view was expressed more than half a century ago.
The difference in the conditions between the Presidency-
towns and the mofussil which led to the enactment of two
separate insolvency Acts has now largely disappeared.
India is being rapidly industrialised and with the imple-
mentation of the Five Year Plans, trade and commerce
has spread into many other towns besides the Presidency-
towns of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras. Time is, there-
fore, ripe for consolidating the two insolvency Acts and
having one uniform law of insolvency for the whole of
India, including the territories comprised in the former
Part B States to which neither the Presidency nor the
Provincial Act at present applies.

5. Insolvency law has a two-fold purpose—(i) to give Objects of

relief to the debtor from the harassment of his creditors Insolvency
whose claims he is unable to meet, and (ii) to provide a °
machinery by which creditors who are not secured in the
payment of their debts are to be satisfied. It is based on
the Roman principle cessio bonorum, that is to say, sur-
render by the debtor of all his goods for the benefit of his
creditors in return for immunity from court process.
Broadly speaking, the existing insolvency law contained
in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909 and the Pro-
vincial Insolvency Act, 1920 is sound in principle and has
worked satisfactorily in practice. Apart from combining
the two Acts, there is, therefore, little scope for any sub-
stantial change in the law.

6. Under the Proviso to section 3(1) in the Provincial Insolvency
Act, the State Government is empowered to authorise sub- jurisdiction
ordinate courts to exercise insolvency jurisdiction. Where Date courts.
a subordinate court exercises such jurisdiction, an appeal and appeals.
lies under section 75 of that Act to the District Court. We
feel that in view of the serious consequences which flow


4

from a person being adjudicated insolvent and the compli-
cated questions of law and fact which usually arise in
insolvency matters, appeals in such cases should lie to the
High Court. There are two ways of achieving this
object—
(i) providing an appeal direct to the High Court,
and
(ii) placing a limitation on the jurisdiction of sub-
ordinate courts.

The second course involves the difficulty of finding a satis-
factory method of limiting the jurisdiction. Two tests can
be applied for this purpose—
(i) the quantum of debts of the insolvent, and
(ii) the value of the property of the insolvent dis-
tributable among his creditors.

There is one basic objection to adopting the first test. The
idea of limiting the jurisdiction is that at least in large in-
solvencies an appeal should lie to the Higi Court. A ques-
tion accordingly arises, what is a large insolvency? Is an
insolvency where the debts of the insolvent amount to one
lakh of rupees but the insolvent’s property is worth only
Rs. 2,000 a large insolvency? In such a case the stakes are
not high. The creditors will at the most get a dividend of
two naye paise in the rupee and no complicated questions
of title, etc. are likely to arise in view of the negligible
value of the property of the insolvent. Apart from this
basic objection, there are also some practical difficulties.
One practical difficulty is pointed out in a case of the
Rangoon High Court’. The petitioning creditor in that case
filed an insolvency petition in the district court alleging
that the debt due to him from the respondent amounted to
Rs. 15,947-1-9. Under a notification issued under the pro-
visc to section 3 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920
which at that time appligd to Burma, the district court
had jurisdiction if the amount of debts exceeded Rs. 15,000
while if the amount of debts was less than Rs. 15,000 the
Assistant District Court had jurisdiction. The debt due
to the petitioning creditor was alleged to consist of two
items—(1) Rs. 8,029-9-9 due on three promissory notes, and
(2) the sum of Rs. 7,917-8-0 due under a registered mort-
gage. It, however, appeared from the petition that on
the date of the petition a mortgage suit in respect of the
second item was pending. In these circumstances the
district judge refrained from taking further steps in the
proceedings until the result of the mortgage suit was
known. After the mortgage suit was dismissed, the
amount of the petitioning creditor’s debt was reduced to
Rs. 8,029-9-9. The district judge, accordingly, transferred
the proceedings to the Assistant District Court. An

1$.P.K. Chettyar Firm v. S. Dutt (1936); LL.R. 14 Rangoon, 280 3.
AIR 1936 Rangoon 223.


5

adjudication order was passed by the Assistant District
Court. Subsequently, it appeared that the total debts of
which proof was submitted in the insolvency amounted
to Rs. 15,707. An application, however, was made by the
Receiver in insolvency that certain debts alleged to be due
by the insolvent to the petitioning creditor might not be
admitted. The application of the Receiver was dismissed
by the Assistant District Court. Against the order dismiss-
ing the application the Receiver appealed to the district
court. On appeal, the District Judge reduced the amount
of the debts which ought to be admitted by Rs. 3,052,
thereby reducing the total amount of debts of which proof
was admitted to a figure less than Rs. 15,000. The Assis-
tant District Court had further held that it had no jurisdic-
tion in the matter inasmuch as the debts of the insolvent
exceeded Rs. 15,000. On appeal from the order, the District
Court, in the events that happened, namely, that the debts
ot which proof was admitted amounted to less than
Rs. 15,600, allowed the appeal and held that the Assistant
District Court had jurisdiction. Page C.J. while deliver-
ing judgment on the case made the following observa-
tions: —

“The mere recital of the nature of the proceedings
that have taken place and the orders that the Assis-
tant District Court and the District Court were com-
pelled to pass in the circumstances discloses a situation
full of humour though for those concerned in insolvency
proceedings the humour is grim.”.

While construing the notification in question Page C.J.
further observed :--

“The effect of accepting this construction of notifi-
cations 37 and 207 is that the court may or may not
possess jurisdiction to hear an insolvency proceeding
at any particular time according to the amount of
the debts of the insolvent that at that particular time
may appear to be outstanding. The present case is
a simple but cogent illustration of the situation that
results from the issue of these notifications, and, if
the Court were at liberty to express an opinion upon
a_matter of policy, it would appear advisable
that steps should be taken by amending either the
Burma Courts Act or the Provincial Insolvency Act
in order that an end should be put to the present
impasse”.

Dunkley J. who concurred in the judgment made the
following observations:—

“Debts of the insolvent must clearly mean the
debts admitted or proved in the proceedings; the
expression cannot include secured or doubtful debts
which may or may not become provable at some
subsequent stage; for, if so, the jurisdiction cf the
Assistant District Court will always remain in doubt



6

in every insolvency case. It is urged that the effect
of this construction of the expression is that in any
particular case the Assistant District Court may have
jurisdiction at one time and not at another, and that
in consequence several transfers of the case between
the District Court and the Assistant District Court
with their attendant evils of prolonged duration and
uncertainty, may occur. I agree that this is so, and
that in an insolvency case uncertainty as to the court
having ‘original jurisdiction is most unfortunate as
it entails uncertainty as to the court to which aypeals
lie; but it is impossible to devise any form of notifi-
cation which will entirely remove this uncertainty,
and if I may make the suggestion, in my opinion the
only satisfactory method of meeting the difficulty is
by an amendment of the Burma Courts Act, to make
all appeals, of whatever kind, from the Assistant
District Court He direct to the High Court”.

It is true that the difficulty pointed out by the Rangoon
High Court could perhaps be met by a suitable wording
of the notification. Instead of the word ‘debts’ the words
‘alleged debts’ may be used’. But then the creditors could
by inflating or undervaluing their debts choose their
forum and the debtor will have no voice in the matter.
Apart from the difficulty pointed out by the Rangoon
High Court there is a further difficulty. A petitioning
creditor will, for the purpose of jurisdiction of the court,
have to state in his petition the aggregate amount of debts
due from the debtor. Will he be in a position to do so?
The debts which are due from a debtor will be known
only to the debtor himself. The law, therefore, requires
the debtor and not the petitioning creditor to file a sche-
dule of creditors. In a vast country like India, the cre-
ditors of a debtor may be spread over a number of places,
and it will not, therefore, be possible for the petitioning
creditor to know who are the other creditors of the deb-
tor and much less the amount of their debts. In_ the
absence of such information a petitioning creditor would
not know in what court to file the petition. Application
of the rst test, therefore, gives rise 1० several complica-
tions.

The second test relating to the value of the property
of the insolvent distributable among his creditors has
been adopted in relation to summary administration of
small insolyencies. But in the case of summary adrninis-
tration of an insolvency no question of jurisdic-
tion arises. After a petition is admitted, the court if it is
satished by affidavit or otherwise that the property of
the insolvent does not exceed a particular value may

3866 Gulabrao v, Yadavrae, (1958) 60 Bom. LR. 505.


7

make an order that the insolvent’s estate be administered:
in a summary manner’. The value of the insolvent’s pro-
perty is relevant only for the purpose of determining the
manner in which the insolvent’s estate is to be adminis-

tered and not for the purpose of the jurisdiction of the

court in which the petition for insolvency is to be pre-
sented. If this test is adopted for the purpose of deter-
mining the jurisdiction of subordinate courts, the petition-
ing creditor will be faced with the same difficulty which
he will experience if the first test is adopted. It will be
difficult for him to ascertain the value of the property
of the insolvent at the time of the presentation of the
petition. For these reasons, it appears to us that the
second course, though desirable in some respects, is not
practicable. We, therefore, recommend’ the adoption of
the first course, that is to say, that an appeal should lie
direct to the High Court from certain decisions and orders
of a subordinate court exercising insolvency jurisdiction.
In this connection, we may refer to s. 4A of the Guardian
and Wards Act, 1890, under which the High Court is
empowered to delegate jurisdiction to subordinate courts.
Under section 47 of that Act, when a case is decided by
a subordinate court in exercise of its delegated jurisdic-
tion, an appeal lies to the High Court. We appreciate
that our recommendation has the drawback, that even
in a small matter an appeal will lie to the High Court.
We, therefore, propose that an appeal to the High Court
should lie in important matters only, e.g., adjudication,
avoidance of transfers etc. We may point out that, if
there is no delegation of jurisdiction to subordinate courts,
an appeal against certain decisions and orders at present
lies to the High Court. [Section 75(2) read with Sche-
dule I of the Provincial Act]. We recommend that only
in these cases an appeal should lie to the High Court. In
all other cases an appeal should lie to the District Court.

7. In the Presidency-towns of Bombay, Calcutta and
Madras, insolvency jurisdiction is at present exercised by
the High Court on its original side. An important ques-
tion which arises for consideration is whether, in view of
the consolidation of the two Acts, insolvency jurisdiction
of the High Court in the Presidency-towns should be re-
tained. The main argument in favour of retention of the
jurisdiction is, that trade and commerce in these towns
is much more developed than in the mofussil and that it
is, therefore, desirable that administration of insolvency
law in the Presidency-towns should be entrusted to the
highest judicial authority. The arguments against the
retention of the jurisdiction of the High Court in the
Presidency-towns are the following:—

(i) the distinction in the administration of in-
solvency law between the Presidency-towns and the

*Presidency Act, s. 106 and Provincial Act, s. 74.
3866 Appendix I, clauses 97 and 116.

Insolvency
jurisdiction:
of High
Courts in
Presidency.
Towns.


Official
Assignees.
and Official
Receivers.

8

mofussil, even if justified in the past on account of
the difference between commercial conditions, can no
jonger be maintained in view of the general pro-
gress in commerce and industry all over the country;

(ii) except in respect of a few matters, there is
no material difference in the substantive law as en-
acted in the two Acts;

(iii) a substantial part of the original jurisdic-
tion of the High Court in the Presidency-towns has
already been transferred to the City Civil Court.

8. In an earlier report}, the Law Commission has made
the following observations on the subject:—

“It is to be noticed that the insolvency jurisdic-
tion in the Presidency-towns has been conferred ex-
clusively upon the High Court. As entrustment of
this jurisdiction to the High Court is necessary in the
interests of the better administration of the insol-
vency law, we are of the opinion that such exclusive
jurisdiction should continue even though the two
Acts are consolidated into one”.

We respectfully agree with this view. The High Courts
in Bombay, Madras and Calcutta have been exercising
insolvency jurisdiction for over a century. Public opi-
nion in these towns is in favour of the retention of the
jurisdiction of the High Court. When a person is ad-
judged an insolvent the adjudication affects his status
and reputation. It is, therefore, important that such ad-
judication should be made by the highest Court in large
commercial towns like Bombay, Calcutta and Madras. It
is true, that apart from Bombay, Calcutta and Madras
there are many other towns which from a commercial
point of view are no less important than the former Pre-
sidency-towns, ¢.g., Delhi, Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Kanpur,
Patna, Asansol, Nagpur, Hyderabad, Bangalore, etc. As
however, in relation to these towns the High Courts do
not exercise original jurisdiction, it would not be prac-
ticable to confer insolvency jurisdiction on these High
Courts* in relation to these towns.

9. The Presidency Act provides for the appointment
in each of the Presidency-towns of Bombay, Madras and
Calcutta of an officer called the Official Assignee, in
whom all the property of the insolvent is vested.’ The
Official Assignee is constituted a corporation sole in
Bombay and Madras by local amendments. (See s. 77A,
Presidency Act). The scheme of the Provincial Act is
different‘. Section 57 of that Act provides for the appoint-
ment of an Official Receiver. Such appointment is not

गत Report, Vol. 1, page 517, para. 3.
2See Appendix I, clause 97.
356६ s. 77, Presidency Act.
“See sections 56, 57, 58, Provincial Act.


obligatory. Under section 28(2) of the Act, on the mak-
ing of an order of adjudication the property of the in-
solvent vests either in the court or in a receiver. Where
an Official Receiver has not been appointed, the Court
generally appoints, ad hoc for each insolvency a member
of the Bar or a ministerial officer of the court to dis-
charge the functions of the receiver. The defects of this

* system have been pointed out in an earlier Report of the
Law Commission}. In that Report, it has been stated that
in the States of Madras and Andhra Pradesh where Offi-
cial Receivers are appointed for an entire area the results
have been more satisfactory. Under s. 58 of the Provin-
cial Act, where no receiver is appointed the property
vests in the Court. But the vesting of the property in the
court is not convenient and may lead to complications.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the system of
vesting the insolvent’s estate in the Court and leaving it
to the court to appoint a receiver ad-hoc should be abo-
lished. We think that in this respect the provisions of
the Presidency Act are better, and should apply through-
out India. This change would assimilate the position in
the mofussil to that obtaining .in the Presidency-towns,
and it would also facilitate the administration of estates
in insolvency?.

10. At the outset, it will be useful to set out briefly the Jurisdiction
evolution of the jurisdiction of insolvency courts. Before of Insolven-
the Bankruptcy Act, 1869, Bankruptcy Court in England °
had no jurisdiction to decide questions of title in which
third persons were interested, unless they submitted to
the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court. (Vide section
12 of the Bankruptcy Act, 1849). Section 72 of the Bank-
ruptcy Act, 1869, conferred jurisdiction on the Bankruptcy
Court to decide all questions, whatsoever, for doing justice
to the parties and for effectively administering the estates
of bankrupts. That section was couched in such wide
terms that the Bankruptcy Court could exercise jurisdic-
tion to decide all questions of title in which the rights of
third parties were involved. In construing this section,
the courts, however, drew a distinction between claims
arising in bankruptcy and claims not arising in bankruptcy.

‘The former comprised transactions which could not be
impeached but for the special provisions of the Bankrupt-
cy Act. The right of the trustee in bankruptcy in those
claims rests on a title superior to that of the bankrupt.
The following are some of the matters in which the trustee

in bankruptcy is said to have a higher title than the in-
solvent®:—

(i) transfers of property by the bankrupt made Claims atis~

between the commencement of the bankruptcy and ing one

z4th Report, Vol. I, page 512, para. 6 and page 514, para. 8.
3568 Appendix I, clause 88. P Page हक Para.
36f. Mulla, Law ‘of Insolvency in India, (1958), page 40.


10

the date of the order of adjudication which come
within the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court by
virtue of the doctrine of relation back;

(ii) possession by the bankrupt of goods of other
persons to which the Trustee in bankruptcy is en-
titled by operation of the doctrine of reputed owner-
ship; हे

(iii) transfers within two years of the bankruptcy
not made in good faith and for valuable considera-
tion;

(iv) transfers by way of fraudulent preference in
favour of creditors;

(v) transfers which are in themselves acts of
bankruptcy.

Claims not arising in bankruptcy are those claims against
third parties in respect of which the Trustee in Bankrup-
tey has no superior title than the bankrupt himself and
which he can enforce against such parties only under the
ordinary law and in the ordinary courts. As regards
claims arising in bankruptcy the Courts in England held
that though they should normally be tried by the Bank-
ruptcy Court’, the ordinary civil courts had also juris-
diction over the same®. As regards claims not arising in
bankruptcy the Courts in England took the view that they
should be tried by the ordinary courts unless the parties
thereto submitted to the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy
Court’. This was the position under section 72 of the
Bankruptcy Act, 1869. The Bankruptcy Act, 1869 was re-
placed by the Bankruptcy Act, 1883, and section 102 of the
latter Act was with certain modifications a re-enactment
of section 72 of the former Act. In 1914 a new Bank-
tuptecy law was enacted which repealed the Act of 1883.
Section 105 of the Act of 1914 corresponds to section 102
of the Act of 1883. Judicial decisions’ under the Bankrup-
tey Acts of 1883 and 1914 reaffirmed the principles which
had been laid down in the construction of section 72 of
the Act of 1869.

11. The relevant Brovisions of the two Indian Acts
are section 7 of the Presidency Act and section 4 of the
Provincial Act. Although the language of section 7 of
the Presidency Act is quite general, the Calcutta High
Court! held that the Insolvency Court should decline to

D 1Vide the observations of James L. J. in ex parte Armitage, 17 Ch.
' 13.

2Vide Sharp v. McHenry, 55 L.T. 747 and Re Evelyn, (1894) 2 Q.B.
302.

Vide Ellis v. Silber, L. R. 8 Ch. App. 83 ; Ex parte Dickin, 8 Ch
D. 377 5 Ex. parte Musgrave, 10 Ch. D. 94 3 Ex parte Brown, 11 Ch. D. 4.485
Ex “parte Fletcher, 9 Ch. D. 381 3 Ex parte Davies, 19 Ch. 10. 86. ,

‘Jnanendra Bala Devi v. Official Assignee, I.L.R. 54 Cal) 351
ALR. 1926 Cal. 597. है



11

entertain claims against third parties which do not arise
in insolvency. A similar view was taken under the Pro-
vincial Act by a majority of the High Courts’. The Mad-
ras High Court, however, took the view that the Insolvency
Court had jurisdiction under section 7 of the Presidency Act
to decide all questions between the Official Assignee and
strangers, even though the latter did not submit to the
jurisdiction of the Insolvency Court. The conflict was
set at rest by the amending Act? of 1927 which inserted
a proviso to section 7 of the Presidency Act and also
amended sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 36 of that
Act. The net result of these amendments was that where
proceedings were taken against a stranger under section
36 of the Act and he denied the claim of the insolvent,
the Insolvency Court had no jurisdiction to decide the
claim. In other words, the view of the Calcutta and
Bombay High Courts which was in accordance with the
English practice was preferred to that of the Madras High
Court. Subsequent to the amendment of 1927, a question
arose whether the Insolvency Court could entertain
claims against a stranger where the stranger had not
been examined under section 36. It was held by the Mad-
ras High Court’ that the proviso to section 7 introduced
by the amending Act of 1927 restricted the jurisdiction of
the Insolvency Court only in those cases where there had
been examination under section 36, and that when there
was no such examination, the language of section 7 was
wide enough to confer the necessary jurisdiction on the
High Court. In another Madras case* it was further held,
that even when there was an examination under section
36, the jurisdiction of the Court to decide matters out-
Side the scope of inquiry under that section was not
barred by the proviso to section 7. The Bombay High
Court took the view® that though the proviso to the section
applied only when there was examination under section
36, even when there was no such examination the court
should in the exercise of its discretion decline to enter-
tain a claim against a stranger unless he submitted to its
jurisdiction.

The Provincial Act of 1907 did not contain any provi-
sion corresponding to section 7 of the Presidency Act.
There was, accordingly, a conflict of opinion as to whether

1Naginlal Chunilal v. Official Assignee, 1.L.R. 35 Bom. 473 ; Doraiappa
Iyer. v. Official Assignee, 42 ML.J. 413 Official Assignee Madras v
Official Assignee, Rangoon, AR. 1925 Mad. 141.

*Act 11 of 1927.

10 fficial Assignee, ‘Madras v. Narasimha Mudaliar, 1.L.R. 52 Mad,
77.

‘Chinnappa v. Official Assignee, (1932) ILL.R. 55 Mad. 385 ; AIR
1932 Madras 167.

‘In re Balubhai Kallianchand, A.ILR. 1942 Bom, 118 ; 44 Bom. L.R.
71.

42 MofL—2


Acts of
Insolvency.

12

a disputed claim against a stranger could be tried by
the Insolvency Court. The question was answered in the
affirmative by the Allahabad High Court in Bansidhar v.
Kharagjit', and in the negative by the Calcutta High
Court in Nilmoni Chowdhury v. Durga Charan Chow-
dhury*. It was to set at rest this conflict that section 4
of the Provincial Act of 1920 was enacted. This section
gives effect to the view of the Allahabad High Court and
confers jurisdiction on the insolvency court to adjudicate
claims against third parties. It will be observed, that
on the language of section 4, the Insolvency Court is em-
powered to decide question of title against a stranger even
when the stranger disputes that title and does not sub-
mit to the jurisdiction of the insolvency court. To this
extent section 4 differs from section 7 and section 36 (4)
and (5) of the Presidency Act.

12. We have carefully considered this matter, and we
think that having regard to general legal principles, the
provisions of section 7 of the Presidency Act are to be
preferred to the provisions of section 4 of the Provincial
Act. We are fortified in our opinion by the view ex-
pressed by Mulla that the provisions of section 4 of the
Provincial Act should be brought in line with the provi-
sions of section 7 of the Presidency Act. Insolvency
jurisdiction is a special jurisdiction, and such jurisdiction
should not be extended beyond what is strictly necessary
for the purpose of administering the insolvency law.
Third parties are strangers to an insolvency, and they
should not be dragged to the insolvency court against their
will. To give an illustration, if A is adjudged insolvent
by a court in Delhi and A has a claim against B, who
ordinarily resides in Trivandrum, it will be great hard-
ship upon B if the Official Assignee could enforce his
claim against B in the insolvency court in Delhi. More-
over, if the insolvency court is given jurisdiction in res-
pect of claims against third parties, the Official Assignee
could enforce such claims without payment of any court
fee. We, however, see no harm if small claims, not ex-
ceeding Rs. 5,000 in value against* third parties are de-
termined by the insolvency court.

13. We propose that a new act of insolvency on the
lines of section 1(1)(g) of the English Bankruptcy Act,
1914 should find a place in the revised law. Under ihe
English Act it is open to a person who has obtained a
decree or order for the payment of money to give notice
to the debtor, calling upon him to pay up the amount due

'Bansidhar v. Kharagjit, (1915), 1.L.R. 37 All. 65.
*Nilmoni Chowdhury v. Durga Charan Chowdhury, (1918) 22 C.W.N.
402.

*Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958) page 24, para. 26.
“Appendix I, Clause 99.


13

under the decree or order and failure to do so amounts to
an act of insolvency. It may be urged against such a pro-
vision, that it is Hable to be abused by scheming creditors
and may be used for ulterior purposes. But in Bombay
a provision based on section 1 (1) (g) of the English Act
has already been enacted both in the Presidency Act and
jn the Provincial Act. The Bombay amendment seems
to have worked satisfactorily for about a quarter of a cen-
tury and does not scem to have led to any abuse. In this
connection reference may usefully be made to the recom-
mendation made in an earlier report? of the Law Com-
mission in the following terms:

“the most cffective way of instilling a healthy
fear in the minds of dishonest judgment-debtors would
be to enable the Court to adjudicate him an insolvent
if he does not pay the decretal amount after notice by
the decree-holder, by specifying a period within which
it should be paid, on the lines of the Bombay amend-
ment to the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act.”

We. therefore. recommend that the Bombay Amendment
should form part of the general insolvency law in India#

14. The Blagden Committee appointed to review the Discharge.
Bankruptcy Law in England has made far-reaching re-
commendations in respect of discharge of insolvents. The
Committee has observed as follows* :--

“The most unsatisfactory feature of the existing
system is the fact that, whether or not any bankrupt
obtains his discharge, depends, in the first instance,
upon whether or not he makes application therefor,
and this has Jed to the position that only one
in every four or five of all bankrupts ever
in fact does apply for his discharge.
We are of opinion that the question of
whether a bankrupt should be discharged and, if so,
under what terms, is of such vital importance that a
decision with regard thereto ought to be made by
court in every case. Discharge should never depend
upon the debtor making an application to the Court,
a step which we consider to be quite irrelevent to
the proper consideration of the issue.”

15. The Blagden Committee has, therefore, recom-
mended? that after the lapse of a period of two years from
the conclusion of the public examination of an insolvent,

786९ the Bombay Insolvency Amendment Act, 1939 (15 of 1930).
®Third Report (Limitation Act) pp. 65-66, para, 171.
१६९९ App. 1, Clause 3(2) -

cng डिश oF fe Committee on Bankruptey Law Amendment ete. (1957)
md. 221, page 20, para. s4.

sReport of the Committee on Bankruptcy Law etc. Amendment (1
‘Cmd. 221, page 22, para. 60. y (1957)


Relation
back.

14

the insolvent should automatically be discharged unless
the Court of its own motion or on the application of the
Official Receiver, Trustee or creditor has entered a caveat
against the bankrupt’s discharge. So far as we have been
able to gather, the recommendations made by the Blagden
Committee have not yet been implemented in England.
We have given careful consideration to this recommen-
dation of the Committee, and we are of the opinion that
the conditions in this country are different from those
prevailing in England. The figures we have received!
from the High Courts of Bombay, Madras and Calcutta
disclose that generally an insolvent does not unduly delay
making an application for a discharge. We, therefore,
think that no change in the Indian law on the lines pro-
posed by the Blagden Committee is necessary’.

16. On the question as to the date from which an order
of adjudication should take effect, there is difference bet-
ween the law as enacted in section 37(1) of the Bankrup-
tey Act, 1914 and section 51 of the Presidency Act on the
one hand, and that embodied in section 28(7) 0! the Pro-
vincial Act on the other. Under the English law, the
order of adjudication relates back to the date of the act
of insolvency and to the earliest of such acts if there is
more than one. That is also the law under section 51
of the Presidency Act. But the Provincial Act has made
deliberate departure from this position and enacts that
the order shall relate back to the date of the presentation
of the petition. Such a provision was first enacted in the
Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907 (3 of 1907). The reason
for the departure from the English law was stated in the
Legislative Council in the following words:—

“The English doctrine that it may have the effect
of avoiding certain questionable transactions is a de-
parture from the general rule that a decree or order
relates back only to the commencement of the list”.

On this reasoning, it was enacted that the order should
relate back only to the date of the petition, and that posi-
tion was re-iterated in section 28(7) of the Act of 1920.

17. The principle behind the doctrine of relation back
is explained by Mulla as follows? :—

“It is not uncommon for debtors on the eve of
insolvency to transfer their property to others to
defraud their creditors. Justice to the creditors
requires that such transfers should not be allowed to
stand and it is for this purpose that the title of the
Official Assignee or Receiver is made to relate back to

1868 Apr. IV.
?Appendix I, Clauses 18 and 37.
*Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958) page 574.


15

a date earlier than the date of the order or adjudica-
tion.”

Having this principle in mind, we think that in the condi-
tions prevailing :n this country the provisions of the Presi-
dency Act in this respect are better suited to achieve the
objec: in view than those of the Provincial Act. Insol-
vency law is intended for an honest debtor. But unfortu-
onest debtors take advantage of the
insoivency law in this country for the purpose of getting
rid of their debts and at the same time concealing a sub-
stantial par: of their property from the creditors. Relation
back of insolvency to the date of the presentation of the
petition does not serve any useful purpose, because it is
rarely that an insolvent dishonestly transfers his property

after the presentation of the petition. Mulla has observed,
that the + sions of the Provincial Act on this subject
are open to objection on the ground that they afford pro-
tection to a large number of transactions entered into by
the debtor on the eve of insolvency to the detriment of his
creditors. In the Presidency Act as originally introduced
in the L ature, it was provided that insolvency should
relate b: io the date of the presentation of the petition.
But on the representations made by the High Courts of
Calcutta and Bombay, the relevant provision was altered
in the Select Committee on the lines of the English 8९7,
The Bombay High Court in its objection made the follow-
ing point? :—

“The title of the Official Assignee should be made
to relate back to the act of insolvency because in the
ease of many traders’ insolvencies, the insolvent has
been contemplating the possibility of adjudication
order for several months before it is actually made
and has been making preparations for disposing of his
to guard against such a contingency. His
preparations would to a large extent be frustrated if
the title of the Official Assignee is related back as it
does under the English Act.”

We think’ that these observations have considerable force
and have as much validity now as they had when the 1909
Act was being enacted. We may point out that in actual
practice. the doctrine of relation back as enunciated in the
Presidency Act does not work any hardship, because bona
fide transactions are always protected‘.

18. The doctrine of reputed ownership embodied in
section 52(2)(c), Presidency Act, and section 28(3), Pro-
vincial Aci, apples only when an insolvent is not the true

*Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958) page 27, middle.

286९ the Report of the Select Committee for the 1909 Act and Appendix
thereto.

3868 Appendix I, Clause 23.
35. 57 of the Presidency Act and s. 55 of the Provincial Act.

Reputed
ownership.


16

owner of the goods in his possession. It is highly immoral
and inequitable that the true owner should lose his title
to the goods merely because for some presumably good
reason he allows his goods to remain in the possession of
the insolvent. In the present economic conditions, the doc-
trine of reported ownership appears to be outmoded and
should in our opinion be abolished. The doctrine is
pased on the assumption that the true owner of the
goods, by allowing the goods to remain in the apparent
ownership of the insolvent, enables the insolvent to obtain
false credit. Credit is at present obtained through banks.
and banks usually insist upon the pledge of goods or some
other security before allowing credit. Few persons now-
a-days give credit merely on the strength of the quantity
of goods lying in the shop of the borrower. Muila makes
the following observations on the doctrine of reputed own-
ersh —~

“The doctrine of reputed ownership operated
very Larshiy in several cases and has worked greater
evil than geod. It is not recognised in several systems
of bankruptcy law. If, however, that clause is to stand
पा the Statute Book of Ind‘a as a living clause the
whole section should be recast. The section as it now
stands is like a cheap Jack’s shop packed जाती a variety
of clothes some of which are for mere show.”

In cur cpinion it is not possible to recast the close w.th-
out affecting the very fundamental principle on which the
doctrine of reputed ownership is based. We. the
think that the better course would be to omit altoge
from the new law the provisions relatin to renul
ownership. We may point out, that the Blasden Com-
mittee has also recommended the abolition of the doe-
trine of reputed ownership’. While omitting the prov
of reputed ownership’, we think that there shouid be some
machinery by which persons who claim propetiy in the
possession of the insolvent may be able to establish their
claim. We have, accordingly, added a new ¢
the lines of section 50 of the Canadian Bankruptey
which will enable a person claiming property in the posses-
sion of the insolvent, to lodge such claim before the OMc:al
Assignee. If the Official Assignee does not accept the
claim, provision is made for an appeal to the court. If no
claim is made within a specified time, the proverty shall
be deemed to have been relinquished in favour of the
Official Assignee.

2Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958) page 573, Fara. 578.

Report of the Committee on Bankruptcy Law etc. Amendment (1957)
Cmd. 221, page 37, para. 110.

3566 Appendix I, clause 48.
#See Appendix I, clause 51.


17

Burden of
. In the case of a voluntary transfer, the burden of

proving tack of consideration and good faith lies on the roe
Official Assignee!-°. In a Rangoon case under the Provin- Soluntary

cial Act, Page C.J. made the following observations’:— transfers.

“There is no doubt that the effect of the ruling of
the Judicial Committee (in 1931 P.C. 75 and 1934 P.C.
3) to the effect that in a proceeding under section 53
(Provincial Act), the onus lies upon the applicant to
prove that the transfer was not made “in favour of
a purchaser or an encumbrancer in good faith and for
valuable consideration” has placed the Receivers and
creditors in insolvency in a great difficulty, In 99
cases out of 100 in which proceedings are taken under
section 53 of the Act, the Receiver knows nothing cf
the transaction which is impeached and is called upon
to prove the negative in connection with a matter of
which he cannot be expected to have any personal
knowledge. I should have thought that in an applica-
tion under section 53 of the Provincial Insolvency Act,
it would have been the intention of the Legislature
when once a transfer of property by the debtor is
proved within two years of the presentation of the
petition that the transferee should have been called

upon to prove that he was a purchaser in good faith
ete.”

In another Rangoon case® under section 55 of the Presi-
dency Act, Page C.J. re-iterated the same view. We have
given careful consideration to these observations but we
think that the burden of proof should not be shifted to the
transferee. The period of two years during which a volun-
tary transfer may be impeached is a long period. During
this period the insolvent must have entered into a large
number of transactions many of which would be bona jide.
It is only a few transactions that may be tainted with
fraud. If the burden of proof is placed on the transferee,
it will work great hardship on bona fide transferees for

Official Receiver v. P. L.K. M. R. M. Chettyar Firm, A.LR. 1931
9.0. 75, 78 left-hand column—s8 I.A. 115 (Lord Atkin) (appeal from
Rangoon under the Provincial Act).

*O ficial Assignee v.Khoo Saw Cheow, A.1.R. 1930 P.C. 26: ‘Appeal
from Straits Settlements, Penang) Lord Tomlin), 5 Are

scat Stroman Iyer v. Official Receiver, A.LR. 1958 S.C. 1 ; (1958)

‘Harry Pope v. Official Assignee, ALR. 1934 P.C. 3, Ib R. 12
Rangoon Tos 3 60 Ind. Appeals 362 'P.C. (decision under’ Presidency
ct).

*For previous law see Official Assignee v. Sheikh Moiddeen, A.LR.
1927 Mad. 1013, 104 right ; LL.R. 50 Mad. 948 (Presidency Act).

‘Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India (1958), pages 613-614.

2H. Hagemister v. U. Po Cho, A.LR. 1935 RB LLR.
Rangoon 625 (Provincial Act). 935 Rangoon 53° बयां: 12

*U. Ohn Pe v. Fatima Bibi, A.I.R. 1936 Rangoon > 146, Ie
reported in ILL.R.). 8 हु 145: मी (Not


Fraudulent

prefe

ference.

18

value. Moreover, the normal rules relating to burden of
proof are clearly y laid down in Chapter VII of the Indian
Evidence Act. Section 101 of that Act enacts that whoever
desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right
or liability dependent on the existence of facts which he
asserts must prove that those facts exist. Section 102
enacts that the burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies
on that person who would fail if no evidence at all were
given on either side. These are salutary rules, and should
not be lightly changed. We, therefore, think that no suffi-
cient grounds exist for changing the law' in respect of
burden of proof laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

20. So far as transfers by way of fraudulent preference
are concerned, the Official Assignee has to prove that the
dominant intention of the insolvent was to prefer the par-
ticular creditor’-*, The Blagden Committee, in dealing
with this question, has made the following observationst:—

“117. Such evidence (regarding intention) may
exist in an admission made by the bankrupt in the
course of his public examination or otherwise, but that
evidence is not admissible against the respondent to
the motion. If the bankrupt is called as a witness it is
most unlikely that he will admit his intent to prefer,
which, apart from defeating that intent, might render
him liable to a charge of having made an undue pre-
ference if he wished to obtain his discharge. A further
difficulty in the way of a successful claim against the
person preferred is the fact that any evidence of inten-
tion to prefer may be rendered nugatory if the pre-
ferred creditor can show that he was threatening the
bankrupt with proceedings or otherwise using pressure
to obtain payment. Such evidence can often he ad-
duced, and advantage may be taken of this rule by a
debtor in order to protect the creditor he wished to
prefer by stating that the creditor was in fact pressing
him and threatening him with proceedings if he were
not paid.”

“118. It has been represented to us that the effect
of the law last referred to is fundamentally wrong, and
that pressure by a creditor, far from enabling him to

1See Appendix I, Clause 54.

4Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958), page 630. Peat v. Gresham
Trust Ltd., (1934) A.C. 252, 262. (1934) A.E.R. 82. .

*Sime Derby and Co. v. Official Assignee etc, A.LR. 1928 P.C. 77,
right-hand column (From Straits Settlements, Singapore) (Lord Warrington
of Clyffe) ;

Kasi v. Official Receiver, A.1.R. 1929 Madras 321 ; Kashi Nath v.
Official Receiver, A.ILR. 1931 All. 142 ; Dina Nath v. Labhu Ram, A.LR.
1932 Lah, 321 (Addison J) ; Gopal v. Balli Rao, A.I.R. 1937 Nag. 117
@ollock J.) } Official Receiver y. Veripati Venkayya, A.J.R. 1941 Madras
796, right-hand column (Patanjali Sastri J.).

‘Report, page 39, para, 117—~119.



19

retain the payment made to him, should have the op-
posite effect of rendering the payment void as against
the trustee in bankruptcy, so that the creditor exercis-
ing pressure should not, by so doing, obtain an advan-
tage over the other creditors. We appreciate the
moral aspect exemplified in this view, but we cannot
agree that a creditor who looks after his own i
before a bankruptcy to the extent of pre:
debior to pay the debi owing should not ०
benefit of his diligence.”

“119, We do, however, recognise that the state of
the law as it is at present is far from satisfactory, the
principal reason bemmg the difficulty of proof. We ac-
curdingly suggest that (in addition to new p> ons
allowing the transcript of the notes of the public exa-
mination to be used in evidence under certain condi-
tions) there should be not only a voidable preference,
as at present, at any time within six months before
presentation of 3 bankruptcy petition, but that there
should also be “absolute preference” after the pre-
sentation of a petition or during a period of twenty-one
days prior thereto. This absolute preference would be
void against the trustee in the bankruptcy if, in fact,
the payment or transfer did prefer a creditor, without
any onus resting upon the trustee to prove intent to
prefer.”

21. Section 95 of the Australian Bankruptcy Act pro-
vides that every conveyance, etc., by am y person unable to
pay his debts as it becomes due from his own money, in
‘avour of any creditor or of any person in trust for any
creditor having the effect of giving that creditor, etc. pre-
ference, priority or advantage over the other creditors
shall be void. These words substitute an objective test for
the subjective test. If there has in fact been a preference,
the question of intention is immaterial. The corresponding
provisions of section 64(2) of the Canadian Act proceed on
slightly different lines. The Canadian Act provides that
where any such conveyance, etc., hag the effect of giving
any creditor a preference over other creditors or cver any
one or more of them, it shall be presumed prima facie to
have been made, etc., with a view to giving such creditor
a preference over other creditors, whether or not it was
made voluntarily or under pressure and that evidence of
pressure shall not be receivable or availed to support such
transaction. We have considered the recommendation of
the Blagden Committee and the relevant provisions of the
Australian and Canadian Acts, but we think that no change
is called fer in our law. It is true that it is very seldom
that there is direct evidence regarding fraudulent inten-
tion of the insolvent, But the court can infer such inten-
tion from the circumstances attending the transfer as es-
tablished by the evidence’. In this connection, we may

Sime Derby & Co. v. Official Assis

De ssignee ALR. 1928 P.C. 3 Peat
v. Gresham Trust Ltd. (1934) A.C. 262 3 (1934) ABR. 82. 7 eat



20

7 to illustration (a) to section 106 of the Indian Evi-
ere Met, 1872, on provides that when a person does
an act with some intention other than that which the
character and circumstances of the act suggest, the burden
of proving that intention is upon him. In actual practice
it should not be difficult for the Official Assignee to prove
certain facts from which the necessary inference about
intention may be drawn, Shifting the burden of proof on
the transferee would give rise to another difficulty. A
transfer by way of fraudulent preference is also an 8९६ of
inscivency As an act of insolvency the burden of proof
lies on the creditor. We see no reason why as a fraudulent
preference the rule regarding burden of proof should be
different’. Such a change would result in a certain amount
of inconsistency in the law.

"Void ? and
**voidable ”

ections 95
of ve

and 56 of the Presidency Act relating
ransfers and tra: rs by way
a Li In 5९ए-
incial Act dealing with voluntary irans-
the word used is ‘voidable’, while in section 54 dealing
ih fraudulent preferences, the word used is ‘void’. The
consideration is whether in the new law the
’ or ‘voidable’ should be used, It is true? that the
word ‘void’ has been construed as ‘voidable’, The object
of using the word ‘void’ instead of ‘voidable’, as observed
in an Engl:sh case, seems to be to make it clear that the
itle of the trustee could not be avoided by anything done
en the date of bankruptcy and the declaration of the
fitie®, In another English case* the point is ex-
in the following words:—
“On one side it is said void ab initio—void from
the date of settlement. Where do you find that? The
words are not there. There are other words which
point in the contrary direction and these are the words
‘void against the trustee in the bankruptcy’. What do
they mean? They mean void as against the trustee in
the bankruptcy from the date of the accruer of his
title or in other words, void from the date of the act of

bankruptcy to which the title of the trustee relates
ack.’

These two cases were considered in later cases’. In
Gunsbourg & Co. Ltd.6 a doubt was cast whether the doc-
trine of relation back applies in cases where a settlement

15९6 Appendix 1, clause 55.

Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958) page 614, para. 620, and
Williams, 17th edition, p. 348.

3568 In re Brall, ex. parte Norton (1893) 2 0.8. 381, Vaughan Williams

‘In re Carter and Kenderdine’s Contract, (1897) 1 Ch. 776 CA.

sin re Hart, ex-parte Green (1912) 3 K.B. 6 and in re A. Gunsbou
& Co. Ltd., (1920) All. E.R. 492. 3 %

*Gunsbourg & Co. Lid.s (1920) AER. 492—(1920) 2 B.K.426.


21

is declared void as against the trustee. But the view taken
in earlier cases has not been overruled. In any case the
word ‘void’ has not in practice given rise to any difficulty,
and as explained above has been used with a definite
object. We, therefore, think that the word ‘void’ is to be
preferred to ‘voidable’!.

23. In section 44 of the English Bankruptcy Act, 1914,
which deals with fraudulent preference, the period of हें
three months was extended to six months by section 115(3) fraudulent
and (6) of the Companies Act, 1947. We recommend* that preferences,
in the new law a similar change should be made. Fraudu-
lent preference is one of the acts of insolvency. In view of
the doctrine of relation back, 2 transaction which amounts
to fraudulent preference will, Gua an act of insolvency, be
liable t. be impeached if it mas taken place within three
months of the insolvency pei!
residences’ Ac
estricted ty

limitation in

24. Under secti
transaction entered ir
of the order of adiu:

Pona fide
cransactions,

1 the insolvent be
tion is protected if
olvent has nu nates

tion of the insolven
of the pre-entation «
consistent with the doctrine of
under the Presidency Act. Mulla has po
consistenev, and has suggested? an amend
57 on the lines of section 45 of the En:
this suggestion. We also accept the
such ac i i

into the Indian law the provisions of
Bankruptey Act, 1914.

special
of section 97 of th
following terms:

Protection
to bankers,

before the making, or without negligence an the
of the benker after the making, of the order of se
tration made against the debtor shall be valid as
against the trustee.

1See Appendix 1, clauses s4-ss.
38९९ Appendix I, clause 55.
®Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958) pages 27, 28.

4See Appendix I, clauses 57-58.


‘Transferees
from donees.

Copyright.

Second
bankruptcy.

22

While there may be no objection to protecting bankers in
respect of transactions entered into in good faith before
adjudication, we think the extension of the protection in
the absence of negligence to transactions after adjudica-
tion may be liable to be abused. It is to be noticed that
in this country banking business is not only done by re-
gular banks but also by private firms. In our opinion the
interests of bankers are sufficiently safeguarded by the
section’ protecting bona fide transactions and the new
provision proposed by us on the lines of section 46 of the
English Bankruptey Act, 1914.

26. Under the existing law, the position of transferees
fron: donees where the original transaction with the donee
ig declared void, is not quite clear? It has been held in a
Nagpur case® that the provisions of section 53 of the Pro-
vineial Act apply only to transfers by the insolvent and
not to transfers by the transferees from the insolvent. In
this connection, we think that the provisions of section 66
of the Canadian Act are suitable and may be adopted.
That section, while protecting the sights of bona fide
transferees for value empowers the Official Assignee to re-
cover property of the bankrupt which has been acquired
under a transaction that is void or the value or sale pro-
ceeds in the hands of the transferee.

27. The existing law does not contain any provision re-
lating to the property of the insolvent consisting of works
in which copyright subsists. Section 52 of the Canadian
‘Act contains useful provisions on this subject. That sec-
tion enacts that subject to certain conditions, the author’s
manuscripts and any copyright assigned to a publisher, etc.,
shail on the publisher, etc., becoming bankrupt revert to
the author. We recommend that a provision on the lines
of the Canadian Act may be incorporated in the new law‘.

28. The existing law does not provide for a contingency
where a person who has become insolvent is again adjudg-
ed insolvent before he is discharged in the first insolvency.
In this connection, we may refer to section 39 of the English
Bankrupicy Act, 1914 and the modification suggested in
that section by the Blagden Committee’. In paragraph 114
of the Report, the Committee have considered two solutions
of the problem. We prefer the second solution,® under
which the assets in the second or subsequent insolvency
will first be applied towards payment to the creditors of
such insolvency of a dividend up to the amount of any

1866 Appendix 1, clauses 57-58.

Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958) pages 20-621, para. 625.
"Govind v. Sonba, AIR. 1930 Nagput 34.

3566 Appendix I, clause 64.

Report, (1957), Cmd. 221, pages 37-38, para. 714.

3568 Appendix I, clause 49.


23

dividend that has been paid to the creditors in the former
insolvency, but when both the insolvencies reach equality
as regards dividend paid, any further assets available will
be distributed pro rata to the creditors in both the insol-
vencies. In our opinion, the “administrative complications”
referred to in the Report of the Blagden Committee (which,
incidentally, are not specified in that Report) may not be
insurmountable, and should not stand in the way of this
solution which seems just and fair to the creditors of both
the insolvencies.

29. There is difference between section 52(2)(a) of the
Presidency Act and section 28(2) of the Provincial Act as
to the character and title of the insolvent over after-
acquired property and the rights of transferees fram him
of such property. In England!, the law is, that it is enly
when the Official Assignee intervenes that such property
vests in him. It follows, that any dealing by the insol-
vent with the property before the Official Assignee actual-
ly intervenes will be valid if it is bona fide and for cons'-
deration. The law in the Presidency Act is the same as in
England. Under the Provincial Act, however, such prc-
perty vests “forthwith” in the Official Receiver*. The
Privy Council® has accordingly held that the doctrine in
Cohen v. Mitchell has no application to cases governed by
the Provincial Act. The result is that under that Act any
dealing with the after-acquired property by the insolvent
would confer no title whatsoever on the transferee. The
question for consideration is which of these two rules
should be adopted. We are of the opinion, that the law as
laid down in the Provincial Act should be adopted as it is
both logical and just’.

It is conceivable that such law may work hardship in
cases where an insolvent who is carrying on business with
the knowledge of the Official Assignee transfers property
acquired by him in the course of such business to a person
who purchases it in good faith and for valuable considera-
tion. It seems that the rule in Cohen v. Mitchell was
originally evolved for giving protection to such persons-§,
Though the rule is now applied without limitation to all
after-acquired property, in practice it is largely used with
reference to transfers of property in the ordinary course

1, Cohen ¥. Mitchell, (1892) 2 Ch. 138. And see s. 38(a) and 47, English

*Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958), P 5
page soe फल et y (1958), page so9, para. =2y and

*Kala Chand v. Jagannath, 54 1.8, 190 5 LLR.
1927 7.0. 108. annath, 54 LA. 190 ; LR. s4 Cal. 595 5 ALR,

* See Appendix I, clause 48(2).

SObservations of Kay, L.J. in re New Land Development Associatic Mh
Sg (1892) 2 Ch. 138. See also Official Receiver ५ Cook, 1908)

‘Cf. Williams on Bankruptcy, 17th edition, page 381, bottom.

After-
acquired
property.


Pelority of
debts.

24

of business. The rule is allied in principle to another rule
equally well-established, under which where an insolvent
is permitted by the Official Receiver to carry on business,
creditors of the insolvent in that business are, as regards
the assets of that business, entitled to priority over other
creditors'. The Privy Council has applied this principle
ina case? arising under the Indian Insolvency Act, 1848.
We are, accordingly, of the cpin‘on that while the law
should be enacted in terms of section 28(4) of the Provin-
cial Act, an exception should be made in favour of trans-
eres of after-acquired property in the ordinary course of

usiness.

In this view there is no need to consider the question
whether the rule in Cohen v. Mitchell should be appl ed to
immovable property. Before the Bankruptcy Act of 1914,
it had been held in England in a series of decisions* that
the rule had no application to real property. But this ex-
ception was swept away by the Act of 1914, and under sec-
tion 47 of that Act real property was also brought within
the rule. The decisions of the Indian Courts are not uni-
form on this subject. The High Court of Madras’ has held
that the rule in Cohen v. Mitchell does not apply to im-
movable properiy. The contrary view® has been taken by
the Caleutta, Bombay and Allahabad High Courts. In a
later case? the Calcutta High Court has taken the view
that the rule in Cohen v. Mitchell does not avply to im-
mevable property. Jf after-acquired property vests in the
Official Receiver at the time of acquisition °nd the insol-
vent has in consequence no title which he could transfer,
it would make no difference whether the property trans-
ferred is movable er immovable. If the property whith is
dealt with by the insolvent falls within the exception, as
one acquired in the ordinary course of bus‘ness, then the
transfer will be valid whether the pronertv is movable or
immovable.

30. Under section 33 of the English Bankruptey Act,
1914, taxes due only for one year heve priority over other
debts, Under the two Indian Acts*, all debts due to the

"Troughton v. Gitley, 25 FR. 408 + Engelbach v. Nixon, G87) LR.
10 CP. 645.

’Kerakoose v. Brooks, 8 M.I.A. 339 + Ah Chone v. Mohomed. A.LR.
1939 Rangoon 186.

Mn re New Land Develonmert Association & Gray, (1892) 2 Ch. 138 +
Officiel Receiver v. Cook, (1906) 2 Ch. 661.

35९९ Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India. (1958) pages 513-514, para. 531.

8Rowlandson v. Champion, (1894) V.L.R. 17 Madras 21. Shri Ramulu
v. Andalammal, (1907) V.L.R. 30 Mad. 148.

®Kristo Comul v. Suresh Chander (1882) LI R+ Cal. 5563 Fatima
Bibi ए आर Bibi (802) LER, 16 Bom 2९2 5 Chhote Lal v,Kedar
Nath, LL.R. 46 All. 565 ; ALR. 1924 All. 703.

‘Kamala Bala Dasi v. Fanindra Chandra De, I.L.R. (1947) 1 Cal
394 (Das J.).

"Section 61(1), P.A., s. 490), P.T.A



25

Government, which include taxes, take precedence over
other debts. We think that in the conditions prevailing in
this country the preference of debts due to Government
should not be whittled down. We considered the question
whether any preference should be given to small creditors
But in view of the difficulty of defining a small creditor
and where to draw the line, we think that no such provi-
sion, althgugh desirable, is feasible. We also examined
the question whether priority should be given to payments
to be made under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. 1923,
the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, and the sums due
to an employee from a Provident Fund, etc., as provided in
section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956. In our opinicn
there is a great deal of difference between the liquidation
cf a corapany and the insolvency of an individual. Com-
panies do business on a very large scale, while an insol-
vent may be a small trader. We think that under the
Insolvency Jaw, the list of preferential creditors should be
as small es possible. We, therefore, do not recommend any
change on these matters in the existing law’.

31. There are very few prosecuiions under the insol-
vency law in this country. The reason perhaps is that it
is difficult to prove the guilty intention of an insolvent
which is 8 necessary ingredient of every insolvency
offence. In this connection the following observations made
by Mulla® are relevant: —

“In England all that the prosecution has to prove
is the act or omission complained of. and the onus
rests upon the debtor to prove that he had no intent te
defraud or that he did not mean to conceal the state of
his affairs or to defeat the law. This proceeds on the
principle that the debtor is in a position to knew all
facts which go to prove his innocence and it is, there-
fore, for him to prove those facts. This, it is submit-
ted, is a sound principle, and it is in accordance with
the provisions of section 106 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872. That section says that when any fact is
especially within the knowledge of any person the bur-
den of proving that fact is upon him: The same rule,
it is submitted, should be applied to insolvency offences
in India. But it is a matter for the Legislature.”

We recommend that this suggestion may he accepted’.

Some cffences in the English Bankruptcy Act of 1914
are not included in the Indian Acts. We recommend that
the penal provisions in the new law should be enacted on
the lines of sections 154 to 160 of the English Act. We
have also taken this opportunity of further enlarging the

‘Appendix I, clause 72.
Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India, (1958), page 708, para. 72
३56७ Appendix I, clause 119 et seg.

Penalties.


Appendices,

26

list of insolvency offences by borrowing some provisions
from the Australian and Canadian Bankruptcy Acts.

32. In order to give a concrete shape to our recom-
mendations we have, in Appendix I, shown them in the
form of a draft Bill.

x II contains Notes on Clauses, elucidating,
nce to the clauses in Appendix I, the -points that
dation.

x IEE contains comparative tables showing the
n the existing Acts and the corresponding provi-
४; व्‌

Appendix IV gves figures of periods of discharge of
insol ts i the Presidency-towns,

LE 7

2KG |

3.8. K,

4. 5. P. SEN-VARMA,. Members.

5. NIREN DE.

6. T. K. TOPE.
P. M. BAKSHI,

Jeint Secretary and Draftsman.
New Detur;
The 21st February, 1964.


EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN
APPENDIX I

P.A.=The Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920.
P.T.A.=The Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909.

APPENDIX I
PROPOSALS AS SHOWN IN THE FoRM OF A DRAFT BILL
(This is a tentative draft only)

Notes: —(i) Corresponding sections of the existing Acts are
noted in the margin.

(ii) Provisions not occurring in the Provincial
Insolvency Act, 1920, have been described as
“New”.

42M of L_3


INDEX TO APPENDIX I

Clause

Subject-matter

2

SPW Awe

Io.
II.
12.
13.
14.
15.

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Short title, extent and commencement.

Definitions.

CHAPTER II
AcTs OF INSOLVENCY
Acts of insolvency.

CHAPTER III
INSOLVENCY PETITIONS
Petition of insolvency.

Conditions on which creditor may petition.
Conditions on which debtor may petition.
Contents of petition.

Verification of petition.

Appointment of interim receiver.

Admission of petitions.

Release of debtor.

Interim proceedings against the debtor.
Protection order before adjudication.
Duties of debtors.

Procedure at the hearing of the petition.

28


I 2
CHAPTER IV
ADJUDICATION
Order of adjudication
16. Order on creditor’s petition.
17. Order on debtor’s petition.
18. Order to specify period for discharge.
19. Effect of an order of adjudication.
20. Stay of pending proceedings.
21. Suit by Official Assignee and insolvent’s partners.
22. Publication of order of adjudication.
23. Relation back of insolvency.
Proceedings consequent on order of adjudication
24. Protection order after adjudication.
25. Power to arrest after adjudication.
26. Redirection of postal articles.
27. Insolvent’s schedule.
28. Meetings of creditors.
29. Public examination of insolvent.
Annulment of adjudication
30. Power to annul adjudication.
31. Power to cancel one of concurrent orders of adjudication.
32. Proceedings on annulment.
CHAPTER V
COMPOSITION AND SCHEMES OF ARRANGEMENT
33. Submission of proposal and acceptance by creditors.
34. Approval of proposal by court.
35. Order on approval.

36.

Power to re-adjudge debtor insolvent.



37-
38.
39.
40.
41.

43.

45.
46.
47.

48.
49.
50.
डा.

52.

53-
54.

CHAPTER VI
DISCHARGE
Discharge.

Cases in which court must refuse an absolute discharge.
Power to annul adjudication for failure to apply for discharge.
Renewal of application and variation of terms of order.
Duty of discharged insolvent to assist in realisation of property.
Effect of fraudulent settlements on discharge.

Effect of order of discharge.

CHAPTER VII
ADMINISTRATION OF PROPERTY
Proof of debts

Debts provable in insolvency.
Mutual dealings and set-off.
Persons injured by disclaimer may prove.

Proof of debts.

Property of the insolvent

Description of insolvent’s property divisible amongst creditors.
Second or subsequent bankruptcy.
Intimation of after-acquired property.
Property in possession of insolvent.

Effect of insolvency on antecedent transactions
Restrictions on rights of creditor under execution.
Duties of court executing decree or order as to property.

Avoidance of voluntary transfer.



31

60.
61.
62.
63.
64.

70.
ql.

J2.
73:
74.

Avoidance of preference in certain cases.

By whom petitions for avoidance may be made.

Protection of bone fide transactions.

Validity of certain payments to insolvent.

Recovery of property or proceeds thereof in case of void or

voidable transactions.

Realisation of property

Possession of property by Official Assignee.

Seizure of property of insolvent.

Appropriation of portion of pay or other income to creditors.
Inspection of goods pledged.

Copyright.

Disclaimer of property and re.

Dine:

ston of contracts

aimer of onerous property.

Disclamer of leasc-holds.

Power to cull on Of

ignee to

Power for covr to

ad ci

एः disclaimed

uo regarding propert

Power to require information regard

raselyent

1 property,

Power tw eG

SOs.
Distriburion of property

Priority of debts.

Rent due before adjudication.

Joint and separate properties,



32

75:
16.

77-
18.

79-

81.
82.

83.

84.

85.

86.
87.

88.
89.

91.
92.

Calculation of dividends.

Right of creditor who has proved his debt after declaration of
dividend.

Final dividend.

No suit for dividend.

Management by and allowance to insolvent.

Right of insolvent to surplus after payment in full.
Credit to Government of unclaimed dividends.

Committee of inspection.

CHAPTER VIII
SUMMARY ADMINISTRATION
Summary administration.

CHAPTER IX

ADMINISTRATION IN INSOLVENCY OF ESTATES OF
DECEASED PERSONS

Administration in insolvency of estates of deceased persons.
Vesting of estate and mode of administration.
Payment or transfer by legal representative.

Saving of jurisdiction of Administrator-General.

CHAPTER X
OFFICIAL ASSIGNEES AND SPECIAL MANAGERS
Official Assignees.

Official Assignee to be a corporation sole,
Power to administer oath.
Duties and powers of Official Assignee.

Declaration and distribution of dividends.



93.
94.
95.

97.

98.

99.
100.
tol.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108,
109.

110.

112,
113.

114.

Discretionary powers and control thereof.
Control of court.
Power to appoint special manager.

Delegation of powers to Official Assignee.

CHAPTER XI
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE
Courts having jurisdiction in insolvency.
Restrictions on jurisdiction.
Jurisdiction to decide questions.
General powers of courts.
Other powers.
Powers of High Court to control insolvency proceedings.
Withdrawal of petition.
Consolidation of petitions.
Power to substitute petitioner in certain cases,
Exemption of Corporation, etc., from insolvency proceedings.
Power to present petition against a partner.
Proceedings in partnership name or assumed name.
Power to stay proceedings,

Special provisions with respect to High Courts having juris-
diction in insolvency.

Power to dismiss petitions against some respondents only.
Continuance of proceedings on death of debtor.
Courts to be auxiliary to each other.

Warrants of insolvency courts.



34

Ee FFs
I 2
CHAPTER XII
APPEAL AND REVIEW
11s. Appeal to court against Official Assignee.
116. Appeals against orders of district courts and subordinate
courts.
117. Appeals against orders passed by the High Court in insolvency.
118. Review.
CHAPTER XII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
119. Punishment for certain offences.
120. Frauds by insolvents.
121. Insolvent guilty of gambling.
122. Insolvent failing io keep proper accounts.
123. Insolvent absconcing with property.
124. False claim
125. Undischarged insolvent obtaining credit.
126. Bar of prosecution withovt orcer of court.
127. Procedure on charge of offence.
128. Disqual'ficavors of 1501८
CHAPTER XIV
MISCELLANEOUS
129. Application of the provisions of the Limitation Act.
130. Access to insolvent’s books.
131. Fees and percentages.
132. Gazette to be evidence.

133.

Liability of State Government.



134.

135.

136.

137-
138.

Formal defect not to invalidate proceedings.

Certain provisions to bind the Government.

Savings regarding laws for the relief of agriculturist debtors.

Power to make rules.

Repeal and savi

९8.

First SCHEDULE.-—Meetings of creditors.

SECOND SCHEDULE.--Proof of debts.

THIRD ScHEDULE.-- Decisions and orders frorn which an appeal! lies to
the High Court, etc.



Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

(3, 7, 0.8.
Ge
P.T.A.

Definitions.
[New] 46th
meeting.

[s. 2 (a),
part, P.A.]

[ 8. 2(1)(a),
part, P.A.]

13, 2(1)(@),
part, P.A.}

gy. 8. 1(2),

ing. Banke
tuptcy Act,
1914.

अं

THE INSOLVENCY BILL. 196

A Bill to consolidate and amend the laws relating to

insolvency.
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the ......Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the .......... Insolvency

Act, 19-——-.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.

(8) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint in this behalf.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “court” means the court having jurisdiction
under this Act;

(b) “creditor” includes a decree-holder;

(c) “debt” includes a judgment-debt;

(d) “debtor” includes a judgment-debtor, and
also any person, whether a citizen of India or not, who,
at the time when any act of insolvency was committed
by him,—

(1) was personally present in the territories to
which this Act extends; or

(2) was ordinarily resident or had a place of
residence in the said territories; or

(3) was carrying on business in the said terri-
tories either personally or by means of an agent
or manager; or

(4) was a partner of a firm which carried on
business in the said territories;

(e) “district court” means the principal civil court
of original jurisdiction in a district, but does not in-
clude a High Court in its ordinary original civil juris-
diction;

36


37

(f) “Official Assignee” includes a Deputy Official [New]
Assignee;

(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made 200
under this Act;

(h) “property” includes any property over which Ss aaa
or the profits of which any person has a disposing
power which he may exercise for his own benefit;

(i) “secured creditor” means a person holding a 3 MO,
mortgage, charge or lien on the property of the debtor P.AJ

or any part thereof as the security for a debt due to

him from the debtor and includes a iandlord who,

under any enactment for the time being in force, has

a charge on land for the rent of that land;

(j) “transfer of property” includes a transfer of & 3 (000,
any interest in property and the creation or transfer 4
of any charge upon property; and

(k) all words and expressions used but not defined [s.2(), P.A.]
in this Act and defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, Cf. s. 3 ee
1908, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to wy (62 of
them in that Code. 1957). 5 of

1908.

Cf. 8. 2,
Pra”

CHAPTER II
ACTS OF INSOLVENCY

3. (1) A debtor commits an act of insolvency in each of Aa ct ie
the following cases, namely: — Is. 6, main
para., PA.)
(a) if, in the territories to which this Act extends [Cf 8. 9»
or elsewhere, he makes a transfer of all or substantially Pray

all his property to a third person for the benefit of
his creditors generally;

(b) if, in the said territories or elsewhere, he
makes a transfer of his property or of any part there-
of with intent to defeat or delay his creditors;

(c) if, in the said territories or in any place out-
side India, he makes any transfer of his property or
of any part thereof, which would, under this Act, be

void as a fraudulent preference if he were adjudged
an insolvent;

(d) if, in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, he
makes any transfer of his property or of any part
thereof, which would, under this Act or under any
law corresponding to this Act for the time being in
force in that State, be void as a fraudulent preference
if he were adjudged an insolvent;


38

(e) if, with intent to defeat or delay his credi-
tors,—

(i) he departs or remains out of the said
territories;

(ii) he departs from his dwelling-house or
usual place of business or otherwise absents him-
self;

(iit) he secludes himself so as to deprive his
creditors of the means of communicating with
him;

(f) if any of his property has been sold or has
been under attachment for a period not less than
twenty-one days, in execution of the decree or order
of any court for the payment of money.

Explanation—For the purposes of this clause,
where the debtor is a partner in a firm, an_ order.
charging his interest under sub-rule (2) of rule 49 of
Order XXI in the First Schedule to the Code of Civil

[New]

Procedure, 1908, shall be deemed to be an order of 5°f 1908.

attachment,

(g) if he petitions to be adjudged an insolvent
under the provisions of this Act;

(h) if he gives notice to any of his creditors that
he has suspended, or that he is about to suspend pay-
ment of his debts;

(i) if he is imprisoned in execution of the decree
or order of any court for the payment of money.

(2) A debtor commits an act of insolvency if a creditor
who has obtained a decree or order against him for the
of a sum of money (being a decres or order
become 1 and the execution whereof has net
ed). bas served on him an inselvency notice as
reundcr and the debtor does not comply with
v'thin the period specified therein:

[New]

have

ided tha: the debtor shall not be deeme:
ited an act of insclvency for not com
pot be P € if he has a counter-claim or set-off which
८ . ova), OF exceeds the sum remaining due under the decree
& $4!) order, and which he could not lawfully set up in the
nglish Act. + हि +

or proceeding in which the decree or order was made

against him:

As to setof — P.
which could

Provided further that where the insolvency notice is
to be served outside the territories to which this Act ex-
tends, the leave of the court shall be first obtained before
service of the notice.

[New] (3) An insolvency notice under sub-section (2) shall—-
(a) be in the prescribed form;


39

(b) be served in the prescribed manner;

(c) specify for its compliance a period not less
than one month after service, or, if it is to be served
outside the territories to which this Act extends, then
such period as may be allowed by the order of the
court granting leave for the issue of such notice;

(d) require the debtor to pay the amount due
under the decree or order, or to furnish security for
the payment of such amount to the satisfaction of
the creditor or his agent, within the period to be spe-
cified therein, which shall be not less than one month
from the date of the service thereof, or less than the
period allowed under clause (c) of this sub-section,
as the case may be;

(९) state the consequences of non-compliance
with the notice.

(4) Such notice shall not be invalidated by reason only [New]
that the sum specified in the notice as the amount due ex-
ceeds the amount actually due, unless the debtor, within
the period allowed for payment, gives notice to the credi-
tor that he disputes the validity of the notice on the
ground of such mis-statement; but if the debtor does not
give such notice, he shall be deemed to have complied with
the insolvency notice if within the time allowed he takes
such steps as would have constituted a compliance with
the notice had the actual amount due been correctly spe-
cified therein.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the act & 6, Expl.,
of an agent may be the act of the principal, even though P-A]
the agent has no specific authority to commit the act. Stee n

CHAPTER III
INSOLVENCY PETITIONS

4. Subject to the conditions specified in this Act, if a Petition of
debtor commits an act of insolvency, an insolvency peti- insolvency.
tion may be presented either by a creditor or by the debt- fs 7, P.AJ
or, and the court may on such petition make an order Pra”
(hereinafter called an order of adjudication) adjudging TAL
him an insolvent. .

Explanation.—The presentation of a petition by the
debtor shall be deemed to be an act of insolvency within
the meaning of the section, and on such petition the court
may make an order of adjudication.

5. (1) A creditor shall not be entitled to present an Conditions on
insolvency petition against a debtor unless— which cre-
itor may
(a) the debt owing by the debtor to the creditor, petition.
or, if two or more creditors join in the petition, the [s. 9), P.A]
aggregate amount of debts owing to such creditors, (15 2@s
amounts to five hundred rupees, and *PT.AL


[New]

f, 9 (2)
‘A.]

Cf. 8. 12(2),
PTAA.

Of. sy
Limitation
Act;1963,
(36 of 1963).

Cf. s. 2(a),
Limitation
Act, 1963.
Of. s. 2(h),
Limitation
Act, 1963.

Conditions on

which deb-
tor may
petition,

40

(b) the debt is a liquidated sum payable either
immediately or at some certain future time, and

(c) the act of insolvency on which the petition is
grounded has occurred within three months before
the presentation of the petition:

Provided that where the said period of three months
referred to in clause (c) expires on a day when the court
is closed, the insolvency petition may be presented on
the day on which the court re-opens.

Explanation—For the purposes of clause (c), where
the act of insolvency is constituted by a transaction which
is required to be made by a registered instrument under
any law for the time being in force, and the transaction
is made by such registered instrument, the date of regis-
tration of the instrument shall be deemied to be the date
on which the act of insolvency has occurred.

(2) If the petitioning creditor is a secured creditor,
he shall in his petition either state that he is willing to re-
linquish his security for the benefit of the creditors in the
event of the debtor being adjudged insolvent, or give an
estimate of the value of the security; in the latter case,
he may be admitted as a petitioning creditor to the extent
of the balance of the debt due to him after deducting the
value so estimated in the same way as if he were an un-
secured creditor.

(3) In computing the period of three months referred
to in clause (c) of sub-section (1), the time during which
the petitioner has been prosecuting with due diligence an-
other insolvency proceeding, whether in a court of first
instance or of appeal or revision, against the debtor shall
be excluded, where the proceeding is based on the same
act of insolvency and is prosecuted in good faith in a court
which, from defect of jurisdiction, is unable to entertain it.

ExplanationFor the purposes of sub-section (3)--

(a) in excluding the time during which a former
insolvency proceeding was pending, the day on which
that proceeding was instituted and the day on which it

ended shall both be counted; ,

(0) a petitioner resisting an appeal shall be deem-
ed to be prosecuting a proceeding;

(c) “petitioner” includes any person from or
through whom the petitioner derives his right to pre-
sent the petition;

(d) nothing shall be deemed to be done in good
faith which is not done with due care and attention.

6. (1) A debtor shall not be entitled to present an insol-
vency petition unless he is unable to pay his debts and—

(a) his debts amount to five hundred rupees; or


Sof 1908.

41

(b) he is under arrest or imprisonment in execu-
tion of the decree or order of any court for the payment
of money; or

(c) an order of attachment in execution of such 8
decree or order has been made, and is subsisting,
against his property.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, where the
debtor is a partner in a firm, an order charging his in-
terest under sub-rule (2) of rule 49 of Order XXI in the
First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall
be deemed to be an order of attachment.

(2) A debtor in respect of whom an order of
cation.......... has been annulled, owing to his failure
to apply, or to prosecute an application, for his dis:
shall not be entitled to present an insolvency petit
without the leave of the court by which the crder of ad-
judication was annulled.

(3) The court shall not grant leave under sub-section
(2) unless it is satisfied either that the debtor was pre-
vented by any reasonable cause from presenting or prose-
cuting his application, as the case may be, or that the
petition is founded on facts substantially different from
those contained in the petition on which the order of ad-
judication was made.

7. (1) Every insolvency petition presented by a debtor
shall contain the following particulars, namely:—

(a) a statement that the debtor is unable to pay
his debts;

(b) the place where he ordinarily resides,......
carries on business or personally works for gain, or,
if he has been arrested or imprisoned, the place where
he is in custody;

(c) the court (if any) by whose order he has been
arrested or imprisoned, or by which an order has been
made for the attachment of his property, together
with particulars of the decree or order in respect cf
which any such order has been made;

(d) the amount and particulars of all pecuniary
claims against him, together with the names and re-
sidences of his creditors so far as they are known to,
or can by the exercise of reasonable care and dili-
gence be ascertained by, him;

(e) the amount and particulars of all his pro-
perty, together with—

(i) a specification of the value of all such
property not consisting of money;

[s. 10, P.A.]
Cf. 8. 145
PTA,

Contents of

petition.

ff, 13 (1);
AL]

Cf. $. 15),

part, P.T.A..


[New]

[s. 13 (2),
P. Aj.

Verification
of petition.
‘Ls. 12, B.A]
Of. 8. 1307),
PTAA.

Appointment
of interim
receiver.

& 20, 9.2. ]
“Cf. 8. 16,

42

(ii) the place or places at which any such
property is to be found; and

(iii) a declaration of his willingness to place
at the disposal of the court all such property, save
in so far as it includes such particulars (not being
his books of accounts) as are exempted by the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or by any other
enactment for the time being in force, from liabi-
lity to attachment and sale in execution of a
decree;

(f) a statement whether the debtor has on any
previous occasion filed a petition to be adjudged an
insolvent, and (where such petition has been filed) —

(i) if such petition has been dismissed the
reasons for such dismissal, or

(ii) if the debtor has been adjudged an insol-
vent, concise particulars of the insolvency, in-
cluding a statement whether any previous ad-
judication has been annulled and, if so, the grounds
therefor;

(g) particulars of all transfers of property made
by the debtor within the period of two years imme-
diately preceding the date of the presentation of the
petition, and the manner in which the money or other
consideration (if any) received for such transfer was
‘applied by the debtor.

(2) The debtor shall, along with his petition, produce
a list of the books of accounts relating to his affairs.

(3) Every insolvency petition presented by a creditor
or creditors shall set forth the particulars regarding the
debtor specified in clause (6) of sub-section (1), and shall
also specify—

(a) the act of insolvency committed by such
debtor, together with the date of its commission;

(b) the amount and particulars of his or their
pecuniary claim or claims against such debtor; and

(c) when the debtor is not a citizen of India, par-
ticulars sufficient to show how the court has juris-
diction.

8. Every insolvency petition shall be verified in the
prescribed manner.

9. The court—

(a) if it is shown to be necessary for the pro-
tection of the estate, may at any time before adjudi-
cation, appoint, and

5 of 1808. !


43

(b) when the debtor is the petitioner, shail
appoint,
the Official Assignee as the interim receiver of the proper-
ty of the debtor or of any part thereof, and may direct
him to take immediate possession of the same, and the
interim receiver shall thereupon have such of the powers
conferable on a receiver appointed under the Code ot
5 of 1908. Civil Procedure, 1908, as the court may direct.

10. (1) The procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Admission of
5 of 1908 Procedure. 1908, with respect to the admission of plaints, RI >'s ॥
shall, sc far as it is applicable, be followed in the case of”
insolvency petitions, by all courts other than the High

Court.

{s. 19, P.A.J (2) ‘Where an insolvency petition is admitted, the
court shall make an order fixing a date for hearing the
petition.

(3) Notice =f the order under sub-section (2) shall
be given, in such manner as may be prescribed.—

(a) to creditors;

(b) where the petition is grounded on an 2
insolvency constituted by any transfer of property
made by the debtor to any person, then to such trans-
feree; and

(c) to such other persons, if any, as the court
may think fit, being persons having an interest in the
proceedings,

(4) Where the debtor is not the petitioner, notice of
the order under ection (2) shall be served on him in
the manner r the service of summons.

(5) The provisions of this section do not apply to the
High Court.

11. (1) At the time of making an order admitting a Release of
petition or at any subsequent time before adjudicatigM™ debtor.
the court may, if the debtor is under arrest or imprison- हि 2 P.A.)
ment in execution 017 the decree or order of any court
for the payment of money, order his release on such terms
as to security as may be reasonable and necessary.

(2) The court may, at any time, order any person who
has been released under this section to be re-arrested and
tecommitted?to the custody from which he was released.

(3) At the time of making an order under this section,
the court shall record in writing its reasons therefor.

12, At the time of making an order admitting the peti- Interim rro-

tion or at an sequent time before adjudication the eat he
y, either of its own moticn or on the application gebtor.

of any creditor, make one or more of the following orders, [s. 21, P.A.]

namely

(a) order the debtor to give reasonable security
for his appearance until final orders are made upon the

42 MofL—4


Protection

4

petition, and direct that, in default of giving such
security, he shall be detained in the civil prison,

(b) order the attachment by actual seizure of the
whole or any part of the property in the possession or
under the control of the debtor, other than such parti-
culars (not being his books of account) as are exempt-
ed by the Code cf Civil Procedure, 1908, or by any
other enactment for the time being in force, from
liability to attachment and sale in execution of a
decree;

(c) order a warrant to issue with or without bail
for the arrest of the debtor, and direct either that he
be detained in the civil prison until the disposal of the
petition, or that he be released on such terms as to
security as may be reasonable and necessary :

Provided that no order shall be made under clause
(a) or clause (b) unless the court is satisfied that the
debtor, with intent to defeat or delay his creditors or
to avoid any process of the court,—

(i) has absconded or has departed from the local
limits of the jurisdiction of the court, or is about to
abscond or to depart from such limits. or is remaining
outside them, or

(ii) has failed to disclose or has concealed, des-
troyed, transferred or removed from such limits, or
is about to conceal, destroy, transfer or remove from
such limits, any documents likely to be of use to his
creditors in the ccurse of the hearing, or any part of
his property other than such particulars as aforesaid.

13. (1) Any debtor for whose properties a receiver has

order before been appointed under section 9 may apply to the court for
adjudication. protection, and the court may, on such application and if

[New]

satisfied that the receiver has been put in possession of all
the properties, make an order for the protection of the
debtor from arrest or detention in the civil prison, in res-
pect of such debts and for such period as may be specified
by the court, and may revoke, modify or renew the said
order in such manner as it may think fit.

2) A protection order under this section shall protect
the debtor from being arrested or detained in prison for
any debt to which such order applies, and any debtor
arrested or detained contrary to the terms of such an order
shall be entitled to his release:

Provided that no such order shall operate to prejudice
the rights of any creditor in the event of such order being
revoked or modified or the debtor not being adjudged
insolvent.

(3) Any creditor shall be entitled to appear and oppose:
the grant of a protection order under this section.

5 of 1908


हि
44. (1) On the making of the order admitting his peti- Duties of
tion, the debtor shall— [s. 22, PAL
(a) unless the court otherwise directs, produce all (part)
his books of accounts, and Gf. $. 15
(b) file such lists of creditors and afford such -T-A.
assistance to the court as may be prescribed,

failing which the court may dismiss his petition.

(2) After an order admitting a creditor’s petition for | 22, part,
adjudging the debtor to be an insolvent is made, the debtor P-A.]
shall produce all books of accounts whenever so re-
quired by the court or Official Assignee or special manager.

(3) On his adjudication as an insolvent, the debtor shall asia
give such inventories of his property and such lists of his 1]
creditors and debtors and of the debts due to and from cy 5, 3300
them, respectively, submit to such examination in respect and@)P-T.A.
of his property or his creditors, attend at such times before
the court or Official Assignee or special manager, execute
such instruments and generally do all such acts and things
in relation to his property as may be required by the court
or Official Assignee or special manager, or as may be
prescribed.

(4) The debtor shall, on........-- adjudication as an [s. 28 (1),
insolvent, aid to the utmost of his power in the realisation 7"
of his property and the distribution of the proceeds among cy, s. 33(3),
his creditors. P.T.A.

(5) On the making of an order of adjudication, the [New]
jnsolvent shall hand over to the Official Assignee his pass-
port for leaving India, if any such passport has been issued
to him and is in his possession.

15. (1) At the hearing of the debtor's petition, ...... the Procedure’at
court shall require proof that the debtor is entitled to pre- the hearing
sent the petition: of the; peti-
__ Provided that he shall ........ for the purpose of prov- [s, 24(1),
ing his inability to pay his debts, be required to furnish P.A.]
only such proof as to satisfy the court that there are prima
facie grounds for believing the same, and the court, if and ES 13(2),
when so satisfied, shall not be bound to hear any further करत 1560),
evidence on the question of such inability. P.T.A. part.

(2) At the hearing of the creditor's petition, the court
shall require proof of the following matters, namely: —

(a) that the creditor is entitled to present the
petition;

(b) that the debtor, if he does not appear ...... ;
has been served with notice of the order admitting the
petition; and
हे (c) that the debtor has committed the act of
insolvency alleged against him, or, if more than one


act of insolvency is alleged him in the titi
some one of the acts of नव अलमक lvency so alleged. 19
CHAPTER IV
ADJUDICATION
Order on Order of adjudication
creditor's 16. (1) In the case of a petition by a creditor, where

petition. the court is not satisfied with the proof of his right to pre-
a. 25 (8) sent the petition or the service on the debtor of notice of

ff 7 the order admitting the petition, or of the alleged act of

insolvency, or is satisfied by the debtor that he is able to

FBO pay his debts, or that for any other sufficient cause no
oT order ought to be made, the court shall dismiss the peti-

{s. 27 0... tion.

‘part, P.A.}

of.s.135), _ (2) The court may make an order of adjudication if it

RTA is satisfied with the proof above referred to.

(3) Where the debtor appears on the petition and denies
that he is indebted to the petitioner, or that he is indebt-
{New] ed to such an amount as would justify the petitioner in
Gf. 8. 136)» presenting the petition against him, the court may—
PTA. (a) decide the question whether the debtor 18
indebted to the petitioner or whether he is indebted
to such an amount as would justify the petitioner in
presenting the petition, as the case may be; or 4
(b) on such security (if any) being given as th
court may require for payment to the petitioner
any debt which may be established against the a
im due course of law, and of the costs of establishi!
the debt, stay all proceedings on the petition for such
time as may be required for the trial of the questi
relating to the debt.

$5, 80> (4) Where proceedings are stayed under clause (b) of
—_ sub-section (3), the court may, if by reason of the dela:
caused by the stay of proceedings or for any other cause i
thinks just, make an order of adjudication on the petition’
of some other creditor, and shall thereupon dismiss, on so on si
terms as it thinks just, the petition on which
have been stayed as aforesaid.

oe the court shall dismiss the petition, if it is not satisfied

हु asta), his right to present the petition.
AL]

Onder on 17. (1) In the case of a petition presented by a debtors

fs. ees hy (2) ‘The court may make an order of adjuala
part. PA. cation if it is satisfied of the right of the debtor to p

pau. Pd p.T.A. the petition ..---++- sees
iy

334.


a7

_, 18. (1) Where the court makes an order of adjudication,
it may specify in such order or in any subsequent order

the period within which the debtor shall apply for his dis-
charge.

(2) The court may, upon an application being made
before the expiry of the period fixed under sub-section (1)
and upon sufficient cause being shown, extend the period
within which the debtor shall apply for his discharge, and
if the period is so extended, shall publish notice of the
order in-such manner as it thinks fit.

19. (1) On the making of an order of adjudication, the
property of the insolvent wherever situate: shall, subject
to provisions of section 48, vest in the ........ Official
Assignee .:...... and shall become divisible among the
creditors, and thereafter except as provided by this Act, no
creditor to whom the insolvent is indebted in respect of
any debt provable in insolvency shall, during pendency of
the insolvency proceedings, have any remedy against the
property of the insolvent in respect of the debt, or com-
mence any suit or other legal proceeding, except with the
leave of the court and on such terms as the court may
impose.

(2) An application under rule 6 of Order XXXIV in the
First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall
be governed by the provisions of sub-section (1) in the
samé manner as an application for execution by an un-
secured creditor against the property of the insolvent.

(3) Any suit or other legal proceeding commenced
without obtaining leave under sub-section (1) shall be
dismissed.

(4) Nothing in this section shall—

(a) affect the power of any secured creditor to
realise or otherwise deal with his security, in the same
manner as he would have been entitled to realise or
deal with if this section had not been enacted, or

(b) bar a creditor from taking, subject to any
order which may be passed under section 24, any pro-
ceedings against the person of the debtor which are
permitted under the law.

20. (1) A High Court exercising jurisdiction under this
Act may at any time after the making of an order of adju-
dication, stay any suit or other proceeding pending against
the insolvent before any Judge or Judges of the High Court
or in any other Court subject to the superintendence of the
High Court.

(2): An’ order made under sub-section (1) may be serv-
ed by sending a copy thereof, under the seal of the High
Court, by post to the address for service of the plaintiff or

Order to
weal for
discharge.

8. 27 (1),
part, P.A.]

ive 3102)»

Effect of an
order of ad~
judication.
Is. 28 (2),
part, P.A.]
Of. 8. 775

main para.
PTA.

[New]

[New]

E29

A.) Ot

Gf. 8. 17
1100180,
TAAL

[New]

[New]
Cf. 8. 18(2).
P.T.A.


हि PA]
५ 5. 18
10

Publication
of order of
adjudication.
[s. 30, PA]

Cf. s. 20,
P.T.A.

[New]

Cf. 8. 116(2),
PTA}

of. $. 1375
English Act
read with

8. 37.

Relation
back! of
insolvency.
[s. 28 (7),
PA]

6६ 5. 51,
BTA.

48

other party prosecuting such suit or proceeding, and notice
of such order shall be sent to the court before which the
suit or proceeding is pending.

(3) Any court in which suit or other proceedings are
pending against a debtor may, on proof that an order of ad-
judication has been made against him under this Act, either
stay the suits or proceedings or allow them ६0 continue on
such terms as it may think just.

21. (1) Where the person adjudged insolvent is a part-
ner in a firm, the court may authorise the Official Assignee
to continue or commence and carry on any suit or other pro-
ceeding in his name and that of the partner of the insol-
vent; and any release by the partner of the insolvent of the
debt or demand to which the proceeding relates shall be
void

(2) Where an application for authority to continue or
commence any suit or other proceeding has peen made
under sub-section (1), notice of the application shall be
given to the partner of the insolvent, and he may show
cause against it, and on his application the court may, if it
thinks fit, direct that he shall receive his proper share of
the proceeds of the proceeding, and if he does not claim
any benefit therefrom he shall be indemnified against costs
in respect thereof as the court directs.

22. (1) Notice of every order of adjudication stating the
name, address and description of the insolvent, the date of
the presentation of the petition, the date of the adjudica-
tion, the period within which the insolvent shall apply for
his discharge, and the court by which the adjudication is
made, shall be published in,‘the Official Gazette and in such
other manner as may be prescribed.

(2) A copy of the Official Gazette containing an order
of adjudication shall be conclusive evidence of the order
having been duly made and of its date.

23. The insolvency of a debtor, whether the same takes
place on the debtor’s own petition or on that of a creditor or
creditors, shall be deemed to have relation back to and to
commence at—

(a) the time of the commission of the act of in-
solvency on which an order of adjudication is made
against him, or

(0) if the insolvent is proved to have committed
more acts of insolvency than one, the time of the first

1The marginal note in s. 51, P.T.A. is “Relation of assignee’s title.”
But it is considered that it should be changed to ‘Relation back of
insolvency”.


4

of the acts of insolvency proved to have committed by
the insolvent within three months next preceding the
date of the presentation of the insolvency petition:

Provided that no insolvency petition or order of adjudi-
‘cation shall be rendered invalid by reason of any act of
insolvency committed anterior to the debt of the petitioning
creditor.

Proceedings consequent on order of adjudication

24. (1) Any insolvent in respect of whom an order of Protection
adjudication has been made may apply to the court for pro- order after
tection, and the court may, on such application, make an rey
order for the protectton of the insolvent from arrest or & 8. 2561)
detention. te AO

(2) A protection order may apply either to all the debts
of the insolvent provable in insolvency or to such of them
as the court may think proper, and may commence and
take effect at and for such time as the court may direct,
and may be revoked, modified or renewed as the court may
think fit.

(3) A protection order shall protect the insolvent from
being arrested or detained in prison for any debt to which
such order applies, and any insolvent arrested or detained
vontrary to the terms of such an order shall be entitled to
his release:

Provided that no such order shall operate to prejudice
the rights of any creditor in the event of such order being
revoked or modified or the adjudication annulled.

(4) Any creditor shall be entitled to appear and oppose
the grant of a protection order.

25. At any time after an order of adjudication has been Power to
made, the court either of its own initiation or on the appli- ast ae
cation of any creditor or the Official Assignee may, if it has fs. 32. P. ढ़
reason to believe— Cf.'s. 34 (7)

(a) that the insolvent has absconded or is about PuT-As
to abscond with a view to avoiding examination in res-
pect of his affairs or otherwise avoidings, delaying or
embarrassing proceedings in insolvency against him, or

(b) that the insolvent has departed or is about to
depart from the local limits of its jurisdiction, with a
view to avoiding any obligation which has been or
might be imposed on him by or under this Act, or

(९) that the insolvent has removed or is about to
remove his property with a view to preventing or de-
laying possession being taken of it by the Official As-
signee, or that he has concealed or is about to conceal
or has destroyed or is about to destroy any of his pro-
perty or any books, documents or writings which might
be of use to his creditors in the course of the insol-
vency, ‘



50

order a warrant to issue for hisearrest, and on his appear-
ing or being brought before it, may, if satisfied about the
facts mentioned in clause (a), (b) or (c), order’ his release
on such terms as to security as may be reasonable or neces-
sary, or, if such security is not furnished, direct that he
shall be detained in the civil prison for a period which may
extend to three months.

Redirection 26. Where the Official Assignee has been appointed in-
of postal terim receiver or any order of adjudication is made, the
articles. court, on the application of the Official Assignee, may, from
Bass 35» time to time, order that for such. time, not exceeding three
o. $13, Months, as the, court thinks fit, all postal articles as defined
Canadian in clause (21) of seciion 2 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1598,
Act. registered or unregistered, and money orders, addressed to
the debtor at any place or places mentioned in the order for
redirection 1 pdirected or deliver:

Cf. s.24, authorities in the territories to which, this A
” Act nee, cr otherwise as ihe court

Engi. Act. the Official + &
the same shail be done accordingiy.

Insolvent’s 27. (1) Where an order of adjudication is made against
schedule, a debtor, he shall prepare and submit to the court a sche-
pe 24,  dule verified by. affidavit, in such form and containing such
(व) P.T.A, particulars of and in relation to his affairs as may be pres-
eribed.
Ch 2 (2) The schedule shall be submitted within such period
PYra. +> as may be fixed by the court or extended by it from time
to time.
(3) If the insolvent fails, without reasonable excuse, to
Cf. s. 24@), CoMply with the requirements of this section, the court may,
P.T.A. on the application of the Official Assignee or of any credi-
tor, make an order for his committal to the civil prison,
(4) 11 the insi? foils to prepare and submit any .uch
as aforesaid, the Official Assignee may, at the ex-
pense of the estate. cause such a schedule to be prepared
in the manner prescribed.

(1) At avy ime after the me'sng of an order of
ation against an insolvent the court, on the appli-
of a creditor or of the Official Assignee, may direct
i meeting of creditors shall be held to consider the
mstances of the insolvency and the insolvent’s sche-
his explanation thereof and generally as to the
dealing with the property of the insolvent.

(2) With respect to the summoning of and proceedings
ef ५ meeting of creditors the rules in the First Schedule
shal be observed.

Public exa- 29. (1) Where the court makes an order of adjudication,

puneton ०३ it shall hold a public sitting on a day to be appointed by the

; court, of whitch notice shall be given to creditors in the

Cf. s. 27, prescribed iranner. for the examination of the insolvent,

PTA and the insolvent shall attend thereat, and shall be exa-
mined as to his conduct, dealings and property.

6 of 1898


51

(2) The examination shall be held as soon as convenien-
tly may’ be after the expiration of the time for the filing of
the insolvent’s schedule,

(3) The court may adjourn the examination from time

(4) Any creditor who has tendered a proof, or a legal
practitioner on his behalf, may question the insolvent con-
cerning his affairs and the causes of his failure.

(5) The Official Assignee shall take part in the exami-
nation of the insolvent; and for the purpose thereof, sub-
ject to such directions as the court ‘may give, may be re-
presented by a legal practitioner.

(6) The court may put such questions to the insolvent
as it thinks fit. है _

(7) The! insolvent shall be examined upon oath, and it
shall be his dGty to answe¥ all such questions as the court
may put or allow to, be put to him.

(8) Such. notes of the examination as the court thinks Cf. s.18
proper shall be taken down in writing and shall be read नि CEC.
either over to or by the insolvent and signed by him, and § 2° (५
may thereafter be used in evidence against him and shall
be open to the inspection of any creditor at all reasoner
times. हु _ +. bala

(9) Where the court is of opinion that the affairs of the
insolvent have been sufficiently investigated, it shall, by
order, declare that his examination is concluded, but such
order shall not preclude the court from directing further
gxamination of the insolvent whenever it may deem fit to

[0 so.

(10) Where the insolvent is of unsound mind or suffers cy, Article
from any such mental or physical affliction or disability as 102, Consti-
in the opinion of.the court makes him unfit to attend his (tion, as to
public examination, or is a woman who accordin, 6 £0 the mind”.
customs and manners of the country ought not to be com-
pelled to appear in public, the court may make an order
dispensing with such examination, or directing that the in-
solvent be examined on such terms in such manner and at
such place as to the court seems fit.

Annulment of adjudication

30. (1) Where, in the ga of the court, the debtor Power to
ought not have been adju insolvent, the court shall, Faia ade
on the application of any person interested, by order in von.
writing, annul the adjudication. छू “ep part,

Cf.s. ziti.
part, P.T.A.

(2) The court shall annul an adjudication on the appli- Pan
cation of the insolvent or of any other person interested, [$35 Par
where:it is proved to the satisfaction of the court that the Cj. 8. 200,
debts of the insolvent provable’ in insolvency have been part, P.T.A:

paid in full.


3g om
yf. 8. 2161).
part, P.T.As

[New]

fs
2 21 (2),
TAAL]

Power to
cancel one
of concur-
rent orders
of adjudica-
tion,

[s. 36, P.A.]
Cf. s. 22,
P.T.A.
Proceedings
on annul-
ment.

& 37 (1),
AL]

Cf. s. 2300):
BTA. »

& 37 (2),
Gf 2309)
PTA

[New]

52

(3) The court may, of its own motion or on an applica-
tion made by the Official Assignee or any creditor, annul
an adjudication, where the adjudication was made on she
petition of a debtor who was, by reason of the provisions
of sub-section ‘(2) of section 6, not entitled to present such
petition.

(4) The court may, of its own motion or on application
made by the Official Assignee or any creditor, annul an
adjudication where it is proved to the satisfaction of the
court that the insolvent has—

(a) kept false books of account or suppressed books
of account; or पु

(b) suppressed or fraudulently disposed of his as-
sets or any part thereof; or

(c) without reasonable cause failed to comply with
any of the obligations imposed upon him by or under
this Act.

(5) For the purposes of this section, any debt disouted
by an insolvent shall be considered as paid in full if the in-
solvent enters into a bond, in such sum and with such sure-
ties as the court approves, to pay the amount to be recover-
ed in any proceeding for the recovery of or concerning the
debt, with costs, and any debt due to a creditor who cannot
be found or cannot be identified shall be considered as paid
in full if paid into court.

31. Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the court
that insolvency proceedings are pending in any other court
in the territories to which this Act extends against the same
debtor, and that the property of the debtor can be more
conveniently distributed by such other court, the court may
annul the adjudication or may stay all proceedings thereon.

32. (1) Where an adjudication is annulled, all sales and
dispositions of property and payments duly made, and_ all
acts theretofore done, by the court or by the Official
Assignee or other person acting under his authority, shall
be valid; but, subject as aforesaid, the property of the
debtor who was adjudged insolvent shall vest in such
person as the court may appoint by the order of annul-
ment or any subsequent order, or, in default of any such
appointment, shall revert to the debtor to the extent of
his right or interest therein on such conditions, if any, as
the court may, by order in writing, declare.

(2) Notice of every order annuling an adjudication shall]
be published in the Official Gazette and in such other
manner as may be prescribed.

(3) The person appointed under sub-section (1) shall
have power to realise the properties vested in him and to


53

distribute the realisations among the creditors in accor-
dance with the provisions of this Act, and for that purpose
may exercise all powers which the Official Assignee may
exercise under sub-section (1) of section 91.

(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), the person [New]
appointed under sub-section (1) may make or continue
petitions under sections 54 and 55.

5) The exercise of powers under sub-sections (3) and
(4) shall be subject to the orders of the court in that behalf.

(6) Where a debtor has been released from custody un-
der the provisions of this Act and the order of adjudica-
tion is annulled as aforesaid, the court may, if it thinks fit,
recommit the debtor to his former custody and the jailor
or keeper of the prison to whose custody such debtor is so
recommitted, shall receive such debtor into his custody
according to such recommitment and thereupon all pro-
cesses which were in force against the person of such
debtor at the time of such release as afcresaid shall be
deemed to be still in force against him as if such order
had not been made.

[New]

ae
Of. $423 (2
Pas

CHAPTER V
CoMPOSITIONS AND SCHEMES OF ARRANGEMENT

33. (1) An insolvent may, at any time after the making Submission
of an order of adjudication, submit, to the Official Assignee of Proposal
in the prescribed form, a proposal for a composition in tance by
satisfaction of his debts or a proposal for a scheme of creditors.
arrangement of his affairs, and such proposal shall be sub- 38(1),

mitted by the Official Assignee to a meeting of creditors. aN 280),

(2) The Official Assignee shall send to each creditor who [s. 38(2),
is mentioned in the jnsolvent’s schedule, or who has ten- Os es
dered a proof before the meeting, a copy of the insolvent’s par,
proposals with a report thereon. P.TAL

(3) The insolvent may at the meeting amend the 38 3)
terms of his proposal, if the amendment is, in the opinion cy. 3, 28(3)
of the Official Assignee, calculated to benefit the general P.T.A.
body of creditors.

(4) If on a consideration of the propesal a majority in [s. 38(2),
number and three-fourths in value of all the creditors Os ey
whose debts are proved, resolve to accept the proposal. the PTA. °
same shall be deemed to be duly accepted by the creditors. part.

(5) Any creditor who has proved his debt may assent & 284)»
to or dissent from the proposal by a letter in the prescrib- TA]
ed form addressed to the Official Assignee so as to be
received by him not later than the day preceding the
meeting, and any such assent or dissent shall have effect


Approval of
proposal by
oourt,

(Ge an
iad

New)

Cf. 8. 29(2)s
part,

PTA.
{New]

Cf. 8. 29(2)s
part, P.T.A,

[$. 38(4),
ae
pra

&. 38 (4),
part, P.A.)
Cf. 8. 29(4)s
PTA.

f, 3805)
2.

Cf. 5.295%
PTA.

. 386
Nig
Of. 3. 296),
PTAA.
fs. 3807),
Bay”
Cf. 8. 2907)
PTA.
Order on
approval.

5c.
eran”

[New]
Gf. 8. 3००

84

as if the creditor had been present and had voted at that
meeting.

34. (1) The insolvent or the Official Assignee may, after
the proposal is accepted by the creditors, apply to the
court to approve it, and notice of the time appointed for
hearing the application shall be given in the prescribed
manner to éach creditor who has proved.

(2) Except where an estate is being summarily admi-
nistered or special leave of the court has been obtained,
the application shall not be heard until after the conclu-
sion of the public examination of the insolvent.

(3) Any creditor who has proved may be heard by the
court in opposition to the application, notwithstanding
that he may, at a meeting of creditors, have voted for the
acceptance of the proposal. '

(4) The court shall, before approving the proposal, hear
a report of the Official Assignee as to the terms of the pro-
posal and as to the conduct of the insolvent, and........
consider any objections which may be made by or on be-
half of any creditor.

(5) Where the court is of opinion ..... ... that the
terms of the proposal are not reasonable or are not cal-
culated to benefit the general body of creditors, the court
shall refuse to approve the proposal,

(6) Where any facts are (Proved on proof of which the
court would be required either to refuse, suspend or
attach conditions to the insolvent’s discharge, e court
shall refuse to approve the proposal unless it provides
Teasonable security for payment of not less than twenty-
five naye paise in the rupee on all the unsecured debts
provable against the insolvent’s estate.

(7) No composition or scheme shall be approved by the
court which does not provide for the payment in priority to
other debts of all debts directed to be so paid in the distri-
bution of the property of an insolvent.’ -

(8) In any other case the court may either approve or
refuse to approve the proposal.

35. (1) If the court approves the proposal, the terms
shall be embodied in an order of the court, and the order
of adjudication shall be annulled, and the provisions of sec-
tion 32 shall thereupon apply, and the composition oF
scheme shall be binding on all the creditors so far_as re-
lates to any debt due to them from the insolvent and prov-
able in insolvency.

(2) The provisions of the composition or scheme may,
on application by any person. interested, be enforced by.
the court in the manner provided for the execution of


" decrees in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as if the com-
position or scheme were a decree containing such provi-

(3) Notwithstanding the acceptance and approval of a [New]
composition or scheme, the composition or schame shall not ६ हि 8. 325
be binding on an any creditor so far as regards a debt or liabi- “""”
lity from. w! under the provisions of this Act, the in-
solvent would not be discharged by an order of discharge
in insolvency, unless the crea itor assents to the composi-
~or scheme.

36. (1) If default is made in the payment of any instal- Power to
ment due in pursuance of any composition or scheme re-adjudge
i comp section 35 or if it appears to the court that debtor
: composition or cannot without injus- jase"

or uz delay, or that the approval of the court was earlier part,
obtained by fraud, the court may, if it thinks fit, on appli- P.A]
cation by any person interested, re-adjudge the debtor 9;
insolvent and annul the composition or scheme, and the “~
property of the debtor shall thereupon vest in the Official
Assignee but without prejudice to the validity of any
transfer or payment duly made or of anything duly done
under or in pursuance of the composition or scheme.

(2) Where a debtor is re-adjudged insolvent under [s. 4o, latter
sub-section (1), all debts provable in other respects which part, P.A.]
have been contracted before the date of such re-adjudica- Cf § 31@)
tion shall be provable in the insolvency. “J

312),

CHAPTER VI
DISCHARGE

37. (1) An insolvent may, at any time after the order pischarge.
of adjudication and shall, within the period specified by iF 4r (1),
the court, apply to the court for an order of discharge, Pal 8
and the court shall fix a day, notice whereof shall be of 8.3 (0)
given in such manner as may be prescribed, for hearing p.T.A,
such application; but save where the public examination
of the insolvent has been dispensed with under the provi-
sions of this Act, the application shall not be heard until
after such examination has been concluded.

2 rad te urt, af egg F the objections of any [s. 41(2),
creditor od Oy रे of the ial Assignee as to the a)
conduct . anc ७ of the insolvent, may— *2 5),

(a) subject: to the provisions of section 38, grant
or refuse an absolute order of discharge; or

(9) - है? + कर १0 the operation of the order for a
specified 023 or
gy an order of discharge subject to any
condi with respect to any earnings or income
which गम eae ards become due to the insolvent,

or with respect to his after-acquired property.


86

(5,426), (3) The powers of suspending, and of attaching con-
PA. ditions to, an insolvent’s discharge may be exercised con-
Gf. 8. 3903)

PTA. currently.

Cases in 38. (7) The court shall, on proof of any of the facts

which court hereinafter meniioned, either—
must refuse 2

an absolute

discharge.

Se 1), t i :

nec et (a) refuse the discharge; or

Cf. 8. 390), (b) suspend the discharge for a specified time;
Part and (2), or

part, P.T.A.

(c) suspend the discharge until a dividend of
not less than twenty-five naye paise in the rupee has
been paid to the creditors; or

(d) require the insolvent as a condition of his
discharge to consent to a decree being passed against
him in favour of the Official Assignee for any balance
or part of any balance of the debts provable under the
insolvency which is not satisfied at the date of his
discharge; such balance or part of any balance of the
debts to be paid out of the future earnings or after-
acquired property of the insolvent in such manner
and subject to such conditions as the court may
direct; but in that case the decree shall not be
executed without leave of the court, which leave may
be given on proof that the insolvent has since his dis-
charge acquired property or income available for
payment of his debts.

(2) The facts hereinbefore referred to are—
[s. 42(1), (a) that the insolvent’s assets are not of a value
ae vob equal to fifty naye paise in the rupee on the amount
part and, of his unsecured liabilities, unless he satisfies the
part, P.T.A. court that the fact that the essets are not of a value

equal to fifty naye paise in the rupee on the amount
of his unsecured liabilities has arisen from circums-
tances for which he cannot justly be held responsi-
ble;

(8) that the insolvent has omitted to keep such
books of account as are usual] and proper in the
business carried on by him and as sulficiently dis-
close his business transactions and financial position
within the three years immediately preceding his
insolvency,

(९) that the insolvent has continued to trade
after knowing himself to be insolvent;

(d) that the insolvent has contracted any debt
provable in insolvency without having at the time of
contracting it any reasonable or probable grounds of
expectation (the burden of provine which shall lie on
him) that he would be able to pay it;



57

(e) that the insolvent has failed to account
satisfactorily for any loss of assets or for any defici-
ency of assets to meet his liabilities;
As to “or”

(f) that the insolvent has brought on, or contri-
buted to, his insolvency by rash or hazardous specu- aH 5,30)
lations, or by unjustifiable extravagance in living, or °
by gambling, or by culpable neglect of his business
affairs;
(g) that the insolvent has, within three months
preceding the date of the presentation of the petition,
when unable to pay his debts as they became due,
given an undue preference to any of his creditors;

(४) that the insolvent has on any previous occa-
sion been adjudged an insolvent or made a composi-
tion or arrangement with his creditors;

(i) that the insolvent has concealed or removed Asto
his books or his propert, or any part thereof, or has ~ books
been guilty of any other fraud or fraudulent breach हो, $29)

of trust;

(j) that the insolvent has put any of his credi-
tors to unnecessary expense by a frivolous or vexati-
ous defence to any suit properly brought against him;

(k) that the insolvent has, within three months
preceding the date of the presentation of the petition,
incurred unjustifiable expense by bringing any  fri-
volous or vexatious suit;

(1) that the insolvent has committed any offence
under this Act or under sections 421 to 424 of the
45 of 1860. Indian Penal Code.

(3) For the purposes of section 37 and of this section, [s. 42(2),
the report of the Official Assignee shall be deemed to be Gf J 394)
evidence; and the court may presume the correctness of p.T.A. >
any statement contained therein.

29. If the insolvent does not appear on the day fixed Power to
for hearing his application for discharge or on such sub- fadication
sequent day as the court may direct, or if the insolvent ‘failure to
does not apply for an order of discharge within the period apply for
specified by the court. the court may annul the order of नल
adjudication or make such other order as it may think fit, Bai a
and if the adjudication is so annulled, the provisions of Cf. s. 41
section 32 shall apply. part, P.T.A.

40. (1) Where the court refuses the discharge of the Renewal of
insolvent, it may, after such time and in such circums- ae कक
tan as may be prescribed, permit him to renew his of terms of

application. order.
P New]

(2) Where an order of discharge is made subject to Cf. ६ 42
conditions, and, at any time after the expiration of two P.T.A,
years from the date of the order, the insolvent satisfies
the court thet there is no reasonable probability of his

for



being in a position to comply with the terms of such.
order, the court may modify the terms of the order, or of
any substituted or der, in such manner and upon such
conditions as it may think fit. .

Dey red of 41. A discharged insolvent shall, notwithstanding his
‘osolvent to discharge, give such assistance as the Official Assignee
assist in may require in the realisation and distribution of such of
sealisation of his property as is vested in the Official Assignee, and if
New he fails to do so, the court, may, if it thinks fit, revoke

५ 8. 43, his discharge, but without prejudice to the validity of any

PTA. sale, disposition or payment duly made or thing duly done
subsequent to the discharge but before its revocation.
Effect tof दि 42. In either of the following cases, that is to say,—
settlements (a) in the case of a settlement made before and
-on discharge. in consideration of marriage where the settler is not
Yen at the time of making the settlement able to pay all
Pra” his debts without the aid of the property comprised in
A.

the settlement; or
(b) in the case of any covenant or contract

made in consideration of marriage for the future -

settlement, on or for the settler’s wife or children, af

any money or property wherein he had not at the:

date of his marriage any estate or interest (not being.

money or property of or in right of his wite) ;
if the settler is adjudged insolvent or compounds org
arranges with his creditors, and it appears to the courts
that the settlement, covenant or contract was made है|
order to defeat or delay creditors, or was unjustifial
having regard to the state of the settler’s affairs at | a
time when it was made, the court may refuse or su ६
an order of discharge or grant an order subject to condly
tions or refuse to approve a composition or arrangement.“%

Effect of 43. (1) An order of discharge shall not release the in
order of solvent from—
ft rae (a) any debt due to the Government; 4
oe 4500) (b) any debt or liability incurred by means 6
PTA any fraud or fraudulent breach of trust to which

: was a party;

(c) any debt or liability in respect of which
has obtained.forbearance by any fraud to which qa
was a party; or

As to agree- (d) any liability under an agreement for a
econ s tenance or under any decree or order for maint
Sx ance passed under any law for the time being,
Act, force. :
& 44(2), (2) Save as otherwise provided by sub-section ¢

Gs an order of discharge shall release the insolvent from
$5, 45) debts provable in insolvency.


59

3) An order of discharge shall be conclusive evidence [New]
of @ insolvency and of the validity of the proceedings GE 8, 45)»
therein.

(4) An order of discharge shall not release any person [s. 44(3),
who, at the date of the presentation of the petition, was P.A.] )
a partner or co-trustee with the insolvent or was jointly ¥. 454)»
bound or had made any joint contract with him, or any
person who was surety or in the nature of a surety for
him.

CHAPTER प्रात
ADMINISTRATION OF PROPERTY

Proof of debts
Debts prov-

44. (1) Demands in the nature of unliquidated damages 552",
arising otherwise than by reason of a contract or breach insolvency.
of trust shall not be provable in insolvency. [s. 34),

part, ४.23.
Gf. 8. 460),
PTA.

(2) A person having notice of any available act of in- [New]
solvency committed by the debtor shall not prove for Sf, 8; 40%
any debt or liability contracted by the debtor subsequent- Cy. s, 30(2),
ly to the date of his so having notice. English Act,

(3) Save as provided by sub-sections (1) and (2), all 1 34@),
debts and liabilities, present or future, certain or contin- of. ‘ 4603),
gent, to which the debtor is subject when he is adjudged pya.
an insolvent, or to which he may become subject before
his discharge by reason of any obligation incurred before
the date of such adjudication, shall be deemed to be debts
provable in insolvency.

(4) An estimate shall be made by the Official Assignee [s. 33(0),
of the value of any debt or liability provable as aforesaid, Pr", (+
which by reason of its being subject to any contingency part, PA]
or contingencies or for any other reason, does not bear a Cf. s. 46(4),
certain value: PY

Provided that if, in his opinion, the value of the debt
or liability is incapable of being fairly estimated, he shall
issue a certificate to that effect, and thereupon the debt
or liability shall be deemed to be a debt not provable in
insolvency.

Explanation 1.—For the purpose of this section, “liabi- [New]
lity” includes any compensation for work or labour done, Sf है 465
any obligation or possibility of an obligation to pay money p*p.a™to™
or money’s worth on the breach of any express or implied © ”~
covenant, contract, agreement or undertaking, whether
the breach does or does not occur, or is or is not likely to
occur or capable of occurring, before the discharge of the
debtor, and generally it includes any express or implied

42 MofL—5


Mutual
dealings and

[ 8. 47, pro-
viso, P.T.A,

Persons in+
jured by
disclaimer
may prove.
lew
छः दर 67,
P.T.A.
Proof of
debts
(s. 3301),
main para,
PA)
Cf. $. 48,
P.T.A.

Description
of insol-
vent’s pro-
perty divisi-
ble amongst
creditors.
f, 28(5)>
6 sat
8. §2(1),
P.T.A.

60

engagement, agreement or undertaking to pay, or capable
or resulting in the payment of, money, or money’s worth,
whether the payment is as respects amount, fixed or un-
liquidated; as respects time, present or future, certain or
dependent on any contingency or contingencies; as to
mode of valuation, capable of being ascertained by fixed
rules, or as matter of opinion.

Explanation 2.—In this section, “available act of insol-
vency” has the same meaning as in section 57.

45. Where there have been mutual credits, debts or
other mutual dealings between an insolvent and a creditor
proving or claiming to prove a debt under this Act, an
account shall be taken of what is due from the one party
to the other in respect of such mutual dealings, and the
sum due from one party shall be set-off against any sum
due from the other party, and the balance of the account,
and no more, shall be claimed or paid on either side res-
pectively:

Provided that a person shall not be entitled under this
section to the benefits of any set-off against the property
of an insolvent in any case where he had at the time
of giving credit to the insolvent notice of any available act
of insolvency committed by the insolvent.

Explanation —In this section, “available act of insol-
vency” has the same meaning as in section 57.

46. Any person injured by the operation of a disclai-
mer under sections 65 to 69 shell be deemed to be a cre-
ditor of the insolvent to the amount of the injury, and
may accordingly prove the same as a debt under the insol-
vency.

47. With respect to the mode of proving debts, the
right of proof by secured and other creditors, the ad-
mission and rejection of proofs, and the other matters re-
ferred to in the Second Schedule, the rules in that Sche-
dule shall be observed.

Property of the insolvent

48. (1) The property of the insolvent divisible amongst
his creditors, and in this Act referred to as the property
of the insolvent, shall not comprise the following particu-
lars, namely:—

(a) any property held by the insolvent on trust
for any other person;

(b) policies of life insurance or endowment in
respect of the insolvent’s own life, except to the extent
of a charge on the policies in respect of the amount of
the premium paid on the policies during the two years
next preceding the order of adjudication;


5 of 1908.

61

(c) the right of a tenant to remain in or to retain
possession of any premises to which any law with res-
pect to the control of rents and eviction applies for
the time being;

(d) any property (not being books of account)
which is exempted by the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, or by any other enactment for the time being
in force, from liability to attachment and sale in ex-
ecution of decree.

(2) Subject as aforesaid, the property of the insolvent
shall comprise the following particulars, namely: —

(a) all such property as may belong to or be [s. 28(2),
vested in the insolvent ‘at the commencement of the Part PA}

insolvency; & ‘call 52
part, P.T.A.
(0) ...........the capacity to exercise and to take js. 28

proceedings for exercising all such powers in or over P.
or in respect of property as might have been exercised Cf. 5 52(2),
by the insolvent for his own benefit at the commence- ©): P.T.A.
ment of his insolvency or before his discharge; and
(c) any property which may be acquired by or &, 28(4),
devolve on the insolvent, after the commencement of Gi -]
the insolvency and before his discharge; and such pro- & $20)
perty shall forthwith vest in the......Official Assig- part, P-T.A.
nee, and no dealings by the insolvent with that pro-
perty during the insolvency shall be valid:
Provided that where the insolvent has been carrying [New]
on a trade or business with the permission of the court
under section 79, a transfer by the insolvent of properties
acquired in the course of that trade or business, in favour
of a person who takes the same bona fide and for consider-
ation, shall not be invalid merely by reason of the insol-
vency.

49. (1) Where a second or subsequent order of adjudi- second ot
cation is made against an insolvent, or where an order is subsequent
made for the administration in insolvency of the estate of bankruptcy.
a deceased insolvent, then for the purposes of any proceed- ew Be
ings consequent upon any such order, the Official Assignee of the Be.
in the last preceding insolvency shall be deemed to be a Act as
creditor in respect of any unsatisfied balance of the debts fubstituted
provable against the property of the insolvent in that in- -
solvency. Amendment

Act, 65
(2) In the event of a second or subsequent order of modified.

adjudication being made against an insolvent being follow-
ed by an order adjudging him insolvent, or in the event
of an order being made for the administration in insolvency
of the estate of a deceased insolvent, any property acquir-
ed by him since he was last adjudged insolvent, which at
the date when the subsequent petition was presented had
not been distributed amongst the creditors in such last
preceding insolvency, shall (subject to any disposition


& पु lish
amiss

Intimation
हा
acquired
property,
[New]
As to after-
acquired
property
where dis-

(1958) page
394 and
Bombay
Rule 133
under P.T.A,

62

thereof made by the Official Assignee in that insolvency
without knowledge of the presentation of the subsequent
petition) vest in the Official Assignee in the subsequent
insolvency or administration in insolvency, as the case may
be.

(3) Where the Official Assignee in any insolvency re-
ceives notice of a subsequent petition in insolvency against
the insolvent or after his decease of a petition for the ad-
ministration of his estate in insolvency, the Official As-
signee shall hold any property then in his possession
which has been acquired by the insolvent since he was
adjudged insolvent until the subsequent petition has been
disposed of, and, if on the subsequent petition an order of
adjudication, or an order for the administration of the estate
in insolvency is made, he shall transfer all such property
or the proceeds thereof (after deducting his costs and ex-
penses) to the Official Assignee in the subsequent insol-
vency or administration in insolvency, as the case may be.

(4) Out of the assets available in the second or subse-
quent insolvency or proceeding for the administration of
the estate of a deceased insolvent, the creditors in the
second or subsequent insolvency or proceeding shall first be
paid a dividend of as many naye paise in the rupee as
is equal to the percentage of dividend paid to the creditors
in the first or earlier insolvency from the assets of the
first or earlier insolvency, before the Official Assignee act-
ing in the first or earlier insolvency is paid any dividend
in insolvency is made, he shall transfer all such property
or proceding for the administration of the estate of the
deceased insolvent.

50. (1) Where after adjudication any property is
acquired by or devolves on the insolvent after adjudi-
cation, the insolvent shall, within one month of such ac-
quisition or devolution send an intimation in writing to
the Official Assignee of such acquisition or devolution in
the prescribed form and giving the prescribed particulars.

(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to—
(a) salary;
(b) property specified in sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 48:

(c) property acquired in the course of business
by the insolvent, where such business is carried on by
him with the permission of the court under section
79;

(d) any goods the value whereof does not exceed
one hundred rupees.


. 531. (1) Where a person claims any property, or inter- Property in
est therein, in the possession of the insolvent, at the time कक
of the insolvency, he shall file with the Official Assignee @ [s. 28 (9),

proof of claim verified by affidavit giving the grounds on P.A.] modi-

which the claim is based and sufficient particulars to en- an 52(2)
able the property to be identified. (0, first add

. second pro-
(2) The Official Assignee with whom a proof of claim viso, P.T.A.

is filed under sub-section (1) shall within fifteen days modified.
thereafter or within 15 days after the first meeting किक
of creditors, whichever is the later, either admit Act.
the claim and deliver possession of the property

to the claimant or give notice in writing to the claimant

that the claim is disputed with his reasons therefor, and,

unless the claimant appeals therefrom to the court within

thirty days after the sending of the notice of dispute, he

shall be deemed to have abandoned or relinquished all his

right to or interest in the property to the Official Assignee

who thereupon may sell or dispose of the property free

of any lien, right, title or interest of the claimant thereon
or therein,

(3) The onus of establishing a claim to or in property
under this section shall lie on the claimant.

(4) The Official Assignee may give notice in writing
to any person to prove his claim to or in any such proper-
ty or interest as is referred to in sub-section (1), and, un-
less that person files with the Official Assignee a proof of
claim in the prescribed form within thirty days after the
sending of the notice, the Official Assignee may thereupon
with the leave of the court sell or dispose of the property
free of any lien, right, title or interest of that person
thereon or therein.

(5) No proceedings shall be instituted to establish a
claim to, or to recover any right or interest in, any pro-
perty in the possession of an insolvent at the time of the
insolvency, except as provided in this section.

(6) The Official Assignee shall have a power to take
possession of any such property or interest as is referred
to in sub-section (1), notwithstanding that a claim there-
to may be or has been filed under this section,

(7) Where the property referred to in sub-section (1) Cf. Order
is movable property subject to speedy and natural decay, 21, R. 4३
or where the expense of looking after it is likely to exceed C-P.C.
its value, the Official Assignee may sell it at once, notwith-
standing that a claim thereto may be or has been tiled
under this section.

(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed as ex-

tending the rights of any person other than the Official
Assignee.


64

Effect of insolvency on antecedent transactions

Restrictions. 52. (7) Where execution of a decree or order hes
on rights of issued against the property of a debtor, no person shall
Onder execu- be entitled to the benefit of the execution against the Official
tion. Assignee, except in respect of the assets realised in the
is 57, ९.8.] course of the execution by sale or otherwise before the
5° date of the admission of the insolvency petition.

(2) Where execution of a decree or order has issued
against the property of the debtor but the assets have not
been realised in full by the date of admission of the insol-
vency petition, or where after that date a sale is held in
execution of a decree or order against the debtor, the costs
incurred by the creditor in respect of the execution shall
be a first charge on the assets realised in course of the
execution.

(3) A person who in good faith purchases the proper-
ty of a debtor under a sale in execution of a decree or
order shall........ acquire a good title to it against the
Official Assignee, if such sale is held before the making of
an order of adjudication.

(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the rights of a
secured creditor in respect of the property against which
the decree or order is executed.

Duties of 53. Where execution of a decree or order has issued
court exe- against any property of a debtor which is saleable in
cuting decree execution, and before the sale thereof notice is given to the
oe court executing the decree or order that an insolvency
[s. 52, P.A] Petition by or egainst the debtor has been admitted, the
Cf.s. 54, court executing the decree or order shall, on application
PTAA. by any person direct that—

tata (a) pending disposal of the proceedings on the
insolvency petition the sale shall be stayed; and
(b) if the debtor is adjudicated insolvent, the
property, if in the possession of the court, shall be
delivered to the Official Assignee;
but the costs of the execution shall be a first charge on the
property so delivered, and the Official Assignee may sell
the property or an adequate part thereof for the purpose
of satisfying the charge.
Avoidance 54. Any transfer of property, not being a transfer made
of voluntary before and in consideration of marriage or made in favour
transfer. of a purchaser or incumbrancer in good faith and for valu-
{3 53. P.A able consideration, shall, if the transferor is adjudged insol-

Pal” vent on a petition presented within two years after the date
of the transfer, be void against the Official Assignee.

[New] Explanation._For the purposes of this section, in the
ease of a transfer which is required to be made by a regis-
tered instrument under any law for the time being in force,
and which is made by such a registered instrument, the


65

date of registration of the instrument shall be deemed to
be the date of the transfer.

55. (1) Every transfer of property, every payment Avoidance of
made, every obligation incurred, and every judicial pro- preference
ceeding taken or suffered by any person unable to pay his Gases.
debts as they become due from his own money in favour [s, 54, P.A.]
of any creditor or surety with the view of giving that cre- modified.
ditor or surety preference over the other creditors, shall, Cf. s. 56
if such person is adjudged insolvent, on a petition presented ~***"
within six months after the date thereof, be deemed
fraudulent and void against the Official Assignee.

Expvlanation—For the - purposes of this section, in the
case of a transaction which is required to be made by a
registered instrument under any law for the time being
in force, and which is made by such a registered instru-
ment, the date of registration of the instrument shall be
deemed to be the date of the transaction.

(2) This section shall not affect the rights of any perscn
who in good faith and for valuable consideration has ac-
quired a title through or under a creditor or surety of the
insolvent.

56. A petition for the avoidance of any transfer under By whom
section 54, or of any transfer, payment, obligation or judi- petitions for
cial proceeding under section 55, may be made by the Offi- may be
cial Assignee or, with the leave of the court, by any credi- made.
tor who has proved his debt and who satisfies the court fs 5409
that the Official Assignee has been requested and has re- +]
fused to make such petition.

57. Subject to the foregoing provisions with respect to Protection of
the effect of insolvency on execution and with respect to bona fide
the avoidance of certain transfers and preferences, nothing [ess P Al
in this Act shall invalidate in the case of an insolvency— & 8. 575

Pp
(९) any payment by the insolvent to any of his TAL
creditors;

(b) any payment or delivery to the insolvent;
(c) any transfer by the insolvent for valuable con-
sideration; or

(d) any contract or dealing by or with the insol-
vent for valuable consideration :

Provided that any such transaction takes place before
the date of the order of adjudication, and that the person
with whom such transaction takes place acts in good faith
and has not at the time of the transaction notice of any
available act of insolvency committed by the insolvent
before that time.

Explanation.—In this section, “available act of insol- Cf. s. 167,
vency” means any act of insolvency available for petition English Act.
of insolvency at the date of the presentation of the petition [New]
on which the order of adjudication is made.


Validity of
certain pay-
ments to
insolvent.

[New]
Cf. 8. 46,
English Act.

Recovery of
property or
proceeds
thereof in
case of void
or voidable
transactions.

ew]

Bs 8. 66,
Canadian.
Act.

Possession of

property b

Bela A

signee.

[New]

Cf. $. 58(1),

BTA

p38

B ‘ ee ,
/. 3. 58(2),

BAS

66

58. A payment of money or delivery of property to a
person subsequently adjudged insolvent, or to a person
claiming by assignment from him, shall, notwithstanding
anything in this Act, be a good discharge to the person
paying the money or delivering the property, if the pay-
ment or delivery is made before the actual date on which
the order of adjudication is made and without notice of
the presentation of an insolvency petition, and is either
pursuant to the ordinary course of business or otherwise
bona fide.

59. (1) Where a person has acquired property of the
insolvent under a transaction that is void or under
a voidable transaction that is set aside and has sold,
disposed of, realised or collected the property or any part
thereof, the money or other proceeds, whether further dis-
posed of or not, shall be deemed the property of the Offi-
cial Assignee.

(2) The Official Assignee may recover the property or
the value thereof or the money or proceeds therefrom from
the person who acquired it from the insolvent or from any
other person to whom he may have resold, transferred or
paid.over the proceeds of the property as fully and effec-
tually as the Official Assignee could have recovered the
property if it had not been so sold, disposed of, realised or
collected.

(3) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), where any person
to whom the property has been sold or disposed of has paid
or given therefor in good faith adequate valuable consi-
deration, he is not subject to the operation of this section,
but the recourse of the Official Assignee shall be solely
against the person entering into the transaction with the
insolvent for recovery of the consideration so paid or given
or the value thereof.

(4) Where the consideration payable for or upon any
sale or resale of such property or any part thereof remains
unsatisfied, the Official Assignee is subrogated to the rights
of the vendor to compel payment or satisfaction.

Realisation of property
60. (1) The Official Assignee shall, as soon as may be,
take possession of the deeds, books and documents of the
insolvent and all other parts. of his property capable of
manual delivery.

(2) The Official Assignee shall, in relation to and for
the purpose of acquiring or retaining possession of the
property of the insolvent, be in the same position as if he
were a receiver of the property appointed under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the court may on his applica- 5 of 1908.
tion enforce such acquisition or retention accordingly.


67

3) Where any part of the property of the insolvent [New]
consnts of stock, Shares in ships, shares, or any other pro- 8६६5७
perty transferable in the books of any company, office or
person, the Official Assignee may exercise the right to
transfer the property to the. same extent as the insolvent
might have exercised it, if he had not become insolvent.

(4) Where any part of the property of the insolvent [New]
consists of actionable claims, such claims shail be deemed ४8541
to have been duly transferred to the Official Assignee.

(5) Any treasurer or other officer, or any banker, attor- few]

ney or agent of an insolvent, shall pay and deliver to the Pra. 585),

Official Assignee all money and securities in his possession ““""" ७४०
or power as such officer, banker, attorney or agent, which
he is not by law entitled to retain as against the insolvent
-or the Official Assignee; and if he fails so to do, he shall
be deemed to be guilty of an offence under section 188 of
45 of 1860. the Indian Penal Code, and shall be punishable according-

ly.

61. (1) The court may grant a warrant to any prescribed Seizure of
officer of the court to seize any part of the property of an property of
insolvent in the custody or possession of the insulvent or insolvent.
of any other person, and with a view to such seizure to Cf. ¥] 59
break open any house, building or room of the insolvent P-T.A.
where the insolvent is supposed to be, or any building or
receptacle of the insolvent where any of his property is
supposed to be.

(2) Where the court is satisfied that there is reason to
believe that property of the insolvent is concealed in a
house or place not belonging to him, the court may, if it
thinks fit, grant a search-warrant to any such officer as
aforesaid who may execute it according to its tenor.

62. (1) Where an insolvent is a person belonging to the A pprcpria-
armed forces of the Union or a servant of the Government tion of
or of a railway company or local authority, the Official portion of
Assignee shall receive for distribution amongst the credi- other income
tors so much of the insolvent’s pay or salary liable to at- to creditors.
tachment in execution of a decree as the court may direct. Rew) 60,

A,

(2) Where an insolvent is in the receipt of a salary or ?.
income other than as aforesaid, the court may, at any time Leet
after adjudication and from time to time, make such order CPC ve
as it thinks just for the payment to the Official Assignee, See also
for distribution among the creditors, of so much of such $ 5, Eng.
salary or income as may be liable to attachment in execu- 4
tion of a decree, or of any portion thereof.

63. Where any goods of an insolvent are held by any Inspection
person by way of pledge, pawn, or other security, it shall of goods
be lawful for the Official Assignee, after giving notice in Pledsed.
writing of his intention to do so, to inspect the goods, and, ८; ew]
where such notice has been given, such person as aforesaid Eng. Ace


Copyright.
ie

, 8. 52

jan

Act.
See also s.
60, English
‘Act and

8. 110 Aus-
tralian Act.

As to a an
“copyright”,
see 38.

13-14;
Copyright
Act; 1957:

68

shall not be entitled to realise his security until he has
given the Official Assignee a reasonable opportunity of in-
specting the goods and of exercising his right of redemp-
tion, if he thinks fit to do so.

64. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act or in any
other law, the author’s manuscripts of and copyright in any
work or any interest in such copyright assigned io a pub-
lisher, printer, firm or person becoming insolvent, shall—

(a) if the work covered by such copyright has not
been published and put on the market at the time of
the insolvency and no expense has been incurred in
connection therewith, thereupon revert and be deli-
vered to the author or his heirs, and any contract bet-
ween the author or his heirs and such insolvent shall
then terminate and be void;

(b) if the work covered by such copyright has in
whole or in part been put into type and expenses have
been incurred by the insolvent, revert and be deliver-
ed to the author on payment of the expenses so incurr-
ed and the product of such expenses shall also be
delivered to the author or his heirs and any contract
between the author or his heirs and the insolvent shall
then terminate and be void; but if the author does not
exercise his rights under this clause within six months
of the date of the insolvency, the Official Assignee may
carry out the contract;

(c) if the Official Assignee at the expiration of six
months from the date of the insolvency decides not to
carry out the contract, revert without expense to the
author and any contract between the author or his
heirs and such insolvent shail then terminate end be
void.

(2) Where, at the time of the insolvency the work was
published and put on the market, the Official Assignee is
entitled to sell, or authorise the sale or reproduction ot,
any copies of the published work, or to perform or autho-
rise the performance of the said work, but there shall be
paid to the author or his heirs such sums by way of royal-
ties or share of the profits as would have been payable by
the insolvent; and the Official Assignee is not, without the
written consent of the author or his heirs, entitled to assign
the copyright or transfer the interest or to grant any inter-
est therein by licence or otherwise, except upon terms that
will guarantee to the author or his heirs payment by way
of royalties or share of the profits at a rate not less than
that which such insolvent was liable to pay, any contract
between the author or his heirs and such insolvent shall
then terminate and be void, except as to the disposal, under
this sub-section, of copies of the said work published and
put on the market before the insolvency.

(3) The Official Assignee shall offer in writing to the
author or his heirs the right to purchase the manufactured


69

er marketable copies of the copyright work comprised in
the estate of the insolvent at such price and upon such
terms and conditions as the Official Assignee may deem
fair and proper before disposing of such manu-
factured and marketable copies in the manner laid down
in this section.

Disclaimer of property and rescission of contracts
65. (1) Where any part of the property of an insol- Disclaimer

i of onerous
vent consists of— हि property.

(i) land of any tenure burdened with onerous [New] 4
covenants; 8. 62,

(ii) shares or stocks in companies;
(iti) unprofitable contracts; or
(iv) any other property that is unsaleable, or
not readily saleable, by reason of its binding tne
possessor thereof to the performance of any onerous
act or to the payment of any sum of money,
the Official Assignee may, notwithstanding that he may
have endeavoured to sell or have taken possession of the
property, or exercised any act of ownership in relaticn
thereto, but subject always to the provisions hereinafter
contained in that behalf, by writing signed by him, at any
time within twelve months after the insolvent has been
adjudged insolvent or within such extended period as may
be allowed by the court, disclaim the property:

Provided that where any such property has not ecme
to the knowledge of the Official Assignee within one
month after such adjudication as aforesaid, he may dis-
claim the property at any time within twelve months after
he has first become aware thereof, or within such exten-
ded period as may be allowed by the court.

(2) The disclaimer shall operate to determine, as from
the date thereof, the rights, interests and liabilities of the
insolvent and his property in or in respect of the pro-
perty disclaimed. and shall also discharge the Official
Assignee from all personal liability in respect of the pro-
perty disclaimed as from the date when the property
vested in him, but shall not, except so far as is necessary
for the purpose of releasing the insolvent and his pro-
perty and the Official Assignee from liability, affect the
rights or liabilities of any other person,

66. The Official Assignee shall not be entitled to dis- Disclaimer
claim any leasehold interest without the leave of the of lease-
court, except in any cases which may be prescribed; and holds.
the court may, before or on granting such leave, require iw “)
such notices to be given to persons interested, and impose P.
such terms as a condition of granting leave, and make G
such orders with respect to fixtures, tenant’s improve-
ments and other matters arising out of the tenancy, as the
court thinks just.



Power to
call on
Official As-
signee to
disclaim,
[New]
Of. 8. 64,
TA.

Power for
court to
rescind con-
tract,
{New]

Ch. 8. 655
PTA.

Power for
court to |
make vesting
order in
Tespect of
disclaimed
property.
{New]

Cf. 8. 66,
P.T.A,

70

67. The Official Assignee shall not be entitled to dis-
claim any property in pursuance of section 65 in any case
where an application in writing has been made to the
Official Assignee by any person interested in the property
requiring him to decide whether he will disclaim, and
the Official Assignee has for a period of twenty-eight days
after the receipt of the application, or such extended
period as may be allowed by the court, declined or neg-
fected to give notice that he disclaims the property; and
in the case of a contract, if the Official Assignee, after such
application as aforesaid, does not within the said period
or extended period disclaim the contract, he shall be deem-
ed to have adopted it.

68. The court may, on the application of any person
who is, as against the Official Assignee, entitled to the
benefit or subject to the burden of a contract made with
the insolvent, make an order rescinding the contract on
such terms as to payment by or to either party of damages
for the non-performance of the contract, or otherwise, as
to the court may seem equitable, and any damages pay-
able under the order to any such person may be proved
by him as a debt under the insolvency.

69. (1) The court may, on the application of any person
claiming either any interest in any disclaimed property
or under any liability not discharged by this Act in res-
pect of any disclaimed property, and on hearing such per-
sons as it thinks fit, make an order for the vesting of the
property in or delivery thereof to any person entitled
thereto, or to whom it may seem just that the same shoula
be delivered by way of compensation for such liability
as aforesaid, or a trustee for him, and on such terms as
the court thinks just; and on any such vesting order being
made, the property comprised therein shall vest accord-
ingly in the person therein named in that behalf without
any transfer for the purpose:

Provided that—

(a) where the property disclaimed is of a lease-
hold nature, the court shall not make a vesting order
in favour of any person claiming under the insolvent,
whether as sub-lessee or as mortgagee, except upcn
the terms of making such person subject to the same
liabilities and obligations as the insolvent was subject
to under the lease in respect of the property at the
date when the insolvency petition was filed; and

(b) any sub-lessee or mortgagee failing to apply
or or declining to accept a vesting order upon suck
t 5 shall be excluded from all interest in and se-
curity upon the property; and

(c) if there is no person claiming under the in-
solvent who has applied for and is willing to accept
an order upon such terms, the court shall have



5 of 1908.

71

power to vest the insolvent’s interest in the property
in any person liable either personally or in a repre-
sentative character, and either alone or jointly with
the insolvent, to perform the lessee’s covenants in
such lease, freed and discharged from all estates, en-
cumbrances and interests created therein by the in-
solvent. '

(2) The court may, if it thinks fit, modify the terrns
prescribed by the proviso to sub-section (1) so as to make
a person in whose behalf the vesting order may be made
subject only to the same liabilities and obligations as if
the lease had been assigned to him at the date when the
insolvency petition was filed, and (if the case so requires)
as if the lease had comprised only the property comprised
in the vesting order.

Information regarding property

70. (1) The court may, on the application of the Offi- Power to
cial Assignee or of any creditor who has proved his debt, require _
at any time after an order of adjudication has been made, information
summon before it in the prescribed manner the insolvent, Ineclvent’s
or any person known or suspected to have in his possession propetty.
any property belonging to the insolvent or supposed to ve [S. 598 (1)
indebted to the insolvent, or any person whom the court ae 372)
may deem capable of giving information respecting the pra.”
insolvent or his dealings or property; and the court may
require any such person to produce any documents in his
custody or power relating to the insolvent or his dealirgs
or property.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 19 of
Order 16 in the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, a person residing at any place in the terri-
tories to which this Act extends may be summoned under
sub-section (1).

(3) If any person summoned under sub-section (1), is. 593 (2)
after having been tendered a reasonable sum, refuses tc ८ रो 36(2),
come before the court............ at the time appointed, 97172
or refuses to produce any such document, having no law-
ful impediment made known to and allowed by the court
bese ee eens , the court..........may, by warrant, cause
him to be apprehended and brought up for examination.

(4) The court............ may examine any person So [s. 598 (3),
brought before it concerning the insolvent, his dealings or ८ |
property, and such person may be represented by a Tegal है. 363)»
practitioner: _

(5) If the person summoned under sub-section (1) [New]
denies that he owes any money to the insolvent or that he
is in possession of any property belonging to the insol-
vent, the court may, in its discretion, and subject to. the
provisions of the proviso to section 99, decide the dispute.


72

{New} (6) If on his examination any such person admits, or
49.5 364s if the court under sub-section (5) decides, that he is in-
“ou debted to the insolvent, the court may, on the application
of the Official Assignee order him to pay to the Official
Assignee, at such time and in such manner as to the court
may seem just, the amount in which he is indebted, or
any part thereof, either in full discharge of the whole
amount or not, as the court thinks fit, with or without

costs of the examination.

Wer] ), (7) If on his examination any such person admits,
he, 309» or if the court under sub-section (5) decides, that he has

in his possession any property belonging to the insolvent,
the court may, on the application of the Official Assignee,
order him to deliver to the Official Assignee that property,
or any part thereof, at such time, in such manner and on
such terms as to the court may seem just.

(8) Orders made under sub-sections (6) and (7)
shall be executed in the same manner as decrees for the
payment of money or for the delivery of property under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, respectively.

[New]
of 8. 36(6),

[New] (9) Any person making any payment or delivery in

Fes 30?» pursuance of the order made under sub-section (6) or

ow“ sub-section (7) shall, by such payment or delivery, be
discharged from all liability whatsoever in respect of any
such debt or property.

power 71, The court shall have the same powers to issue com-

missions. missions and letters of request for the examination on com-

Cf.s. 37, mission or otherwise of any person liable to examination

PTA. under section 70 as it has for the examination of witnesses
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

Distribution of property

Friority of 72. (1) In the distribution of the property of the in-

[s, 61, P.A] Solvent, there shall be paid in priority to all other debts—

SES 4 (a) all debts due to the Government or to any
local authority;

(b) all salary or wages.........- of any clerk,
servant or labourer, in respect of services rendered to
the insolvent during four months before the date of
the presentation of the petition, not exceeding three
hundred rupees for each such clerk, and one hundred
rupees for each such servant or labourer; and

(c) rent due to a landlord from the insolvent:

Provided that the amount payable under this ciause
shall not exceed one month’s rent.

(2) The debts specified in sub-section (/) shall rank
equally between themselves, and shall be paid in full, un-
less the property of the insolvent is insufficient to meet

5 of 1908.

5 of 1908.


73

them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions
between themselves.

(3) Subject to the retention of such sums as may be
necessary for the expenses of administration or otherwise,
the debts specified in sub-section (7) shall be discharged
forthwith in so far as the property of the insolvent is suffi-
cient to meet them.

(4) In the case of partners, the partnership property
shall be applicable in the first instance in payment of the
partnership debts, and the separate property of each par-
tner shall be applicable in the first instance in payment of
his separate debts.

(5) Where there is a surplus of the separate property
of the partners, it shall be dealt with as part of the part-
nership property; and where there is a surplus of the
partnership property, it shall be dealt with as part of the
respective separate property in proportion to the rights and
interests of each partner in the partnership.

Explazation.—Where the debtor is adjudged insolvent
on a petition presented by the holder of a decree obtained
against a partner of the firm, the decree shall, for the
purposes of sub-section (4) and of this sub-section, be trea-
ted as a separate debt of that partner, notwithstanding
that it is passed on a debt on which a decree could have
been passed against the firm.

(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, all debts
proved in insolvency shall be paid rateably according to
the amounts of such debts respectively and without any
preference.

(7) Where there is any surplus after payment of the
foregoing debts, it shall be applied in payment of interes?
from the date on which the debtor is adjudged an insol-
vent at the rate of six per centum per annum on all debts
proved in the insolvency.

73. After an order of adjudication has been made no Rent due
distress for rent due before such order shall be made before ad-
upon the goods or effects of the insolvent, unless the order रा
be annulled, but the landlord or party to whom the rent Gf. s. 50,

may be due shall be entitled to prove in respect of :uch P.T.A.
rent. |

74. Where one partner in a firm is adjudged insol- joint and
vent, a creditor to whom the insolvent is indebted separate
jointly with the other partners in the firm properties.
or any of them shall not receive any dividend out of New
the separate property of the insolvent until all the sepa- P.T.A.

rate creditors have received the full amount of their res-
pective debts. हु


74

Caleulation 75. (1) In the calculation and distribution of dividends,
t eae the Official Assignee shall retain under his control suffi-
Gf.s. 71, cient assets to meet—
pra (a) debts provable in insolvency and appearing,
eo oe from the insolvent’s statements or otherwise, to be
—— due to persons resident in places so distant that in the
ordinary course of communication they have not had
sufficient time to tender their proofs;
(b) debts provable in insolvency the subject of
claims not yet determined;
(c) disputed proofs or claims; and
(d) the expenses necessary for the administra-
tion of the estate or otherwise.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (J), all
money realised by the Official Assignee shall be distribu-
ted as dividends.

Right of 76. Any creditor who has proved his debt after the dec-
creditor who laration of any dividend or dividends shall be entitled to
has proved be paid, out of any money for the time being under the
his dept ae control of the Official Assignee, any dividend cr divi-
tion of dends which he may have failed to receive, before that
dividend. | money is applied to the payment of any future dividend
[s. 63, P-A.] or dividends; but he shall not be entitled to disturb the
ean 75 distribution of any dividend declared before his debt was

a 65; Enge proved by reason that he has not participated therein.
lish Act.

Final divi- 77, (1) When the Official Assignee has realised all the
dend. property of the insolvent, or so much thereof as can, in his

[s- S4, earlier opinion, be realised without needlessly protracting the
ae 4300, Proceedings in insolvency, he shall, with the leave of the
Pra.” court, declare a final dividend; but before so doing, he shall
give notice in the manner prescribed to the persons whose
claims to be creditors have been notified but not proved,
that if they do not prove their claims, to the satisfaction
of the court, within the time limited by the notice, he shall
proceed to make a final dividend without regard to their
claims.
[s. 64, latter (2) After the expiration of the time so limited, or, if
pat 9302) the court, on application by any such claimant, grants him
‘A. further time for establishing his claim, then, on the expira-
tion of such further time, the property of the insolvent
shall be divided among the creditors who have proved
their debts, without regard to the claims of any sther per-
sons.

No suit for 78. No suit for a dividend shall lie against the Official

aN Assignee; but where the Official Assignee refuses to pay

6. a4. -] any dividend, the court may, on the application of any

PTA. creditor who is aggrieved by such refusal, order him to pay
such dividend and interest thereon at such rate as may be
prescribed for the time that it is withheld, and the costs
of the application.


75

79. (1) The court may, on the application of the Official Management
Assignee, appoint the insolvent himself to superintend the allowance to
management of the property of the insolvent or of any part insolvent,
thereof, or to carry on the trade, if any, of the insolvent Is. 66, P.AJ
for the benefit of the creditors, and in any other respect Cf. s. 75,
to aid in administering the property in such manner and P.T.A.
on such terms as the court may direct.

(2) The court may, from time to time, make such allow-
ance as it may think just to the insolvent out of his pro-
perty for the support of himself and his family, or in con-
sideration of his services if he is engaged in winding up
his estate; but any such allowance may, at any time, be
varied or determined by the court.

80. The insolvent shall be entitled to any surplus re- Right of
maining after payment in full of his creditors with interest insolvent to
as provided by this Act, ang of the expenses of the pro- payment in
ceedings taken thereunder. full. PA

3. 67, P.A.)-

Explanation—In this section, “surplus” includes any & 4 76.
property which has been acquired by or has devolved on P.T.
the insolvent after the commencement of the insolvency
and before his discharge and which has not been divided
amongst his creditors,

81. (1) Where the Official Assignee has, under his con- Credit to
trol, any dividend which has remained unclaimed for Government,
fifteen years from the date of declaration or such less Sividends.
period as may be prescribed, he shall pay the same to the [New]
account and credit of the State Government, unless the C/. s. 122,
court otherwise directs, P.T.A.

(2) Any person claiming to be entitled to any monies s. 153 Eng.
paid to the account and credit of the State Government Act.
under sub-section (1), may apply to the court for an order Gs S123»
for payment to him of the same; and the court, if satisfied 7 ४
that the person claiming is entitled, shall make an order
for payment to him of the sum due:

Provided that, before making an order for the payment
of a sum which has been carried to the account and credit
of the State Government, the court shall cause a notice to
be served on such officer as the State Government may
appoint in this behalf, calling on the officer to show cause,
within one month from the date of the service of the
notice, why the order should not be made,

82. (1) The court may, if it so thinks fit, authorise the Committee
creditors who have proved to appoint from among the cre- of inspec-
ditors or holders of general proxies or general powers-of- rons A
attorney from such creditors, a committee of inspection for (67 7
the purpose of superintending the administration of the Of. 88. 88
insolvent’s property by the Official Assignee: and 89,

Provided that a creditor, who is appointed a member
of a committee of inspection, shall not be qualified to act
until he has proved.

42 M of L—6



Summary
administra-
tion.

[s. 74, open-
ing lines,

PA]
Cf. 8. 106(1),
opening
lines,

PTAA.

[s. 74@),
P.A. omitted]
f, TAC),

Al]

[s. 7408),
B.A. omit-
ted.]

| 740०),
हर

of. 3. 106
MOP.T.A.
28 to
“where”,
see P.T.A.

हि. 74(),
P.AJ

[New]
Cf. s. 129(4),
Eng. Act.

[Ne
Gr. 106

M@,
PTA.

[s. 74),
P.A.

Gf. 8. 106 (1)
@), P.T.A.

76

(2) The committee shall have such powers of control
over the proceedings of the Official Assignee as may be
prescribed.

CHAPTER VIII
Summary ADMINISTRATION

83. (1) When a petition is presented by or against a
debtor, if the court is satisfied by affidavit or otherwise
that the property of the debtor is not likely to exceed in
value—

(a) in Presidency Towns, five thousand rupees or
such other less amount as may be prescribed, and

(b) elsewhere, two thousand rupees, the court
may make an order that the debtor’s estate be admin-
istered in a summary manner, and thereupon the pro-
visions of this Act shall be subject to the following
modifications, namely:—

(i)_on the admission of a petition by a debtor,
the Official Assignee shall forthwith become the
receiver of the properties of the debtor, with such
of the powers conferable on a receiver appointed
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as the
court may direct;

(it) no examination of the insolvent shall be
held except on the application of a creditor or the
Official Assignee;

(iii) the property of the insolvent shall Ee
realised with all reasonable dispatch and there-
after, where practicable, distributed in a single
dividend;

(iv) the insolvent shal! apply for his discharge
within six months from the date of adjudication;

(v) there shall be no committee of inspection,
but the Official Assignee may, with the sanction
of the court, do all things which may be done by
the Official Assignee with the permission of the
committee of inspection;

(vi) no appeal shall lie from any order of the
court, except by leave of the appellate court; and

_, (ett) such other modifications as may be pres-
cribed with the view of saving expense and simpli-
fying procedure.

5 of 1908,


77

(2)... ..« The court may, at any time, if it thinks fit, [s. 743 Pro-
revoke an order for the summary administration of an in- ८6 5. Ad. 2),
solvent’s estate, and thereafter the ordinary procedure pro- P.T.A,
vided for in this Act shall be followed in regard to the in-

solvent’s estate.

CHAPTER IX

ADMINISTRATION IN INSOLVENCY OF ESTATES OF DECEASED
पु PERSONS

84. (1) Any creditor of a deceased debtor whose debt Administra-
would have been sufficient to support an insolvency peti- insolvency
tion against the debtor if the debtor had been alive, may of estates of
present to the court within the limits of whose ordinary deceased
original civil jurisdiction the debtor resided or carried on Persons.
business for the greater part of the six months immediate- [New] 108.
ly prior to his decease, a petition in the prescribed form P.T.A
praying for an order for the administration of the estate
of the deceased debtor under this Act.

(2) Upon the prescribed notice being given to the legal
representative of the deceased debtor, the court may, upon
proof of the petitioner’s debt, unless the court
is satisfied that there is a reasonable probability that the
estate will be sufficient for the payment of the debts owing
by the deceased, make an order for the administration in
insolvency of the deceased debtor’s estate, or may upon
cause shown dismiss the petition with or without costs.

(3) A petition for administration under this section
shall not be presented to the court after proceedings have
been commenced in any court of justice for the adminis-
tration of the deceased debtor’s estate; but that court may,
in that case, on proof that the estate is insufficient to pay
its debts, transfer the proceedings to the court exercising
jurisdiction in insolvency under this Act, and thereupon
the last-mentioned court may make an order for the ad-
ministration of the estate of the deceased debtor, and the
like consequences shall ensue as under an administration
order made on the petition of a creditor,

85. (1) Upon an order being made for the administra- Vesting of
tion of a deceased debtor’s estate under section 84, the pro- estate and
perty of the debtor shall vest in the Official Assignee, and mode of
he shall forthwith proceed to realise and distribute the tose

same in accordance with the provisions of this Act. [New]
8. 109
BTA,

(2) With the modification hereinafter mentioned, all the Of. s. 15504),
provisions of this Act relating to the administration of the Australian
property of an insolvent and to Official Assignee, shall, so Act.
for as the same are applicable, apply to the case of such
administration order in like manner as to an order of
adjudication under this Act.


Ch. $. 155
(4A), Aus-
tralian Act.

Payment or
transfer by
legal re-

presentative. h

[New]
Cf. ५. 110,
BTA,

Saving of
Jurisdiction
of Adminis-
trator-
General.
[New]

Cf. 8. IIT,
P.T.A.

Official
Assignees,
[New]

Cf. 8.77)»
part, P.T.A.
Cf. Article
229, Consti-
tution,

Of. 8. 7700,
part, P.T.A.

78

(3) The provisions of sections 52 to 59 and section 70
shall, so far as they are applicable, apply to the case of
such administration order in like manner as to an order of
adjudication under this Act, and for the purpose of appli-
cation of the said provisions to such case, references in the
said provisions to an insolvency petition shall be construed
as references to a petition under section 84.

(4) In the administration of the property of the deceas-
ed debtor under an order of administration, the Official
assignee shall have regard to any claims by the legal repre-
sentative of the deceased debtor to payment of the proper
funeral and testamentary expenses incurred by him in and
about the debtor’s estate; and those claims shall be deemed
a preferential debt under the order, and be payable in fuil,
out of the debtor’s estate, in priority to all other debts.

(5) If, on the administration of the deceased debtor’s
estate, any surplus remains in the hands of the Official
Assignee after payment in full of all the debts due from
the debtor, together with the costs of the administration
and interest as provided by this Act in case of insolvency,
such surplus shall be paid over to the legal representative
of the deceased debtor’s estate, or dealt with in such other
manner as may be prescribed.

86. (1) After notice of the presentation of a petition
under section 84, no payment or transfer of property made
by the legal representative shall operate as a discharge to

im as between himself and the Official Assignee.

(2) Save as aforesaid, nothing in section 84 or section
85 or this section shall invalidate any payment made or act
or thing done in good faith by the legal representative.

87. The provisions of sections 84, 85 and 86 shall not
apply to any case in which probate or letters of adminis-
tration to the estate of a deceased debtor have been grant-
ed to an Administrator-General,

CHAPTER X
OFFICIAL ASSIGNEES AND SPECIAL MANAGERS

88. (1) The Chief Justice of each of the High Courts at
Bombay, Calcutta and Madras—

(a) shall appoint an officer called the Official
Assignee, who shall have and exercise all the jurisdic-
tion and powers conferred on Official Assignees under
this Act within the local limits of the ordinary original
civil jurisdiction of that High Court;

(b) may appoint such persons as he thinks fit as
Deputy Official Assignees, to discharge, within the
local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction
of that High Court, such functions of the Official
Assignee as may be defined by such Chief Justice.


79

(2) The Chief Justice of each High Court— SN 7 (1),

(a) shall appoint, for each district outside the
Presidency-towns, an officer called the Official
Assignee, who shall have and exercise all the jurisdic-
tion and powers conferred on the Official Assignee
under this Act within the local limits of that district;

(b) may appoint such persons as he thinks fit to
be Deputy Official Assignees, to discharge, within the
local limits of any district outside the Presidency-towns
such functions of the Official Assignee as may be defin-
ed by the Chief Justice.

89. (1) The Official Assignee shall be a corporation sole Official
by the name of the Official Assignee of............... (namin; Assignee to
the particular place), and as such Official Assignee shall tion sole,
have a perpetual succession and an official seal, and may [New]
sue and be sued in his corporate name, and may hold pro- Cf. s. 83,
perty of every description, make contracts, enter into any wan ae
engagements binding on himself and his successors in Pra, °
office, and do all other acts necessary or expedient to be inserted in
done in the execution of his office. Bombay and
Madras.
Cf. 8. 76,
Eng. Act.
(2) In all suits or proceedings by or against such Official [New]
Assignee, there shall be inserted after his official title the Cf s- oR
description “as Official Assignee of the property of...... , Part, P.T.A.
an insolvent (naming the particular insolvent)”.

90. An Official Assignee may, for the purpose of affida- Power to
vits verifying proofs, petitions or other proceedings under *¢minister
this Act, administer oaths, Cf. 8. 78,

PAT.
91. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Official puties and
Assignee shall, with all convenient speed, realise the pro- powers of
perty of the debtor and distribute dividends among the Official As-

creditors entitled thereto, and for that purpose— PAY
(a) may sell all or any part of the property of the FS, १0%
insolvent; _
(b) may give receipts for any money received by
him; and

(c) may, by leave of the court, do all or any of the
following things, namely:—

(i) carry on the business of the insolvent so
far as may be necessary for the beneficial winding
up of the same;

(ii) institute, defend or continue any suit or
other legal proceeding relating to the property of
the insolvent;

(iii) employ a legal practitioner or other
agent to take any proceedings or do any business
which may be sanctioned by the court; :


80

(iv) accept as the consideration for the sale
of any property of the insolvent a sum of money
payable at a future time or fully paid shares, de-
bentures or debenture stock in any limited com-
pany, subject to such stipulations as to security
and otherwise as the court thinks fit;

(v) mortgage or pledge any part of the pro-
perty of the insolvent for the purpose of raising
money for the payment of his debts, or for the
purpose of carrying on the business;

(vi) refer any dispute to arbitration, and com-
promise all debts, claims and liabilities, on such
terms as may be agreed upon; and

(vii) divide in its existing form amongst the
creditors, according to its estimated value, any
property which, from its peculiar nature or other
special circumstances, cannot readily or advan-
tageously be sold.

Xow] (2) The duties of an Official Assignee shall have rela-
Jf. 790)» tion to the conduct of the insolvent as well as to the admin-
PTA. istration of his estate.

(3) In particular, it shall be the duty of the Official
Assignee—

[New] 5 {a} to investigate the conduct of the insolvent and
GES 79> to report to the court upon any application for dis-

charge, stating whether there is reason to believe that
the insolvent has committed any act which constitutes
an offence under this Act or under sections 421 to 424
ot the Indian Penal Code in connection with his in-
solvency or which would justify the court in refusing,
suspending or qualifying an order for his discharge;

(b) to make such other reports concerning the
conduct of the insolvent as the court may direct or as
may be prescribed; and

(c) to take such part and give such assistance in
relation to the prosecution of any fraudulent insolvent
as the court may direct or as may be prescribed.

ew) 682) (4) The Official Assignee shall account to the court and

Ppa. pay over all monies and deal with all securities in such

manner as is prescribed or as the court directs.

Ch. 8: 80, (5) The Official Assignee shall, whenever required by

PTA. any creditor so to do, and on payment by the creditor of
the prescribed fee, furnish and send to the creditor by post

a list of the creditors, showing in the list the amount of
the debt due to each of the creditors,

Declaration 92. (1) The Official

ration Assignee shall, with all ient
@ distrib A ५ all convenien’
fon oP speed, declare and distribute dividends amongst the cre-
ern ditors who have proved their debts,

lew

of. 8. 69, (2) The first dividend (if an 1
Ch 8 69 distributed कलम (i 'y) shall be declared and be

in one year after the adjudication, unless

45 of 1860.


81

. . . te is suffi-
the Official Assignee satisfies the court that there is sul
cient reason for postponing the declaration to a later date.

(3) Subsequent dividends shall, in the absence of suffi-
cient reason to the contrary, be declared and be payable at
intervals of not more than six months.

(4) Before declaring a dividend, the Official Assignee
shall cause notice of his intention to do so to be published
in the prescribed manner, and shall also send reasonable
notice thereof to each creditor mentioned in the insolvent’s
schedule who has not proved his debt.

(5) When the Official Assignee has declared a dividend,
he shall send tc each creditor who has proved a notice
showing the amount of the dividend, and when and how
it is provable, and, if required by any creditor, a statement
in the prescribed form as to the particulars of the estate.

93. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the
directions of the court, the Official Assignee shall in the
administration of the property of the insolvent and in the
distribution thereof amongst his creditcrs, have regard to
any resolution that may be passed by the creditors at a
meeting.

(2) The Official Assignee may, from time to time, sum-
mon meetings of the creditors for the purpose of ascertain-
ing their wishes, and it shall be his duty to summon meet-
ings at such times as the creditors, by resolution at any
meeting, or the court, may direct, or whenever requested
in writing to do so by one-fourth in value of the creditors
who have proved.

(3) The Official Assignee may apply to the court for
directions in relation to any particular matter arising un-
der the insolvency.

(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Official
Assignee shall use his own discretion in the management
of the estate and its distribution among the creditors.

94. (1) If any Official Assignee does not faithfully per-
form his duties and duly observe all the requirements
imposed on him by any enactment, rules or otherwise, with
respect to the performance of his duties, or if any com-
plaint is made to the court by any creditor in regard there-
to. the court shall inquire into the matter and take such
action thereon as may be deemed expedient.

(2) The court may at any time require any Official
Assignee to answer any inquiry made by it in relation te
any insolvency in which he is engaged, and may examine
him or any other person on oath concerning the insolvency.

(3) The court may also direct an investigation to be
made of the books and vouchers of the Official Assignee.

Discretion-
ary powers
and control
thereof.
Ch. s. 85,
कप.

Control of
court.

Cf. s. 875
PTA.


82

Power to 95. (1) If in any case the court, having regard to the
हम nature of the debtor’s estate or business or to the interests
manager, of the creditors generally, is of opinion that a special mana-
[New] ger of the estate or business ought to be appointed to assist

16 19, the Official Assignee, the court may appoint a manager
cae thereof accordingly to act for such time as the court may
authorise, and to have such powers of the Official Assignee
as may be entrusted to him by the said Assignee or as

the court may direct.

(2) The special manager shall give security and fur-
nish accounts in such manner as the court may direct, and
shall receive such remuneration as the court may deter-
mine.

Delegation 96. The High Court may ,..००००: ० ४०:०० ०० ००५ direct
ot हद that, in any matters in respect of which jurisdiction is
Assignee. given to any* court by this Act, the Official Assignee shall,
i 80(1), subject to the directions of the court, have all or any of the
| following powers, namely:—

(a) to frame schemes
(b) to make interim orders in any case of urgency;

and
(०) to hear and determine any unopposed or ex
parte application.

CHAPTER XI

JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE

Courts hav- 97, (1) The courts having jurisdiction in insolvency un-
ing jurisdic der this Act shall be—

selvency. (a) in the Presidency-towns, the High Courts in
i 3(1) +९.8.) the exercise of their ordinary original civil jurisdic-
Pr tion, and

(8) in other places, the district courts:

Provided that the State Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, invest any court subordinate to
a district court with jurisdiction in any class of cases, and
any court so invested shall, within the local limits of its
jurisdiction, have concurrent jurisdiction with the district
court under this Act.

9 3, (2) For the purposes of this Act, a court of Small
AL Causes shall be deemed to be subordinate to the district
court.
Restrictions 98. (1) The court shall not have jurisdiction to make
on jutisdic- an order of adjudication, unless—
[s. 11, main (a) the debtor is at the time of the presentation
PA] of the insolvency petition, imprisoned in execution of

*Ror “the court”, the words “any court” have been used, to avoid the
interpretation that article “the” refers to “High Courts’


83

the decree or order of a court for the payment of
money in any prison to which debtors are ordinarily
committed by the court in the exercise of its original
jurisdiction; or

(b) the debtor, within a year before the date of
the presentation of the insolvency petition, has ordina-
rily resided or had a dwelling house or has carried on
business either in person or through an agent within
the limits of the original civil jurisdiction of the court;
or

(c) the debtor personally works for gain within
those limits; or

(d) in the case of a petition by or against a firm
of debtors, the firm has carried on business within a
year before the date of the presentation of the insol-
vency petition within those limits.

Explanation.—In this sub-section, “original jurisdic-
tion”, in relation to High Courts, means ordinary original
jurisdiction.
(2) Where the debtor is not a citizen of India, no court [New]
in the territories to which this Act extends shall have Cf. $ 40)
jurisdiction unless— ©; English
(a) the debtor, within one year before the date of
the presentation of the petition, had ordinarily resided
or had a dwelling-house or place of business or had
carried on business personally or by means of an agent
cr manager, within the said territories; or
(b) a firm of which the debtor is, or within the
said one year has been, a partner, has carried on busi-
ness by means of a partner or partners or an agent or
manager within the said territories.

(3) .. No objection as to the place of [६ 11, pro-
presentati shall be allowed by any appellate or re- viso, PA.)
visional court unless such objection was taken in the
court by which the petition was heard at the earliest
possible opportunity, and unless there has been a con-
sequent failure of justice.

99. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the court Jurisdiction
shall have full power to decide all questions whether cf to decide
title or of priority or of any nature whatsover, and whe- arene
ther involving matters of law or of fact, which may arise I >
in any case of insolvency coming within the cognizance C
of the court, or which the court may deem it necessary or ™:
proper to decide for the purpose of doing complete justice
or making a complete distribution of property in any such
case:

Provided that where the matter in dispute involves the
determination of complicated questions of fact or law, the
court may refer the parties to a civil court for adjudication
of the same:



.T.A,
and Mulla’s

comm

ent

thereon
(p. 22 bot-

tom

PP. 39—43,
50.)

Cf. s.

@), proviso,

Eng.

and

105

Act.

80

General
powers of
courts.

[s. 501),
PA]

Other

Powers.

Cf. s.
(5)s
(7) P.

(6) and

“TAAL

84

Provided, further, that the jurisdiction hereby given
shall not be exercised for the purpose of adjudicating upon
any claim not arising out of the insolvency, unless all par-
ties to the proceeding consent thereto ‘or the money,
money’s worth, or right in dispute does not, in the opinion
of the court, exceed in value five thousand rupees.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and notwith-
standing anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, every such decision shall be final and bind-
ing for all purposes as between, on the one hand, the insol-
vent and the insolvent’s estate and, on the other hand, all
claimants against him or against it and all persons claim-
ing through or under them or any of them.

100. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the court,
in regard to proceedings under this Act, shall have the
same powers and shall follow the same procedure as it has
and follows in the exercise of its original civil jurisdic-
tion.

(2) Subject as aforesaid, High Courts and district courts,
in regard to proceedings under this Act in courts subordi-
nate to them, shall have the same powers and shall follow
the same procedure as they respectively have and follow
in regard to civil suits.

101. (1) The court may at any time amend_any written
process or proceeding under this Act upon such terms, if

४. any, as it thinks fit to impose.

(2) Where by this Act or by rules made under this Act
the time for doing any act or thing (other than the filing of
an appeal)" is limited, the court may extend the time either
before or after the expiration thereof, upon such terms, if
any, as the court thinks fit to impose.

(3) Subject to rules made under this Act, the Court
may in any matter take the whole or any part of the evi-
dence either viva voce or by interrogatories, or upon affi-
davit, or by commission.

(4) For the purpose of approving a composition or
scheme by joint debtors the court may, if it thinks fit, and
on the report of the Official Assignee that it is expedient
so to do, dispense with the public examination of one of the
joint debtors if he is unavoidably prevented from attending
the examination by illness or absence abroad.

1 As to appeals see clause corresponding to s. 78. Provincial Act,


85

102. (1) A High Court exercising jurisdiction under
this Act may, at any time after the presentation of an
insolvency petition, stay any insolvency proceedings pend-
ing against the debtor in any court subject to the superin-
tendence of that High Court, and may, at any time after
the making of an order of adjudication annul an adjudi-
cation against the debtor made by any such court.

(2) Where an adjudication is annulled under sub-sec-
tion (1), all sales and dispositions of property and payments
duly made and all acts done by the court whose order is
annulled, or by the Official Assignee or other person acting
under his authority, shall be valid, but the property vested
in such Assignee shall vest in the Official Assignee appoint-
ed by the High Court for the territorial limits of its ordi-
nary original civil jurisdiction, and the High Court may
make such direction in regard to the custody of such pro-
perty as it thinks fit.

(3) Notice of an order annulling an adjudication under
sub-section (1) shall be published in the Official Gazette
and in such other manner as may be prescribed.

103, No petition, whether presented by a debtor or by
a creditor, shall be withdrawn without the leave of the
court, and no such leave shall be granted after an order of
adjudication has been made.

104, (1) Where two or more insoivency petitions are
presented against the same debtor or where separate peti-
tions are presented against joint debtors, or where joint
debtors present separate petitions, the court may consvli-
date the proceedings or any of them, on such terms as the
court thinks fit.

(2) Where any order of adjudication has been made on
an insolvency petition against or by one partner in a firm,
any other insolvency petition against or by a partner in
the same firm shall be presented in or transferred to the
court in which the first-mentioned petition is in course of
prosecution; and such court may give such directions for
consolidating the proceedings under the petitions as it
thinks just.

105. Where in the case of a petition presented by a cre-
ditor the petitioner does not proceed with due diligence on
his petition, the court may substitute as petitioner any
other creditor to whom the debtor may be indebted in the
amount required by this Act in the case of a petitioning
creditor:

Provided that no such order for substitution shall be
made if the original petition was not maintainable
and the application for substitution is made more
than three months after the date of the act of insolvency
on which the original petition was based.

Powers of
the High
Court to
control in-
solvency
proceedings.

Withdrawal

of petition.
. 149 PAL]

modified.

Cf. ss. 138)

and 15 (2),

P!

m ied.
Consolida-
tion of,
petitions.
[s. 155 PA]
Cf. $. 915
P.T.A.

[New]
Cf. 8. 975

Power to
substitute
petitioner in
certain cases
(8. 16, PAD
Cf. s. 92,
P.T.A.

[New]


£xemption of

corporation,
etc., from
insolvency
proceedings.
[s. 8, P.A.}
Cf. $, 1075
PTA,

Power to
present
petition
against a
partner.

Proceedings
in partner
ship name

or assumed

name.

Cf. Calcutta
rule 151
under the
Presidency
Act,

English rule
285 5
Madras rules.
under the
Presidency
Act, Order
V, rule 5,
and Bombay
rule 154(1),
under” the
Presidency
Act.

86

106. Subject to the provisions of section 108, no insol-
vency petition shall be presented against any corporation
or against any association or company registered under any
enactment for the time being in force.

107. Any creditor whose debt is sufficient to entitle him
to present an insolvency petition against all the partners
in a firm may present a petition against any one or more
of the partners in the firm without including the others.

108. (1) Any two or more persons, being partners, may
take proceedings or be proceeded against under this Act
in the name of the firm:

Previded that in that case the court may, on application
by any person interested, order the names of the persons
who are partners in the firm, to be disclosed in such man-
ner and verified on oath or otherwise as the court may
direct.

(2) Where a mincr has been admitted to the benefits of
partnership in a firm, an order of adjudication made
against the firm shali bind his share but shall not affect
any other property of the minor, nor shall the minor be
deemed to have been adjudged insolvent.

(3) An order of adjudication made against a firm shall
Operate as if it were an order of adjudication made ugainst
each of the persons who, at the date of the order, is a part-
ner in that firm.

(4) Any person carrying on business in a name or style
other than his own may be proceeded against under this
Act in such name ur style:

Provided that in that case the court may, on applica-
tion by any person interested, order the real name of such
person to be disclosed in such manner and verified cn oath
or otherwise as the court may direct.


87

109. The court may, at any time, for sufficient reason, Power aad
make an order staying the proceedings under an insolvency ceedings.
petition, either altogether or for a limited time, on such [New]
terms and subject tc such conditions as the court thinks Cf. s. 94,
just. PTAA.

110. (1) Where the court having jurisdiction in Special prow
insolvency under this Act is a High Court in its ordinary एड 1
original civil jurisdiction, the manner in which such juris- High Coutts
diction may be exercised, may be provided for by rules having juris-
made under this Act. diction in

हे insolvency.
[New]
Cf. ss. 4 and
5; P.T.A,

(2) The Chief Justice may, from time to time, direct os 8. 661)
that, in any matters in respect of which jurisdiction is 7
given to the High Court by this Act, an officer of the court
appointed by him in this behalf shall have all or any of
the powers mentioned in sub-section (3); and any order
made or act done by such officer in the exercise of the said
powers shall be deemed ta be the order or act of the Court.

(3) The powers referred to in sub-section (2) are the GF 8, 82)»
t#lowing, namely:— _
है (a) to hear insolvency petitions presented by
debtors, and to make orders of adjudication thereon;
(b) to hold the public examination of insolvents;
(c) to make any order or exercise any jurisdiction
which is prescribed as proper to be made or exercised
in chambers;

(d) to hear and determine any unopposed or ex-
parte application;

(९) to examine any person summoned by the
court under section 70.

(4) An officer appointed under sub-section (2) shall Cf. s. 6(3),
not have power to commit for contempt of court. PTA.

111. Where there are more respondents than one to a Power to __
petition, the court may dismiss the petition as to one or dismiss pe
more of them without prejudice to the effect of the peti- some res-

tion as against the other or others of them. pondents
only.
New]

Jf. 5. 96,
PTA.

142. If a debtor by or against whom an insolvency peti- Continuance
tion has been presented dies, before or after adjudication, of proced-

the proceedings in the matter shall, unless the court other- (p8h, °%
. . हि death of
wise orders, be continued as if he were alive. debtor.
Is 17, P.A.}
if. S. 93»

P.T.A,


88

Courts tobe 113. All courts having jurisdiction in insolvency and

अदा 0० the officers of such courts, respectively, shall covers tly act

[s.77,P.A] in aid of and be auxiliary to each other in all matters of

Cj.s.126, insolvency, and an order of a court seeking aid with a re-

PTA, quest to another of the said courts shall be deemed suffi-
cient to enable the latter court to exercise, in regard to
the matters directed by the order, such jurisdiction as
either of such courts could exercise in regard to similar
matters within their respective jurisdictions.

Warrants of 114. (1) A warrant of arrest issued by the court may be
insolvency executed in the same manner and subject to the same

iNew] conditions as a warrant of arrest issued under the Code of
Cf. s. 100, Civil Procedure, 1908, may be executed. 5 of 1908.
P.T.AL

(2) A warrant to seize any part of the property of any
insolvent issued by the court under sub-section (1) of
section €1 shali be in the form prescribed and may be
executed in the same manner and subject to the same
conditions as a warrant of attachment of movable property
issued under the said Code may be executed.

(3) A search-warrant issued by the court under sub-
section (2) of section 61 may be executed in such manger
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. के

CHAPTER XII .

APPEAL AND REVIEW

Appeal to 115. Tf the insolvent or any of the creditors or any other’
court against person is aggrieved by any act or decision of the Official
Official As- Assignee, he may appeal to the court, and the court may
signee. confirm, reverse or rsodify the act or decision complained

15,68 RA of, and make such order as it thinks just:
ee on Provided that no appeal under this section shall be

part, P.T.A. entertained after the expiration of twenty-one days from
the date of the act or decision complained of.

Appeals 116. (1) The debtor, any creditor, the Official Assignee
against orders Or any other person aggrieved by a decision come to or an
oi district order made in the exercise of insolvency jurisdiction by a

courts and है raven
Scbordinate court subordinate to a district court may appeal— है
courts. (a) to the High Court, if the decision or order is
fs. 75, P.A.] specified in the Third Schedule, or

(b) to the district court, in any other case;

and the order of the High Court or the district court upon
such appeal shall be final:

Provided that the High Court, for the purpose of satis-
fying itself that an order made in any appeal decided hy
the district court was according to law, may call for the
fase and pass such order with respect thereto as it thinks

itt


5 of 1908.

89

«Provided, further, that any such person aggrieved by a
det ys ion of the district court on appeal from a decision of a
subordinate court under section 99 may appeal to the High
Court on any of the grounds mentioned in sub-section (1)
of section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

(2) Any such person aggrieved by any such decision or
order of a district court as is specified in the Third Sche-
dule, come to or made otherwise than in appeal from an
order made by a subordinate court, may appeal to the High
Court.

(3) Any such person aggrieved by any other order made
by a district court otherwise than in appeal from an order
made by a subordinate court may appeal to the High Court
beens by leave ........0f the High Court; and in every
case in which the High Court admits such appeal, such leave
shall be deemed to have been granted.

(4) The periods of limitation for appeals to the district
court and to the High Court under this section shall be
thirty days and ninety days, respectively.

117. (1) An appeai shall, at the instance of any person Appeals
aggrieved by an order made by an officer of the court against order
empowered under sub-section (2) of section 110, lie to the fhe High’
Judge assigned for the transaction and disposal of matters Court in
in insolvency, and no appeal shall lie against the order of insolvency.
the Judge passed in such appeal except by leave of such ew) 8(2)

Judge (a), P.T.A.

(2) Save as provided in sub-section (1), an appeal shall S&S; 80200)
lie, at the instance of any person aggrieved by an order 7 “AL
made by a Judge of the High Court in the exercise of the
jurisdiction conferred by this Act, in the same way and
subject to the same provisions as an appeal from an order
made by a Judge in the exercise of the ordinary original
civil jurisdiction of that Court.

(3) The period of limitation for an appeal under sub- s. ror part,
section (1) shall be twenty days from the date of the order. P.T.A.

(4) The period of limitation for an appeal under sub- Cf. s. ror,
section (2) shall be the same as that for appeals against Part, P.T.A.
judgments of a Judge of the High Court passed in the
exercise of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of that
court.

118. The court may review, rescind or vary any order poeview,
made by it under its insolvency jurisdiction. [New] |
Cf... 80),
P.T.A.
and 5. 108
(2), English
Act,


Punishment
for certain
offences.

[s. 69, P.A.]
Cf. ss. 33 (4)
and 103,
P.T.A,

Ch. 5. 154
(1)(1), Eng-
lish Act.

As to burden
of proof,

see English
Act.

Of. 8. 154
(1) (9), (70)
and (11),
English Act
mentioning
period also
before peti-
tion,

Of. s. 154
@; (4) and
(5) English
Act men-
tioning also
period before
presentation.

Cf. 8. 154
(1006), Eng-
lish Act.
[New]

Cf. $. 154
(1), (7) Eng-
lish Act.
[New]

90

CHAPTER XIII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

119. Any person adjudged insolvent who—

(a) whether before or after the making of the
order of adjudication wilfully fails to perform the
duties imposed on him by section 14, or

(b) wilfully “fails to deliver up possession of any
part of his property which is divisible among the cre-
ditors under this Act and which is for the time being
in his possession or under his control to the Official
Assignee or to any person authorised by him to take
possession of it, unless he proves that he had no intent
to defraud; or

[er whether before or after the
making of the order of adjudication—

(i) has destroyed or otherwise wilfully pre-
vented or purposely withheld the production of
any document relating to such of his affairs as are
subject to investigation under this Act, or

(ii) has kept or caused to be kept false books;
or पु

(iti) has made false entries in, or withheld
entries from, or wilfully altered or falsified, any
document relating to such of his affairs as are
subject to investigation under this Act;

and is unable to prove that he had no intent to conceal
the state of his affairs or to defeat the objects of this
Act; or

(d) whether before or after the making of the
order of adjudication—

(i) has discharged or concealed any debt due
to or from him; or

(ii) has made away with, charged, mortgaged
or concealed any part of his property of any kind
whatsoever; and is unable to prove that he has no
intent to diminish the sum to be divided among
his creditors or to give an undue preference to
any of his creditors; or

(e) makes any material omission in any statement
relating to his affairs, unless he proves that he had no
intent to defraud; or

(f) knowing or believing that a false debt has
been proved by any person under the insolvency, fails
for the period of a month to inform the Official As-
signee thereof; or


91

after the presentation of an insolvency peti- Cf. s- i.

¥en 2 or against him, prevents the production of any (HO) E

ok, document, paper, or writing affecting or relating [New]
to his property or affairs, unless he proves that he had
no intent to conceal the state of his affairs or to defeat

the law; or

(h) after the presentation of an insolvency peti- Cf. s. 1
tion by or against him, or at any meeting of his creditor (G2), E
within twelve months next before such presentation, New}
attempts to account for any part of his properiy by
fictitious losses or expenses; or

(i) within twelve months next before the presen- Cf. s. 154
tation of an insolvency petition by or against him, or 7003
after the presentation of an insolvency petition and pNewy)
before the making of the order of adjudication, by any :
false representation or other fraud, has obtained any
property on credit and has not paid for the same; or

(j) within twelve months next before the presen- Of. s. 154
tation of an insolvency petition by or against him, or ६200 Act.
after the presentation of an insolvency petition and [New]
before the making of an order of adjudication, obtains
‘under the false pretence of carrying on business, and,
if a trader, of dealing in the ordinary way of his trade,
any property on credit and has not paid for the same,
unless he proves that he had no intent to defraud; or

(0) within twelve months next before the presen- Cf. 8. 154
tation of an insolvency petition by or against him, or g oe
after the presentation of an insolvency petition and [New]
before the making of the ‘order of adjudication, pawns,
pledges, or disposes of any property which he has
obtained on credit and has not paid doe, unless, in the
case of a trader, such pawning, pledging, or disposing
is in the ordinary way of his trade, and unless in any
case he proves that he had no intent to defraud; or

(0) is guilty of any false representation or other Cf. s. 154
fraud for the purpose of obtaining the consent of his 10060 Ene-
creditors or any of them to an agreement with refer- [New] "
ence to his affairs or to his insolvency; shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years.

120. If any person who has been adjudged insolvent— Frauds by
insolvents.
(a) in incurring any debt or liability has obtain- [New]

ed credit under false pretences or by means of any g ड. 156,
other fraud; or glish Act.

(0) with intent to defraud his creditors or any (As to levy
of them, has made or caused to be made any gift or Of execution!
transfer cf, or charge on, his property, or has caused Ameniment)
or connived at the levying of any execution against
his property; or

42M of L—7


92

(c) with intent to defraud his creditors, has con-
cealed or removed any part of his property since, or
within two months before, the date of any unsatisfied
judgment or order for payment of money obtained
against him;

8 6 he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years. .

Insolvent 121, (/) Any person who has been adjudged insolvent
guilty of shall be guilty of an offence, if, having been engaged in
Rene any trade or business, and having outstanding at the date
Cf. s. 157, Of the order of adjudication any debts contracted in the
Eng. Act. course and for the purposes of such trade or business,—
Cf. 8. 27407), (a) he has, within two years prior to the presen-
Australian tation of the insolvency petition, materially contri-
« buted to or increased the extent of his insolvency by
gambling or by rash and hazardous speculations, and
such gambling or speculations are unconnected with
his trade or business; or -

(b) he has, between the date of the presentation
of the petition and the date of the order of adjudica-
tion, lost any part of his estate by such gambling or
rash and hazardous speculations as aforesaid; or

(c) on being required by the Official Assignee at
any time, or in the course of his public examination
by the court, to account for the loss of any substantial
part of his estate incurred within a period of a year
next preceding the date of the presentation of the in-
solvency petition, or between that date and the date
of the order of adjudication, he fails to give a satis-
factory explanation of the manner in which such
loss was incurred:

Act.

As to pu- Provided that, in determining for the purposes of this
ene section whether any speculations were rash and hazard-
English Act. 0US, the financial position of the accused at the time when

he entered into the speculations shall] be taken into con-

sideration.

(2) A person guilty of an offence under this section
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years.

(3) A prosecution shall not be instituted against any
person under this section where the order of adjudication
is made within two years from the commencement of this
Act.

Insolvent 122. (1) Any person who has been adjudged insolvent
failing to _ shall be guilty of an offence if, having been engaged in
accents. any trade or business during any period in the two years
[New] immediately preceding the date of the presentation of the
Gf. 85. 158 insolvency petition, he has not kept proper books of
४10 16 ‘5 account throughout that period and throughout any fur-
English Act. ther period in which he was so engaged between the date


93

of the presentation of the petition and the date of the & Sat 158,
order of adjudication, or has not preserved all books of Gana
account so kept:

Provided that a person who has not kept or has not
preserved such books of account shall not be convicted of
an offence: under this section—

(a) if his unsecured liabilities at the date of the
order of adjudication did not exceed, in the case of a
person who has not on any previous occasion been
adjudged insolvent or made a composition or
arrangement with his creditors, seven thousand and
five hundred rupees, or in any other case one thou-
sand and five hundred rupees; or

(9) if he proves that in the circumstances in
which he traded or carried on business the omission
was honest and excusable.

(2) A person guilty of an offence under this section
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years.

(3) A prosecution shall not be instituted against any
person under this section where the order of adjudication
is made within two years from the commencement of this
Act.

(4) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be
deemed not to have kept proper books of account if he
has not kept such books or accounts as are necessary to
exhibit or explain his transactions and financial position
in his trade or business, including a book or books con-
taining entries from day to day in sufficient detail of all
cash received and cash paid, and, where the trade or busi-
ness has involved dealings in goods, statements of annual
stock-takings, and (except in the case of goods sold by
way of retail trade to the actual consumer) accounts
of all goods sold and purchased showing the buyers and
sellers thereof in sufficient detail to enable the goods and
the buyers and sellers thereof to be identified.

123. If any person who is adjudged insolvent, after the Insolvent
presentation of an insolvency petition by or against him, or absconding
within six months before such presentation, quits the with pro-
territories to which this Act extends and takes with him, [New}
or attempts or makes preparations to quit those territories Cf. ss. 159
and take with him, any part of his property to the amount and 164,
of three hundred rupees or upwards, which ought by law English
to be divided amongst his creditors, he shall (unless he ct.
proves that he had no intent to defraud) be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years.

4, As to refusal to order discharge for failure to keep proper books, see
Presidency Act, section 39(2) (0), ete.


Undischarg-

ed insolvent

obtaining

credit.

iy 20)
A.)

Gf. 8. 102,

BTA.

As to.
engaging
in trade
under old
name,

compare
8. 1550),
English
Act.

[New]

Bar of —
prosecution
without
order of
court.
[New]

Procedure
on charge
of offence.
io 72; PA)
8. 104;
BTA

94

124. If any creditor, or any person claiming to be a cre-
ditor, in any insolvency proceedings, wilfully and with in-
tent to defraud, makes any false claim, or any proof, dec-
laration or statement of account, which is untrue in any
material particular, he shall be punishable with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.

125. Where an undischarged insolvent—

(a) obtains credit to the extent of two hundred
rupees or upwards from any person without inform-

ing such person that he is an undischarged insolvent;
or

(b) engages in any trade or business under a
name other than that under which he was adjudged
insolvent, without disclosing to all persons with whom
he enters into any business transaction the name un-
der which he was adjudged insolvent;

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

Explanation—A person receiving money for goods to
be delivered or services to be rendered by him in future
shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be ob-
taining credit.

126.-No prosecution for any of the offences referred to
in sections 119 to 125 shall be instituted except—

(a) upon a complaint of the court under section
127, or

(b) otherwise by an order of the court. ~

127. (1) Where the court is satisfied, after such preli-
minary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary, that there
is ground for inquiring into any offence referred to in sec-
tion 119, 120, 121, 122, 123 or 125 and appearing to have
been committed by the insolvent, or into any offence refer-
red to in section 124 and appearing to have been committed
by any creditor, the court may record a finding to that
effect and make a complaint of the offence in writing to a
Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class
having jurisdiction, and such Magistrate shall deal with
such complaint in the manner laid down in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898.

4, As to offences under the LP.C., see sections 206-210 and 421—424 of
that Code.

gofl


36 of 1963.
*

95

(2) Any, complaint made by the court under sub-sec-
tign (1) may be signed by such officer of the court as the
court may appoint in this behalf.

128. Where an insolvent has been guilty of any of the Giiminal
offences specified in sections 119 to 121 or section 125, he liability |
shall not be exempt from being proceeded against there- charge or
for by reason that he has obtained his discharge or that a composition.
composition or scheme of arrangement has been accepted & Ts PA)
or approved. Ca ५५

129. (1) Where a debtor is adjudged or re-adjudged in- Disqualifi-
solvent under this Act, he shall, subject to the provisions gatians of
of this section, be disqualified from being appointed or fs 73 PA]
acting as a Magistrate’, or holding any civil judicial post. Cj.

. 8, 103A,
P.T.A.
(2) The disqualifications to which an insolvent is sub- [Portion re 1
ject... under’ this section— eae
(a) shall be removed and shall cease if— omitted. ]

(i) the order of adjudication is annulled under
section 30, or

(ii) he obtains from the court an order of dis-
charge, whether absolute or conditional, with a certi-
ficate that his insolvency was caused by misfortune
without any misconduct on his part;

(b) shall, in any event, cease to have effect on the
expiry of a period of five years from the date on which
an order of absolute discharge is passed or an order
of discharge becomes absolute, or such shorter period
as the court may fix in any particular case.

(3) The court may grant or refuse any certificate un-
der sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) as if
thinks fit, but any order of refusal shall be subject to
appeal.

CHAPTER XIV
MISCELLANEOUS

130. (1) The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, Application
shall, unless the context otherwise requires, apply to of the
appeals and applications under this Act, and for the pur- Provisions
pose of section 12 of the said Act, a decision under this Act °f Fimita-
from which an appeal lies shall be deemed to be a decree. & 78 0),

A.)

(2) Where an order of adjudication has been annulled
under this Act, in computing the period of limitation pres- 18. 78 (2),
cribed for any suit or other legal proceeding [other than a PA)
suit or other legal proceeding in respect of which the leave Offs. 1cr-A,
of the court was obtained under sub-section (1) of section P-T-A-

19] which might have been brought but for the making
3As to provisions in England, see section 32 of the 1883 Act (still in forge); and

section 9 of the 1890 Act (still in force) and section 26(4), 1914 Act; Williams
(a7th Edn. ) pages 835-837 and page 137. °



Access to
insolvent’s
books.
Pew]

f. $. 124;
Pra”

Fees and
percentages.
iNew]

. 8. 12:
Pra”

Gazette to
be evidence.
[New]

Cf 8. 116
0), P.T.A.

Liability
of State
Government.
pew

. S. 825
P.T.A.
as amended
in Bom-
bay.

Formal
defect not
to invalidate
proceedings.
New]

Cf. s. 118,
P.T.A.

provisions
to bind the
Government,
lew)
Bs 8, 120,
P.T.A.

96

of an order of adjudication under this Act, the period from
the date of the order of adjudication to the date of the
order of annulment shall be excluded:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply
to a suit or other legal proceeding in respect of a debt prov-
able but not proved under this Act.

131. (1) No person shall, as against the Official Assignee,
be entitled to withhold the possession of the books of
accounts belonging to the insolvent or to set up any lien
thereon.

(2) Any creditor of the insolvent may, subject to the
control of the court, and on payment of such fee, if any,
as may be prescribed, inspect at all reasonable times, per-
sonally or by agent, any such books in the possession of
the Official Assignee.

132. Such fees and percentages shall be charged for and
in respect of proceedings under this Act as may be pres-
cribed.

133. A copy of the Official Gazette containing any notice
inserted in pursuance of this Act shall be evidence of the
facts stated in the notice.

134. The State Government shall be liable to make good
all sums required to discharge any liability which the Offi-
cial Assignee may be liable to discharge, except when such
liability is one to which neither the Official Assignee nor
any of his officers has in any way contributed or which
neither he nor any of his officers could, by the exercise
of reasonable diligence, have averted, and in either of
these cases the Official Assignee shall not, nor shall the
State Government, be subject to any liabilities.

135. (1) No proceeding in insolvency shall be invalidat-
ed by any formal defect or by any irregularity unless the
court before which an objection is made. to the proceeding
is of the opinion that substantial injustice has been caused
by the defect or irregularity, and that the injustice cannot
be remedied by any order of that court.

(2) No defect or irregularity in the appointment of an
Official Assignee or member of a committee of inspection
shall vitiate any act done by him in good faith.

136. Save as herein provided, the provisions of this Act
relating to the remedies against the person or property of
a debtor, the priorities of debts, the effect of a composition
or scheme of arrangement, and the effect of a discharge
shall bind the Government,


97

137. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions | 0६ Savings
any law for the time being in force relating to the relief of regarding
agricultural indebtedness. the relief

of agricul-
turist
debtors.

[s. 82, P.A.]

138. (1) The Supreme Court, after consulting the High power to
Courts, may make rules for carrying into effect the provi- make rules.
sions of this Act. is 79 PA.)

if. $8. 112,
113 and
114, P.T.A.
Cf. 8. 643
(1), Com=
panies Act,
1956.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera-
lity of the foregoing provision, such rules may provide for
and regulate—

(a) the fees and percentages to be charged under
this Act and the manner in which the same are to be
collected and accounted for and the account to which
they are to be paid;

(b) the investment, whether separately or collec-
tively, or unclaimed dividends, balances and other sums
appertaining to the estates of insolvent debtors, and the
application of the proceeds of such investment;

(c) the proceedings of the Official Assignee in tak-
ing possession of and realizing the estates of insolvent
debtors;

(d) the receipts, payments and accounts of the
Official Assignee;

(e) the audit of the accounts of the Official Assig-
nee;

(f) the payment of the costs of the audit of his
accounts out of the proceeds of the investments in his
ands;

(g) the payment of the costs incurred in the pro-
secution of fraudulent debtors and in legal proceedings
taken by the Official Assignee under the direction of
the court out of the proceeds aforesaid;

(h) the payment of any civil liability incurred by
an Official Assignee acting under the order or direction
of the court;

(i) the proceedings to be taken in connection with
proposals for composition and schemes of arrangement
with the creditors of insolvent debtors;


98

(j) the intervention of the Official Assignee at the
hearing of applications and matters relating to insolyent
debtors and their estates;

(k) the filing of lists of creditors and debtors and
the affording of assistance to the court by a petitioning
lebtor;

(0) the examination by the Official Assignee of the
books and papers of account of undischarged insolvent
debtors;

(m) the service of notices in proceedings under
this Act;

(n) the appointment, meetings and procedure of
committees of inspection;

(०) the conduct of proceedings under this Act in
the name of a firm;

(p) the forms to be used in proceedings under this
Act;

(q) the procedure to be followed in the case of
estates to be administered in a summary manner;

(r) the procedure to be followed in the case of
estates of deceased persons to be administered under
this Act;

(s) the distribution of work between the Official
Assignee and the deputy or deputies;

(t) the procedure to be followed by the High Court
in exercise of its insolvency jurisdiction, where it has
such jurisdiction under this Act;

(४) the form of insolvency notice and the manner
in which it may be served;

(०) the manner of publication of the notice of an
order annulling adjudication, under sub-section (2) of
section 32;

(w) the time after which and the circumstances in
which permission for renewing an application for dis-
charge may be granted under sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 40;

(x) the cases in which the Official Assignee may
disclaim any lease-hold interest without the leave of
the court under section 66;

५) the manner of giving notice under sub-section
(1) of section 77, and sub-section (2) of section 106;


aa
i

3 Of 1909.

5 of 1920.

99

(z) the rate of interest under section 78;

(aa) the period after which the Official Assignee
shall pay an unclaimed dividend to the account and cre-
dit of the State Government under sub-section (1) of
section 81;

(bb) the duties of the Official Assignee in res-
pect of the matters referred to in clauses (b) and
(c) of sub-section (3) of section 91 and in sub-sec-
tion (4) of that section;

(cc) the payment of costs of maintaining a
debtor in the civil prison;

(dd) the manner in which and the conditions
subject to which a search-warrant may be executed
under sub-section (3) of section 114;

(ee) any other matter which is to be or may be
prescribed.

(3) All rules made under this Act shall be published
in the Official Gazette.

(4) Until rules are made by the Supreme Court as Cf. s.643
aforesaid, all rules made by any High Court on __ the (3)»>,Com-
matters referred to in this section and in force at the Porc Act,
comencement of this Act shall, in so far as they are not .
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to
be in force in the High Court and in courts subordinate
thereto.

139. (1) The Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909, Repeal and

the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, any Provincial Act savings.
or State Act amending either of the said Act and any law [New]
corresponding to the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act,
1909 or to the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, in force in
any part of the territories which, immediately before the
first day of November, 1956, were comprised in Part B
States, and any law amending such coresponding law,
are hereby repealed.

(2) Every person appointed as Official Assignee under हू 3. 652,
the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909, cr as any Companies
corresponding officer under any law corresponding Act 1956.
thereto, or as Official Receiver under the Provincial In-
solvency Act, 1920, or as any corresponding officer under
any law corresponding thereto, and holding — such office
immediately before the commencement of this Act, may,
without further appointment for that purpose, act as the cy, the
Official Assignee under this Act also, for the local limits wording of
for which he was appointed, until an Official Assignee is BEA D>
appointed. under this Act for those limits. “o“


Cf. s. 51
(220
ie

ial
iage
Act, 1954.

Cf. 8. 51

(३, Special
age

Act, 1954.

100

(3) Where an Official Assignee is appointed under
this Act for any local limits under this Act, he may, sub-
ject to any orders of the appointing authority to the
contrary, also act as the Official Assignee or the Official
Receiver, or corresponding officer, as the case may be, for
those local limits for the purposes of all proceedings aris-
ing out of any insolvency petition presented before the
commencement of this Act under the Presidency-towns
Insolvency Act, 1909, the Provincial Insolvency Act,
1920, or any law corresponding to either of the said Acts,
if, for the time being, there is no person appointed under
such Act or law and holding office as the Official
Assignee, Official Receiver or corresponding officer, as the
case may be.

ww

(4) All proceedings arising out of any insolvency
petition presented before the commencement of this Act
in any court under the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 3 of 1909.
1909, the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, or any such 5 of 1920,
corresponding law, shall be dealt with and decided by
that court as if this Act had not been passed.

(5) Without prejudice to the generality of the provi-
sions of sub-section (4), an Official Assignee appointed
under the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909 _ or 3 of 1909.
under any law corresponding thereto or an Official Re-
ceiver or other person appointed as a receiver under the
Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, or under any law cor- 5 of 1920,
responding thereto, may, in relation to proceedings aris- .
ing out of any insolvency petition presented before the
commencement of this Act, have and exercise all such
jurisdiction and powers as he could if this Act had not
been passed.

(6) The provisions of sub-sections (2), (4) and (5)
shall be without prejudice to—

(a) the provisions contained in section 6 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897, which shall also apply to yo of 1897.
the repeal of the corresponding law as if such law °
had been an enactment;

(b) the provisions contained in section 24 of
the said Act, which shall also apply to the repeal of
the corresponding law as if such law had been a
Central Act.


101

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 28)
MEETING OF CREDITORS

1. The Official Assignee may at any time summon a Meeting of
meeting of creditors, and shall do so whenever so direct- creditors.
ed by the court or by the creditors by resolution at any Yj. हि ad
meeting or whenever requested in writing by one- p.T.a’

fourth in the value of the creditors who have proved.

2. Meetings shall be summoned by sending notice of Summoning
the time and place thereof to each creditor at the of nt
address given in his proof, or, if he has not proved, at rule 2, | e
the address given in the insolvent’s schedule, or such P.T.A.
other address as may be known to the Official Assignee.

3. (1) The notice of any meeting shall be sent not less Notice of
than seven days before the day appointed for the meet- OF Se L
ing and may be delivered personally or sent by prepaid of > ne
post letter, as may be convenient. A.

(2) The Official Assignee may, if he thinks fit, also
publish the time and place of any meeting in any local
newspaper or in the Official Gazette.

4, (1) It shall be the duty of the insolvent to attend Duty of
any meeting which the Official Assignee may, by notice, insolvent
require him to attend, and any adjournment thereof. Hd anon 4

Cf. Sch. 1,
tule 4,
P.T.A.

(2) Such notice shall be either delivered to him per-
sonally or sent to him at his address by post at least
seven days before the date fixed for the meeting.

5. The proceedings held and resolutions passed at any Proceeding
meeting shall, unless the court otherwise orders, be valid एण te be
notwithstanding that any creditor has not received the *voided for

+ + nor.-receipt
notice sent to him. of notice?

Cf. Sch. I,
tule 5,
P.T.A.

6. A certificate of the Official Assignee that the notice proof of
of any meeting has been duly given, shall be sufficient issue of
evidence of such notice having been duly sent to the notice.
person to whom the same was addressed. Gi So L

PTAA.

7. Where on the request of creditors the Official Costs of
Assignee summons a meeting, there shall be deposited meeting.
with the written request the sum of five rupees for oS L
every twenty creditors for the costs of summoning the P.T.A.
meeting, including all disbursements: Provided that the


Proof in
respect of
negotiable
instruments.
f. Sch. I,

102

Official Assignee may require such further sum to be
deposited as in his opinion shall be sufficient to cover. the
costs and expenses of the meeting.

8. The Official Assignee shall be the Chairman of
every meeting of creditors.

9. A creditor shall not be entitled to vote at a meet-
ing unless he has duly proved a debt provable in insol-
vency to be due to him from the insolvent, and the proof
has been duly lodged one clear day before the time
appointed for the meeting.

10. A creditor shall not vote at any such meeting in
respect of any unliquidated or contingent debt, or any
debt the value of which is not ascertained,

11. (1) For the purpose of voting, a secured creditor
shall, unless he surrenders his security, state in his proof
the particulars of his security, the date when it was
given, and the value at which he assesses it, and shall be
entitled to vote only in respect of the balance, if any,
due to him after deducting the value of his security.

(2) If he votes in respect of his whole debt, he shail
be deemed to have surrendered his security, unless the
court on application is satisfied that the omission to value
the security has arisen from inadvertence. -

12, Where a creditor seeks to prove in respect of a
bill of exchange, promissory note, or other negotiable
instrument or in respect of any security, on which the
insolvent is liable, such bill of exchange, note, instru-
ment or security must, subject to any — special order of
the court made to the contrary, be produced to the Offi-
cial Assignee before the proof can be admitted for voting.

13. It shall be competent to the Official Assignee,
within twenty-eight days after a proof estimating the
value of a security has been made use of in voting at

ity, any meeting, to require the’ creditor to give up - the

security for the benefit of the creditors generally, on
payment of the value so estimated.

14. If one partner in a firm is adjudged insolvent, any
creditor to whom that partner is indebted jointly with
the other partners in the firm, or any of them, may prove
his debt for the purpose of voting at any meeting of cre-
ditors and shall be entitled to vote thereat,


103

15. (1) The Official Assignee shall have power to Power of
admit or reject a proof for the purpose of voting, but Sate,
his decision shall be subject to appeal to the court. + to admit

or reject
proof.

Cf. Sch. I,
tule 15,
P.T.A.

(2) If he is in doubt whether the proof of a creditor
should be admitted or rejected, he shall mark the proof
as objected to, and shall allow the creditor to vote, sub-
ject to the vote being declared invalid in the event of
the objection being sustained.
16. A creditor may vote either in person or by proxy. oe ch.
Rule 16,”
P.T.AL

17. Every instrument of proxy shall be in the prescrib- Instrument

. f 4
ed form and shall be issued by the Official Assignee. of Prony. L

tule 17,
P.T.A.

18. (1) A creditor may give a general proxy to his General
attorney or to his manager or clerk, or any other person OS. L
in his regular employment. rule 18,”

P.T.A.

(2) In such case the instrument of proxy shall state
the relation in which the pagson to act thereunder stands
to the creditor.

19. A proxy shall not be used unless it is deposited Proxy to be
~with the Official Assignee one clear day before the time deposited
appointed for the meeting at which it is to be used. before date

of meeting.
Cf. Sch. I,
tule 19,
P.T.A.

20. A creditor may appoint the Official Assignee to Official
act as his proxy. Assignee
as proxy.
Cf. Sch. I,
rule 20,
P.T.A.

21. The Official Assignee may adjourn the meeting Adjournment
from time to time and from place to place, and no notice रु meeting.
Sch. 1,

ef the adjournment shall be necessary. tale 2

P.T.A.

22. The Official Assignee shall draw up a minute of Minute of

the proceedings at the meeting and shall sign the same. proceedings.
tule 22, >
P.T.A.


Time for
lodging

proof.
Gf. Sch. U,
tule 1,
PTA.

Mode of
lodging

proof.

iS 49 (1)
AL

Cf. Sch. I,

tule 2,
P.T.A.

Authority
to make
affidavit.
Cf. Sch. IL,
rule 3,
P.T.A.

Contents of

affidavit.

& 49 (2),
Ass part]

Cf. Sch. I,
rule 4,
छत.

Affidavit to
state if
creditor
holds
security
Is. 49 (2),

Cf. Sch. वा,

Sch., rule 5,
English Act
as amended
in 1926
(Williams,
page 558).

Cost of

Cf. Sch. II,
tule 6,
PTAA.

104
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 47)
PROOF OF DEBTS
Proof in ordinary cases

1, Every creditor shall lodge the proof of his debt as
soon as may be after the making of an order of adjudica-
tion.

2. A proof may be lodged by delivering or sending
by post in a registered letter to the Official Assignee an
affidavit verifying the debt.

3. The affidavit may be made by the creditor himself
or by some person authorised by or on behalf of the
creditor; if made by a person so authorised, it shall state
his authority and means of knowledge.

4. (1) The affidavit shall contain or refer to a state-
ment of account showing the particulars of the debt, and
shall specify the vouchers,@f any, by which the same
can be substantiated.

(2) The Official Assignee may at any time call for the
production of the vouchers.

5. The affidavit shall state whether the creditor is or
is not a secured creditor; ‘and if it is found at any time
that the affidavit made by or on behalf of a secured credi-
tor has omitted to state that he is a secured creditor, the
secured creditor shall surrender his security to the Offi-
cial Assignee for the general benefit of the creditors un-
less the court on application is satisfied that the omission
has arisen from inadvertence, and in that case the court
may allow the affidavit to be amended on such terms as
to the repayment of any dividend or otherwise as the court
may consider to be just.

6. A creditor shall bear the cost of proving his debt
unless the court otherwise specially orders.


105
7. Every creditor who has lodged a proof shall be en- Right tose:
titled to see and examine the proofs of other creditors at and famine

all reasonable times. Cf. Sch. वा,
rule 7,
P.T.A.

8. A creditor in lodging his proofs shall deduct from Deduction
his debt all trade discounts, but he shall not be compelled to be made १
to deduct any discount, not exceeding five per centum on Or sath
the net amount of his claim, which he may have agreed yuie 8,

to allow for payment in cash. BTA.

Proof by secured creditors

9. If a secured creditor realises his security, he may Proof where
prove for the balance due to him, after deducting the security we
net amount realised. [s. 47 0);

Cf. “Sch. वा,
tule 9,
P.T.A.

10. If a secured creditor surrenders his security to the Proof where

Official Assignee for the general benefit of the creditors, security is

he may prove for his whole debt. , pare

Cf ben. वा,
rule 10,
PTA.

11. If a secured creditor dogs not either realise or sur- Proof in
render his security, he shall, before ranking for the divi- other cases,
dend, state in his proof the particulars of his security, {447 (3
the date when it was given and the value at which he cy इक, 1,
assesses it, and shall be entitled to receive a dividend only rule rr,
in respect of the balance due to him after deducting the P.T.A.
value so assessed.

12. (1) Where a security is so valued the Official Valuation of
Assignee may at any time redeem it on payment to the security.
creditor of the assessed value. (a7 (के

Cf. Sch. वा,
rule 12,
P.T.A.

(2) If the Official Assignee is dissatisfied with the
value at which a security is assessed, he may require
that the property comprised in any security so valued
be offered for sale at such times and on such terms and
conditions as may be agreed on between the creditor and
the Official Assignee, or as, in default of agreement, the
court may direct: and if the sale is by public auction, the
creditor, or the Official Assignee on Yehalf of the estate,
may bid or purchase:

Provided that the creditor may at any time, by notice
in writing, require the ‘Official Assignee to elect whether
he will or will not exercise his power of redeeming the
security or requiring it to be realised, and if the Official


Amendment
of valuation.
Cf. Sch. II,
tule 13,
P.T.AL

Refund of

+ excess re-
ceived.
Cf. Sch. IT,
P.T.A.

Amendment
where se-
curity
subsequently
realised.
fs. 47 (5),
9.8.
Cf. Sch. व,
tule 15,
P.T.A.

Exclusion
from shar-
ing in divi-
dend.

Cf. Sch. Il,
rule 16,
P.T.A.

Limit of
& Sch. व,
rule 17,

P.T.A.

106

Assignee does not, within six months after receiving the
notice, signify in writing to the creditor his election to
exercise the power, he shall not be entitled to exercise
it; and the equity of redemption, or any other interest in
the property comprised in the security which is vested in
the Official Assignee, shall vest in the creditor, and the
amount of his debt shall be reduced by the amount at which
the security has been valued.

13. Where a creditor has so valued his security, he may
at any time amend the valuation and proof on showing to
the satisfaction of the Official Assignee, or the court, that the
valuation and proof were made bone fide on a mistaken esti-
mate, or thatthe security has diminished or increased in
value since its previous valuation; but every such amend-
ment shall be made at the cost of the creditor and upon such
terms as the court shall order, unless the Official Assignee
shall allow the amendment without application to the
court.

14. Where a valuation has been amended_ in accord-
ance with the foregoing rule, the creditor shall forthwith
repay any surplus dividend which he has_ received in
excess of that to which he would have been entitled on
the amended valuation, or, as the case may be, shall be
entitled to be paid out of any money for the time being
available for dividend, any dividend or share of dividend
which he has failed to receive by reason of the inaccuracy
of the original valuation, before that money is made
applicable to the payment of any future dividend, but he
shall not be entitled to disturb the distribution of any
dividend declared before the date of the amendment.

15. If a creditor after having valued his security sub-
sequently realises it, or if it is realised under the provi
sions of rule 12, the net amount realised shall be substi-
tuted for the amount of any valuation previously made by
the creditor and shall be treated in all respects as an
amended valuation made by the creditor. .

16. If a secured creditor does not comply with the
foregoing rules, he shall be excluded from all share in any
dividend.

17. Subject to the provisions of rule 12, a creditor shall
in no case receive more than one hundred naye paise in
the rupee and interest as provided by this Act.


107

Taking accounts of property mortgaged, and of the sale
thereof

18. (1) Upon application by any person claiming to be
a mortgagee of any part of the insolvent’s estate! and
whether such mortgage is by deed or otherwise, and whe-
ther the same is of a legal or equitable nature, or upon
application by the Official Assignee with the consent of
such person claiming to be a mortgagee as aforesaid, the
court shall proceed to inquire whether such person is such
mortgagee, and for what consideration and under what
circumstances; and if it is found that such person is such
mortgagee, and if no sufficient objection appears to the
title of such person to the sum claimed by him under such
mortgage, the court shall direct such accounts and inqui-
ries to be taken as may be necessary for ascertaining the
principal, interest and costs due upon such mortgage, and
of the rents and profits, of dividends, interest or other pro-
ceeds received by such person, or by any other person by
his order or for his use in case he has been in
possession of the property over which the mort-
gage extends, or any part thereof, and the court,
if satisfied that there ought to be a sale, shall
direct notice to be given in such newspapers as the
court thinks fit, when and where, and by whom and in
what way, the said premises or property, or the interest
therein so mortgaged, are to be sold, and that such sale
be made accordingly, and that the Official Assignee (un-
less it is otherwise ordered) shall have the conduct of
such sale; but it shall not be imperative on any such mort-
gagee to make such application.

(2) At any such sale the mortgagee may bid and pur-
chase.

19. All proper parties shall join in the conveyance to
the purchaser, as the court directs.

20. (1) The monies to arise from such sale shall be
applied, in the first place, in payment of the costs, charges
and expenses of and occasioned by the application to the
court, and of such sale and the commission (if any) of
the official assignee, and in the next place in payment and
satisfaction, so far as the same extend, of what shall be
found due to such mortgagee, for principal, interest and
costs, and the surplus of the sale monies (if any) shall
then be paid to the Official Assignee.

(2) But if the monies to arise from such sale are in-
sufficient to pay and satisfy. what is so found due to such
mortgagee, then he shall be entitled to prove as a credi-
tor for such deficiency, and receive dividends thereon rate-
ably with the other creditors, but so as not to disturb any
dividend then already declared.

1The words “real or leasehold” before “estate” are omitted.
42M of L—8

Inquiry into
mortgage,
etc,

Cf. Sch. II,
tule 18,
P.T.A.

Conveyance.
Cf. Sch, II,
tule 19,
PTA.
Proceeds of

sale,

Cf. Sch. I,
tule 20,
P.T.A.


Proceedings
on inguiry
Gf. Sch. II,
rule 21,
PTA.

Periodical
payments.
Cf. Sch. 11,
rule 22,
PTA.

As to

“ accrued ””
Cf. 8. ३6,
P.T.AL

Interest.

{s. 48,
PA.)

Cf. Sch. वा,
rule 23,
P.T.A.

Debt payable
in future.

Sere

rule 24,
P.T.A.

108

21. For the better taking of such inquiries and accounts,
and making a title to the purchaser, all parties may be
examined by the court upon interrogatories or otherwise
as the court thinks fit, and shall produce before the court
upon oath all deeds, papers, books and writings in their
respective custody or power relating to the estate or effects
of the insolvent as the court directs.

Periodical payments

22. When any rent or cther payment falls due at stated
periods, and the order of adjudication is made at any time
other than one of those periods, the person entitled to the
rent or payment may prove for a proportionate part there-
of up to the date of the order as if the rent or payment
due accrued from day to day.

Interest

23. (1) On any debt or sum certain whereon interest
is not reserved or agreed for, and which is overdue when
the debtor is adjudged an insolvent, and which is pro-
vable under this Act, the creditor may prove for interest
at a rate not exceeding six per centum per annum—

(a) if the debt or sum is payable by virtue of a
written instrument at a certain time, from the time
when such debt or sum was payable to the date of such
adjudication; or

(b) if the debt or sum is payable otherwise, from
the time when a demand in writing has been made
giving the debtor notice that interest will be claimed
from the date of the demand until the time of pay-
ment to the date of such adjudication.

(2) Where a debt which has been proved in insolvency
includes interest or any pecuniary consideration in lieu of
interest, the interest or consideration shall, for the pur-
poses of dividend, be calculated at a rate not exceeding
six per centum per annum, without prejudice to the right
of a creditor to receive out of the debtor’s estate any higher
rate of interest to which he may be entitled after all the
debts proved have been paid in full.

Debt payable at a future time

24. A creditor may prove for a debt not payable when
the debtor is adjudged an insolvent as if it were payable
presently, and may receive dividends equally with the
other creditors, deducting therefrom only a rebate of in-
terest at the rate of six per centum per annum, compu-
ted from the declaration of a dividend to the time when
the debt would have become payable, according to the
terms on which it was contracted.


109

Admission or rejection of proof

25. (1) The Official Assignee shall examine every proof हि on
and the grounds of the debt, and in writing admit or 76- (६ Soot.
ject it in whole or in part, or require further evidence in Cy. Sch. I,

fe rule 25,
support of it. P.T.A.

(2) If he rejects a proof, he shall. state in writing to
the creditor the grounds of the rejection.

26. If the Official Assignee thinks that a proof has been Court may
improperly admitted, the court may, on the application of oer arn: .
the Official Assignee, after notice to the creditor who made Propetly
the proof, expunge the proof or reduce its amount. received,

8. 50, 7.8...
rt,

छः 00. tl,

rule 26,

P.T.A.

27. The Court may also expunge or reduce a proof upon Power for
the application of a creditor if the Official Assignee dec- court Oot
lines to interfere in the matter, or in the case of a com~ ¢xpung’

re ati ‘. educe proof,
position or scheme upon the application of the iysolvent. Is 505 PA,

part, ]
Cf. Sch. 11,
tule 27,
PTA.

28. Any creditor of the insolvent may, at any time proof by
before the declaration of the final dividend under section creditors
77, tender proof of his débt and apply to the court for an before Gee-
order directing his proof to be admitted in respect of any हि की
debt which is provable under this Act and in respect of dends.
which a proof has not been tendered; and the court, after Cf. s. 333)
causing notice to be served on the Official Assignee and 2.8.
the other creditors who have proved their debts, and
after hearing their objections, if any, shall allow or re-
ject the application.

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 121(1) and 121(2)] [First Sche-

Decisions and orders from which an appeal lies to the High dule, P.A.]
Court under section 121(2)

Section Nature of decision or order
Section 16 . . . Order dismissing a petition.
Section 18 . . . Order of adjudication.
Section 30 . . . Order annulling adjudication.
Section 32 . . . . Order declaring the conditions on which

the insolvent’s property shall revert to
him on annulment of adjudication.

Section 37 . 2°". Order on application for discharge.

148 to orders under the clause corresponding to existing section 33,
provincial Act, the orders will now be passed by the Official Assignee, and
jot by the court.


110

Nature of decision or order

Section
Section 54
Section 55
Section 70 .
Section 99

Second Schedule, Rules 26

and 27.

Order for avoidancet of 8. voluntary
transfer.

Decision that transfer of property is a
preference in favour of a creditor.

Decision of a dispute as to whether the
person summoned owes any money to the
insolvent or is in possession of any
property belonging to the insolvent.

Decision of — questions...... arising in
insolvency.

Order expunging the proof or reducing the
amount,

388 to “ avoidance ” of a voluntary transfer, see clause dealing with volun-

tary transfers.

*Section 115, P.A. is omitted in the Bill. Hence orders awarding com-
pensation are not mentioned in this Schedule.


EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE
NOTES

P.A. or Provincial Act—The Provincial Insolvency Act,
1920.

P.7.A. or Presidency Act.—The Presidency-towns In-
solvency Act, 1909.

Mulla.—Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India.

Williams.—Williams on Bankruptcy, 17th Edition
(1958).

APPENDIX II
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1

Part B States—The new Act will apply to the whole
of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The
existing Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, does not extend
to territories which were comprised in Part B States before
the 1st November, 1956. But there is no reason why the
Act should not apply to those territories!.

Scheduled districts—The Provincial Inselvency Act,
1920, does not extend to areas formerly known as “sche-
duled districts”. It is, however, unnecessary to make any
such exception, initially, in the new Act. The legislative
practice, which is in conformity with the intentions of
the framers of the Constitution, is not to make any such
exception in Acts of Parliament. There is, however, 2
power under the Constitution to exclude the application
of Acts to certain areas. So far as tribal areas in Assam
are concerned, the Governor can, under paragraph
12 (1) (b) of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, notity
that the Act will not apply to any autonomous district or
region, or will apply subject to modifications. Similarly,
so far as scheduled areas in other States are concerned,
the Governor can, under paragraph 5(1) of the Fifth
Schedule to the Constitution, notify that a particular “Act
of Parliament” will not apply to a scheduled area, or will
apply subject to modifications.

3See body of the Report, para. 4.

111


112

Goa, ete.—As to Goa, Pondicherry, Nagaland, etc., if it
is intended to exclude the application of the Act, the ques-
tion may be considered by Government.

Clause 2
“Court”.—Needs no comments.
“Creditor”-No comments needed. As to “sureties”,

the subject has been discussed in the notes on another
clause’.

“Debt”.—The definition of “debt” needs no comments.
“Debtor”.—The definition of “debtor” has been  en-
larged so as to include persons of foreign domicile. A

full discussion will be found in the notes on another
clause’,

“District Court’”,—Needs no comments.

“Official Assignee”.—Since the appointment of Deputy
Official Assignees can be made’, this definition becomes

necessary. It is unnecessary to say (as the Presidency Act
does) that “acting” incumbents are included‘,

“Prescribed”.—Needs no comments.

“Property”.—Needs no comments’,

“Secured creditors”.—The inclusive part has been taken
from the Presidency Act, as useful.

“Transfer of Property”.—The only change made is the
addition of the words “or transfer” after “creation”. This
addition has been made to cover cases of transfer of charge,

Last para.—
(ores words, > ९९१५ no comments.
etc.

Clause 3

General.—This follows section 6, Provincial Act and sec-
tion 9, Presidency Act.

Sub-clause (1)—
Paragraph (a).—Needs no comments
Paragraph (b).—Needs no comments.

1566 notes to clause 55.

2566 notes to clause 98.

3866 clause 88.

‘Although the expression adopted in the Bill is “ Official Assignee”,
yet in the Notes on clauses the expression “ Official Receiver” has also.
been used, having regard to existing nomenclature; but this should be under.
stood as referring to the Official Assignee.

‘The meaning of “ property” has been explained in a Supreme Court
decision, See Murti Lal v. Trustees of the Provident Fund, etc. A.JI.R. 1956.
S.C. 336, 341, para. 21.


113

Paragraphs (c) and_(d).—The existing wording in
section 6(1) (०) of the Provincial Act and section 9(1) (९)
of the Presidency Act is—“if he makes any transfer which
would under this or any other enactment for the time
being in force” be void as a fraudulent preference. The re-
ference to “other enactment” was mainly intended, it seems,
for the sister Act. That is to say, the Presidency Act by
these words referred to the Provincial Act, and vice versa.
Perhaps the laws in force in other parts of India where
neither of the two Acts is in force (for example, the area
of an erstwhile Indian State) would also be covered
(though the definition of “enactment” in the General
Clauses Act, 1897, is not specific on this point, because it
is an inclusive definition.) Anyway, it is considered that
these words should be retained in an altered form to cover
clearly cases of a transaction regarded as a fraudulent
preference under the Insolvency Law in Jammu and Kash-
mir also. The necessary change has been made accord-
ingly. For clarity, the matter has been dealt with in two
paragraphs.

Paragraph (e).—Needs no comments.

Paragraph (j)—Section 6(e) of the Provincial Act
enacts that it is an act of insolvency if any property has
been sold in execution of the decree of any court. The
corresponding provision in the Presidency Act, section
9(e), provides further that it is an act of insolvency if the
property has been under attachment for a period of 21
days. That has been adopted as useful. Further, “orders”
for the payment of money have also been included’, since
they should receive the same treatment as decrees as re-
gards attachment and arrest.

Another question which arises on this clause is, whe-
ther an order charging a partner’s share under Order 21,
Rule 49, Code of Civil Procedure. is “attachment” within
this clause. It was held in Gulam Mustaffa v. Madanlal*,
that it is not. It is true that an order under Order 21, rule
49, is different from an attachment; but, for the present
purpose, the effect of both is the same. Hence an Ex-
planation on the subject is added.

Paragraph (1).—“Orders” have been included’.

Sub-clause (2).—Is mainly based on section 1 (1) (8) of
the (English) Bankruptcy Act, 1914. Under this section,
it would be open to a person who has obtained a decree or
order for the payment of money to give notice to the debtor
calling upon him to pay the amount due thereunder, and
failure to do so would itself be an act of insolvency*. In

1Gf. clauses 6 and 7, etc.

2(1931) LL.R. 58 Cal. 624 ; ALR. 1931 Cal. 167. See
page 124, para. 121-B. ° 93 7 Malla (1958),

*Cf. clauses 6 and 7, etc.
‘See Williams, pages 31—42.


114

Bombay? provisions? based on the English Act have been
imtroduced both in the Presidency Act and in the Provin-
cial Act, by the Bombay Insolvency Amendment Act
(Bombay Act 15 of 1939).

If the notice is to be served outside India, leave of the
court must be obtained and the period for compliance of
the notice should be fixed by the court. The provision
(contained in the English Act) has been embodied here.
If the notice is to be served within India, the period will
not be less than one month. Having regard to conditions
in India, a minimum period of one month seems to be
appropriate.

Sub-clauses (3) and (4)—Contain detailed provisions as
to insolvency notice.

Clause 3, Explanation

Explanation—The Explanation (found in the existing
Acts also) is departure from the English Law. Under that
law the act of bankruptcy must be personal to the debtor,
and therefore there can be no adjudication founded mere-
ly on the act of the agent*. It has been pointed out by the
Privy Council‘ that the position of Gumashta who carries
on business on behalf of the proprietor may not strictly
be that of a mere manager or agent, and that he may be
entrusted with such large powers of management as to
virtually assimilate his position to that of an owner, and
that therefore a proprietor may be adjudicated on en act
of insolvency committed by him. It is this view that is
embodied in the Explanation to section 9 of the Presi-
dency Act and section 6 of the Provincial Act. Both of
them provide that an act of insolvency committed by an
gent may be the act of the principal. This does not, 7
course, mean that every act of the agent must be treated
as act of the principal. That appears to have been assumed
in Kalianji v. The Bank of Madras’, which has been com-
mented upon by Mulla®. Whether it should be treated as an
act of the principal must depend upon the authority of the
agent and the nature of the business, vide John v. The
Oriental Government Security Life Assurance Co’.

It should be noted that in the Explanation to section 9
of the Presidency Act there occur the following words:
“even though the agent has no specific authority to com-
mit the act”. Thisis not found in the Explanation to
section 6 of the Provincial Act. The effect of the Explana-
tion will be the same whether those words were there

ii,e.. erstwhile Province of Bombay.
2Eor Bombay amendment, see Mulla (1958), page 135.
Mulla (1958), pages 139-140, pa 136.
4Kasturchand ५1 Dhanpat Singh, 22 I-A. 1623 I.L.R. 23 Cal. 26.
ELE 39 Mad. 603. (18८ ,

ee the criticism in 1958), page 142.
TA.LR. 1929 Mad. 347.


115

or not, because if there is specific authority by the princi-
pal to the agent to commit the act, then it becomes the
act of the principal himself!. However, since the quoted
words are useful by way of emphasis, they have been
retained.

Clause 4

The language of section 10 of the Presidency Act has
been followed. This is better than section 7 of the Pro-
vinciai Act. Compare section 6 of the English Act.

The Explanation (which occurs in the existing section
also) might appear to be a repetition of the provision in
section 6(f) of the Provincial Act and section 9(f) of the
Presidency Act*, under which a debtor commits an act of
insolvency if he petitions to be adjudged an_ insolvent.
Apparently, however, the real object of the Explanation
is to provide that in the case of a petition by a debtor, the
existence of the antecedent act of insolvency is not neces-
. The Explanation, to this extent, clarifies the main
Faragraph. It is not necessary to disturb the Explanation,
which does not seem to have caused any difficulty.

Clause 5

Sub-clause (1)—Follows existing section 9(1) of the
Provincial Act, as amended in 1950 and section 12(1),
Presidency Act. Language of the latter Act has been
followed.

Sub-clause (2)—Follows section 9(2) of the Provincial
Act. [Compare section 12(2) of the Presidency Act].

Transactions assented to by vreditors.—It was decided
in England as early as the 18th century that a creditor who
assented to a deed of arrangement was precluded from
relying on it as an act of bankruptcy, vide Bamford v.
Baron, and that has been accepted as the law ever since,
notwithstanding that successive statutes on bankruptcy
had remained silent on the question*. That principle has
been accepted in the law of this country®, vide Kheta Mal
v. Chuni Lal® and Rukmani Ammal v. Rajagopala’. The
question whether an express provision enacting this prin-
ciple and extending it to all transactions, written or oral,
to which the creditor has consented, should be embodied
has been considered. It is felt that it is unnecessary to do
so.

1See Mulla (1958), page 139, para. 136.

2Mulla (1958), pages 149 and 185, deals with these sections generally.
31788) 2 T.R. 594.

“Williams, page 4.

‘Mulla (1958), page 157.

(1879) LL.R. 2, All. 173.

(1924) LL.R. 48 Mad. 294.


116

Registration.—The three months’ period for presenta-
tion of the petition is to be counted from _ registration
where the act of insolvency is constituted by an instru-
ment requiring registration'-*. That has been clarified in
view of the uncertainty prevailing on the subject.

Sub-clause (3)—Is new. It is framed on substantially
the same lines as section 14(1), Limitation Act, 1963. The
present® position is that no extension of time is allowed
on the ground of the period spent in an unsuccessful in-
solvency proceeding previously prosecuted in a wrong
court. It is considered that such a relaxation should be
allowed. It, however, appears unnecessary to allow this
relaxation for defects other than want of jurisdiction.

Clause 6

General.—See section 10, Provincial Act, and section 14,
Presidency Act.

Sub-clause (1)—Does not need any comments. In
paragraphs (b) and (c) after “decree”, a reference to
“order” has been added’. An Explanation regarding orders
charging a partner’s interest has also been added.

Sub-clauses (2) and (3)—The words “whether made
under the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act or under this
Act” have been omitted, since both the Acts have been
combined in this Bill. The opening portion of sub-clause
(3) has been re-drafted slightly for clarity.

There are two amendments to this section made by
the Provincial Legislatures, which should be mentioned.
One is the Punjab Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1934
(Punjab Act 7 of 1934). That Act, while fixing the limit
under section 74 for summary administration at rupees
two thousand, enacted a new clause, clause (aa) in section
10, providing that it was an ect of insolvency if the debts
of the debtor amounted to not less than rupees two hund-
red and fifty, and the debtor was entitled to an order for
summary administration. It is considered that the ques-
tion whether there is an act of insolvency or not should
not depend on the size of his assets. The other amend-
ment was made in 1936, by the Legislature of the Central
Provinces, which enacted the Provincial Insolvency (C.P.
and Berar Amendment) Act, 1936, whereby the minimum
of rupees five hundred in clause (1) (a) was reduced to
rupees two hundred. The reason for this amendment
would appear to be that in the stringent financial condi-
tions which were then prevailing, rupees two hundred

1See case-law discussed in Ramasubba v. Official Receiver, AJR. 1963
Mysore 257 (September, 1963 Hegde J).

*Compare clauses $4, 55.

3See Mulla (1958), pages 162 and 163.

“Cf. clause 7.


117

was considered sufficient to entitle the debtor to move for
relief under the Act. In view of the present financial con-
ditions, there is no need to lower the limit of rupees five
hundred.

Nor is it necessary to increase the figure of five hun-
dred'.

Clause 7

See sections 13(1), P.A. and 15 (1) P.T.A. The following
points may be noted: —

G) In sub-clause (1) (c), after decree, “order”
has been added, as in other clauses?
(ii) In sub-clause (1), a provision has been added
requiring particulars of all transfers, etc., made with-
in two years. This will assist the court in its scrutiny
of such transfers.

(ili) Sub-clause (2) has been added to require
the debtor to produce a list? of books of account along
with the petition. This will facilitate serutiny at later
stages.

(iv) In sub-clause (3), the addition of paragraph
(c) is consequential on the provision’ regarding juris-
diction against foreigners,

Clause 8

This deals with the verification of petitions and cor-
responds somewhat to section 12(1) of the Provincial Act.
In the Presidency Act, section 13(1) is confined to credi-
tors’ petitions; as regards debtors’ petitions, the matter is
{under the Presidency Act) governed by rules". The pro-
posed provision has been framed in such manner as to
allow the mode of verification to be dealt with by rules.

Clause 9

General.—This deals with the appointment of interim
receivers, and follows section 20 of the Provincial Act
which corresponds to section 16, Presidency Act.

1. Modification in Provincial Act—The Provincial Act
provides for the appointment of a receiver generally, but
the clause provides for the appointment of an Official

‘Cf. the discussion in the English Committee’s Report (1957), cmd,
221, page 10, para. 16,

*Cf. clause 6, etc,

388 to production of accounts, see clause 14.

‘See clause 98.

SFor example, Bombay rule 54 (Mulla, page 1117) requires attestation,
Calcutta rule 68 (Mulla, page 1064) also requires attestation. Madras Order

ILL, rule 4, requires verification in the manner prescribed by the High Court's
rules for plaints,


118

Receiver as a receiver. Under the Provincial Act, the
properties of the insolvent would, on adjudication, vest
in the court or in the Official Receiver. That Act does not
provide thet there should be an Official Receiver in each
and every area, and that the properties of the insolvent
should vest in him and no other person. Since it has been
provided’ that there should be an Official Assignee for
every area and that on adjudication ‘he property should
vest in him, there is no reason why the Official Assignee
himself should not be appointed interim receiver pending
adjudication. Before adjudication the status of the Offi-
cial Assignee will be that of a receiver under Order 40,
Rule 1, Civil Procedure Code, and the properties of the
debtor would not vest in him, and his position is only that
of a manager of those properties. It is only when there is
an order of adjudication that they will vest in him. It
seems desirable that the person who is to act as interim
receiver should be the person in whom the properties
should vest if the petition results in an order of adjudica-
tion. It has accordingly been provided that the Official
Assignee must be the interim receiver.

2. The Presidency Act, section 16, says that an order
under this section may be made “if it is shown to be
necessary for the protection of the estate”. This express
limitation is not found in the Provincial Act, but has been
retained.

3. The Presidency Act gives such powers to the interim
Receiver “as may be prescribed”. The Provincial Act
gives such powers “as the court may direct”. The language
of the Provincial Act is better, since it gives a discretion
to the court to deal with each individual case according
to its requirements, and has been preferred.

4. The Provincial Act uses the words “when making an
order admitting the petition”. There is also a power to
make the appointment subsequently before adjudication.
This is slightly narrow, inasmuch as, before the admission
of the petition the appointment cannot be made. The
Presidency Act empowers the court to make an order
“at any time after the presentation of the insolvency peti-
tion and before an order of adjudication is made”, It
is considered that the provision in the Presidency Act
should be preferred, but the words “after the presenta-
tion of the insolvency petition” are thought to be unne-
cessary and have been omitted.

5. The words “immediate possession thereof or of any
part thereof” have been replaced by “immediate posses-
sion of the same”. The words “the same”, it is considered,
should suffice for all situations covered by the existing
wording.

See clause 88,


119
Clause 10

Sub-clause (1).—Follows section 18 of the Provincial
Act.

Sub-clauses (2), (3) and (4).—Deal with the topic
dealt with in section 19 of the Provincial Act. There is
no similar elaborate provision in the Presidency Act regard-
ing notice to be given before adjudication. | [There is a
short provision in section 13(3) which implies that the
giving of notice is not obligatory.] The matter is dealt
with elaborately in the rules under the Presidency Act’.

The English rules” are to the effect that where the peti-
tion is filed by the debtor, the receiving order is made
forthwith, and where the petition is filed by a creditor,
notice is given to the debtor.

It is considered that so far as courts other than High
Courts are concerned, notice should be obligatory in terms
of the clause as drafted.

Giving of notice—This has been discussed above.

Notice to transferees——Provision for notice to trans-
ferees has been added. The subject has been discussed
elsewhere’.

Interested persons—Provision empowering notice to
be given to interested persons has been added.

Sub-clause (5)—High Courts——High Courts have been
excluded from the scope of this provision‘.

Clause 11
This has been taken from section 23 of the Provincial
Act. There is nothing corresponding to it in the Presi-
dency Act, but it appears to be a useful provision worth
incorporating.

Clause 12

This corresponds to section 21 of the Provincial Act
(there being nothing corresponding to it in the Presidency
Act). The paragraphs have been put as (a), (b), (०)
instead of as (1), (2), (3).

Clause 13

This is new. At present, section 31 of the Provincial
Act vests in the court a power to grant protection only

1566 Calcutta Rule 74 (Mulla, 1958, page 1065). Bombay Rules 59A
and 60 and Rules 84 and 844 (Mulla, pages 1118 and 1121); and Madras Rules,
Order III, rule 13 (and rule 9, relating to transferees).

See Bankruptcy Rules, 1952, rules 162, 163, 164 reproduced in
Williams (17th Edn.), page 633.

3566 notes to clause 22.
*High Courts will be governed by rules.


120

after the debtor is adjudged insolvent. Under section 23
of that Act the court can release the debtor, but only if
the debtor is actually under arrest or imprisonment. There
is no provision in the Act for granting protection to the
debtor before he is adjudged insolvent, if in fact he is not
under arrest. There are decisions in which the courts,
acting in exercise of their inherent jurisdiction, have
granted interim protection even before adjudication when
the debtor was not under arrest. Vide Abdul Razah v.
Basiruddin Ahmed', and Nallagatti Goundan v. Ramana
Gourdan*, The correctness of these decisions has been
doubted", but it is considered that there should be power
in the courts to grant protection in cases which do not fall
-within section 23 of the Provincial Act, and this clause
provides for that.

While an earlier clause‘ which corresponds to section
“23 of the Provincial Act confers a power on the court to
grant protection when the debtor is under arrest even
before adjudication, the clause under discussion authcrises

the court to pass such order even when he is not actually
under arrest.

Tt will be noticed that the scope of this clause is diffe-
rent from that of section 31 of the Provincial Act, which
has been reproduced in a subsequent clause’.

Clause 14

General—This follows section 22 of the Provincial
Act and sections 15(3), 33 (1) and 33(2) of the Presidency
Act. An attempt has, however, been made to re-draft the
provision so as to deal separately with—

(i) duty to produce accounts’, and
(ii) other duties.

As regards (i), again, the clause deals separately with
(a) debtor's petition [following the provision in the Pre-
sidency Act, section 15(3)] and (9) creditor’s petition, In
the former case, the debtor should primarily be under a
duty io produce accounts, failing which the petition may be
dismissed as under the Presidency Act; in the latter case,
the duty should be to produce accounts whenever required
by tne court, etc.”

Duty to file lists of creditors, etc., should, in the case of
debtor's petition, arise on admission of petition.

11g C.W.N. 586.

2A,LR. 1925 Mad. 170.

3566 Mulla (६959), page 229.

‘Clause 11.

*Clause 24.

®As to list of accounts, see clause 7.

"Cf. Akhoy Chand v. Emp., A.LR. 1934, Calcutta 409, 410 (D.B.).



121

Cf. section 15(3), Presidency Act. The other duties should
arise only on adjudication, as in section 33, Presidency Act.

Necessary changes have been made.

Mention of “special manager” has been added as in the
Presidency Act.

Sub-clauses (1) and (2).—Need no further comments.
Sub-clauses (3) and (4).—Need no further comments.

Sub-clause (5).—A provision requiring the insolvent to
hand over his passport has been added. This does not
appear in either of the existing Acts. But a recommen-
dation to this effect has been made by the English Com-
mittee’, and such a provision might usefully be adopted.

Clause 15
General.—This follows section 24(1) of the Provincial
Act and sections 13(2) and 15(1) of the Presidency Act.
But the provision has been re-drafted to achieve clarity.

Scheme of re-draft.—The re-draft is intended to state
separately the position as regarding hearing of a—

(i) debtor’s petition; and
(ii) ereditor’s petition.

Some of the circumstances to be inquired into on a
creditor’s petition—for example, proof of the act of insol-
vency,—are not applicable to a debtor’s petition, and have
accordingly been omitted.

It will be noted that, except for the point discussed below
regarding proof of inability to pay debts, the re-draft does
not differ in substance from the propositions embodied in
the following provisions of the two Acts: —

Provincial Act (for debtor’s petition) —section
24(1) read with section 10(1).

Provincial Act (for debtor's petition)—section
15(1) read with section 14(1).

Provincial Act (for creditor’s petition) —section
24(1) read with section 9(1).

Presidency Act (for creditor’s petition) —section
13 (2) read with section 12(1).

Inability to pay debts——How far the debtors’ in-
ability to pay debts should be proved (when the peti-

tion is by the debtor) is a point which presents some
difficulty.

The first difficulty is created by the difference in the
wording of the two Acts. In the Provincial Act, section

‘Committee on Bankruptcy Law Amendment, etc, (1957), cmd. 221,
page 17, para. 47.


122

10 (opening lines), expressly provides that the debtor
cannot present a petition unless he is unable to pay his
debts; and section 24(1) (a) requires proof of the debtor’s
being entitled to present the petition. But the provisions
in the Presidency Act are not so direct. Section 15 (1) of
that Act does require that the debtor’s petition shall
“allege” that the debtor is unable to pay his debts. But
the same section, when dealing with proof, merely says
that “if the debtor proves that he is entitled to present
the petition”, the court may make an order of adjudica-
tiun, ete. Now, when one turns to the section in the Pre-
sidency Act dealing with the subject of the debtor being
“entitled to present a petition”, one funds that sec-
tion 14(1) does not mention the requirement of
inability to pay debts. The question that arises
is, whether the ‘inability, etc., has to be “be proved” at
the hearing under the Presidency Act. It seems that the
answer should be in the affirmative for cases under the
Presidency Act also. It has been held under the Presi-
dency Act, that a false allegation about inability entails
the ‘annulment of the adjudication’ under section 21. As
was cbserved in another case”, a debtor petitioner’s only
justification for obtaining the benefit of Insolvency Acts 15
his inability to pay his debts. A clear provision on the
subject would be useful.

The second difficulty is created by the proviso to section
24(1) (a) of the Provincial Act. Inability to pay debts
has been made a condition precedent to the presentation
of the petition in section 10 of the Provincial Act, and this
change was made in 1920 deliberately (departing from the
old Provincial Act of 1907, section 11) to prevent abuse by
debtors filing petitions to avoid liability from arrest in
execution. Mulla has observed® that this has not resulted
in any practical benefit to the creditors. At the same
time, he has not suggested the deletion of the proviso
which limits the scope of the inquiry by the court for this
condition. It is considered that since the proviso does
not impose an absolute limitation, the section in the Pro-
vincial Act need not be disturbed on this point.

Sub-clause (1).—Deals with the case of _ petition by
debtor. No further comments are needed. Mention of
adjourned date is omitted, as unnecessary. See 0.17,

Sub-clause (1), proviso.—The question of inability to
pay debts has already been discussed above'.

1 See Alamelu Mangatha Yarammal v, Balusami, A.LLR. 1928, Madras
394 395, Tight-hand, and 396.

2 Viswanathav. Oficial Assignee,” A.ILR. 1930 Madras 544, 546, left-hand
(Ramesam and Carnish JJ.).

* Mulla (1958), page 200, paragraph 209.
4 See notes to clause 15, “Inability to pay debts”.


123

Sub-clause (2).—Deals with the creditor’s petition.

Omission of section 24(2), P.A—Section 24(2) of the
Provincial Act provides that the court shall also examine
the debtor if he is present. It was held in Gangadas v.
Percival’ that this provision is mandatory, and an order of
adjudication made without examination of the debtor was
bad. The contrary was held in Sitaram v. Amrutrao*.
It has, however, been proposed to omit this sub-section
altogether, as it is considered that a public examination of
the debtor at that stage is not necessary*. Both under the
English Act and under the scheme of the Presidency Act,
the public examination of the debtor takes place after
adjudication, and that procedure has been adopted for all
the courts under the Bill’.

It may be noted that in an earlier Report’ the Law
Commission recommended the acceptance of the sugges-
tion that there should be a provision in the Provincial
Act for the public examination of the insolvent after the
adjudication order is made, and that the examination of a
debtor under section 24 of the Provincial Act® before the
order for adjudication is premature, as there is hardly any
material on which the debtor could be examined at that
stage.

Omission of section 24(3), P.A. and section 90(3), P.T.A.
Provisions regarding adjournment are omitted, as cover-
ed by Order 17, C.P.C.

Omission of section 24(4), P.T.A.

Section 24(4) of the Provincial Act dealing with the
maxing of the memorandum of ihe substance of the evi-
dence has been omitted, as it is considered that such a
detailed provision need not be made in the Act.

Clause 16
General—This deals with disposal of a petition filed
by the creditor.
Sub-clause (1).—This corresponds to section 25 (1),
Provincial Act, section 13(4), Presidency Act.
Sub-clause (2).—This corresponds to section 27(1), part,

Provincial Act, section 13(5), Presidency Act. The words
“may make” have been used, following the Presidency

* ALR. 1927 Cal. 32.

2 LR. 1939 Nag. 463.

2 Cf, suggestion in Mulla (1958), pages 24-25 and 27.

4 See clause 29.

* 1404 Report of the Law Commission (Reform of Judicial Administra~
vion), Vol. 1, page 514, paragraph 9.

* Cited in the 1401 Report as the “Presidency Act’? through slip.

42 MofL—9


124

Acti. [This is a departure from section 27(1) of the Pro-
vincial Act, which uses the word “shall”.]

Section 13(5) of the Presidency Act contains the words
“unless in its opinion the petition ought to have been pre-
sented before some other court”, etc. These have not been
adopted, because under the provisions of the Civil Proce-
dure Code, a court has powers to return a plaint, etc.,
wrongly presented to that court.

Sub-clause (3).—This deals with the procedure to be
adopted when the debtor denies the debt—either its exis-
tence or amount. The position under the two Acts at
present is as follows:—

Dispute as to Section 13(6) and (7) of the Presidency Act provides

debt, that if there is a dispute as to the truth of the debt or
about its quantum, the insolvency court might stay its
hands unti] the debt is established in appropriate proceed-
ings. , There is nothing corresponding to it in the Provin-
cial Act.

In Gopikabai v. Chapsi? it was held by the Bombay High
Court that even under the Provincial Act the insolvency
court had the power to stay the proceeding and refer the
matter for adjudication to a civil court. The contrary view*
has been taken by the Madras High Court in Gangi Reddi
v. Narasimha Reddit, and by the Nagpur High Court in
Deorao Raoji v. Ramji Baheraji* and Shriram Latuji_ v.
Saolaram Govind’, and by the Lahore High Court in Hukam
Chand v. Ganga Ram*-§, (In Wazir Singh v. Janki Das®, the
Lahore High Court has held that when a question is raised
as to whether a property alleged to have been fraudulently
alienated by the debtor belongs to him or not, the insol-
vency court must decide the question and should not refer
it to the Civil Court.) The question is which view should
be adopted. On the one hand, if the insolvency court is
made powerless to decide the dispute, the proceedings may
be delayed. On the other hand, where there is a bona fide
dispute, there is a possibility that the ifsolvency court may
be used by a scheming creditor as a weapon to harass the
debtor. It is considered that the insolvency court should
have a discretion in the matter, and should determine which.
of the following two courses should be adopted, namely,—

(a) deciding the question of debt; or

(b) staying the proceedings pending trial of that
question, provided the debtor furnishes security to the
court’s satisfaction.

See discussion below, “shall” and “may”.

(1935) LL.R. 59 Bom. 161; A.I.R. 1935 Bom. 80.

2
3. See discussion in Mulla (1958), page 191, para. 198.
* LL.R. 1942 Madras 147; A.I.R. 1941 Madras 895.
57. 1953 Nag. 608; A.LR. 1953 Nag. 189.
‘
7
ड़

पः 1953 Nag. 625.
A.LR. 1927 Lah. 111.
See also A.K.R.M.C.T. Chetty Firm v. Maung Aung. A.LR. 1923
Rangoon 21.
* A.LR. 1926 Lahore 679.


125

The sub-clause has been drafted on these lines.

Sub-clause (4) —This is linked up with stay of proceed-
ings for deciding the question of debt.

“Shall” and “may”.—Under the English law, it has. been
held that though an order of adjudication will ordinarily be
made when the conditions mentioned in the section are
satisfied, there might be special grounds for declining to
pass such an order, as for example, (1) when there are no
assets to be distributed, vide Re Betts’; Re Otway”, or (2)
where the petition is filed for other purposes than securing
distribution of the assets, such as extorting money, vide Re
Larard’. These principles have been followed by the High
Courts in India in deciding petitions under section 13 (4) (b)
of the Presidency Act. In Nagiah v. Suryanarayena*, the
creditor's petition was dismissed on the ground that the
motive behind the petition was not payment of the debt
which could be obtained out of the fund in court, but in-
juring the credit of the debtor. See also Ex parte Harsuk-
daj Balkishen Das*, But ina case under the Provincial
Act—Chatrapat Singh v. Kharag Singh’, the question arose
whether an insolvency petition could be dismissed on the
ground that it was an abuse of the process of court even
though all the statutory conditions had been fulfilled. It
was held by the Privy Council. in reversal of the decision
of the Calcutta High Court, that the debtor had a right ex
debito justitiae to have an order of adjudication when the
conditions are satisfied".

Apparently, while under the Presidency Act, the court
has a discretion in all cases, under the Provincial Act it has
no discretion in the case of a debtor’s petition, though per-
haps it has in a creditor's petition under the wording “suffi-
cient cause” in section 25 (1).

Now the question is whether the court should have dis-
cretion in the matter of passing an order of adjudication or
not. On the word “shail”, in section 27(1) of the Provincial
Act, the cour! will have no discretion. If the word “may”
is substituted for the word “shall”, then the court will have
a discretion. It is desirable that the courts should be given
discretion to pass an order of adjudication or not. The
normal rule will undoubtedly be that when the conditions
are satisfied, the order of adjudication would be made, and
it is only when exceptional circumstances exist that the

1 (1897) 1 0.8. 50.

2 (1895) 1 0.8. 812.

3 Mars. 317.

‘ : sed i ५
pan EER 2b Mc al iy REMY 285 sped 2 Reman

* ALR. 1924 Cal. 964.

* (1916) 44 1.0. 115 (1917) LL.R. 44 Cal. 535 P.C.

7 See also Mulla (1958), page 171, para. 166, page 173, para. 167,
81, pana BY and pages 307-208, para. 223 हल 173) Para. X07, Page

(Further
discussion)


126

court would decline to pass such an order. The courts can
be trusted to exercise their discretion in accordance with
the well-settled practice.

Clause 17

General.—This deals with disposal of a petition filed by
a debtor.

Sub-clause (1).—This follows section 25(2) of the Pro-
vincial Act. The proposition is not embodied in so many
words in section 15(1) of the Presidency Act. But, obvious-
ly, where the debtor is not entitled to present the
insolvency petition, the petition must be dismissed under
that Act also}.

Sub-clause (2).—This follows section 27(1), part, of the
Provincial Act and section 15(1), part, of the Presidency
Act. The order of adjudication is to be made only if the
court is satisfied of the right of the debtor to present the
petition. This proposition, embodied in a negative form in
the Provincial Act, section 25(2), is put in a positive form
as in the Presidency Act, section 15(1).

“Shall” and “may”.—See discussion? on clause dealing
with creditor’s petition.

Wrong court—Section 15(1) of the Presidency Act con-
tains the words “unless in its opinion the petition ought to
have been presented before some other court”, etc. These
have been omitted, as under the Civil Procedure Code, re-
turn of a plaint, etc., for presentation to the proper court is
provided for.

Clause 18

General—This corresponds to section 27(1), part and
section 27(2), 9.8.

Sub-clause (1)—-Under the Presidency Act, the period
for applying for discharge is prescribed by the rules*.
Under the Provincial Act the period has to be specified in
the order of adjudication. It is, however, possible that the
court might through oversight omit to mention the period
in the adjudication order, and to meet such cases, the court
should have a power to specify the period in a subsequent
order. Necessary provision has been made.

Sub-clause (2).—It is desirable that the power to extend
the period should be limited to cases where an application
for extension is made within the time (originally) limited

1 See Mulla (1958), page 175, para. 171, last sentence.

3 See notes to clause 16.

3 See Mulla (1958), page 322, para. 350, foot-note. See Bombay Rule
136 (18 months) and’ Calcutta Rule 142A (18 months), Mulla, pages 1128
and 1074. In Madras, Order VIII, Rule 2, mentions 18 months or such other
period as the court may fix.


127

for applying for discharge. The necessary change has been
made. (At present, extension can be granted even after
expiry of the original period.}!

Clause 19

General.—See section 28(2), Provincial Act, and section
17, Presidency Act.

Sub-clause (1)—This incorporates sub-section (2) of
section 28 of the Provincial Act, with this modification that,
whereas under that section, the vesting is in the court cr
in the Receiver, under the clause, the vesting is tu in the
Official Assignee. The reason for this change is, that wader
the scheme of this Bill, the appointment of an Official
Assignee is obligatory throughout the territor.es to which
the Act applies, and hi to occupy the position of €
Official i #H

nm section 17 of the Presidency Act, the wor
“wherever situate” have been used. That has been adopte

The property to vest under the clause ur
will of course be the “property of the inso!ve
in another clause", and hence the words “subject to..... ..
have been inserted to make it clear. This has bec,
necessary in view of the break-up of section 28, Provin
Act, into several clauses in this draft.

Sub-clause (2).—This ‘s new, and is intended to remove
any doubts which may arise as to whether secured credi-
tors who have enforced the security can take proceedings
tor recovery of the baiance from the insolvent’s other pro-
perty.

Sub-clause (3) —There has been some conflict of spinicn
as to whether the provision for obtaining leave of the ¢
before proceedings are taken is a condition precedent ta the
maintainability of those proceedings, or whether such leave
could be obtained after the proceedings are commenced. In
Nazir Ahmad v. People’s Bank of Northern India®, it was
held that a suit instituted without leave of the Court could
not be treated as a nullity on that account. (It was also
observed in Satyamma v. Official Receiver® that if objec-
tion as to the want of leave is not taken at the earliest
opportunity, it must be deemed to have been waived.) But

+ The subject has been discussed by Mulla (7958) at pages 324-326,
para, 351, where the conflict of decisions on the subject is also noted." Hig
suggestion is for providing that the court’s power should be limited to cases
where the application is made before expiry.

2 See clause 88.
3 See clause 48.

* The discussion in Mulla (1958) is at page 259.

3 LL. 1942 Lab. 517; A.LR. 1942 Lahore 289 FB.
© ALR. 1933 Mad. 917.


128

the preponderance of authority is in favour of the view
that a proceeding taken without obtaining leave as requir-
ed by the section is wholly incompetent and must be dis-
missed on that ground. Vide Maya Ookeda v. Kuverji,
Davood Mohideen Rowther v. Sahabdeen Sahib? and
Naruyana Iyer v. Kendan’. In accordance with the view‘,
it has been provided that a proceeding commenced without
obtaining leave shall be dismissed.

Section 28(3)—Provincial Act.-Under section 28(3) of
the Provincial Act, goods which are in the possession of the
debtor on the date of the presentation of the petition under
the circumstances mentioned therein are divisible among
the creditors of the insolvent.

Section 28(6) of the Provincial Act provides that
nothing in that section shall affect the rights of secured
creditors. On the terms of section 28 (6), therefore, if the
owner of the goods mortgages them but continues in posses-
sion, section 28(3) will have no application and the right of
the mortgagees will prevail. That is the view taken by the
High Court of Calcutta in Shamaldas Kshettry v. Phanin-
dra Nath®, and by the Allahabad High Court in Moti Ram
vy. Rodwell’, That is not the law in England nor under the
Presidency Act, and there are no particular reasons why
the law should be different under the Provincial Act’. It
is proposed to deal with the topic dealt with in section
28 (3), Provincial Act in a later clause*. Section 28 (4) and
(5) of the Provincial Act also will more appropriately be
dealt with later®. This splitting up will avoid the confu-
sion caused by existing section 28. .

Sub-clause (4) —Section 28(6) of the Provincial Act is
reproduced in this sub-clause, with one addition which is
intended to settle the conflict of decisions, as to whether
proceedings against the person of the insolvent are or are
not barred under section 28(2) of the Provincial Act’.
Some decisions hold that such proceedings are not barred,
and can be taken without the leave of the court. Vide
Hariram v. Sri Krishna Ram"; Ali Hussain v. Lakshmi-
narain®, Mahomed Roshan v. Gulam Mohinddin"*. The con-

1 ALR. 1932 Bom. 338.

2 LLL.R. 1937 Mad. 841; A.ILR. 1937 Madras 667.
3 LL.R. 1938 Mad. 897.

« Cf, the view of Mulla (1958), page 245.

& ALR. 1923 Cal. 532.

* ALR. 1923 All. 159. (Case of charge).

7 See also Mulla (1958), pages 29-30 and 532.
8 See clause 51.

* See clause 48.

3० See Mulla (1958), pages 252-253.

मे (1927) LL.R. 49 All. 201.

12 54 All. 416; A.LR. 1932 All. 188.

3१ ALR. 1929 Bom. 135.


129

trary was held in Alamelu Ammal v. Venkatarama Tyer?
and Hitnarayan Singh v. Brij Nandann Singh. The for-
mer view has been preferred and embodied in this sub-
clause, as the grant of protection is a privilege to be grant-
ed or withheld at the court's discretion.

[Jt may be noted that while paragraph (a) of this sub-
wlause is confined to secured creditors, paragraph (9) (i.e.,
the added paragraph) will apply to all creditors, including
unsecured creditors. ]

{Stay of suits after adjudication—Whether suits insti-
tuted after the order of adjudication could be stayed under
these sections is a question on which the decisions are con-
flicting. Under the corresponding provisions of the English
Statutes, it has been held that the court has the power to
stay proceedings commenced after an order of adjudication
had been made. Vide Brownscomne v. Fair'-‘-'. In Maho-
med Haji Essack v. Abdul Reahimnan®, a suit insti-
tuted after adjudication was stayed under section
18(3) of the Presidency Act, following the decision in
Brownscombe v. Fair, and that was in turn followed in
Bheraji Samarathji and Co. v. Vasantrao Govindrao Pra-
bhakar? and Bhimaji Bhabhutmal v. Chunilal Jhaver-
chand*. In Maya Ookeda v. Kuverji® and in Jehangir Cur-
setji v. Kastur Pannaji'’, however, it was held that such a
‘suit was wholly incompetent and should be dismissed. In
Ghouse Khan v. Bala Subba Rowther'', it was observed
that a suit instituted after the order of adjudication might
be continued under section 29 of the Provincial Act, but
in Davood Mohideen Rowther v, Sahabdeen Sabbib™ and
Narayana Iyer v. Kenden', it was held that sucha suit
was not maintainable, and that the court had no power
under section 29 to grant leave to continue the suit. That
was also the view taken in Pannulal v. Hira Nand'*, In
Haji Uman Sharif v. Jwala Prasad“, it was held that
if a suit is instituted after adjudication but in ignorance

३ (1927) LL.R, 5० Mad. 977.

2 (1931) LL.R. 10 Pat, 422.

३ 58 L.T. 85.

+ Mulla (1958) page 245.

$ Williams, page 73, speaks of “restraining” the proceedings.
* (1917) LL.R. 41 Bom. 312.

> A.LR. 1929 Bom. 398.

* LL.R. 57 Bom. 623; A.LR. 1932 Bom. 344.

१ A.LR. 1932 Bom. 338.

ALR. 1939 Bom. 344.

11 (1928) LL.R. 51 Mad. 833; A.LLR. 1927 Mad. 925.
12 LL.R. 1937 Mad. 841; A.LR. 1937 Madras 667.

13 LL.R. 1938 Mad. 897; A.LR. 1938 Madras 643.

¥4 (1927) LL.R. 8 Lah. 5933 AIR 1928 Lahore 28.
४ ALR. 1924 Nag, 300,


130

cf adjudication, the court can act under this section. In
view of the provision proposed above’—that a suit insti-
tuted without leave shall be dismissed,—this question can
no longer arise.]

Clause 20

Sub-clauses (1) and (2).—Correspond to section 18(1)
(2), Presidency Act. There is no such provision in the
Provincial Act.

Sub-clause (3).—Follows section 18(3), Presidency Act,
corresponding to section 29 of the Provincial Act. The
wording swift or other proceeding has been adopted. Bot
these sections would apply in terms only to suits or pro-
ceedings which are pending at the date of the order of
adjudication.

while the
वा is better,

The Pr uses the ver “may
Provineial / he verb “shail”. The fo

Stay of suits filed after adjudication—-This has heen
it with separately*.

Clause 21

This is not found in the Provincial Act, but has been
adopted as a useful provision from the Presidency Act,
section 98.

Clause 22

General.—This is based on section 30 of the Provincial
Act and sections 20 and 116(2) of the Presidency Act.

Conclusiveness of order—(a) Section 116(2) of the
Presidency Act contains a special provision that “a copy of
the Official Gazette containing any notice of an order of
adjudication shall be conclusive evidence of the order
having been duly made and of its date”. This is based on
section 132 of the (English) Bankruptcy Act, 1883, replaced
by section 137 of the Act of 1914. There is no similar
provision in the Provincial Act?-i. The reason behind the
English provision has been very lucidly explained by James
L. J. in Learoyd’s case’. A man cannot be duly adjudged
a bankrupt unless he has committed an act of bankruptcy.
That is the “great requisite of all”, and that is why the
determination is “conclusive”.

(b) The provision gives rise to a serious question as
regards the rights of transferees from the insolvent, where

1 Clause 19(3).
3 See notes to clause 19.

2 The Supreme Court has in Ramaswami v. Official Receiver, (1960)
1,8.C.R. 616, 641 decided that the English Rule does not apply in the mofussil.

4 See also discussion in Kehar Singh v. Raghbir, A.I.R. 1960 Punjab 24.
5 Cf. Mulla (1958), page 743.


131

those tranfers from the foundation on which an order of
adjudication is made. It has been held by the English
courts, cn a construction of the corresponding provision of
the English statutes, that if a debtor is adjudged insolvent
on a finding that a transfer by him is an act of insolvency,
as, for exemple, a fraudulent preference, that finding will
be conclusive and binding on the transferee, and that he
will thereafter be precluded for ever from raising the
question as to whether in fact the transfer is an act of in-
solvency, vide ex parte Learoyd'~ This view must
ele entail great hardship on the transferee who is not
a party to the insolvency petition, and whe has no
tunity of being heard on the merits of his transfer
becn stated 11 tification of the iaw as laid down
paurie Learoy ree ot without a
against the order of adjudicat
sgrieved” by it, but ;
cannot be substituted ior 3
0 take part in proceedings and adduce evidence
3 the right te move for annulment of edjudication on
the ground that Jebter should net have been adj 1
clyent an effective substitute for the right to take |
adjudication might be founded

as he can appee
undoubtedly & p:
hav

In Official Assignee of Madras v. O.R.M.O.RS. F
it was held by the Madras High Court that a finding thet
the insolvent has cornmitied a fraudulent preference ७
not be binding on the transferee if he was not a ps
the order of adjudication, and that when the p:%
were taken by the Official ignee to impugn the transfer
as a fraudulent preference, it was open to the transferee 10
plead that the transaction was not hit by the section. The
court declined to follow the decision in ea parte Learoyd.
However, the point came up for consideration before the
Privy Councilin Mahomed Siddique Yousuf v. Official
Assignee, Calcutta‘, and therein the decision 222 13
Leuroyd was followed, and it was held that a third pers
was bound by the finding in the adjudication order. The
Madras High Court had again occasion to consider the same
question in Official Receiver v. Gopela Krishniah®. It re-
affirmed the decision in Official Assignee of Madras v.
O.R.M.O.R.S. Firm, and distinguished the decision in
Mahomed Siddique Yousuf v. Official Assignee, Calcutta,
on the ground that it arose under the Presidency Act and
that there being no provision in the Provincial Act similar

1 Ex. parte Learoyd, (1878), 10 Ch. D. 3.

8०. 3 See discussion in Mulla (1958), pages 743 to 746, and page 178, para,
180.

3 Also see Williams, page 239 and page 485.

4 (1878) 10 Ch. D. 3.

5 (1927) LL.R. 50 Mad. 541.

5 701.A. 935 ILL.R, (1943) 2 Cal. 517 P.C.; A.I.R. 1943 P.C. 130.
7 LLR. 1945 Mad. 541; A.LLR. 1945 Madras 66.


Notice to
«transferee.

Relation
back to

what date.

132

to section 116(2) of the Presidency Act, the order of ac-
judication wes not conclusive so far as the transferee is
concerned on the question whether the transfer was hit
by the Act.

(c) It cannot be denied that transferees would be put
to a hardship if they are barred by an order passed with-
oat hearing them. To avoid this hardship, a provision has
been made elsewhere’ for giving notice to the transferee.
With this safeguard, there does not appear to be any ob-
jection to the adoption of section 116(2) of the Presidency

ct,

Sub-clause (1).—The words “every order of adjudica-
tion” used in the Presidency Act, are better than the words
“an order of adjudication” in the Provincial Act, and have
been adopted.

The Presidency Act requires the date of presentation
of the petition also to be mentioned. This is a useful pro-
vision, and has been adopted.

Sub-clause (2).—Needs no further comments.

Clause 23
This follows section 28(7), P.A. and section 51, P.T.A.

The question as to when an order cf adjudication
should take effect has been discussed elsewhere*.

As to the proviso, see discussion in Mullat,

Clause 24

General.—See section 31, Provincial Act and section
25(1) to (4), Presidency Act.

Cognate provision.—It will be noticed that while this
clause confers a power on the court to grant protection
after adjudication, an earlier clause’ confers a power to
grant protection prior to the adjudication. Further, while
the exercise of the power under that clause is subject to
various conditions and that clause is only a recognition of
the inherent power of the court (recognised by the deci-
sions) to grant protection at that stage, this clause con-
fers a general power in wide terms.

State debts-This is discussed separately’.

3 See clause 10.
2 Mulla has suggested adoption of the English rule. See Mulla (1958),
page (viii) and discussion at page 179, para. 180, page 195, para. 207 and pages

- 743-749, para. 788.

3 See discussion in the body of the Report, paras. 16-17.
* Mulla (1958), pages 583-584, para. 591.

® Clause 13.

5 Notes to clause 136.


133

Submission of Schedule.—Under section 25(1) and (5),
Presidency Act, a person who has not submitted his sche-
dule cannot apply for protection unless the court
thinks it necessary to grant him protection in the in-
terest of the creditors. No such restriction appears to be
called for, and hence the provision in the Presidency Act
has not been incorporated in the clause under discussion.

“Provable in insolvency”—Instead of the words “all
the debts of the debtor or to any of them as the court may
think proper”, occurring in section 31(12) of the Provin-
‘cial Act, the words “debts provable in insolvency.....-0T
to such of them” have been used. The words “provable
in insolvency” will secure precision. [It may be noted,
that section 25(2) of the Presidency Act uses the
expression “mentioned in the Schedule’.] The word
“such” has also been used for precision.

“Modified” Power to modify has been added.

Certificate by Official Assignee.—Section 25(4), latter
part, of the Presidency Act provides that the insolvent
should be prima facie entitled toa protection order on
production of a certificate signed by the Official Assignee’
that “he has so far conformed to the provisions of this
Act”. This part of the sub-section in question has been
omitted, because the real enquiry by the Official Assignee
will, under the draft", begin only after the adjudication,
and therefore the Official Receiver would not be in a posi-
tion to give such certificate soon after adjudication.

Discretion of court.—The grant of a protection order is
amatter of discretion of the Court. The Civil Justice
Committee was unable to recommend any change in the
provision’ (though it noted that it may be anomalous that
an insolvent complying with the requirements of insol-
vency law may yet be liable to go to jail “for indefinite
times”).

Clause 25

This corresponds to section 32 of the Provincial Act
and section 34(1), Presidency Act. The latter has been
mainly followed.

The section of the Presidency Act is a bit wider than
that in the Provincial Act, because it allows the court to
issue the warrant of arrest not only where the insolvent
has absconded but also for removal, etc., of property. An
attempt has been made in the clause under discussion to

2 Mulla (1958), page 276, para. 279, expresses the view that even
the Provincial Ack, che repor’ of the Oficial Receiver willbe taken into account,

३ Clause 29(5).
3 See A.I.R. 1929 Cal. 44 (Rankin C.J.) (Presidency Act).
* Civil Justice Committee, Report (1925), page 231, para. 14.


134

combine the useful features of both the Acts. According-
ly, power to issue the warrant will, under the clause, be
available where a person has absconded (or is about to
abscond as in the Presidency Act) or has departed (as in
the Provincial Act) or is about to depart from the court’s
jurisdiction or has removed or is about to remove his
property as in the Presidency Act or has concealed or is
about to conceal or has destroyed property (as in the
Presidency Act) or is about to destroy property.

A few unnecessary refinements have been omitted.

Omission of Section 34(2) of the Presidency Act’ provides that no
8 34 (2), Pre- payment for compensation made or security given after
sidency Act. srcost under this section shall be exempted from the pro-
visions of the Aet relating to fraudulent preferences.

rev e section relating to fraudulent prefe-
of the Presidency Act, (corresponding
e Provincial Acty—does net come into
a except in respect of transactions entered 0
८ ihe presentation of the insolvency petition’, it is
tcod what useful purpose would be served by
section of the Presidency Act, which can have appli-
iter adjudication. It has, therefore, been

Clause 26

1. This corresponds to section 35 of the Presidency Act.
(There is no such provision in the Frovincial Act.
छः

2. Instead of “post letters” and “parcels” the expres-
sion “postal articles” used in the Indian Post Office Act,
(1898) has been adopted, as comprehensive.

3. The words “from time to time” (not usually used)
have been retained, as in the context their removal would
create doubts, in view of the subsequent words “not ex-
ceeding three months”.

Clause 27

General._This deals with the “Insolvent’s Schedule”,
and follows section 24, Presidency Act. There is no such
provision in the Provincial Act.

Sub-clause (1)—This follows section 24(1) of the Pre-
sidency Act. There is nothing corresponding to it in the
Provincial Act, but it has been adopted as a useful pro-
vision.

Sub-clause (2)—The time within which the schedule
is to be submitted, has been specified here. Section 24(2)
of the Presidency Act makes a detailed provision about the

2 A similar provision in the English Act is section 23(2), discussed in
Williams, page 367, under section 44.
2 Cf. Mulla (1958), page 643, para. 651.


135

calculation of the time-limit, but it is unnecessary to be
so elaborate. It is considered unnecessary to use the
word “so” before the word “submitted”.

Sub-clause (3).—Section 24(3) of the Presidency Act
empowers the court to commit the insolvent to civil prison
for failure to file the schedule. This has been considered
to be a useful provision for application to the, whole 0:
India, and has been adopted.

Sub-clause (4).—This follows section 24 (4) of the Pre-
sidency Act.

Clause 28

This corresponds to section 26 of the Presidency Act.
There is no such provision in the Provincial Act. It has
been adopted as useful.

Clause 29

i. This is based on section 27 of the Presidency Act.
There is nothing corresponding to it in the Provincial Act,
but it has been adopted as a useful provision.

2. Sub-clause (3), which provides for adjournment of
the examination, is not found in the Presidency Act, but
has been inserted as a useful provision.

3. Public examination, it should be noted, should be
held after adjudication'-*.

4. Following section 27(2), Presidency Act, it has been
provided that the examination will be held as soon 85
possible after expiry of the time for filing the insolvent’s
schedule’.

5. In sub-clause (6), instead of the existing expression
“expedient”, the expression “fit” has been substituted, as it
is considered more appropriate.

6. In sub-clause (8), “expedient” has been replaced by
“fit”. The expression “lunatic” has been replaced by
“of unsound mind”, following article 102 of the Constitution.

Clause 30

Sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3).—1. These correspond to
section 21(1) of the Presidency Act (which corresponds
to section 35 of the Provincial Act).

2. Section 21 of the Presidency Act, and section 35, Pro-
vincial Act, as originally enacted, were different. Addi-
tions were made in both the Acts by section 5 of the In-
solvency (Amendment) Act, 1927 (11 of 1927).

18९6 suggestion by Mulla (1958), page 24, para. 27.
3566 also notes to clause 15.
*As to insolyent’s schedule, see clause 27.

Annulment,
discretionary
or man-
datory.


136

3. But as regards cases in which a “debtor” ought not
to have been adjudged or where his debts were paid in
full, there still remained a fundamental difference bet-
ween the Presidency Act and the Provincial Act, in that
while under the former Act the Court “may” annul the
adjudication, under the latter it “shall” annul it on the
grounds set out therein; and adverting to this difference in
language, it was pointed out! that under the Provincial
Act the ceurt had no discretion in the matter (except in
certain cases) while under the Presidency Act, the court
had a discretion in all cases, But’ the Amendment of 1950
substituted the word “shall” for the word “may” in the
first portion of section 21(1) of the Presidency Act, thus
assimilating the position under the Presidency Act to that
under the Provincial Act.

4. The question whether the law should be re-enacted
in terms of the sections as they have stood since the
amendment of 1950, has been considered. Under the Eng-
lish law, it has been generally held that annulment is a
matier of discretion®, and that such an order should not
be passed even if all the debts of the insolvent have been
paid in full, if his conduct had been mala fide. (It may
be mentioned that one of the grounds given for maintaining
the distinction between the Provincial Act and the Presi-
dency Act, was that the Privy Council had held in Chhat-
rapat Singh v. Kharag Singh’, that the court was bound to
adjudicate a person as insolvent if the statutory conditions
were satisfied, and that it had no discretion in the matter.
Qn this point, the Bill now follows the scheme of the
Presidency Act). It is considered unnecessary to disturb
the law as it exists. It may be noted that the English
Committee has (in substance) recommended that the
annulment should be mandatory®.

5. After the word “insolvent”, the words “provable in
insclvency” have been added, to define the debts that must
have been paid in full.

Sub-clause (4)—Is new and is intended to implement
the recommendation made in an earlier Report of the Law
Commission® to the effect that the court may be em-
powered to annul the adjudication in the cases mention-
ed in the sub-clause under discussion.

'Periakaruppan Chettiar v. Arunachalam Chettiar, 1.L.R. 1949 Mad.
4415 ALR. 1940 Madras 375 (F.B.)

*Discussion in Mulla (1958), page 316, paras. 339-340 is with reference
1० previous law.

%See Williams, page 148 and foot-note 60.
344 LA. गा ; LLR. 44 Cal. 535 5 ALR. 1916 P.C. 64 (P.C).

‘Report of the Committee on Bankruptcy Law, etc., (1957) cmd. 2215
Page 49, paras, 145-146.

*r4th Report of the Law Commission (Reform of Judicial Administration),
Vol I, page 514, para, 9, latter half. om)


137

Sub-clause (5).—Is taken from section 21(2) of the
Presidency Act. There is nothing corresponding to it in
the Provincia] Act, but such a provision is considered ne-
cessary’.

Clause 31

The language of section 22, Presidency Act has been
followed. The corresponding section in the Provincial
Act is section 36.

Clause 32

General.—This is based on section 37 of the Provincial
Act [and section 23(1), (2) and (3) of the Presidency Act].

Sub-clauses (1) and (2).—Do not need any furiher
comment. In sub-clause (1), the words “or other person
acting under his authority” have been taken from the
Presidency Act, as useful. The words “such terms”, etc.,
occurring in the Presidency Act have been omitted, as the
word “conditions” will suffice. It has also been made clear
that the appointment can be made by a subsequent order.
(The question of retrospective effect of subsequent
appointment, it is considered, need not be dealt with).

Sub-clauses (3) to (5)—These are new. There Ss
been a conflict of judicial opinion? as to the status of
an appointee under section 37, Provincial Act. In Panna
Lal v. Official Receiver’, the High Court of Allahabad has
held that the purpose of vesting of assets under this
section was not distribution among creditors, under the
Act, but making them available to the creditors in the
ordinary process of courts. The same view has been
taken by the Rangoon High Court in Jaing Bir Singh v.
The Official Receivert and by the Nagpur High Court in
Sulaeman Latif v. Laxman*. The contrary view was taken
in a Full Bench decision of the Madras High Court in
Veerayya v. Sreenivasa Rao*, wherein it was held that
the properties of the insolvent are vested in an appointee
under section 37 for the purpose of distribution among
the general body of creditors and that the court has power
to issue appropriate directions to him for that purpose.
The same view has been taken (i) by the Calcutta High
Court in Beikuntha Nath Haldar v. Kishori Mohan

*Mulla (1958) (Edition)—page 313, para. 335, last four lines, expresses
the view that the same principle will be applied under the Provincial Act.

*See Mulla (1958), page 329, and his suggestion to resolve the conflict
at page 339.

SLL.R. 53 All. 313.

51933) LL.R. 11 Rang. 287.

FA.LR. 1938 Nag. 312.

*(1935) LL.R. 58 Mad. 908. F.B.


138

Banerji!, Abdul Latif v. Percival?, and in re Kashablal
Dhar®, (ii) by the Patna High Court in Atmakur Rama
Rao v. Digamber Rath*; and (iii) by the Bombay High
Court in Jagannath v. Babu Rao’. The clause adopts the
latter view, as being more just.

A connected question on which there has been the same
divergence of judicial opinion is, whether the appointee
under section 37 of the Provincial Act can commence or
continue proceedings with reference to the estate of the
quondam insolvent. As regards properties which actually
vest in him by reason of the order under this section, he
is clearly entitled both to institute fresh proceedings and
to continue those which are pending. But different con-
siderations arise as regards properties which have been
alienated by the insolvent. Until an order is made under
section 53 or section 54 of the Provincial Act annulling a
transfer, the properties vest not in the insolvent, but in
the alienee, and therefore they cannot vest in the appointee
under section 37 of the Provincial Act. He cannct, there-
fore, commence fresh proceedings for annulling transfers
under section 53 or section 54 of the Provincial Act.
Where, however, proceedings under those sections have
been commenced by the Official Receiver and are pending
at the date of the annulment of the adjudication, the
question has been discussed whether the appointee under
section 37 of the Provincial Act can continue them. Con-
sistently with the views expressed on the question already
discussed as to the status of the appointee, the High Courts
of Rangoon and Nagpur have held* that the proceedings
abate on the annulment of adjudication and could not be
continued by the appointee, while the High Courts of
Madras, Bombay and Lahore’? have taken the view that
the institution of the proceedings by the Official Receiver
is an act which is within the saving provision of section
37(1) of the Provincial Act, and that therefore they could
be continued by the appointee for the benefit of creditors.
With a view to settling this conflict, an express provision
is zed that proceedings already taken under sections
53 and 54 of the Provincial Act may be continued hy the
appointee.

To make the provision as comprehensive as possible,
it is provided that the appointee shall have all powers of

TLL.R. (1943) 1 Cal. 5.

®LL.R, (1937) 1 Cal. 264.

3(1933) LL.R. 60 Cal. 259.

‘LL.R. 25 Pat. 286 ; ALR. 1947 Pat. 339.
58,17९, 1944 Bom. 72.

5566 AIR. 1933 Rang. 223 F.B.;

ALR. 1938 Nag. 312.

7566 A.LLR. 1930 Mad, 278 ;
A.LR. 1944 Bom. 72 5
A.LR. 1941 Lah. 316.



139

the Official Receiver relevant to the realisation of the
property and distribution of the estate.

Sub-clause (6)—Is taken from section 23 (2) of the
Presidency Act. It is not found in the Provincial Act. [Sec-
tion 43(2) of the Provincial Act deals with | a different
situation.] It has been adopted as a useful provision.

Clause 33

1. This and the following three clauses' deal with r re
topic of composition and schemes of arrangement. The
statutory provisions bearing on this subject are sections
28 to 32 of the Presidency Act, and sections 38 to 40 of
the Provincial Act. While both these groups of sections
contain the same provisions in substance, they differ on
the procedure to be adopted for the acceptance of a com-
position or scheme. Under the Presidency Act, it is the
Official Assignee that has in the first instance seisin of the
matter, and it is he that has to arrange for a meeting of
the creditors. If the conditions laid down in section 28
of the Presidency Act are satisfied, then the matter comes
before the court under section 29 of that Act; section 30
of that Act provides for the composition or scheme being
accepted by the court, and section 31 for its annulment.
Section 32 states the effect in law of the acceptance and
approval of a composition or scheme.

the Presidency

Under the Provincial Act, however, it is the court that Provincia)
has the entire seisin of the matter. It is the court ihat 4
under section 38 calls for a meeting of creditors and
under section 39 makes an order if the requisite conditions
are satisfied. The effect in law of a composition or a
scheme is also set out in section 39. Section 40 of the Pro-
vincial Act provides for annulment of the composition or
scheme.

2. The difference in procedure between the two groups
of sections is due to the fact, that whereas under the -
Presidency Act there will be an Official Assignee who can
deal with the matter in the first instance, under the Pro-
vincial Act there may or may not be an Official Receiver,
and the matter has therefore necessarily to go to the
Court. As it is proposed to make the appointment of an
Official Assignee obligatory®, there is no reason why the
provision of the Presidency Act should not be made
generally applicable to all the courts.

3. This clause is based on section 28(1) to (4) of the
Presidency Act, and section 38(1) to (3) of the Provincial
ct.

*Clauses 34 to 36.
3566 clause 88.
42 MofL—10


140

4. In sub-clause (4), the words “a majority” have been
preferred to “the majority” occurring in the Presidency
Act. Compare article 368 of the Constitution.

5. Portion dealing with approval has been placed after
the portion dealing with amendment, for the reason that
approval is with reference to the proposal as amended.

6. The words “legal practitioner” have been preferred
to “pleader”.

Clause 34

General.—The clause follows section 29 (1) to (7), P.T.A.
and section 38(4) to (7), P.A.

Sub-clause (1).—A provision has been added that the
notice will be given in the prescribed manner?.

Sub-clauses (2) to (5) —Need no further comments,

Sub-clause (6).—It may be noted that while unde
section 29(5) of the Presidency Act, security has to ~
given for the payment of not less than four annas in ae
rupee, under section 38(5) of the Provincial Act, it n 2, 4°
be for the payment of not less than six annas in the rupeSx
Adopting the provision in the Presidency Act, the clause
substitutes 25 nP. for six annas.

Clause 35

General—This corresponds to sections 30 and 32, Pre-
sidency Act and section 39, Provincial Act,

Sub-clause (1).—Is based on section 80 of the Pre-
sidency Act (which corresponds to section 39 of the Pro-
vincial Act).

Sub-clause (2)—There is nothing in the Provincial
Act, corresponding to section 30(2) of the Presidency
Act, which provides that the provisions of the composi-
tion or scheme may be enforced on application to the
court. This is adopted as a useful provision, and ampli-
fied by providing that the enforcement should be in the
manner provided for the execution of decrees. There is
a further provision in section 30(2) of the Presidency Act
that the disobedience of an order made’ on the application
shall be deemed to be a contempt of court. As the clause
will apply not merely to the High Courts in the Presidency
Towns, but to all the courts, it has been omitted.

Sub-clause (3).—Follows section 32, P.T.A.

Clause 36

General—See section 40, Provincial Act and section
31, Presidency Act.

जा. is suggested that the notice should be published in newspapers,
(besides any other mode of publication that may be suitable),


141

Sub-clause (1).—The words “on application”, etc., and
the mention of vesting of the property have been added
on the lines of the Presidency Act.

Sub-clause (2) —Needs no further comments.

Clause 37
General.—This clause has been taken from section 41
and section 42(3) of the Provincial Act and sections 38°
and 40, Presidency Act.

Sub-clause (1).—Concluding portion beginning with
the words “but save where the public examination” has
been taken from section 38 (1) of the Presidency Act. As to
hearing, see below.

Sub-clause (2).—The words “subject to....this section”
in existing section 41(2) of the Provincial Act are not accu-
rate, Actually, it is the next section—section 42 of the
Provincial Act—which controls the discretion of the court,
and hence the provision should be made subject to the
next section. This has been made clear.

The effect of the next section—i.e., section 42 of the
Provincial Act—is that in the cases mentioned in that
section, the court cannot grant an absolute discharge.
But the court’s discretion to grant a discharge with sus-
pended operation or with condition is not affected. To
make this clear, the words “subject to...... 2? have been
placed not at the beginning of sub-clause (2) in the draft,
but in paragraph (a) of that sub-clause, so that they will
control only the grant of an absolute order of discharge.

“Hearing”—The provision in section 38(1), latter part,
Presidency Act, about hearing in open court, has been
omitted as unnecessary.

In the Presidency Act, section 40, second sentence, there
is a provision that at the hearing the court may put such
questions as it thinks fit to the insolvent and record evid-
ence also. It is considered unnecessary to have this ela-
borate provision, since all these things are implied in the
expression “hearing”.

Clause 38

General.—l. This clause deals with the powers of the
court to grant or refuse discharge. * The corresponding pro-
vision in the Presidency Act is section 39, and in the Pro-
vincial Act, section 42.

2. Under the Presidency Act, the court is bound to re-
fuse discharge when the insolvent has committed any
offence under the Insolvency Act or under sections 421 to
424 of the Indian Penal Code. Then follows the provision
that on proof of certain facts the court may pass one of the
four orders mentioned in section 39(1). [Section 39(2)
of the Presidency Act sets out those facts.] Thus, under
the Presidency Act, there is a distinction between cases
where the Court has no option but to dismiss an application


142
.
for discharge, and cases in which there is a discretion to
pass one of the four orders mentioned in section 39(1).

Section 41(2) of the Provincial Act provides that the
court may pass one of the three kinds of orders mentioned
therein, and section 42(1) sets out the circumstances in
which the court must refuse an absolute discharge. Under
the scheme of the Provincial Act, the court is not bound in
any case to dismiss an application for discharge. While it
must refuse absolute discharge when the circumstances
mentioned in section 42(1) are established, it has neverthe-
less power to pass other kinds of orders under section 41 (2)
in those cases.

3. Where, however, the court has a discretion, the
manner of exercising the discretion is described more ela-
borately in the Presidency Act, which enumerates the
various possible orders,

4. The question is whether the distinction made in ;
tion 39 of the Presidency Act between cases where 9%,
charge must be refused and cases in which the court कब्ज
pass any one of the orders mentioned in the section shoula
be maintained. In England, section 48 of the Bankruptcy
Act, 1869, gave a discretion to the court to grant or refuse
discharge. Then came section 28 of the Bankruptcy Act.
1883, and it provided that the court should refuse discharge
in any case where the insolvent has committed certain
offences. Subsequent legislation in England has departed
from the provision enacted in section 28 of the Bankruptcy
Act, 1883. Section 8 of the Bankruptcy Act, 1890, provided
that the court must refuse discharge in cases where the
bankrupt has committed any felony or misdemeanour
unless for special reasons, the court otherwise determines.
This was substantially reproduced in section 26 of the
Bankruptcy Act, 1914, but it was amended in the year 1926,
and the section as it now stands’ leaves it to the court to
pass any one of the four kinds of orders mentioned therein
even when the bankrupt has committed any misdemeanour
or felony connected with his bankruptcy. Section 39 of
the Presidency Act substantially reproduces the law as
enacted in section 28 of the Bankruptcy Act, 1883, while
section 42 of the Provincial Act is nearer to section 26 of the
Bankruptcy Act, 1914, as it now stands. It is considered
that in all cases, the court should have a discretion? to
pass any of the various orders enumerated in_ section
39(1), Presidency Act. Compare section 26(2), proviso,
English Act. Necessary change has been made.

Sub-clause (1).—See points mentioned alresdy*. In other
respects, it follows the Presidency Act.

See Williams, page 126.
°Cf. the suggestion made by Mulla (1958), page 370, para. 400.
3866 “ General”? above.


143

Sub-clause (2)—A paragraph has been inserted corres-
ponding to section 42(1) (h) of the _ Provincial Insolvency
Act, there being nothing corresponding to it in the Presi-
dency Act. Paragraphs have also been inserted which
correspond to clauses (g), (h) and (0) in section 39 of the
Presidency Act, there being nothing corresponding to them
in section 42 of the Provincial Act.

In the paragraph relating to assets, the proportion ot
eight annas (50 nP.) has been adopted from the Provincial
Act, in preference to four annas mentioned in section 39 (2)
(a) of the Presidency Act. The proposition of 50nP. is
more suitable in the Mofussil (which will constitute the
larger part of the territories to whfzh the Bill will extend).

It has been suggested that the paragraph relating to
trading by the insolvent, should be made subject to the
provisions of section 66 of the Provincial Act, under which
the court can appoint the insolvent to carry on his trade
for the benefit of the creditors. No such clarification seems
to be necessary, because the various acts mentioned in this
clause relate to a stage prior to the insolvency and not
subsequent to the insolvency.

As to offences under LP.C., section 39(1), P.T.A. bars dis-
charge in such cases, but it is considered that' the court
should have a discretion in all cases.

Sub-clause (3)—Report to be evidence.—This provision
(Report to be evidence) is relevant for the preceding
clause also”. That has been made clear.

Section 39(4) of the Presidency Act says that the report
shall be “prima facie” evidence. This has not been adopted,
as it has been considered sufficient to provide that the re-
port shall be evidence.

Clause 39
This follows section 43(1) of the Provincial Act (com-
pare section 41 of the Presidency Act). The former 15
adopted as being more complete*.

__ As to “period of discharge”, see the provision proposed
in the relevant clause which leaves it to the court? to fix
the period.

Section 43(2), Provincial Act, speaks of “re-commit-
ment”. This is omited, as the matter is covered by another

clause*. The mention of that clause® will cover section 41, A

jast 11 words, read with section 23(2), Presidency Act, also.

1866 “ General ” above.
{Clause 37.
__ *The discussion in Mulla (1958), page 326, para, 351, apparently is mad
swith reference to the Provincial Act a it stood ‘before 1950. eS
*See clauses 18 and 37.
"Clause 32.

Grounds of
refusal, etc.

Omission of
section 43(2),
Provincial

Cte


Review.

English law.

Gii) Presi-
dency Act.

Renewal,

(0) Course
adopted.

144

Clause 40

This follows section 42 of the Presidency Act, there being
nothing corresponding to it in the Provincial Act. There is
some doubt! as to whether the dismissal of an application
for discharge under section 42 of the Provincial Act
operates as a bar to a subsequent application by the insol-
vent for discharge. A Sind case—-Re Henry Robert Smith*—
decides that it does, but the contrary view has been held
by the Madras High Court in Gopalan v. Gopalan®, which
is a decision of a Full Bench, by the High Court of Calcutta
in Re Karim Miat and by the Lahore High Court in Ladha
Ram v. Prabh Dial*-°, The position may be first discussed
under review. Section,108(1) of the English Act gives the
court the power to ceifew its order and rescind or vary it
if it thinks it right to do so. This power is used for review-
ing an order refusing discharge’-*. Secticn 8(1) of the Pre-
sidency Act corresponds to section 108(1) of the Bank-
ruptcy Act, 1914, and under that section, the court has the
same power to review an order refusing discharge. There
is no provision in the Provincial Act corresponding to sec-
tion 8(1) of the Presidency Act, and a power to review can,
therefore, be exercised by courts under that Act only in
accordance with Order 47, Rule 1 of the Civil Procedure
Code".

There is another provision bearing on this question.
Section 42 of the Presidency Act provides that when the
court refuses discharge, it may permit the insolvent to re-
new the application. This power is recognised by the au-
thorities in England also, which hold that the court itself
might, when refusing to grant discharge, reserve liberty
to the insolvent to apply again,—though the more conveni-
ent course is to refuse it altogether and use the power of
re-hearing'”.

It is considered that a power in terms of section 42(1)
of the Presidency Act should be conferred on all the courts,
and this clause has been framed" with that object. Section
42(2) of the Presidency Act gives the court power to vary
an order, and that has also been adopted in this clause.
The words “shall satisfy” have been replaced by “satisfies”

1866 Mulla (1958), page 387, para. 408.
21915) 32 1.0. 575.

*A,LR. 1925 Mad. 915 (F.B.).

4A,LR, 1931 Cal. 392.

SA,LR. 1931 Lah, 672.

55९९ also Mulchand v. Official Receiver, (1930) LL.R. 52 All. 385.
*Re Tobias, (1891) 1 Q.B. 463.

356९ Williams, pages 139 and 481.

*See notes to clause 118.

1See Williams, page 139.

मर, Mulla (1958), page 387, para. 408.


145

—which is more in consonance with modern legislative
practice.

Clause 41

This is taken from section 43, Presidency Act. There is
nothing corresponding to it in the Provincial Act. It has
been adopted as a useful provision, as necessary to ensure
proper compliance by the insolvent with his statutory
duties’.

The mention of “contempt of court”, has been omitted
as the new Act will apply to the mofussil also.

Clause 42

This is taken from section 44 of the Presidency Act.
There is nothing corresponding to it in the Provincial Act.
It has been adopted as a useful provision.

Clause 43

General.—This clause follows section 44 of the Provin-
cial Act, and section 45, Presidency Act.

Sub-clause (1)—In paragraph (d), maintenance under
agreements has been added on the lines of section 135(1)
(c), Canadian Act. Further, maintenace under a decree
passed under any law for the time being in force has been
added,

Sub-clause (2)—The Provincial Act uses the words
“provable under this Act”, while the Presidency Act uses
the words “provable in insolvency”. The two are same in
substance.

Sub-clause (3) —Has been added on the lines of section
45(3) of the Presidency Act, as a useful provision.

Sub-clause (4)—The words “or in the nature of a
surety” have been added on the lines of section 45 (4) of the
Presidency Act. It may be that even without these words,
the result would be the same. But lest their omissicn

should throw a doubt on the question, they have been
retained,

Clause 44

1. General—This corresponds to section 33(1), proviso,
and section 34 of the Provincial Act and section 46, Presi-
dency Act.

2. Debts incurred before adjudication with notice, etc.
___An important point which arises is the question of debts
incurred before adjudication with notice of presentation of
petition. The question to be determined OE stion to be determined is, “whether suc whether such

‘As to revocation of discharge under this section,
398, para. 425.

see Mulla (1958), page


146

debts should be provable in insolvency and should be ex-
tinguished on the discharge of the insolvent.

There is a sharp contrast on this point between the Pre-
sidency and the English Acts on the one hand and the Pro-
vincial Act on the other, as explained below: —

(a) Presidency Act, section 46(2), and Bankruptcy Act,
section 30 (2)

Under section 45 of the Presidency Act, an order of
discharge releases the insolvent from all debts contracted
before adjudication. Section 46(2) of that Act enacts that
a person having notice of the presentation of any insol-
vency petition by or against the debtor shall not prove for
any debt or liability contracted by the debtor subsequently
to the date of his so having notice. The result is, that the
debt itself is provable and extinguished on discharge, but
at the same time, the creditor is under a personal disability
to prove it!-*,

This is also the law under the English Act. The hardship
of this rule is, that the creditor can neither prove for the
debt (arisng after notice of bankruptcy) nor sue for it
after the discharge of the debtor. He is thus totally with-
out a remedy.

(b) Section 33 (1), proviso ard section 34 of the Provincial
Act

On the other hand, under the Provincial Act, all debts
incurred up to adjudication seem to be provable”, though
the position is not quite certain’. Though the Provincial
Act, section 34, is silent on this topic, yet, in the absence of a
provision similar to the one contained in the Presidency
Act, it is a plausible view to take that under that section
all debts and liabilities contracted up to the date of the
order of adjudication could be proved, and that those
debts (i.e., even debts incurred after the petition) will also
stand released by the order of discharge. That would appear
to be the construction placed upon the section by the Bom-
bay High Court in Jamshedji v. Pestonji*. The contrary
view, however, was taken by a Full Bench of the Lahore
High Court in Kewal Kishan v. Special Official Receiver’.
There it was held, that the order of adjudication relates
back, under section 28(7), Provincial Act, to the date of

_‘Halsbury (3rd Edn.), Volume on Bankruptcy, page 465, para. 917 3
Williams (17th Edn.), page 187. Rangnekar J. in Jamshedji v. Pestonji,
A.LR. 1932 Bom, 511, 513.

2Mulla (1958), page 4०, para. 431.

K 2E.g. see Jamshedji v. Pestonji, A.I.R. 1932 Bom. 511 (provable) and
‘ewal Kishan v. Special Official Receiver, A.I.R. 1939 Lahore 384 (Full
Bench) (not provable).

*A.LR. 1932 Bom. 5711.
SLL.R. 1940 Lah. 50; A.LR. 1939 Lahore 384 (F.B.)


147

the presentation of the petition, and that on a correct read-
ing of section 28(7), and section 34 it is only debts which
are contracted before the date of the presentation of the
petition that are provable under the Act. The principle
behind this view is, that the insolvent is as from the date
of petition “dead”. A hardship arising on the Lahore view
is, that there is no provision saving debts contracted
bona fide by a person without knowledge of the presenta-
tion of the petition.

3. The question is which of these rival provisions should
be adopted. There are certain other possible alternatives
also.

4, Following possible courses can be considered: —

(i) The first course is, that all debts contracted
after the presentation of the petition should be left
out of insolvency proceedings, that is to say, neither
they will be provable in insolvency nor would an order
of discharge release the debtor from his liability in res-
pect of them.

(ii) The second course is, that the date of the order
of adjudication may be taken as the determining factor,
so that (irrespective of notice) debts contracted after
the presentation of the petition and before adjudication
would be provable in insolvency and would stand re-
leased by the order of discharge.

(iii) The third course is, that, while loans advanc-
ed or dealings had by third persons without notice of
the presentation of the petition should be provable in
insolvency, those which are incurred with notice of
the presentation of the petition should not be “prov-
able”. (Here discharge will not extinguish the debt.)

(iv) The fourth course is, that debts incurred with
notice of presentation should be neither available in
insolvency nor available after discharge.

5. (i) The first course is logical; but it leaves out a large
number of debts, and hence may work hardship.

(ii) The second is also logical, and appears to have been
adopted in the Provincial Act. But it may be criticised
as defective, inasmuch as it regards notice as irrelevant,
and may encourage fraud. ©

(iii) A question can be asked why the third course
should not be preferred and why a person advancing money
with notice of insolvency should have a right to prove for
the debt. The second course is based on the principle that
the presentation of an insolvency petition does not deprive
a person of his capacity to contract and therefore debts
contracted by him should be enforceable. But if it is to
be rejected, it is to be considered whether (iii) should be
adopted or (iv) should be incorporated.


Other
points on
sub-clauses.

148

(iv) The fourth course, which follows section 46(2),
Presidency Act and the English Act seems to be the best,
and has been adopted. It might appear to be harsh, as
involving the consequence that the debts become unavail-
able at all times’. But it is considered, that there is no
reason why a person advancing money with notice of the
act of insolvency should be empowered to sue upon such
loans if the debtor becomes insolvent.

While thus adopting the fourth course, the proposed pro-
vision has substituted notice of act of insolvency in place
of “presentation of petition” occurring in section 46(2),
Presidency Act, as the relation back is to the act of insol-
vency?.

Sub-clauses (1) and (2)—Need no further comments,
Sub-clause (3)—Needs no further comments.

Sub-clause (4)—Power to certify has been given to
the Official Assignee as in the Presidency Act (instead of
the court as in the Provincial Act). .

Meaning of “debt”—‘“Debt” includes fines owing to the
Government, it has been decided* in England, under sec-
tion 30(3) of the English Act.

Explanation 1—Definition of “liability’.—This follows
section 46 of the Presidency Act, Explanation, defining
“liability” in an exhaustive manner to include certain
kinds of obligations. There is no such provision in the
Provincial Act.

Explanation 2.—Is necessary, as the expression “avail-
able act of insolvency” has been used in the clause.

Clause 45

Main para—This is based on section 47 of the Presi-
dency Act; compare section 46, Provincial Act.

Proviso—Section 47 of the Presidency Act contains a
proviso that no set-off will be allowed when the credit
had been given with notice of the presentation of insol-
vency petition. (The Provincial Act has no such provi-
sion). As there can be no set-off in respect of a credit
which the creditor is not entitled to prove under the Act,
section 47, consistently with section 46(2), excludes cre-
dits given with notice of the presentation of insolvency

1Mulla (1958), page 401, para. 431.
4Cf. the suggestion in Mulla (1958), page 28, para. 29.
*Re Pascoe, (1944) 1 All. Eng. Reports 593.


149

petition. As section 46(2), Presidency Act has been adopt-
ed', the proviso has also been adopted, with one modifica-
tion, namely, substitution of act of insolvency’.

On the lines of section 31 of the (English) Bankruptcy
Act, 1914, the words “mutual dealings” have been ampli-
fied by using the words “mutual credits, mutual debts or
other mutual dealings”.

Explanation.—Needs no comments.
Clause 46

This follows section 67, Presidency Act. There is no
such provision in the Provincial Act.

Clause 47

General—See section 48, Presidency-towns Act, section
33(1), Provincial Act. The detailed provisions as to mode
of proof of debt and rights of various creditors and con-
nected matters will be dealt with in a Schedule? as in the
Presidency Act.

This scheme will cover the main paragraph of section
33(1), Provincial Act, in substance.

Section 33(2), Provincial Act, omitted—Section 33 (2),
Provincial Act (Pasting of schedule of debts on court
house) has been omitted, as unnecessary. It is a matter of
detail. which can be dealt with in the rules, if necessary.

Clause 48

General.—This clause deals with properties which are
or are not divisible among the creditors, and, following the
scheme of section 52 of the Presidency Act, it is in two
parts, sub-clause (1) describing properties which are not
divisible among the creditors, and sub-clause (2) describ-
ing those which are.

Sub-clause (1).—Section 28(5) of the Provincial In-
solvency Act, which corresponds to section 52(1), Presi-
dency Act, differs from it in. two respects: —

(i) It does not exclude properties held in trust
by the insolvent. But, under the general law, the re-
sult would be the same as in the Presidency Act.
Such properties have been excluded to avoid any
doubt.

(ii) It does not enumerate, as does section
52(1) (b) of the Presidency Act, the articles which do
not pass on to the Official Receiver, but generally pro-
vides that whatever is not attachable under section 60

4See notes to clause 44.
2Cf. clause 44.
3866 Second Schedule.


After-
acquired
property.

150

of the Civil Procedure Code will not vest in the court.
This has been adopted as more comprehensive.

The Presidency Act imposes in this respect a limit of
rupees 300 in the whole, which appears to be unnecessary.

Insurance policies have been excluded, following sec-
tion 91(b) Australian Act.

Tenancies.—This is discussed below’.

Swb-clause (2).—This sets out the properties which
are divisible among the creditors.

Paragraph (a)—Corresponds to section 28(2), earlier
part, of the Provincial Act, and follows section 52(2) (a)
of the Presidency Act, but omits therefrom after-acquired
properties, for which there is a separate provision 180९7,

Paragraph (b)—Is taken from section 52(2) (9), Pre-
sidency Act and section 28A of the Provincial Act*. Para-
graph (c) corresponds to section 28(4) of the Provincial
Act, and follows section 52(2) (a), latter part, Presidency

ct.

Section 28A of the Provincial Act contains two pro-
visos which have been omitted in the draft, as they are
obsolete now.

Reputed ownership.—The doctrine of reputed owner-
ship is proposed to be abolished and a new provision* is
recommended in its place®.

Paragraph (c)—This deals with after-acquired proper-
ty. There is difference between section §2(2) (a) of the
Presidency Act and section 28(4) of the Provincial Act,
in this respect.

The Bill has adopted the law as laid down in the
Provincial Act’.

Hire-purchase tramsactions—In an earlier Report* of
the Law Commission, a recommendation had been made
to exclude goods taken under hire-purchase from the doc-
trine of reputed ownership.

As the doctrine is being replaced by a different provi-
sion®, it becomes unnecessary to incorporate any special
provision on the subject.

3566 below—* Insolvency and Tenancies”.

*Clause 48 (2)(¢). ;

3५ to & 28A, see discussion in R. M. Bhatt v. Manilal, ALR. 1559
Bom, 229 (J. C. Shah J.).

Sec clause 51. .

5566 para. 18, body of the Report.

SCf, Mulla (1958), pages 516, 520, 522.

75६६ for a detailed discussion the body of the Report, para. 29.

*20th Report, para. 10 (Hire-purchase).

3566 clause 51.



151

1, The question of vesting of tenancies, particularly Insol

statutory tenancies, is considered below.

2. Ordinarily speaking, all leases would be “property”
and would, on the insolvency of the lessee, vest in the Offi-
cial Assignee’. The question has been raised whether an
exception should not be made for tenancies to which the
Rent Control Act of the State concerned applies. The
following points require consideration: —

(i) Whether the exemption should apply tc all
premises wherever situated, or whether it should be
confined to those areas where some legislation in the
nature of Rent Control Act is in force;

(ii) If it is to be confined to areas where the Rent
Control Act is in force, the next question is, whether
it should apply to all kinds of leases or whether it
should be confined to those leases where the tenancy
is purely statutory, i.e. where, after determination of
the tenancy, the tenant continues only by virtue of
the Rent Contro] Act.

(iii) whether, (if it is to be applied to all areas
in which Rent Control Act is in force) should it cover
all premises, or only premises of a certain area,
value or rent?

After careful consideration, it is felt that the provision
should apply to all tenancies in respect of premises to
which the Rent Control Act applies, irrespective of area,
value or rent.

3. The Rent Control Acts do not appear to contain any
express provision barring the attachment of tenancies to
which those Acts apply. There are, however, provisions
prohibiting the tenant from sub-letting the premises or
assigning or transferring? in any other manner his inter-
est therein (subject to certain exceptions not relevant for
the purpose)®. Unauthorised sub-letting or assigning, etc.,
is a ground justifying the landlord’s claim for recovery of
possession under, for example, section 13 (1) (e) of the
Bombay Act and section 14(1) (b) of the Delhi Act.

4. The definition of “statutory tenant” in the English
Act may be noted here.

Section 49(1) of the (English) Housing Repairs and
Rents Act, 1954 (2 and 3 Eliz. 2, c. 53) gives the following
definition: —

“statutory tenant” means a tenant [as defined in
section 12(1)(g) of the Act of 1920] who retains

1Reoves v. Davies, (1921) 2 K.B. 486, (C.A.).

१९९९, for example, section 15 of the Bombay Act and section 16(3) of the
Delhi Act.

"The Bombay Act is the Bombay Rents, Hotels and Lodging Houses
Rates Control Act, 1947 (Bombay Act 57 of 1947). The Delhi Act is the
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (59 of 1958).

cies.

Ivency
tenan-


doz

possession by virtue of the Rent Acts and not as being
entitled to a tenancy, and “statutory tenancy” shall
be construed accordingly.

The definition of “landlord” and “tenant” in the Eng-
lish Act of 1920 is as follows:—

‘The expression “landlord” also includes in relation to
any dwelling-house any person, other than a tenant, who
is or would but for this Act be entitled to possession of
the dwelling-house and the expressions “tenant” and “ten-
ancy” include sub-tenant and sub-tenancy and the expres-
sion “let” includes sub-let; and the expression “tenant”
includes the widow of a tenant dying intestate who was
residing with him at the time of his death, or where a
tenant dying intestate leaves no such widow or is a woman,
such member of the tenant’s family so residing as afore-
said as may be decided in default of agreement by the
country court.’.

5. It is considered that the protection should not be
confined to purely statutory tenancies as defined in the
English Act. है

(It has been held in England that a statutory tenancy
under the Rent Acts normally arises when a tenant under
a lease or other contractual tenancy within the Act holds
over, 1.९. remains in possession after the! expiration of the
contractual tenancy. Another case of statutory tenancy
is the one where, without any formal termination of the
tenancy, a contractual tenant dies leaving a widow or other
relative resident with him, who does not take as his per-
sonal representative?.)

6. The legal position of a statutory tenancy was lucidly
explained in a Bombay case*. “The plaintiff was entitled
to terminate under the ordinary rules of law the contract
which had been establisheq between him and the defend-
ants by the consent decree, and on August 31, 1922, when
the plaintiff’s notice expired, that tenancy terminated.
Had it not been for the Rent Act, the defendants would
have been bound to vacate; but under its provisions they
might remain in possession, and under section 9 no order
for the recovery of possession of the premises could he
made so long as they paid or were ready and willing to
pay rent to the full extent allowable by the Act, ang ner-
form the conditions of the tenancy. I presume that would
mean the conditions of the tenancy existing between the
parties before the agreement terminated, which would be
continued to that extent by virtue of those words if the
tenant remained in possession under the Act”.

*Megarry, Rent Restriction Acts (1961), page 156.
*See Megarry, Rent Restriction Acts (1961), page 156.

*Kalianmal v. Dharamsey Jetha and Co. A.I.R. 1924 Bombay _ 330;
331, right hand and 332, left hand (Macleod C. J. and Crump J.) [Under
Bombay Rent War, Restrictions Act, 1918 (2 of 1918)}.


153
The statutory tenant’s right is a “personal” right to re-
main in possession of the property, and no more’.

7, The following chart will show the difference between
the two kinds of tenancies: —

Contractual tenancy Statutory tenancy

1, Assignable subject to contract Not assignable (except where there
to the contrary. is a statutory provision, as in
section 17 of the English Act of
1957--Rent Act, 1957,—5 and 6

Eliz. 2 Ch. 25).

2. Vests in the heirs on death? Does not vest in the heirs, in the
‘absence of specific provision in
the Act. (The English Act of 19575
section 17, provides for such vesting
in certain cases. The definition
of “tenant” in the English Act of
1920, section 12 and certain Acts in
India ‘5 has also this effect in
substance).

3. Vests in the Official Assignee, Does not vest in the Official Assignee”,
on insolvency’. on insolvency.

4. Continuous transmissibility. Transmissibility only by statute,
‘and that also only once®, {Double
transmissibility may be — specially
provided for as in section17 of the
(English) Rent Act of 1957,—5 and 6
Eliz. 2 Ch. 25].

8. In England it has been held that a statutory tenancy
created by the Rent Restrictions Act confers in the statu-
tory tenancy only a personal right to possession, and
therefore it is not “property” within section 167 of the Bank-
ruptcy Act, 1914 so as to vest in the trustee in the bank-

| ANihal Chand v, Shiv Narain, ALR. 1958 Punjab 263, 265 (Mehar
Singh J.).

2Megarry (1961), page 214.

2Anwar Ali v. Jamini Lal, 1.L.R. (1939) 2 Cal. 254, 258 (Nasim Ali
1) (Case of monthly tenancy).

‘Megarry, Rent Restriction Acts (1961), page 214, top and page 198.

‘Nehal Chand v, Shiv Narain, A.ILR. 1958 Punjab 263, 265, lelt
hand. middle (Mehar Singh J.) {Delhi and Ajmer Merwara Rent Act (19 of
1947)]-

*Megarry, Rent Restriction Acts (1961), page 198, foot-note 77.
?Megarry, Rent Restriction Acts (1961), page 198, foot-note 85.
®Megarry, Rent Restriction Acts (1961), page 214, top.


154

ruptey of the statutory tenant. Thus, in Sutton v. Dorf‘,
the plaintiff claimed possession from the defendant of
premises which were let by the plaintiff to the defendant
for a period of 3 years from a certain date. At the end of
the term, he continued in possession as a statutory tenant.
In 1930, he was adjudicated a bankrupt and, in 1931 the
trustee disclaimed the tenancy under section 54 of the
Bankruptcy Act, 1914. The judge made an order of pos-
session, holding the statutory tenancy to be “property”.
The defendant appealed. It was held, after a discussion of
case-law, that the right of the statutory tenant was purely
personal right. The case-law had made it clear that it
could not be—

(i) assigned;
(i) sublet; or
(ili) transmitted by will.

It was true, that on death intestate, the tenant’s widow
or some other member of the family residing with him
had a right to continue in possession, under section 12(1) (g)
of the Act of 1920; but that was only due to the express
statutory provision—the definition of “tenant” which in-
cluded such person.

(The drafts given below were also considered, but the
draft appearing in the Billl was preferred.)

Alternative draft No. 1

“the interest of a tenant in, or the right of a tenant to
retain possession of any premises, being premises to which
any law relating to the control of rents and of eviction
therefrom applies for the time being.”

Alternative draft No. 2

“the interest of a tenant in any premises to which any
lew providing for the control of rents and of eviction
therefrom applies for the time being, or the right of a
tenant as defined in any such law to retain possession of
any premises by virtue of any such law.”

Clause 49

This is a new provision, intended to deal with the case
of a second or subsequent bankruptcy. It mainly follows
section 39 of the English Act; but one modification has
been made, to provide that from the assets available in
the second insolvency the creditors in the second insol-
vency shall first be paid dividend equivalent to the divi-
dend paid to the creditors of the first insolvency from the

1968 Sutton ४. Dorf, (1932), A.E.R. Reprint 70 EB Dyn} (Acton
and Talbot JJ.) approved in Smith v. Oder (1949) W. N. 249 (Court of
Appeal) ; see Williams, Bankruptcy (17th Edn.), page 29, foot-note:
170.


155

assets of the first insolvency. This adopts the second _al-
ternative discussed in the English Committee’s Re-
port!-», The existing position is stated in Mulla’.

Clause 50

This is a new provision requiring the insolvent to inti-
mate to the Official Assignee particulars of after-acquired
property. Cf, the recommendation of the English Com-
mittee on Bankruptcy Law‘.

Exception has been made for suitable cases,

Clause 51

This provision, dealing with property in the possession
of the insolvent, is intended to take the place of the exis-
ting provisions relating to reputed ownership’—section
28 (3), P-A. and section 52(2) (०), P.T.A. It has, in subs-
tance. been taken from section 50 of the Canadian Act,
except that the time limit of 15 days (after sending of the
notice) (appearing in the Canadian Act) has been replaced
by 30 days. It has also been considered desirable to insert
a specific provision authorising the Official Assignee to
take possession of property to which the section applies,
pending determination of the claim of the third person.
The wording “property under this section” or “property
referred to in sub-section (1)” used in the Canadian Act
has been replaced by more precise words.

A provision authorising the Official Assignee to seize
the property (in the case of movable property subject to
speedy and natural decay) has been added.

Clause 52

General.—This is based generally on section 51 of the
Provincial Act, the corresponding provision in the Presi-
dency Act being section 53.

Sub-clause (1).—Needs no special comments. “Orders”
have been added. :

Sub-clause (2)—This is new, and provides that wherr
an execution has issued but the assets have not been rea-
lised before the day of the admission of the petition, the
decree-holder should have a first charge for the costs in-
curred by him in the execution. Under sections 51 and 52
of the Provincial Act (as they now stand), the position:
shortly is, that when a creditor executes his decree, if
assets have been realised before the date of the admission

186९ English Committee’s Report, page 38, para. 114.
2 See detailed discussion in the body of the Report, para. 28.
2 Mulla (1958), page 517, para. 533.
‘English Committee’s Report, page 18, para. 47, latter half.
5 See also body of the Report, para. 18.

42 Mof L—i1


156

of the petition, they will wholly be available to him, under
section 51; if no sale has taken place before the petition is
admitted, then, under section 52; the court, if informed of
the petition, is to take possession of the property sought
to be sold and put it in the possession of the receiver, the
execution creditor, however, being given a charge for the
costs of the suit in which the decree was passed, and of
the execution. But where the sale has already taken
place in execution of the decree before the date of ad-
mission of the petition but assets have not been realised
in full before the date of the admission of the petition, the
case remains uncovered. Similarly, where the property is
sold subsequent to the admission’ of the petition, but
the court is not notified and a move made to stay the sale,
the case is uncovered. In both the cases, there ‘is no pro-
vision giving the creditor a charge for the costs incurred
in the execution. This is rather harsh. There is no rea-
son why the execution creditor, at whose instance the
property has been brought to sale, should not be given a
charge for his costs. That was the view taken in Official
Receiver v. Sambasiva Aiyar!, differing from the decision
in Balarami Reddi v. Official Receiver?.’ The Bill has adop-
ted the former view as just’.

Sub-clause (3)—In place of the words “in all cases”,
the words “if such sale is held before the making of an
order of adjudication” have been introduced. It was held
in some cases, on the strength of the words “in all cases”,
that a sale held even after adjudication would pass good
title to a bora fide purchaser. See Khurshid Ali v. Thakur
Rachman Singh*; Katyani Devi v. Haridas Addhya*; Moti-
lal Dhannalal v. Nathu®. The contrary view has been taken
in Guravaiah v. Rangiah*: Thiruvaraya Mathu Pillai v.
Official Receiver*; Chunilal Bhwanidas v. Vithal Balaji’:
and that seems to be correct, and has been adopted’. The
order of adjudication vests the title in the Official Recei-
ver, and a sale thereafter of the “right”, title and interest,
of the debtor should convey no title.

It may be noted that the Privy Council" has held that
an attachment in execution does not invalidate an alienation
by operation of law effcted by a vesting order under the
Indian Insolvency Act, 1848, and that after such vesting

गुर, 1942 Mad. 757 ; ALR. 1943 Madras 118,
*LL.R. 1939 Mad. 343 3 ALR. 1939 Madras 291.
3, Cf. Mulla (1958), page 586, middle,

‘LL.R. 1949 All. 508 ; ALR. 1949 All. 660.

553 C.W.N. 304.

5 LL.R. 1942 Nag. 377 3 ALR. 1942 Nag. 414.
TLLAR, 1942 Mad. 614 3 A.LR. 1942 Mad. 415 (1).
SA.LR. 1951 T.C. 193. (Discussed case-law),
®A.LR. 1933 Nag. 28.

20, Cf. discussion in Mulla (1958), pages 251-252.

Pc.” Raghunath Das v. Sundar Das, (1915) I.L.R. 42 Calcutta 72, 83,


157

order the judgment-debtor has no right, title or interest
which could be sold to or vested in an auction-purchaser,
and consequently the auction purchaser in execution would
not acquire any title to the property.

Where the sale takes place after presentation of the oie before
petition but before adjudication, the position is different. adjudication.
It is only by virtue of the doctrine of relation back that
the debtor ceases to have title, and it is but right that the
retrospective operation of the order should not affect titles
of purchasers who had in the meantime purchased property
bona fide. है

There is no reason why the clause under discussion
should not apply to the execution of “orders”. The neces-
sary change has been made accordingly'.

Sub-clause (4)—This has been placed at the end, as
it is in the nature of a saving. The Provincial Act speaks
of “the decree” and “creditor” while the Presidency Act
speaks of “debtor”. The former is more precise and has
been adopted,

Clause 53

1. This follows section 54 of the Presidency Act, the
corresponding provision in the Provincial Act being section
52.

2. There is one point of difference between the two
Acts. While under the Presidency Act the decree-holder
is given a charge only for costs of the execution which
becomes infructuous, the Provincial Act gives him a charge
for the costs of the suit also in which the decree was pass-
ed. There appears to be no justification for this. There
are no grounds for giving a charge for costs of the suit
to a decree-holder who moves for execution, while deny-
ing it to other decree-holders. The clause accordingly
confines the charge to the costs of the execution.

3. It hes been made clear that until adjudication the
court will stay the proceedings. This is necessary, because
the Official Receiver does not, speaking generally, come on
the scene until the actual adjudication. Consequently,
it has also been provided that the assets will be delivered
on adjudication?.

4. The words “court shall, on application” have been
replaced by more elaborate wording, “court executing the
decree or order shal!, on application by any person inter-
ested”.

1 5. The provision has been made applicable to orders
8450४,

10. changes made in existing sections by clauses 6 and 53.
Rea Mulla (1958), page 598, para. 605. ¥ 33
‘Cf. changes made in existing section by clauses 6 and 52.


158

Clause 54

General—This deals with voluntary transfers and cor-
responds to section 55, Presidency Act and section 53 of
the Provincial Act. Section 55 of the Presidency Act
makes such transfers “void”, and its language has been
preferred'-2-" fo “that in the Provincial Act which uses
“voidable”.

Main para.—Under section 55 of the Presidency Act, the
period of two years is to be counted up to the date of the
adjudication. Read with the doctrine of relation back, this
would mean the date of the act of insolvency’. This, how-
ever, is not convenient, and the clause under discussion,
therefore, speaks of a “petition presented”, as in the Pro-
vincial Act.

Explanation.—In the case of a document which is regis-
tered, the period should be counted from the date of
registration. For reasons, see the notes to the clause re-
lating to avoidance of preference’.

Clause 55

General—vhis deals with fraudulent preferences, and
corresponds to section 54 of the Provincial Act and section
56 of the Presidency Act.

“VYoid”.—The Provincial Act treats the transfers under
this clause as “void’*. So does the Presidency Act. But
the Provincial Act also says that they “shall” be annulled
by the “court’—a provision not found in the Presidency
Act. It is not considered necessary to depart from the
language used in the Presidency Act’.

Surety.—In England, it had been held under the Bank-
ruptcy Act of 1883, that a payment by the debtor to a surety
for a debt was not a fraudulent preference, vide Re Mills‘;
Re Warran'. The law was altered in the Bankruptcy Act
of 1914, which provided in section 44(1) that the payment
to a surety by the debtor was also a fraudulent preference.
Section 55 of the Presidency Act, 1909, followed the lan-
guage of English Act of 1883, and séction 54 of the Provin-
cial Act, 1920, followed that of section 55 of the Presidency

388 to interpretation of “ void”, see Mulla (1958), page 601, para. 608
and page 655, para. 665. But also see page 56.

2Also see Williams, Commentary on section 42(1).

3566 discussion in body of the Report, para. 22.

‘Mulla (1958), page 615, para. 621.

*See notes to clause 55.

Cf. Ramaswami Chettiar v. Official Receiver, (1960) 1 S.C.R. 6161
A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 70 ; (1960) S.C, J. 128.

7866 the body of the Report, paras. 20-21.

(888) 58 L.T. 871.

१1900) 2 0.8. 138.


159

Act. It was, however, held in Roderigues v. Ramaswami',
following the English authorities. that a surety is a credi-
tor for the purposes of the section. Necessary change has
been made to include surety.

Period.—The period of three months has been increased
to six months’.

Explanation.—As pointed out in an earlier Report*, there
is a conflict of views on the question whether, for decid-
ing a fraudulent preference under the Insolvency law, the
transfer should be deemed to have been made on the date
of the instrument or on the date of the registration. It
was observed there, that the matter should be dealt with
by an amendment of the relevant provisions of the insol-
vency law. It is proposed that the period should be counted
from the date of registration’. This will make for more
efficient working of the insolvency law, by giving an ex-
tended period and defeating any move on the part of an
insolvent to avoid the provisions relating to fraudulent
preference by postponing registration. It is considered that
the principle should apply to the section relating to volun-
tary transfers also’-’, though the cases where the result
would be different must be very few, in view of the limits
within which documents are ordinarily required to be
registered (sections 23—26, Registration Act).

Transfers falling under section 53, Transfer of Property
ct—

These need not be discussed’.
Clause 56

1. This follows section 54-A of the Provincial Act, which
was introduced by the Amending Act (39 of .1926). The
section gives effect to the view taken by the Calcutta
High Court in Re Surajmull Mungle Chand* and by the
Madras High Court in Ananthanarayana Aiyar v. Sankara-
narayana Ayyar®. (There is no such provision in the Pre-
sideney Act'"),

(1917) LL.R. 40 Mad. 783 (F-B.)
2 See discussion in the body of the Report, para. 23.
a 36th Report of the Law Commission (Registration Act), page 29, paragraph
‘See Mulla (1958), page 638.
5866 clause 54.
*Cf. Mulla (1958), page 163, para. 154, generally.
7566 Mulla (1958), pages 65, 56, 146, 618, 603, for several points.
SA.LR. 1921 Cal. 403.
*(1924) LL.R. 47 Mad. 673.
ewe the practice in Presidency Towns, see Mulla (1958), page 642, para,


160

2. Instead of the word “annulment”, the word “avoid-
ance” has been substituted’.

Clause 57

General._Compeare and contrast section 55 of the Pro-
vincial Act and section 57, Presidency Act.

“Good faith’—The word “bona fide” apear in the
marginal note to the section in both the Presidency and
Provincial Acts. Though the words do not occur in the
body of the section, it is considered that the transaction
to be protected, must be entered into in good faith (apart
trom want of notice as provided under the proviso). That
has been made clear*.

The history of the provision in English law is this.
Section 133 of the Bankruptcy Act, 1849, contained the
words “bona fide”. They were replaced by the words “in
good faith” in sections 94 and 95(1) of the Bankruptcy
Act, 1869. In section 49 of the Bankruptcy Act, 1883, ne?-
ther of these expressions was reproduced. But the margi-
nal! note continued the words “bona fide”*. It is this langu-
age that has been adopted in section 55 of the Provincial
Act and section 57 of the Presidency 3०४.

Strictly speaking, the words occurring in a marginal
note should not be used for the purpose of controlling the
interpretation which would be proper on the language c!
the section itself. It should, therefore, follow that a tran-
saction will be protected under the section if it satisfies
the two conditions specified in the proviso, namely, that
it takes place before the date of the order of adjudication
and the person with whem the transaction takes place has
not, at that time, notice of the presentation of an insolven-
cy petition. The question whether a transaction will be
protected under this section when it lacks bona fides even
though the two conditions specified therein be satisfied
has been the subject of judicial decisions. In the Mercan-
tile Bank of India Ltd. v. The Official Assignee*, the creditor
received a notice from the debtor’s agent that the debtor
was soing to suspend payment and thereafter took posses-
sion of the debtor’s goods pursuant to a letter previously
given by him. The question was, whether this was pro-
tected by section 57 of the Presidency Act. It was found,
that at that time no insolvency petition had been present-
ed. Therefore the conditions specified in section 57 were

1Cf. clauses 54 and 55.

2See also body of the Report, para, 24.

SWhether good faith is required in England is slightly doubtful at present.
See Williams, pages 245, 366, 370 and Re Seymour, (1937) Ch. 668 3 (1937)
3

“Discussion in Mulla about history is at page 645, para. 6530).

§(1916) LL.R. 39 Madras 250.


161

satisfied. But the court, nevertheless, held that the trans-
action was not protected, because, having regard to ihe
notice received from the debtor’s agent, the action of the
creditor could not be said to be bona fide as that was notice
to him that an act of insolvency was being committed.
«dverting to the contention that the words “bona fide” did
not occur in the body of the section, the court pointed out,
that on the corresponding provision of the English statute
< had been held in a series of authorities in England that
bona fides also should be established before protection
under that section could be claimed; and (following those
authorities) it was held that the transaction was not pro-
tected by section 57, fur the reason that it was not bona
fide. This decision has been criticised as not warranted
py the language of the section'-", but there can be no
doubt that the conclusion reached therein is just and
equitable and in accordance with the principle on which
Insolvency Law is based. To remove doubts and uncer-
tainties, the words “in gocd faith” have been inserted.
Notice of “petition” or “act of insolvency”

The proviso to section 57, Presidency Act, speaks of the
transaction having been entered into without notice of
presentation of the “petition”. This is inconsistent with
the scheme of relation back as adopted in that Act®. Hence
it has been changed te notice of “available” act of insol-
vency’. (Compare section 45, proviso, English Act and
section 167). The inconsistency in the existing section 57,
Presidency Act has been noted in one decision also*.

Bona fide transferees from transferees

The question whether® the protection should be extend-
ed to a transferee taking property bona fide from a trans-
feree (where the intermediate transferee did not act in
good faith) has been considered. It is, however, not
thought proper to make such a provision, as it would be
illogical to protect a subsequent transferee, when the in-
termediate transferee (from whom he derived title) is not
protected.

Opening words.—The elaborate wording in section 57,
Presidency Act and in section 55, Provincial Act, referring

to the “foregoing” provisions relating to the effect, etc., has
been retained.

1866 discussion in Mulla (1958), page 650, para. 656.

°Cf. Surya Kumar v, Bijay K. Hazra, 1.L.R. (1 पर
है 2 1 1// $5. vay a, (1937) 1 Cal. 557, 566
“Mulla (1958), page 26, para. 29, page 28 (discussion as to protected
transactions may be seen). Also see page 649, para. 656(3).
“See also body of the Report, para. 24.

*See Surya Kumar v, Bijay K. Hazra, I.L.R. .
(Lone wiles jay fazra, I.L.R. (1937) 1 Cal. 557, 564

®Cf. Mulla (1958), page 656 to] » para. 66: ding transfe
donees, see page 620, pars. 623). 5 (Regarding transferees from


162

Bankers.—The question of granting protection to bank-
ers on the lines of section 97, Australian Act [and section
47(1), last para. English Act] has been considered, but no
such further protection appears to be necessary, in addi-
tion to that conferred by the new clause! corresponding
to section 46, English Act?.

Clause 58

This is @ new provision, which follows section 46 of the
English Act, and is intended to protect payments, etc.,
made to an insolvent without notice of presentation of the
petition. The insertion of such a provision has been sug-
gested by Mulla?. The suggestion has been accepted, as
such protection seems to be needed, (The English section
was first introduced, as pointed out by Williams‘, to remedy
the dilemma of a defendant to a money claim who has
notice of an act of bankruptcy, and generally to prevent
such notice from “paralysing” persons dealing with the
debtor in the ordinary ‘course of business or otherwise
bora fide*.)

Since in the clause® dealing with protected transactions,
want of notice of act of insolvency has been substituted in
place of want of notice of presentation, etc., this change is
necessary.

Clause 59

This is a new provision, suggested by section 66 of the
‘Canadian Act.

Clause 60

General.—This follows, in general, section 58, Presi-
dency Act. Compare section 56 (3), Provincial Act.

Sub-clause (1).—Needs no further comments.

Sub-clause (2).—There is a provision in section 56(3),
proviso, Provincial Act barring removal from possession of
“any person whom the insolvent has not a present right
so to remove”. It does not appear in the Presidency Act,
and has therefore been omitted’. The sub-clause covers
section 56(3), main para., Provincial Act and section 58 (2),
Presidency Act. The latter is better, and has been mainly
followed*.

“3Glause 58... 77777 ए्््््ू 58.

*See also the body of the Report, paras. 24-25.

*Mulla (1958), page 28, para. 29.

‘Williams, page 373, bottom.

SAs to the existing law in India, see Mulla (1958), page 653, para. 660
and page 582, para. 588.

See clause 57.

*DiscussionJin Mulla is at page 672, para. 686.

°Cf. Mulla (1958), page 671, para. 684.


163

Sub-clause (3).—Needs no further comments.

Sub-clause (4) —The words “things in action” used in
the Presidency Act have been replaced by “actionable
claims”, (being the expression used in the Transfer of
Property Act).

Sub-clause (5).—The mention of “contempt of court”
appearing in the Presidency Act, has been replaced by a
reference to section 188, I.P.C. as the new Act will apply
to the Mofussil also.

Clause 61

This is based on section 59 of the Presidency Act.
There is nothing corresponding to it in the Provincial Act.
It has been adopted as a useful provision. The mention
of police officers, though found in the Presidency Act, has
been omitted, as it is considered that such warrants should
be executed only by the prescribed officers.

Clause 62
This follows section 60 of the Presidency Act. There
is no such provision in the Provincial Act. Certain
verbal changes have been made to bring the section up-
to-date and to apply it to persons mentioned in section
60(1), proviso (i), Civil Procedure Code.

Clause 63
This provision regarding goods pledged is a new one,

and follows section 59 of the English Act. See also section
48, Canadian Act.

Clause 64
General.—This clause relating to copyright is new and
has been added on the lines of section 52 of the Canadian
Act. Compare also section 60 of the English Act, and section
110, Australian Act, which are not so elaborate.

Sub-clause (1), opening part.—For the words “the
author’s muniscript and any copyright or any interest in a
copyright” (occurring in the Canadian Act), the clause
substitutes the words “author’s manuscripts of and copy-
right in any work or any interest in such copyright”, as
it is considered that, for precision—(i) “copyright” should
be followed by words denoting that the copyright is in a
work, and (ii) the word “manuscripts” should be similar-
ly qualified. Further, the words “in whole or in part”
have been omitted, as unnecessary.

“Agreement” —The words “agreement” after “contract”
appearing in the Canadian Act is omitted, as unnecessary.

Sub-clause (1) (a), (b).—The word “original” occur-
ring in the Canadian Act is omitted, as unnecessary.

For a discussion of the existing position, see Mulla (1958), paras. 540-
540A.


164

Clauses 65 to 69

General—These clauses provide for disclaimer of title
by the Official Assignee. They follow sections 62 to 66
ot the Presidency Act, which are in turn based on section
55 of the (English) Bankruptcy Act, 1883, since replaced
by section 54 of the Bankruptcy Act, 1914. There
is nothing corresponding to them in the Provincial Act,
but it is considered that such provisions should be appli-
cable to the whole of India.

Detailed points——(i) Power to extend the period for
selling has been added, and items to be disclaimed have
been mentioned one by one, as in section 535, Companies
Act, and section 104, Australian Act}.

(ii) The words “subject always to rules” are replaced?
by “except in any cases which may be prescribed”. Com-
pare section 54(3), English Act.

(ili) The word “either” has been placed after “claim-
ing” and not before the word “claiming”, for the sake of
grammar’.

(iv) Case of the sub-lessee or mortgagee failing 10
apply has been covered‘-.

(v) Instead of “under-lessee”, the word “sub-lessee” is
used, following the usage in India‘.

(vi) Instead of the word “foregoing”, the exact provi-
sion has been referred to for precision*.

Clause 70

Sub-clauses (1) to (4).—(i) They are based mainly on
section 36 of the Presidency Act. There was nothing
corresponding to them in the Provincial Act, as originally
enacted. By section 4 of the Provincia] Insolvency
(Amendment) Act (Act 39 of 1926) a new section’, section
59A, was inserted therein, reproducing sub-sections (1) to
(3) of section 36, Presidency Act, with certain modifica-
tions.

(ii) The clause as drafted generally follows section 36,
Presidency Act, but differs from it in one important res-
pect. There has been a controversy in the High Courts,

गुल clause 65 (1).

*In clause 66.

In clause 69 (1).

“In clause 69 (1), proviso.

8Cf. Report of Committee on Bankruptcy, ete., Law (1957), cmd. 2215
para, 134.

In clause 69 (1), proviso.

In clause 69 (2).

*Section 59A was inserted after the Report of the Civil Justice Com-
mittee (1925), pages 232-233, paragraph 15.


165

as to whether a summons could be issued under this
section to a witness who lives beyond the local limits of
the court’s original jurisdiction. In Dinaram Somani v.
Bhim Bahadur Singh’ the Calcutta High Court held that
the court could, acting under this section, issue summons
against a person who could not be compelled to give evi-
dence under Order 16, Rule 19, Code of Civil Procedure,
because section 36 deals with discovery of property and
not with taking of testimony, and the jurisdiction confer-
red by the section is not, by reason of the proviso to section
90(1). Presidency Act, controlled by the provisions of the
Civil Procedure Code. See also Re Pushkar Narayan
Brahmwar*. In Madras. it has been held that while no
witness could be compelled to give evidence if he satisfies
the requirements of Order 16, Rule 19, C.P.C., he could be
compelled to produce documents, as documents could be
produced by him through any other person. Vide Re
Abdul Rahim Saheb & Co; Re Viswanathan Chettiar',
and Re Murugappa Chetty & Co. v. Official Assignee of
Madras*. In view of the provision in section 37, Presi-
dency Act, that “the court saall have the same powers to
issue commissions for the examination of any person liable
for examination under section 36, as it has for the exami-
nation of the witnesses under tne Code of Civ:] Procedure,
1908,” it is desirable to make express provision, if the wider
view is to be accepted. It is considered that the limita-
tion in Order 16, Rule 19, C.P.C. should not apply to
courts under this Act. Necessary provision has been pro-
posed®.

(iii) It should be mentioned that under section 59A(1),
Provincial Act, unlike section 36. Presidency Act. the
examination can be only of third persons, but not of the
insolvent himself. There is no reason why the scope of
the section should be so limited. There is a distinction
between an examination under section 27 of the Presiden-
ey Act and one under section 36 of the Act, the former
is a public examination, and the latter a private one, in
the nature of a secret proceeding taken with a view to
eliciting information. Vide Learoyd v. Halifax Joint Stock
Banking Co.*; Lakshmi v. Official Assignee of Madras’. A
provision for the public examination of the insolvent is
proposed in another clause’, and his private examination
is dealt with in the clause under discussion.

XA.LR. 1923 Cal. 427.

2A.LR. 1953 Bom. 19.

354 M.L.J. 715; ALR. 1928 Mad. 890.
“(1948) 1 M.LJ. 241 5 ALR. 1948 Mad. 496.
5(1948) 1 M.L.J. 242.

‘The proposed provision will clarify the position. Cf. Mulla (1958),
page 31, last line and page 297, para. 312.

7(1893) 1 Ch. 686, 692.
SLL.R. 1950 Mad. 895 ; ALR. 1950 Madras 410.
*See clause 129.


166

Incriminating questions—
On this topic, see discussion in Mulla’.

(iv) Section 59A, Provincial Act, limits the power to
examine under that section to courts (or officers) spe-
cially authorised. It is considered that all the insolvency
courts should have this power. Necessary change has
been made.

(v) It is necessary to refer to one point—the authority
which can exercise this power. Under section 36 of the
Presidency Act, it is the court acting on the application
of the Official Assignee that can summon and examine
witnesses; but under section 6(2)(e) of the Presidency
Act, this power could be delegated. In the Provincial
Act, section 59A confers this power on any court or officer
of the court specially empowered by the State Government
to summon and examine witnesses. It is now preposed,
first, that this power should not be delegated (except as
regards examining the witnesses in Presidency towns’)
to any officer, but should be exercised by the court itself,
and, secondly, that this power should be conferred upon all
the courts. The reason for this change is that under the
clause as now drafted*, when there is a dispute as to the
debt or title to the property, the disputes may (subject to
certain restrictions) be determined by the insolvency
court and need not be referred for determination to a
suit. If the insolvency court decides to hear the dispute,
then the application is to be treated as a suit and tried
as a suit and the order to be passed as a decree and would
also be appealable as a decree. Having regard to this
scheme, the power to summon and examine, etc., should not
be exercised by any authority other than the courts (ex-
cept in Presidency towns, to the extent mentioned above).

Under sub-clause (3), the objection regarding produc-
tion of a document has to be made to and allowed by the
court. The Presidency Act makes the provision more
elaborate, by adding that the objection may be made at
the time of the court’s sitting. No such elaboration seems
to be necessary.

Sub-clause (5).—This is new. There should be a power
in the court to decide the dispute. It has been framed in
conformity with the recommendation relating to decision
of claims of the! insolvent against a third person or vice
versa’,

1Mulla (1958), page 292, para. 307.
As to Presidency towns, see clause 110(3) (e).

*See clause 70 (5).

*See clause 99, and notes thereto,

5As to existing law, see Mulla (1958), pages 300—302, and page 22.


167

Sub-clauses (6) to (9).—These correspond to sub-sections
(4) to (7) of section 36, Presidency Act’, with this
important difference that whereas under the Presidency
Act, the jurisdiction to pass an order is limited to cases
where the claim is admitted, the proposed provisions,
conformably to what is provided above”, adds the case
where the court decides the matter under its powers.
Thus, the position is that the insolvency court can hold an
enquiry, and make an order under sub-clauses (6) and (7),
even though the claim is disputed.

The word “just” has been used in sub-clause (6) ins-
teed of the word “expedient” appearing in the Presidency
Act, as the former is considered more appropriate. Com-
pare sub-clause (7) also.

Clause 71

This corresponds to section 37 of the Presidency Act.
There is no such provision in the Provincial Act.

Clause 72

General.—This follows section 61 of the Provincial Act
(which corresponds to section 49 of the Presidency Act).

Small creditors—It has been considered unnecessary to
give any priority to small creditors as it would not be easy
to draw a line’.

Workmen’s Compensation, ete.—It is unnecessary to
add a provision for priority to payments due under Work-
men's Compensation Act, etc., as in section 530, Companies

ct.

Sub-clause (1).—The language of paragraph  (b)
follows that of section 49(1) (b), Presidency Act, and the
pecuniary limit is also what is laid down therein. Para-
graph (c) has also been taken from the Presidency Act.
There is no corresponding provision in the Provincial Act
regarding rent. But it has been adopted as a useful pro-
vision.

Sub-clauses (2) and (3).—No special comments are
needed.

Sub-clauses (4) and (5).—Need no special comments.

Explanation—-The Explanation is new, and has been
introduced in view of the decision in Narcin Das v, Sahu
Mihin Lal‘. In England, it has been held that when a cre-
ditor of a firm chooses to obtain a decree against a partner
thereof, and not against the firm or all the partners, that

1The provisions are discussed in Mulla (1958), page 22, page 24. para. 26>
pages 300—302, page 311, para, 331 and page 671, para. 684.

2566 clause 70 (5).

3566 also body of the Report; para. 30.

4(1934) LLL.R. 56 All. 1041.


168

must be dealt with, for the purpose of this rule, as a sepa-
rate debt of the partner, and not as a joint debt of the
firm. Vide ex parte Ackerman'; ex parte Brown’. It wae,
however, held in Narain Das v. Sahu Mihin Lal’ that this
exception cannot be engrafted on the language of section
61(4). Provincial Act, and the rule of English law em-
bodied in the above decisions cannot be applied to cases
arising under that section. Once the principle is accepted
that partnership property and partnership debts should
be treated as distinct from the separate property and
separate debts of a partner, it should logically follow that
a creditor who obtains a decree against an individual part-
ner (when he could have obtained one against the firm)
and follows it up by obtaining an order adjudicating that
partner, must be held to have elected to treat his debt
as a separate debt of the partner and not as a partnership
debt. The reason for adopting such a rule is all the
grea as the doctrine of election has been accepted as
part of the insolvency law in this country, with reference
to distinct as distinguished from joint contracts‘, The
Explanation is intended to give effect to this view’.

Sub-clauses (5) and (6).—The words “entered in the
schedule” have been replaced by “proved in insolvency”
(on the lines of the Presidency Act), as more appropriate’.

Clause 73

This corresponds to section 50 of the Presidency Act.
There is no such provision in the Provincial Act.

Clause 74

This does not occur in the Provincial Act, but has been
taken from section 70, Presidency Act, as a useful provision’.

Clause 75

This is based on section 62 of the Provincial Act
(which corresponds to section 71 of the Presidency Act).

In sub-clause (1), the words “in his hands” have been

replaced by “under his control”, which are wider and more
appropriate. Consequently, in sub-clause (2), the words

1(1308) 14 Ves. 6043 33 ER. 653.

2812) 1 Rose 432.

2 (7934) LL.R. 56 All. togr ; ALR. 1934 All. देश,
"Yethalal v. Lallubhai, ALR, 1930 Bom. 380.

जप will remove doubts on the subject. Cf. Mulla (1958), pages 442-444
para. 480.

*Cf. clause 77 (2).

4Generally as to partners, see Mulla (1958), page 443, and also pages 945
142, 155, 213, 476, 483, 562, 679, 692.


169

“realised by the Official Assignee” have been used’-*-”.

Clause 76

1. This is based on section 63 of the Provincial Act
(which corresponds to section 72 of the Presidency Act).

2. The words “in the hands” have been substituted by
the words “under the control” as more appropriate‘-*-°.

3. Instead of the existing negative wording “Any cre-
ditor who has not proved his debt before”, the positive
wording “Any creditor who has proved his debt after” has
been preferred.

Clause 77

This is based on section 64 of the Provincial Act and
section 73 of the Presidency Act. It may be noted that
while under the Provincial Act, it is the court that has to
decide (when all the properties have not been realised),
whether a final dividend may be declared, under the Pre-
sidency Act, it is the Official Assignee who has to come
to a decision on the question, but leave of the court has to
be obtained before the final dividend is declared. The
difference in substance, is slight; but the language of the
Fresidency Act has been preferred to that of the Provin-
cial Act.

In sub-clause (2), the words “entered in the schedule”
have been replaced by “proved their debts” (as in the
Presidency Act) as more appropriate’.

Clause 78

This is based on section 65 of the Provincial Act. Fol-
lowing section 74 of the Presidency Act, two changes have
been made: —

(i) Instead of “entered in the schedule”, the
words “aggrieved by such refusal” have been used, as
more appropriate.

(ii) The rates have been left to be prescribed.

Further, there is no reason why the Official Assignee
should pay the interest on the demand out of his own

1Cf. the Madras amendment to s. 71, Presidency Act.
2Cf. also clause 76.

°Cf. s. 122, P.T.A.

‘Cf. clause 75.

SCf. s. 72, Presidency Act, as amended in Madras
Cf. s. 122, P.T.A.

7Cf. clause 72.



170

money. Such a provision is harsh. In Madras and Bom-
bay', the Presidency Act has been amended so as to remove
this personal liability, and there is no reason why the
amendment should not be made applicable to the whole of
India. Necessary changes have been made accordingly.

Clause 79

This is based on section 66 of the Provincial Act, which
corresponds to section 75 of the Presidency Act. The
clause differs from the former in requiring an application
of the Official Assignee—a requirement which has been
inserted as a useful safeguard. It differs from the latter
in this, that it is the court and not the Official Assignee
that has to make the appointment.

The Presidency Act makes this power “subject to such
conditions and limitations as may be prescribed”. But
this restriction has not been adopted, as it is unnecessary
and not found in the Provincial Act.

Clause 80

1, The main paragraph is based on section 67 of the
Provincial Act (corresponding to section 76 of the Presi-
dency Act).

2. For an exhaustive discussion of the scope of this
section, see a recent Supreme Court case®. One of the
points made in the Supreme Court case was, that property
(whether movable or immovable) which devolves on the
insolvent after his becoming insolvent and before dis-
charge is also included in the “surplus” of which the
section speaks. The Explanation seeks to codify the posi-
tion on that point?.

Clause 81
Sub-clause (1).—Is based on section 122, Presidency
t.

Sub-clause (2).—Is based on section 123, Presidency
Act.

Clause 82

This is based on sections 88 and 89 of the Presidency
Act (which correspond to section 67A of the Provincial
Act). The language of the Presidency Act has been
followed!.

1866 the amendment to section 74, Presidency Act, made in Madras and
Bombay.
*Raghunath Kharkar v. Ganesh Kharkar, (Supreme Court) decided on
2nd May, 1963 (C.A. No. 98 of 1962) Gudgment delivered by’ Wanchoo J.)
n appeal from Bombay), A.ILR. 1964 S.C. 234 (Feb.).
"Generally as to effect of discharge, see Mulla (1958), pages 397, 398
687, 699.

‘Section 678 was inserted as a result of the recommendation made in
the Report of the Civil Justice Committee (1935), Chapter 14, para. 19.



171

Clause 83

General.—This is based on section 74 of the Provincial
Act and also on section 106 of the Presidency Act. The
jurisdiction for summary administration has been fixed
for the Presidency towns at five thousand rupees (instead
of existing rupees 3,000 under the Presidency towns Act,
1909). For other places, it has been increased from rupees
five hundred to two thousand. These changes have been
made in view of fall in the value of money.

Special points—

Sub-clause (1).—It has been provided that on the ad-
mission of a petition, falling within this section, the Ofi-
cial Assignee shall stand automatically appointed as
receiver, with powers analogous to those of a receiver
appointed by Court. It is also considered that publica-
tion of notices and framing of schedules should not be dis-
pensed with by a mandatory provision in the Act. This
involves omission of section 64(i) and (iii), Provincial Act.
The provision regarding committee of inspection has been
taken from section 129(ii) of the (English) Bankruptcy
Act, 1914, as a useful provision,

It is considered that an appeal with the leave of the
Appellate Court should be allowed. That has been pro-
vided. The Presidency Act allows an appeal with the
leave of the court of first instance, but in India generally
leave obtained is that of Appellate Court.

Sub-clause (2)—As regards revocation of the order,
opportunity has been taken to combine the language both
of the Presidency Act and of the Provincial Act, so as to
make two points clear:—

(i) the court can revoke the order for summary
administration at any stage, and

(ii) from the date on which order is revoked, the
normal provisions will come into operation.

Omission of section 196(1), proviso, Presidency Act

Section 106(1), proviso, of the Presidency Act bars
the modification of the provisions relating to discharge.
It is considered that no such restriction is necessary. It
has, therefore, been omitted. It is better to leave the
matter to the rule-making body.

Clause 84
1. This is based on section 108, Presidency Act. (There
is nothing corresponding to it in the Provincial Act.)
42 M of L-12


172

2. In sub-clause (1), the words “had been alive” have
been replaced by “if the debtor had been alive” for
clarity.

3. The marginal note has been slightly changed, as it
is considered that the existing words “persons dying in-
solvent” are not apt.

Clause 85

1. This is based on section 109 of the Presidency Act.
There is nothing corresponding to it in the Provincial Act.
It has ‘been adopted as a useful provision.

2. Provisions regarding Official Assignees, and power
to require information regarding insolvent’s property and
effect of insolvency on antecedent transactions, etc., should
apply in relation to the mode of administration in insol-
vency of estates of deceased persons. Necessary change
has been made. Compare section 155(4) and (4A) of the
Australian Act. As to examination of witnesses, compare
also section 130 (5), English Act.

Clause 86

This is based on section 110 of the Presidency Act.
The existing section refers to section 64 of the Adminis-
trator General’s Act, 1874. That Act of 1874 was repea-
led by the Administrator-General’s Act, 1913, where the
corresponding section was section 54, whereunder the Dis-
trict Judge could take charge of the property of deceased
persons in specified cases. But now the Administrators-
General Act. 1963 (45 of 1963) has been passed", and it
contains no corresponding provision. Hence the referen-
ce is omitted.

Clause 87
This is based on section 111 of the Presidency Act.

Clause 88

General—This deals with appointment of Official
Assignees and Deputy Official Assignees in Presidency
towns as well as in the Mofussil. It corresponds to section
77(1), Presidency Act, and section 57(i), Provincial Act.
The clause proceeds on the footing that under this Act,
the High Courts in the three Presidency towns will con-
tinue to exercise insolvency jurisdiction on their original
side’.

‘The existing position is discussed in Mulla (1958), page 720, para. 746.
?The Act is to come into force on a notified date.
351. notes to clause 97.


173

The Official Assignee for those areas will be appointed
by the Chief Justice of the High Courts'. There is also a
provision for the appointment of Deputy Official Assignees.

Sub-clause (1)(a).—Needs no further comments*. Power
to remove and power to make an acting appointment need
not be expressly mentioned. See sections 16-17, General
Clauses Act. It is also considered unnecessary to have
the words “substantively or temporarily”, which occur in
the Presidency Act.

Sub-clause (1) (b).—Needs no further comments.
Omission of section 77(1A), etc., Presidency Act

Section 77(1A), Presidency Act, relating to powers of
Deputy Official Assignees, has been omitted as unneces-
sary. The definition of “Official Assignee’ includes a
Deputy, and that definition, it is considered, should suffice
to give him all powers, etc., of the Official Assignee.

Section 77(2), Presidency Act, relating to security, etc.,
has been omitted. Such matters may be left to the rules

Section 77(3), Presidency Act, is a transitional provi-
sion and has therefore been omitted.

Sub-clause (2)—This provides that Official Assignee
shall be appointed for every district, thus marking a de-

parture from the law as now contained in the Provincial
Acti.

The appointment will be by the Chief Justice of the
High Court.

Appointment of Deputies is also provided for.

Clause 89

Sub-clause (1).—Follows section 83, part, Presidency
Act. As to “corporation sole”, compare section 77A, Pre-
sidency Act, as inserted in Bombay and Madras.

Sub-
Act.

ause (2)—Follows section 83, part, Provincial

Clause 90

This corresponds to section 78 of the Presidency Act.
Clause 91

Sub-clause (1).—Follows section 59, Provincial Act and

Presidency Act. Distribution of demands is treated sepa-
rately*.

’The existing position is not uniform.

3866 also article 229 of the Constitution.

3866 clause 2—“Official Assignee”.

‘For a detailed discussion, see the body of the Report, para. 9.
5866 clause 92.


174

The words “legal practitioner” appearing in the Pre-
sidency Act have been preferred (as more appropriate)
to the word “pleader” appearing in the Provincial Act.

The mention of acceptance of fully paid-up shares and
debentures has been added as in section 68(1) (f) of the
Presidency Act, as a useful provision. The mention of
carrying on business has been added (as in the Presidency
Act) in the paragraph relating to mortgage, etc.

Sub-clause (2).—Follows the Presidency Act, section
79 (1).

Sub-clause (3).—Follows section 79(2), Presidency
Act.

Sub-clause (4).—Follows section 68(2), Presidency
Act.

Sub-clause (5).—This is not found in the Provincial
Act, but has been taken from section 80 of the Presidency
Act as a useful provision.

Clause 92

This deals with the declaration and distribution of
dividends. In the Provincial Act the matter is dealt with
in a very brief way in section 59. But section 69 of the
Presidency-towns Insolvency Act deals with it in an
elaborate manner and that provision is considered suit-
able for the whole of India.

Clause 93
This reproduces the provisions of section 85 of the
Presidency Act, which have been found useful for incor-

poration in the new law. There is no such provision in
the Provincial Act.

Clause 94

This corresponds to section 87 of the Presidency Act.
(There is no such provision in the Provincial Act.)

Clause 95

This is not found in the Provincial Act and is bascd
upon section 19 of the Presidency Act. It has «been
adopted as a useful provision.

Clause 96

This follows section 80(1), Provincial Act with the
omission of mention of power to admit or reject proof'.
The requirement of previous sanction of the State Gov-
ernment, is omitted as unnecessary.

Section 80(2) of the Provincial Act provides that
subject to appeal to the court under section 68, any

1Under the Second Schedule, the power to admit, etc., proof is to vest in
the Official Assignee.


175

order made or act done by the Official Receiver in the
exercise of the said powers shall be deemed to be the
order or act of the Court. ....The words “subject to
appeal”, etc., have been interpreted! to mean that even
m orders under these delegated powers, an appeal
s to the court.

The juxtaposition of the words “shall be deemed to
be the order of the court” with the words “subject to”,
etc., however, creates a wrong impression. In view of
the fact that the matters on which the order can be
passed under the clause in question are of great import-
ance, the orders should be appealable. To make that
clear, section 80(2) of the Provincial Act has been
omitted’-*.

Clause 97

General_In the Presidency Towns, insolvency juris-
diction will continue to be exercised by the High Courts
on their original side‘.

Sub-clause (1).—Combines section 3(1), P.A. and section
3, P.T.A. As to the proviso, reference may be made to
observations contained in an earlier Report of the Law
Commission as follows’ :—

“We recommend that all civil Judicial officers
may be invested with insolvency jurisdiction. Such
powers have been conferred upon these officers in
Bombay and Madras.”

But this does not require a change in the Law. A detail-
ed discussion as to jurisdiction of subordinate courts is
‘unnecessary here’.

Sub-clause (2).—Follows section 3(2), P.A.
Clause 98

Sub-clause (1)—This follows section 11 of the Presi-
dency Act, which is more precise and detailed than sec-
tion 11, main paragraph of the Provincial Act. Cf. section
6(1) (d), English Act. The provision for firms is particu-
larly useful in view of the proposed addition of a specific
clause’ for adjudication of firms. Mention of “orders”
(besides decrees) has been added.

‘Mulla (1958), pages 794-795, para. 844.

2This is one of the two courses suggested by Mulla (1958), pages 794-795,
para. 844,

®As to delegation by High Courts, see clause 110,

‘See discussion in the body of the Report, paras. 7-8.

S14th Report of the Law Commission (Reform of Judicial Administration),
Volume I, page 272, para, 15.

*See discussion in the body of the Report, para. 6,
7866 clause 108.

Original
jurisdiction
of High
Courts.

Subordinate
Courts.


176

Explanation—is required for High Court.

Sub-clause (2).—This deals with the jurisdiction of
Indian Courts in regard to persons who are not citizens of
India. It must be taken along with the definition of
“debtor”!. That definition and this sub-clause follow sec-
tion 1(2) and section 4(1) (d) of the English Act. Under
the rules of private international law (as administered in
England) an order of adjudication of a person as insol-
vent can be passed only by the courts of the State of
which he was a subject?-*, since it affects his status. An
exception, however, has been recognised to this rule when
the debtor, though a foreigner, has been residing or carry-
ing on business in England—in which case English courts.
have jurisdiction to make an order of adjudication. It is
this exception that is embodied in sections 1(2) and
4(1) (d) of the English Act‘-*. It will be noticed, that
the two provisions aforesaid relate to two different aspects
of the question. Section 1(2) of the English Act has refer-
ence to the status of the debtor when he commits an act
of insolvency, and section 4(1) (d) of the English Act has
reference to the conditions which must be fulfilled before
the creditor can take proceedings against the debtor. It
has been observed, that these provisions are cumulative,
and that before a person who is a subject of a foreign
country is adjudged insolvent, both of them ought to be
satisfied".

There is nothing corresponding to these provisions
either in the Presidency Act or in the Provincial Act, and
that is probably due to the fact that there was no question
of any Indian citizenship during the British regime; but
now that India is a sovereign State, it is desirable that the
law should be comprehensive and provide, conformably to
the rules of private international Jaw stated above, for the
adjudication of foreigners who become debtors in this
country. The definition of “debtor”? as proposed corres-
ponds to section 1(2) of the English Act, and has refer-
ence to the status of the foreign subject at the time when
the act of insolvency is committed, while the sub-clause
now under discussion has reference to the conditions under
which proceedings can be taken by a creditor, and corres-
ponds to section 4(1) (व) of the English Act. It may be
noted, that while the sub-clause should, if the scheme of
the English Act is strictly followed, be incorporated in the

1See clause 2, “debtor ”.

3866 Dicey, Conflict of Laws (1958), page 670, Rule 131.

386९ also Bloom Cooper—Bankruptcy in Private International Law
(1954), page 46.

4See discussion in Mulla (1958), page 88, bottom.

5Theophile v. Solicitor General, 1950 A.C. 186.

‘Williams, page 55, and page 3.

7Clause 2—“ debtor ””.


177

clause relating to the conditions on which a creditor may
file a petition, it has been considered that, under the scheme
of the present Act, such a provision might more properly
be brought within this clause.

Sub-clause (3).—This is based on the proviso to sec-
tion 11 of the Provincial Act. There is nothing corres-
ponding to it in the Presidency Act. Section 98(3) of the
English Bankruptcy Act, 1914, which provides for the
court in which bankruptcy petition has to be presented,
also enacts that nothing in that section will invalidate a
proceeding by reason of its being taken in a wrong court.
It was accordingly held that a proceeding taken in a wrong
court could be transferred to the proper court, but not
when it is wilful, vide ex parte May', Re French’; and
Williams’. The provision in section 11 of the Provincial
Act is in consonance with the principle enacted in section
21 of the Civil Procedure Code, and it has been adopted.

Clause 99

General.—This clause covers the ground traversed by
section 4 of the Provincial Act and section 7 of the Presi-
dency Act. The principal topic dealt with is, jurisdiction
of the insolvency court to decide questions of titles, ete.,
when they are in dispute.

Jurisdiction—The principal question of jurisdiction
has been dealt with elsewhere’. Briefly speaking, the
clause has been framed on the lines of section 105 (1),
English 300, and the practice thereunder. A proviso has
also been added empowering the court to refer complicated
questions to civil courts.

The position under the clause will be as follows:—

(i) where the Official Assignee claims by a higher
title than the insolvent, the insolvency court will have
full power to decide all questions. (But its jurisdic-
tion will not be exclusive, and in a proper case the
matter may be left to the ordinary courts, e.g., where
the value of the property at stake is a large one or
questions of character are involved.)

(ii) Where the Official Assignee claims only by
the same right as the insolvent, the insolvency court
will have no jurisdiction as against a stranger, unless
the stranger submits to the jurisdiction or the amount
involved is small. The restriction appears in the Eng-
lish Act also. Though the restriction in the English
(1885) 14 Q.B.D. 37.

°(1890) 24 Q.B.D. 63.
*Williams (17th edition), pages 460-461.
‘See the body of the Report, paras. 10--12.

‘See Mulla (1958), page 43, for a statement of the English practice,
“Cf. Mulla (1958), page 56.

English
ractice
followed.

Comparison
with existing
Acts,


178

section is confined to County Courts, the High Cour:
also follows the same practice'. The draft is, in sub-
stance, the same as section 7 of the Presidency Act,
with the difference that the proviso to that section
has been re-drafted, after considering Mulla’s com-
ments’ pointing out a defect therein.

It may also be noted that even as regards matters where-
in the Official Assignee has higher title, the better view
under the Presidency Act is that the jurisdiction of the
insolvency court is not exclusive under the Presidency
Act*.

As regards the Provincial Act, though the proviso bar-
ring the trial of issues against third parties is not there in
section 4, it may be noted that Mulla‘ has suggested that
such a proviso should be inserted in the Provincial Act
also.

Sub-clause (2).—For “expedient” the clause substitutes
“proper” as more apt.

“Subject to the provisions of this Act”—(a) Section 4
of the Provincial Act and section 7 of the Presidency Act
begin with the words “Subject to the provisions of this
Act”. These are followed by a provision which empowers
the court to decide all questions, whether of fact or of law,
whether of title or of priority, ete. The exact meaning and
scope of the words in quotations has become a matter of
some controversy. At least, four interpretations have
been placed on these words:—

(i) According to one view, these words mean “ex-
cluding questions otherwise provided for by the pro-
visions of this Act”. Thus it was held by the Madras
High Court* that a question under section 53, was
outside the scope of section 4 and, therefore, section
75, allowing a second appeal in respect of a decision
under section 4, did not apply to the determination of
a question under section 53. According to this inter-
pretation, the words in question indicate an intention
not to affect the specific provisions contained in the
other parts of the Act and to make it clear that the
section is intended to provide for matters arising in
insolvency not specifically provided for elsewhere in
the Act. (One of the points made.... in the Madras
decision was that in respect of matters under section
53, the Court’s jurisdiction was exclusive and was not,
therefore, governed by section 4.)

’Mulla (1958), page 58, para. 62-C, end. See also Williams, page 468.
4Mulla (1958), page 22, bottom.

8Mulla (1958), page 56.

‘Mulla (1958), pages 24, 67, 68.

*Alagiri Subba v. Official Receiver, 1.L.R. 54 Madras 989 ; ALR.
1931 Madras 745, 746, right hand column and 749, right hand column.


179

Gi) Another interpretation is that put in a Cal-
cutta case’. The question in that case was, whether
under section 4 of the Provincial Act, the insol-
vency court could deal with question of title as bet-
ween the Official Receiver and strangers. The answer
given by the court was in the affirmative, holding
that the quoted words restricted the Court's power
only to this extent, that it may not be exercised in any
such manner as would be in conflict with any provi-
sion of the Act. In other words, by the use of these
words, “no limitation has been imposed upon the
authority of a provincial court of insolvency to enter-
tain and decide questions of title arising out of insol-
vency proceedings”. (The Court also added, that this
jurisdiction was not exclusive and that the Court
should ordinarily decline to go into questions of title
against strangers where the Receiver claimed no high-
er right than the insolvent; but what was stressed
was that, if the Court in its discretion chose to deter-
mine the question, the decision was not bad on the
ground of want of jurisdiction.) By way of illus-
tration the Court observed, that one of the provisions
to which section 4 is subject is section 56(3). The
court could not direct any person to deliver up pro-
perty in his possession to the Official Receiver, unless
the insolvent himself was entitled to immediate pos-
session. पु

(iii) The third interpretation is that placed by the
Allahabad High Court*. It was argued in that case,
that the words in quotations were intended to limit
the jurisdiction of the insolvency court in respect of
transfers alleged to be fraudulent and fictitious, so
that the insolvency court could not try the matter if
the case did not fall within the four corners of section
53 of the Provincial Act. It was held by the majority,
that this argument was not correct, and that an in-
solvency court could try a question of title raised on
the basis of a transfer which took place more than
two years prior to the adjudication. Accordingly, it
was not obligatory on the receiver to seek his remedy
by a regular civil suit based on section 53 of the Trans-
fer of Property Act. The Court held, that the words
in quotations were used only to limit the power, for
example, in cases governed by the proviso to section
56 (Dalal J.). King J. hinted that these words might
refer to the “rules of procedure and appeal laid down
in the Act itself”. Further, they doubtless refer to the
special rules laid down in sections 51 to 55 of the Pro-

\__, 'Radhakrisina v. Official Receiver, ALR. उ ठग Gone 1932 Calcutta 642, 646,
right hand column and 648, right hand column,
‘Anwar Khan v. Muhammad Khan (1929) LL.R, 51 Allahabad 550,

$57 Dalal J.), 573 (King J. 5 dissenting judgment of Sen J. discusses she
Point at page 565.


180

vincial Act “meaning that the court should follow
those rules whenever they are applicable. They may
also refer to section 81 under which the State Govern-
ment could bar the application of many provisions of
the Act. They might also refer to section 56(3).”
This majority interpretation is not in conflict with
(ii) above, and cites an illustration of a Madras case
relating to section 56". However, the dissenting judg-
ment of Sen J. illustrates the difficulties which were
felt by the Court. According to him, the opening
words of section 4 have been deliberately used by
the Legislature to indicate and define the extent of
the jurisdiction intended to be conferred on the in-
solvency court. “The quoted words”, he said, “ought
to be construed in their natural and grammatical sense
and ought not to be narrowed down to a mere right of
appeal”.

(iv) A fourth interpretation is that placed in a
case decided by the Patna High Court’. The question
there involved was whether, regarding benami and ficti-
tious transfers effected more than two years before the
insolvency, the insolvency court had jurisdiction. The

‘ answer given by the Court was in the affirmative.
According to the Court, “section 4 is controlled by
section 53 only in respect of transfers made by the
insolvents”. Section 53 deals with a real transfer
whereby title had passed to the transferee. Since the
transactions in issue were alleged to be no transfers
at all, section 53 had no application. The contention
that the words in quotations indicated that the Court
was bound by the limitations imposed by section 53
was rejected as not sound.

(Compare the Bombay case on the subject®, which de-
cides that a second appeal does not lie against an appellate
order setting aside an adjudication, as such an order is
not one under section 4.)

To state the matter more clearly, as laid down in a
Nagpur case’, if sections 53 and 54 of the Insolvency Act
are to be taken advantage of, the rule of two years or
three months will apply. If they are not to be taken
advantage of, then, though the remedies can be pursued
under the ordinary law, still they can be pursued in the
Insolvency Court also (the Insolvency Court, of course,
having power to refer the parties to a civil suit on the

\Chittammal v. Ponnuswami, (1926) I.L.R. 49 Madras 762; A.LR.
1926 Madras 363.

*Biseswar Chaudhuri v.Kanhai Singh, 1.L.R. 11 Patna 9 3 ALR.
1932 Patna 129,

*Kantilal v. Rajni Kant, UL.R. 1942 Bom. 175 ; AIR 1942 Bom. 159,
160, right hand column ; (Broomfield and Wassoodew JJ).

“Vinayak Shamrao v. Moreshwar Ganesh, LR. 1944 Nagpur 342 3
ALR. 1944 Nagpur 44 (Niyogi, Vivian Bose and Sen JJ.).


dol

ground of expediency). As regards the words “subject
to”, etc., the court pointed out, that “section 4 travels
much wider than the small class of litigation which centres
round fraudulent transfers, and so does the Provincial
Insolvency Act. All that these words mean is that
where the Act otherwise provides the Insolvency Court
is not to act as a civil court. For example, attachment of
the insolvent’s property is not necessary. It all vests in
the receiver or the Court automatically........... So
also as regards appeals and revisions. And so forth.”

(b) In view of the difference of opinion among the
various High Courts the question whether an improve-
ment in wording should be attempted, has been consider-
ed. In the Madras case', the Court observed that the words
in question “do not appear to be very happy words”. It
is, however, considered unnecessary to recommend any
change. The shades oi meaning attaching to these words
cannot be covered by other phraseology.

(Note:—The particular narrow question as to the in-
ter-relationship of sections 4 and 53 of the Provincial Act
is itself not of much importance, since the majority of the
courts have held, that the insolvency court has jurisdic-
tion to entertain under section 4 questions affecting trans-
fers not falling under section 587.)

Power to sell properties.—It will be noticed that sec-
tion 4(3) of the Provincial Act provides for the sale of
the property of the debtor when the court has reason to
believe that he has a saleable interest in it. This sub-sec-
tion will have application only when there is a dispute as
to the title of the debtor. The question is, whether it is
expedient to provide for a sale under these circumstances.
The purchaser in such a sale cannot be expected to pay
anything like a reasonable price for the property, as in
effect it will be the purchasing of litigation and it is
against the policy of the law to countenance such _ sales.
The only reason for such a provision might be, that it wil!
help a speedy administration of the estate. It is also felt
that that is hardly a sufficient reason for authorising such
a sale. The interests of the creditors would be protected
by postponing the declaration of the final dividend until
the title of the insolvent has been finally decided. Sec-
tion 4(3), Provincial Act has, therefore, been omitted.

Clause 100

This is based on section 5 of the Provincial Act. The
ou provision in the Presidency Act is section
(0).

*Alagirisubba v. O fficial Receiver, (1931) I.L.R. 54 Madras 989 ; ALR.
1931 Madras 745, 746 lefthand column (Reilly ‘J.).

o *See Mulla (1958), pages 61, 62, cases cited in foot-notes (j), (2) and

Omission of

section 4(3),

Provincial
ct.


182

The proviso to section 90(1) of the Presidency Act says
that the genera] provision that the court will have the like
powers, ¢te., as in its original jurisdiction is not to limit in
any way the jurisdiction conferred on the court under the
Act. What this presumably means is, that any extra
powers given by the other provisions of the Aci are not ic
be prejudiced by the general provision referring to the
Code of Civil Procedure.

The Provincial Act uses the words “subject to the pro-
visions of this Act”; and it is considered that these words
would save any other power given by the other provisions
of the Act, and would, thus, have the same effect as_ the
proviso in the Presidency Act. For this reason, the langu-
age of the Provincial Act has been adopted.

Clause 101

This corresponds to section 90, sub-sections (4), (5),
(6) and (7), Presidency Act.

Clause 102

This is not found in the Provincial Act, and is based on
section 18A of the Presidency Act. That section was in-
troduced by section 3 of the Amending Act (10 of 1930)
to remedy an evil which had become rampant in Bengal.
Fraudulent debtors in Calcutta got themselves adjudicated
in the mofussil courts through petitions presented by
friendly creditors, so as to avoid effective investigation by
the High Court, and it has been held in a number of cases
that the High Court on its original side had no power 18
transfer those proceedings to its file. Vide in re Manek-
chand'; In re Naginlal Maganlal Jaichand*; Official Assi-
gnee of Madras v. Zamindar of Udayarpalayam*; Sarat
Chandra Pal v. Barlow and Co.4. It is to remedy this evil
that section 18A was enacted. This provision has been
included in this draft as the High Courts in the Presidency
Towns will continue to have jurisdiction to entertain in-
solvency petitions on its original side’.

Receivers are not, under the scheme of the draft®, ap-
pointed by the court on ad hoc basis, but are permanent
officers, and the property vests in them and never in the
Court. In view of this position, necessary verbal changes
have been made in the clause.

. 1922 Bom. 390,
. 1925 Bom. 543.
. 1926 Mad. 150.
.. 1928 Cal. 782.
5568 clause 97.
5866 clause 88.



183
Clause 103

See section 14, P.A. and sections 13(8) and 15(2), P.T.A.

It has been made clear, that an order permitting with-
drawal cannot be made after adjudication!.

Clause 104

Sub-clause (1).—This topic is dealt with in section 15
of the Provincial Act, and section 91 of the Presidency
Act. The latter section provides also for consolidation of
separate petitions presented by joint debtors. (There is
nothing corresponding to this in section 15 of the Provin-
cial Act.) It has been incorporated in this clause.

Sub-clause (2).-Sub-clause (2) is based on section 97
of the Presidency Act. (There is no such provision in the
Provincial Act).

Clause 105

General.—This is based on section 16 of the Provin-
cial Act and section 92 of the Presidency Act.

Opening part—Has been re-drafted to make it clear
that it applies to creditor’s petition only.

Proviso.—The proviso is new and has been added as
useful provision. The corresponding provision in the Eng-
lish Bankruptcy Act, 1914, is section 111. A question
which arises for decision under this section is whether
a substitution can be ordered thereunder, if the original
petition was incompetent. In Re Maugham’, the petition
ing creditors were found to have assented to the deed of
assignment which was relied on as an act of insolvency,
and the petition was accordingly dismissed as incompetent.
A petition was thereafter presented by other creditors
(who had not assented to the deed) to revive the pro-
ceedings and to continue them, and that was dismissed,
as not maintainable. In In Re Maund*-', the debts due
to the petitioning creditors did not come up to the statu-
tory amount. Three months after the act of insolvency,
the creditors who had the requisite qualification applied
to continue the petition, but that was refused. In Venkata
v. Gangayya*-*, the application for substitution was made
by a creditor whose claim was alive on the date of the
original petition, but became time barred on the date of
the application. It was held, that he was entitled to be

1Cf. Mulla (1958), page 212, para. 228.
*21 QB.D. 21.

%(1895) 1 0.8. 194.

‘See also Williams, page 492.

5(1928) LLL.R. 51 Mad. 594.

"See also Mulla (1958), page 215.


184

substituted. In the course of the judgment, the court re-
ferred to the decision in In Re Maund and observed, “In
Re Maund the original petition was filed by a creditor not
entitled to file it. It was not a valid petition. It was
sought to be amended by the addition of other petitioners.
The court held that this could not be done. This deci-
sion does not touch the present case”. In Venkataratnam
v. Verkatayua', it was held that even if the creditor who
filed the petition should turn out not to have been qualified
to do so, that cannot prevent another creditor
from being substituted and taking advantage of the debt
he act of insolvency mentioned in the petition. This
ion purports to follow the principle enunciated in
Venkata v. Gangayya, but (in view of the observations
already referred to) does not appear to be correct. It
being a well-established principle of insolvency law that
no petition for adjudication should be entertained after
the expiry of a specified period from ihe ‘ate of the act
of insolvency, it would be inconsistent with that principle
to hold that a substitution can be ordered when an inde-
pendent petition on that date would be barred, simply
because there was at that time pending a petition which
was incompetent under the law. The proviso inten-
ded to settle the law as laid down in In Re Maund?.

Clause 106

This is based upon section 8 of the Provincial Act.
(Compare section 107 of the Presidency Act.)

The clause has been made “subject” to the clause re-
cation of firms, to avoid the possible in-
that a petition cannot be presented against
ch is an “association”. It rnay be noted,
2 enn be registered under the Partnership Act.

Clause 107

based on section 95 of the Presidency Act.
8 nothing corresponding to it in the Provincial
it hes been incorporated as a useful provision.

Clause 108

ral—This_is based mainly on section 99 of the
ney Act. There is nothing corresponding to it in
the Provincial Act. Section 79(2)(c) of the Provincial
Act does provide for framing of the rules to be followed
“where the debtor is a firm”: there is, however, in that
Act no substantive provision authorising adjudication of
firms. Under the law it is only a person that can be ad-
judicated, and a firm is not a person but a compendious
name for describing all the persons who are partners of

ALL. 1942 Mad. 316.
21895) 1 0.8. 194.



185

the firm. There are circumstances under which all the
partners of the firm might have rendered themselves
personally liable to be adjudicated insolvent, and it is
only as a matter of convenience that a petition to adjudi-
cate the firm which in substance means all the partners
is allowed. Section 99 of the Presidency Act is not con-
cerned with the conditions under which different partners
can be adjudicated on a single petition. It assumes that
they could be adjudicated, and merely provides that ins-
tead of filing a petition against each of the partners,
there can be one-petition against the firm. It is consi-
dered that this provision, which is well-known both under
the (English) Bankruptcy Act and under the Presidency
Act, should be adopted!. Similar provision is also pro-
posed for petitions against persons carrying on business
under an assumed name’.

Sub-clause (1).-Needs no further comments.
Sub-clause (2).—May be explained as follows: —

In England the law is, that even an infant can be ad-
judicated insolvent where he contracts a debt which is
enforceable in law*. The law in India is different. The
Privy Council has held‘ that a minor’s contract is void
and no decree can be passed thereon. It, therefore, fol-
lows, that under the Indian law a minor can never
become a debtor and cannot, therefore, be adjudged insol-
vent®. When the minor purports to enter into a contract
of partnership, that contract again, so far as he is con-
cerned, is void. Therefore, it might be argued thet there
is no need for this sub-clause.

But a minor in India can be admitted to the benefits
of partnership*, and a provision for defining his liability
if the firm is adjudged insolvent is desirable. The object
of this sub-clause is to make it clear that while the
minor’s share will be available to the creditors of the in-
solvent firm. his personal property will not be liable, and
he shall not be deemed to have been adjudicated insol-
vent. This latter clarification is also considered to be
desirable.

Sub-clause (3).—Provides that adjudication of a firm
has the effect of adjudication of each partner. It has been
taken from similar provisions occuring in rules under the
P.T.A. and under the English Act.

Sub-clause (4).—See notes above’.

'The insertion of a provision in the Provincial Act has been suggested
by Mulla (1958), page 25, para. 28, page 96, para. 90.
3Cf. Order XXX, rule 10, 07.2.
{Malla (1958), page 90, para, 85 5 Williams, page 28.
‘Mohori Bibi v. Dharmodas, (1930) I.L.R. 30 Cal. 539 (P.C.).
*Mulla (1958), page 89, para. 85, middle.
*Section 30, Indian Partnership Act.
"Notes under “ General”, above.



Existing
provision.

Before
adjudication
applicability.

186

Clause 109

This has been taken from section 94 of the Presidency
Act. There is nothing corresponding to it in the Provin-
cial Act. Being a useful provision, it appears to be worth
incorporating,

Clause 110

The clause follows the existing sections 4, 5 and 6 in
the Presidency Act (including delegation of powers),
except that detailed matters as to exercise of jurisdiction
have been left to rules?.

Clause 111

This is based on section 96 of the Presidency Act. The
Provincial Act has no provision corresponding to this, and
it may be said that without this clause, the position would
be the same under the general law. But it is desirable
that this provision should, by way of abundant caution,
be enacted for all areas.

Clause 112

General—This corresponds to section 17 of the Pro-
vincial Act and section 93 of the Presidency Act (subject
to certain special points discussed below), The subject-
matter is the continuation of proceedings on the death of
debtor.

Effect of death
1, An important point which arises in this connection
is, whether the existing language in the Presidency and
Provincial Acts as to the effect of deaths on pending in-
solvency proceedings is clear enough. and, if not, whether
any changes are needed.

2. Omitting. for the present. the difference in the last
few words between the Presidency and Provincial Acts,
it may be noted that both the Acts (section 93 of the Pre-
sidency Act and section 17 of the Provincial Act) pro-
vide that “if a debtor by or against whom en insolvency
petition has been presented dies, the proceedings in the
matter shall, unless the court otherwise orders, be con-
tinued........ पु

Section 112 of the English Act and section 36 of the
Australian Act are also in the same terms.

3. In decisions under the Provincial Act if has been
held that section 17 applies both before and after adjudi-
cation. Thus, in a Calcutta case?, a creditor made an appli-
cation for a debtor being declared insolvent and the

1As to appeals from the officer empowered under this clause, and review,
see Mulla (1958), pages 737-738, para. 779, and page 739, para. 782.
*Ramesh Chandra y. Charu Chandra, A.1.P. 1930 Calcutta 590.


187

debtor dies before the adjudication. The court ordered
the proceedings to be continued in the presence of the heirs
of the deceased, who were to be brought on the record
for realisation, etc., of the assets. In another Calcutta
case, a creditor presented an application (for adjudging
the debtor as insolvent) to the court of the District Judge,
Chittagong, which court refused to adjudicate him on
the preliminary ground that the petition was filed beyond
three months. An appeal against this order was filed
before the High Court, but during its pendency, the cre-
ditor died and his legal heirs were brought on the record.
The question was raised whether the proceedings for ad-
judicating the debtor as insolvent could continue after his
death. The court answered it in the affirmative, relying
upon section 17, and observed:

“But the matter of realisation and distribution of the
property of the debtor cannot be conducted unless there
is a person in whom the property is vested, and the property
of the debtor would vest in the receiver only on adjudi-
cation. Section 17 therefore by necessary implication
authorises the court to pass an adjudication order even
after the death of the debtor”. As has been pointed out
in a recent Mysore case*, the reason why an adjudication
can be passed even after death is that proceedings relating
to the realisation, etc., cannot be conducted unless there is
person in whom the property is vested; and such vesting
cannot take place without adjudication. So far as death
before adjudication is concerned, the only uncertainty is
that resulting from the Lahore case of Attar Chand, discus-
sed below’.

4, Similarly, in the case of death, after adjudication
also, section 17 applies‘. It was on this basis that the
Bombay High Court* observed, that section 17 showed
that the maxim “actio personalis moritur cum persona”
had no application to insolvency proceeding, agreeing
with the Allahabad view* that an appeal against an appel+
late order setting aside the adjudication of an insolvent
did not abate on the death of the insolvent during the
pendency of the appeal in the High Court.

5. In an early case’ (Narain Singh), the Lahore High
Court had held, that where a debtor is adjudged insolvent on

'Undo-Burmah Trader’s Bank v, Barada Charan, AJR. 1944 Cal.
370, 371, left hand column (R-C Mitter and Sharpe JJ.).

2M. 72, Basappa v. Chan: das, A.I.R. [०
devanturthy J. ippa Vv. nappagowdas, R. 1954 Mysore 189 (Vasu’

*See notes to clause 112, para. 5.

‘Sripat Singh v. Prodyat Kumar, (1921) LL.R. 48 Cal. 87.

*Kanti Lal v. Rajni Kant, 1.L.R. 1942 Bom. 3 ALR. 5
159, right hand column. 94 पड 7942 Bom

°Piarey Lal vy. Mohammad Salamatullah, 1.L.R. 1937 All. 616 ; A.LR.
1937 All. 435.

*Narain Singh v. Gurbaksh Singh, 1.L.R. 9 Lahore 306 ; A.LR. 1928
Lahore 119.
42 M of L—13


Controversy
summarised,

188

his own petition and the creditors appeal from the order
of adjudication and the debtor dies pending the appeal,
the appeal abates on his death because the right to sue
does not survive. In another case!, (Attar Chand) it
held, that where a creditor’s petition is dismissed and,
during the pendency of the appeal, the debtor dies, the
sons could not be impleaded as legal representatives and
the appeal abated. But in a later Full Bench case it held’
that a debtor’s appeal against adjudication upon the cre-
ditor’s petition did not abate on the death of the debtor.
(This Full Bench case expressly over-rules the earlier case
of Narain Singh and has been supported by Mulla’). It
tries to distinguish the other case of Attar Chand on the
ground that in that case ४ ............... successful party had
been absolved from all manner of liability under the In-
solvency Act” and “It was not therefore a question of lia-
bility surviving in consequence of an adjudication, but
of the right of the creditors to re surrect the case against
the representatives”.

6. The second point is as to whether non-abatement is
conditional on actual impleading of the legal representa-
tives of the debtor. It has been pointed out in one case?
that under section 17 the court has discretion to continue
the proceedings and for that purpose to bring the legal
representatives on record, if necessary, in place of the de-
ceased; “in such cases the question of limitation and
the application of article 177 of the Limitation Act would
not arise as the provisions of Order 22, Civil Procedure
Code do not apply”. Of course, if the debtor dies before
the adjudication, his legal representatives will practically
for all purposes have to be made parties so that the ad-
judication may bind them.

7. This resume of the case-law* above shows that the
controversy now survives only in relation to the Lahore
High Court, and that too in respect of cases (like Attar
Chand) where adjudication has been refused and an
appeal filed against it. Now, if the correct rule is that
the debtor’s adjudication is not a matter personal to him
but affects his property, which would, but for the adju-
dication, devolve on his heirs, it is not easy to see why
this rule should not apply in cases where the court refuses to

‘Attar Chand y. Mian Muhammad Mobin, A.1.R. 1932 Lahore 121 3
LL.R. 13 Lahore 396. (Harrison J.).

*Bhagat Ram y. Firm Dhanpat Mal, AIR. 1942 Lahore 211, 212 right
hand, 213 ; LL.R. 1942 Lahore 746 (F.B.) (Tek Chand, Monroe and
Muhammad Munir, JJ.).

SMulla (1958), page 219, para. 237.

4Ram Dayal v. Shankar Lal, 1.1..R. 1952 Hyd. 196 3 A.LR. 1952 Hyd.
80 F.B. (Sripat_ Rao, Qamar Hassan and Srinivas Chari JjJ.). (On corres.
ponding provision in the Hyderabad Act),

"Notes to clause 112, paras. 16, above.



189

adjudicate. It would, therefore, be advisable to make it
clear that the provisions of the section apply both before
and after adjudication.

8. The next point is about the difference in wording
between the two Acts. The Presidency Act, following
the English Act, uses the words “as if he were alive”, while
the Provincial Act uses the expression “so far as may be
necessary, ete.”. The reascn for the difference in language
has been explained by the Madras High Court’. As
pointed out there, the words “as if he were alive” were
avoided because, taken literally, they would mean, for
example, that an application for discharge must be made
by the debtor under section 43 of the Provincial Act with-
in the time mentioned therein. It was pointed out, that
there were other provisions in the Act regarding conduct
of the insolvent. After death, all that is necessary is to
see that the assets are realised and distributed, and the
court is not interested after his death in considering his
conduct except as regards fraudulent preference and frau-
dulent transfer. In actual practice the words “as if he
were alive” have not led to any difficulty under the Pre-
sidency Act. Hence those words have been adopted.

[In the notes on clauses appended to the Bill which led
to the Provincial, etc., Act, 1920, the reasons were giveh in
these words: —

“Clause 5 amends section 10 to make it clear that
the object of continuing proceedings on the death of
the debtor is for the purpose only of realising and
distributing his property?.”]

A suggestion has been made that where an insolvent
dies after adjudicaton, the law should authorise the court
to pass an order of discharge, leaving the proceedings for
realisation and distribution of the property to continue so
long as is necessary. It is stated that this is necessary in
order to terminate the insolvency proceedings, as other-
wise those proceedings will continue indefinitely and have
to be shown as pending proceedings in the statement
which is put up by the Official Assignee periodically. (It
appears that in the case of the death of the insolvent, it
is not regarded as correct to pass an order of annulment,
because annulment implies usually that there is some de-
fault in the debtor. Where the insolvent has died, no
question of default by him can be raised.) It is, however,
considered, that this is not a matter which requires a
statutory provision. So far as the power to continue the
proceedings is concerned, that is amply provided for by
the the clause under discussion.

*Ramathai Anniv, Kanniappa Mudaliar, (1928) I.L.R. 51 Madras
495 501 and 502 ; AIR. 1928 Madras 480.

*See notes on clauses, the Gazette of India, 1918, Part V, page 60.

“As if he
were alive”

Nature of
order to be
passed.


General.

190

Clause 113

This is based on section 77 of the Provincial Act (which
is more specific than section 126 of the Presidency Act).

Clause 114

Sub-clause (1).—This has been taken from section
100(1) of the Presidency Act, with the alteration that the
warrant will be executed in the manner prescribed by the
Civil Procedure Code (and not in the manner prescribed
by the Criminal Procedure Code as provided in the Pre-
sidency Act). This alteration has been made in view of
the fact that insolvency proceedings are more in the
nature of civil than of criminal proceedings. (There is
no such provision in the Provincial Act, but it has been
adopted as useful).

Sub-clause (2).—This has been suggested by section
100(2) of the Presidency Act. It is considered that instead
of providing (as the Presidency Act does) that a warrant
to seize property shall be governed by the provisions of
the Criminal Procedure Code, it is more appropriate to
provide that the warrant will be executed as a warrant
for attachment of movable property in the Civil Proce-
dure Code. The provision does not appear in the Pro-
vincial Act, but has been adopted as a useful one.

Sub-clause (3)—This has been taken from section
100(3) of the Presidency Act, with the alteration that the
manner of execution has been left to be prescribed
(instead of providing that the Criminal Procedure Code
will apply). The provision does not appear in the Pro-
vincial Act, but appears to be a useful one.

Clause 115

1, This is based on section 68 of the Provincial Act
[the corresponding provision in the Presidency Act being
section 101 (part and section 86) ].

2. As a proceeding under this section is an appeal (and
not an application), the words “apply”, etc., have been re-
placed by “appeal”, ete.

3. The proviso is not found in the Présidency Act, but
has been adopted, as a useful provision, from the Provin-
cial Act.

Clause 116

This corresponds to section 75 of the Provincial Act,
but departs therefrom in one respect namely, the appeal

1Cf. Mulla (1958), page 790, para. 834.


191

will be to the High Court from certain orders of courts
subordinate to district courts.

A question has also sometimes arisen as to the main-
tainability of an appeal where it has been entertained by
the High Court without an express order granting Icave
under section 75(3). The authorities have mostly held?,
that it is not a condition precedent to the maintainability
of an appeal under this section that leave should have
been obtained before it is preferred, and that, accordingly,
when the appeal has been admitted it could be construed
as involving the granting of the leave. To avoid any
further controversy, it has been made ¢lear that such
leave shall be deemed to have been granted when the
appeal has been admitted.

The word “debtor” has been retained in this clause
and preferred to “insolvent”, to cover pre-adjudication
orders.

Sub-section (3) of section 75, Provincial Act, provides in
certain cases for an appeal to the High Court by leave of the
District Court or the High Court. The provision for leave
of the District Court has been omitted as unnecessary.

Clause 117

This is in general intended to conform to the practice
in the original? side of the High Court in the Presidency
towns, and follows section 8(2), Presidency Act and (in
part) section 101, Presidency Act.

Sub-clause (3).—As to appeals from decisions of the
officer empowered under existing section 6, Presidency
Act, the period of 20 days is taken from the existing pro-
vision (section 101, Presidency Act), and it has been also
provided that it will run from the date of the order.

Sub-clause (4)—As to the period of limitation from
appeals of the orders of a Judge to whom insolvency busi-
ness is assigned, the clause provides for the same period as
for Letters Patent Appeals‘.

Clause 118

Section 8(1) of the Presidency Act provides generally
for a power in court to review, rescind or vary any order
made by it. There is no similar provision in the Provin-
cial Act, and in consequence, an application for review of
an order passed by an Insolvency court under that Act
can be reviewed, by force of section 5 of the Act, only

7866 discussion in Mulla (1958), pages 779-780, para. 825.

2866 discussion in the body of the Report, para. 6.

As to review of orders of an officer empowered under section 6, Pre-
sidency Act, see Mulla (1958), pages 737-738, para. 779.

4See Article 151, (Limitation Act, 1908) and Article 117 (Limitation
Act, 1963).

Hearing
without
grant of
leave.

Debtor”.


192

on one of the conditions mentioned in Order 47, Rule 1,
C.P.C.1. The provision in the Presidency Act has been
adopted, as comprehensive.

It may be added that the jurisdiction to review under
the Presidency Act is very wide’.

Clause 119

General.—This clause, dealing with some of the major
offences under insolvency taws, is wider than section 69
of the Provincial Act and sections 33(4) and 103 of the
Presidency Act, and covers many offences not mentioned
in those sections or mentioned briefly therein. It has been
widened on the lines of section 154 of the English Act,
which is more elaborate.

“Before or after”.—The words “whether before or after
making of an order of adjudication” are, as observed in
Ganga Prasad v. Madhuri Sarant, peculiar to India, because
in the English Legislation, penalties are confined to con-
duct after presentation of the petition. It was noted
there, that the general language “before the making of
an order” is sufficiently wide to cover almost any dis-
tance of time. But, it was also noted, the definition of the
specified acts complained of narrowed down the generality
of the provisions, so as to confine offences strictly 10
matters affecting the investigation of the insolvent’s affairs
under the Act, the duties to be performed by him under
the Act, the distribution of his property or money bet-
ween the creditors, and the concealment or making away
with property, or falsification of his books, with the in-
tention of defeating the objects of the Act. The provi-
sion, it was also observed, was a special provision for cases
in this country.

Burden of proof——Apart from adding certain offences,
the clause also departs from the existing section in throw-
ing the burden of proof on the insolvent. While under
the existing law the burden is on the prosecution, the posi-
tion under the clause is*, that once the act or omission
complained of is made out, the burden of proving that
such act or omission was done without the relevant in-
tent is on the insolvent. This is the law® under section
154 of the English Act?-8,

+See also Mulla (1958), pages 385-386, para. 408.

See Chhaju Ram v. Neki, 1.L.R. 3 Lahore 27, P.C.

१85 to the wide jurisdiction of the court, see—

(a) Mulla (1958), page 735 3

(0) Fivraj v. Gaganmal, AR? 1953 Bom. 430 ;

(c) Thangavelu v. Chockalingam, A.I.R. 1944 Madras 129.

‘Ganga Prasad v. Madhuri Saran, A.1R. 1927 All. 352, 353, right hand
(Walsh, acting C. J! and Banerji J.). 353) पड़

"See also body of the Report, para. 31.

“Cf. suggetion in Mulla (1958), page 20, para. 25 and page 708, para. 729.
पर, V. Governor of Brixton Prison, exparte—Shure, (1926) 1 K.B. 127.
*Williams, pages 528 and 529.



193

Other changes——The period of imprisonment has been
extended to two years as in the Presidency Act (instead
of one year as in Provincial Act), as these are serious
offences’ The words “on conviction” have been omitted

as unnecessary.
As the new Act will apply to the mofussil also, the वश

provision treating some of the acts as contempt of court वध ‘Act,

(occurring in the Presidency Act) has been omitted. — omitted.

Tt has been stated that many buyers, particularly in Prevention

the food-grains market, make purchases on credit with aM practices by
ulterior motive of gain, and that they suddenly close dowN traders.
their business without meeting their financial cbligations

to the sellers. Quite often, it is said, they fraudulently
dispose of their property and defeat their creditors. In

this connection, the question whether an increase in the
penalties for bankruptcy offences is called for has been
examined. But it is considered, that no such in-
crease is necessary. The problem can be dealt with by
rigorous enforcement of the law wherever such cases are
brought to light and by instituting prosecutions under the

penal sections of the Insolvency laws’.

Clause 120

This is a new provision (dealing with frauds by insol-
vents) and follows the provisions of the English Act,
section 156.

Clause 121

This is a new provision (gambling by insolvent) which
follows the provisions of the English Act, section 157.

As to sanction of the court for prosecution, see sepa-
rate clause’.

Clause 122

This is a new provision (failure to keep proper
accounts) which follows the provision of the English Act,
in section 158.

As to sanction of court for prosecution, see separate
clause*.
Clause 123

This is a new provision (Insolvent absconding with
property) which follows the provision of the English Act,
section 159.

4The question whether any changes in sections 421 and 422 of the Indian
Penal Code or section 53 of the Transfer of Property Act, etc., are necessary,
in this context, is not being considered here.

8Clause 126.


194

Clause 124

This is a new provision, which ‘follows the English Act,
section 160. A provision for fine has been added, as this
is an offence which can be committed by a creditor.

Clause 125

This follows section 72 of the Provincial Act and section
102 of the Presidency Act, with the following changes
(compare also section 155, English Act) :—

(i) Instead of rupees fifty, rupees two hundred
has been substituted in view of the fall in the value
of money. हु

(ii) The case of a person receiving money on a
promise to render “Service or to deliver goods in
future has been covered. In a recent case before the
House of Lords! this was held not to fall within the
words “obtaining credit” occurring in the correspond-
ing section 155 of the English Act. It has been con-
sidered desirable to cover such cases.

(iii) Case of the insolvent carrying on business
under the old name has been added, as in section
155(b) of the English Act.

(iv) The provision in section 72(2) of the Pro-
vincial Act to the effect that where the offence under
this section has been committed, the court may send
the cases for trial to the nearest Magistrate, etc., after
preliminary inquiry, has been omitted. This will be
taken care of by the separate clause corresponding to
section 70, Provincial Act’.

Clause 126

This is new. It is considered necessary to make am
express provision to the effect that a prosecution for
offences under the new law should not be instituted ex-
cept by complaint of the (Insolvency) court, or by its
order. It is also considered, that this requirement should
continue to apply even after the insolvency proceedings
have terminated.

Clause 127

This follows section 70 of the Provincial Act and
section 104 of the Presidency Act®. A reference to the
new section regarding offences proposed to be added has
been made.

1Regina v. Fisher, (1963) 2 W-L.R. 1137.

3866 clause 127.

*The Presidency Act was amended as a result of the recommendation
of the Civil Justice Committee, (1925), Report, page 233, para. 16.

3566 clause 120, et seq.


195

One object of the procedure provided in section 104
of the Presidency Act is to avoid the necessity of trial
by the Insolvency Judge; the other object is to bring the
procedure in conformity with section 476, Cr. P. C1.

Clause 128

This is based on section 71 of the Provincial Act (which
corresponds to section 105 of the Presidency Act).

In the Provincial Act, the offence of an undischarged
insolvent obtaining credit is not mentioned in this section,
while the Presidency Act mentions it. It is considered
that prosecution for such offences should not be barred
by the discharge of the insolvent in the meantime. The
clause has, therefore, been altered by adding a reference
to the clause’ dealing with that offence.

References to other offences proposed to be added* have
alse been added.

Clause 129

1, This is mainly based on section 73, Provincial Act
(which corresponds to section 103A, Presidency Act).

2. The existing disqualifications extend only to appoint-
ment, etc., as a Magistrate. It is, however, considered that
insolvents should be disqualified from holding civil judi-
cial posts also. The necessary change has been made.

3. Portions relating to membership of local authority
have been omitted. The matter should be left to be dealt
with by State legislation as it falls within the State List.

4. The provision for appeal has been retained (though
not found in the Presidency Act), as a useful provision‘,

5. Following’ section 9, Bankruptcy Act, 1890, a provi-
sion to the effect that the disqualification shall cease at
the end of five years from discharge has been added. Fur-
ther, the court has been given a power to specify a shorter
period.

Clause 130

Sub-clause (1).—This corresponds to section 78 of the
Provincial Act®. (There is no corresponding provision in

13 1५ 3७ Emperor ४. Girish Chandra, ALR. उठ Galeatie 79 जा, Emperor v. Girish Chandra, A.LR. 1929, Calcutta 777 (Buckland

*Clause 125.
3866 clause 120, etc,

‘As to appealable orders under the Presidency Act, see Mulla (1958),
page 740, para. 785.

५३.६ 13566 Williams, page 836, bottom, for the English provision, which is still
in force.

846. 288 to need for the existing section, see Mulla (1958), page 797, para.
46.


‘@xclusion of
Limitation
for suits by
Receiver.

196

the Presidency Act, but it has been adopted as a useful
provision.) It departs from the Provincial Act in two
respects: —

(i) Not only sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation
Act, but all sections have been made applicable. It is
considered that there is no reason why only some
should be mentioned.

(ii) Under the existing section, only decisions
under section 4, Provincial Act, are deemed to be
decrees, Instead of this, all appealable decisions will
be deemed to be decrees’.

Sub-clause (2).—Follows section 78(2) of the Pro-
vincial Act and section 101A of the Presidency Act, The
wording in the Provincial Act is—‘suit or application for
execution”, while the wording in the Presidency Act is
“suit or other legal proceeding”. The wording in the
Presidency Act is more precise and comprehensive, and
is in harmony with the wording in the provisions relating
to grant of leave for suit, etc.—section 28 of the Provincial
Act and section 17 of the Presidency Act. It has, there-
fore, been preferred.

There is one point to which attention might be invi-
ted. In the Report of the Law Commission on the Limi-
tation Act, it has been suggested’, that for a suit by the
Official Receiver on behalf of the insolvent, a provision*
for exclusion of limitation of the period from petition to
adjudication, etc., should be inserted.

This recommendation has already been implemented*.

Clause 131

This has been taken from section 124 of the Presidency
Act. There is nothing corresponding to it in the Provin-
cial Act, but there is no reason why it should not be in-
corporated.

Clause 132

This is taken from section 125 of the Presidency Act.
Tt does not appear in the Provincial Act, but has been
adopted, being a useful provision.

Clause 133

This has been adopted from the Presidency Act, section
116(1), as a useful provision, though there is no corres-
ponding provision in the Provincial Act. The word “in-

The discussions on the Bill leading to the 1920 Act do not disclose the
reasons for mentioningRonly section 4.

*Third Report (Limitation Act), page 20, para. 45.
*Third Report (Limitation Act), App. I, page 78, clause 14 (3), gives a

-draft also.

4566 Limitation Act, 1963, section 15(3).


197

serted” appears in the Presidency Act and has been re-
tained. As an alternative the word “issued” can be used.

Clause 134
This deals with liability for misfeasance.

Section 82 of the Presidency Act provides that the
court shall cause the Official Assignee to account for any
misfeasance, etc., and may require him to make good
any loss which the insolvent’s estate may have sustained
by reason thereof. It is considered, however, that the
amendment made by the State of Bombay to this section
makes a provision which is better. Under that amend-
ment, the State Government is liable to make good all
sums which the Official Assignee is liable to discharge.
Thus, (i) the positive proposition making the State Gov-
ernment liable is enacted, and (ii) a negative proposition
is enacted, namely, that where neither the Official Assignee
nor his officers have contributed to the liability and none
of them is guilty of negligence, then neither the Official
Assignee nor the State Government is liable.

Incidentally, the adoption of this provision will bring
the law in symmetry with similar provisions in the other
statutes dealing with corporation sole. See, for example,
section 39 of the Administrator-General’s Act, 1913, now
section 38, Administrators-General Act, 1963.

The words “revenues of” (the State Government)
used in the Bombay amendment have not been adopted,
in view of the constitutional provisions’ relating to the
Consolidated Fund.

It is considered unnecessary to add sections 820, 828 Section 82A,
and 82C inserted by the Bengal Amendment or sections he d
82A and 82B inserted by the Madras Amendment, where- Gengal ans
under the State Government is to bear the Official amendment).
Assignee’s expenses of litigation, ete., where the estate is
insufficient to bear the expenses. Except in so far as the
matter falls under the clause as adopted, the revenue of
the State need not be made liable for costs of such pro-
ceedings’.

Clause 135

This is based upon section 118 of the Presidency Act.
There is no similar section in the Provincial Act. Tt has
been adopted as useful.

Clause 136

A i This mainly follows, section 120 of the Presidency
ct.
1866 article 266(1) of the Constitution,

*The Official Assignee can protect himself by obtaining i i
creditors. See Mulla (1958), page 804, para, BU une indemnity from



198

2. State debts.—A question which has been discussed
ander this topic (under the Provincial Act) is whether
section 31 (protection) applies to Crown debts!. Two
principles are well-settled. (i) The Crown is not bound
by any statute unless it is so expressly provided by the
statute. (ii) Crown debts have priority. Section 44(1)
of the Provincial Act and section 45(1) of the Presidency
Act provide that the order of discharge does not release the
insolvent from any debt due to the Government, and
section 61 of the Provincial Act enacts that debts due to
the Government shall be paid in priority. These pro-
visions show that the Government is to be subject to the
Act, for otherwise there was no need for such provisions.
Section 120 of the Presidency Act provides that certain
provisions of the Act are binding on the Government, and
priority of debts and effect of discharge are among them.
That means that the Act is not generally applicable to
Crown debts. (There is nothing corresponding to section
120 in the Provincial Act.) In this state of the law, the
section for protection may not, in the Presidency towns,
apply to debts due to the State. It is, however, consi-
dered that the provision for protection should apply to
them; and hence the clause under discussion _(corres-
ponding to section 120, Presidency Act) enlarges its scope
so as to include remedies against the person of the insol-
vent*. ”

Section 137

Section 82 of the Provincial Act provides that nothing
in the Act shall affect the Presidency Act or apply to
cases to which Chapter IV of the Dekhan Agriculturists
Relief Act, 1879, is applicable. The Dekhan Agriculturists,
etc., Act was repealed in the erstwhile State of Bombay
by the Bombay Agricultural Debtors Relief Act, 1947
(Bombay Act 28 of 1947), section 56 as amended. Hence
very little remains of the Act when the provisions peculiar
to the (old) State of Bombay are omitted. However,
since there are laws relating to the relief of agricultural
indebtedness in almost all the States (see entry 30 of
the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitu-
tion), it is desirable to save the provisions of such laws.
Necessary changes have been made accordingly.

The omission of the reference to the Presidency Act need
not be explained.

Clause 138

General.—This is based on section 79 of the Provincial
Act, and sections 112, 113 and 114 of the Presidency Act.

‘See Aswin Kumar v. Dominion of India, AJ.R. 1952. Cal. 251
(Harries 0. J.) and Akyab vy. Raw Tun U, I.L.R. 5 Rangoon 806 ; A.LR.
1928 Rangoon 81, 83.

*Mulla (1958), page 304, middle, takes the view that section 31,
Provincial Act, Applies to State debts.



199

Supreme Court—It is considered that, in order to
achieve uniformity in the rules, the rules should be made
by the Supreme Court (after consulting the High Courts)
instead of by the High Courts as at present. Compare
section 643, Companies Act. Necessary change has been
proposed.

Sub-clause (1).—Needs no further comments.

Sub-clause (2).—Consequential changes have been
made.

Section 79(2)(c) of the Provincial Act speaks of the
procedure to be followed where the debtor is a firm. As
to such cases, a separate clause’ contains a specific provi-
sion, and hence the language of section 112(2) (०), Pre-
sidency Act—‘conduct of proceedings under this Act in
the name of a firm”—will suffice and has been adopted’.

As a provision for giving insolvency notice has been
added, power has been given to make rules as to the
form and manner of giving such notice. Compare section
79(2) (aa) of the Provincial Act as amended in Bombay
by Bombay Act 15 of 1939. Power to make rules regard-
ing costs of maintaining the debtor in prison is added’.

Sub-clause (3).—Follows modern legislative practice,
by omitting the words “as if enacted in this Act”, etc.
Sub-clause (4)—Compare section 643(3), Companies
Act, saving existing rules.
Clause 139

This is a repeal clause. It has been considered desir-
able to repeal local Amending Acts also, expressly.

Elaborate savings provisions for old insolvencies, as

well as transitional provisions, have been considered ne-
cessary and are embodied in the clause.

First Schedule

_1. Deals with procedure at meetings and follows the
First Schedule to the Presidency Act. There are no such
detailed provisions in the Provincial Act.

2. In rule 8, the words “any meeting” have been re-
placed by “every meeting of creditors”, for precision.

3. In rule 4(1), the period of notice is raised from 3
to 7 days, as the existing period is rather short.

4. In rule 12, for “security”, the words “in respect of
any security” are substituted, for precision.

3Clause 108.

2This is thus consequential on clause 108.

id clause 3(3).

‘This is at present dealt with in section. 76, Provincial Act. It is con-
sidered that it may be left to rules. * ”


Section
33 (3), P.A.

200

Second Schedule

General_—This is based on the Presidency Act, Second
Schedule. Contrast section 33(1), main para., Provincial
Act. Under that section, it is the court that has to frame
the Schedule. Under section 80(1)(b) of that Act, that is
a matter which can be delegated to the Official Receiver,
in which case it is he who has to decide whether the debt
should be included in the Schedule or not, his decision
being subject to appeal to the court under section 68 of
the Act. The question whether, now that the appoint-
ment of an Official Receiver is obligatory, the work of
framing the Schedule should not be entrusted in the first
instance to him has been considered and it has been de-
cided to adopt the scheme in the Presidency Act.

Rules 1—27.—Follow the Presidency Act. Rule 5 is
elaborated as in the English Act?.

Rule 28—Follows section 33(3), Provincial Act, to
some extent. There is no such provision? in the Presi-
dency Act.

Section 33(3) of the Provincial Act provides that a
creditor may tender proof of his debt at any time before
the discharge of the insolvent. On the language of this
section, the question has been discussed whether a credi-
tor is entitled to prove his claim after an order of dis-
charge has been made. One view is, that so long as there
are assets available for distribution in an insolvency, the
creditor is entitled to come in and prove his debt, that
he cannot disturb dividends already made, but that he is
entitled to come in and prove his debt, that he cannot dis-
turb dividends already made, but that he is entitled to
participate in the future dividends and in the distribution
of these dividends he is entitled to be paid an amount
equal to what had been paid to the other creditors who
had proved their debts. That is the law as laid down in
the English courts’-', and is the view taken in Sivasubra-
mania Pillai v. The ethiappa Pillai’ and Arjun Das v.
Marchi Telinee®. The contrary view has been taken by
the Allahabad High Court in Jagdamba Pande v. Ram
Khelawan Upadiya’ and by the Rangoon High Court in
Bank of Chettinad Ltd. v. Ko Tin’. and is based on the
language of section 64, Provincial Act. A creditor should

1866 Williams, page 558.

*As to practice in Presidency towns, see Mulla (1958), page 416, and para.
446 and also page 697, para. 707.

*Vide the judgment of Vaughan, Williams, L.J. in Re Mc Murdo, (1902)
2 Ch. 684, 699.

‘Mulla (1958), page 697.

3(1924) LL.R. 47 Mad. 120 ; A.LR. 1924 Mad. 163.

SLL.R. (1937) 1 Cal. 127 3 A.LR. 1936 Cal. 434.

TLL.R. 1942 All. 848.

SLL.R. 14 Rang. 529 ; ALR. 1936 Rang. 393.


201

be allowed to prove the debt and share in the distribution
so long as there are any assets remaining to be distributed.
It is only when a final dividend has been declared that
his right must be held to cease. To make this clear be-
yond all controversy, for the words “before the discharge
of the insolvent”, words referring to the declaration of the
final dividend have been substituted.

Section 33(3), Provincial Act, speaks of notice to the
insolvent; but the insolvent should not have a right to con-
test the proof. That part has, therefore, been removed.
The Official Assignee is the proper person to be heard!.

Third Schedule

1. This deals with orders which are appealable to the
High Courts, and follows the Schedule to the Provincial
Act. There is no such Schedule in the Presidency Act,
which is confined to High Courts.

2. Decision of a dispute as to whether a person sum-
moned is indebted, etc., to the insolvent or is in possession
of property of the insolvent is made appealable, as such
decisions decide rights of third parties.

a
‘Cf, recommendation of the Civil Justice Committee (1925), Chapter 14,
para. 21,


APPENDIX III
COMPARATIVE TABLES
TABLE A

Showing the provision in the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, and the
corresponding provision, if any, in Appendix I.

Provision in the Provincial Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1920 provision in
Appendix I

पु 2
Section 1, P.A. . . . . . . १4
Section 2 (1)(०), part,--P.A.“ creditor ” 2, part
Section 2 (1)a), part,—P.A. “debt” . पु . 2, part
Section 2 (1)(a), part, —P.A. “ debtor ” . . 2, part
Section 2 (1)(6):—P.A. “ District Court” —. . 2, part
Section 2 (1)(c) —P.A. “prescribed”. . . 2. part
Section 2 (1)(d) -P.A. “ property” . . . 2. part
Section 2 (1)(c) -P.A. “ secured creditor ”” ऊ part
Section 2 (1)(f) -P.A. “ Transfer of property”. 2. part
Section 2(2), PA. पु : . पु . 2, part
Section 3 (), PAL. : . . : : 97 (1)
Section 3 (2), P.A. . . . . पु . 97 (2)
Section 4(1), PAL. . . : . पु 99 (7), main para.
Section 4(2, PA. . . : : . : 99 (2)
Section 4 (3), P.A. पु पु पु पु + पु Omitted?
Section 5(1), PA... . . : . . 100 (1)

1For reasons, See notes to clause 99.

202


203
Provincial

Provision in the Provincial Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1920 provision in
Appendix I
I 2
Section 5 (2), P.A. 100 (2)
Section 6, main para., P.A. . 3 (1)
Section 6, Explanation, P.A. 3, Explanation
Section 7, P.A. . 4
Section 8, P.A. 106
Section 9 (1), P.A. 5 (1)
Section 9 (2), P.A. 5 (2)
Section 10, P.A. 6
Section 11, main para. P.A. 98, part
Section 11, proviso, P.A. 98, part
Section 12, P.A. 8
Section 13 (1), P.A. क्र part
Section 13(2), P.A. 7, part
Section 14, P.A. 103
Section 15, P.A. 104 (1)
Section 16, P.A. 105
Section 17, P.A. 112
Section 18, P.A. 10, part
Section 19, P.A.. 10, part
Section 20, P.A. 9
‘Section 21, P.A.. i2
Section 22, part, P.A. 14 (1)
‘Section 22, part, P.A. 14 (2)

42 M of Law—14.


204

Provincial
Provision in the Provincial Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1920 provision in
Appendix I
I 2.

Section 22, part, P.A. 14 (3)
Section 23, P.A. . . . . . . Ir
Section 24 (1), PA. . पु पु पु . . 15 (1)
Section 24 (2), PA. . . . पु पु . Omitted?
Section 24 (3), PA. . . . . . . Omitted?
Section 24 (4), PA. . : . . पु . Omitted?
Section 25 (1), PA. . . . . . . 16 (1)
Section 25 (2), PA. . . . . . . 17 (1)
Section 26, P.A. (Award of Compensation)’ . Omitted?
Section 27 (1), part, PA. . . . . . 18 (1), part
Section 27 (1), part, PA. . . . . . 16 (2)
Section 27 (1), part, PA. . . . . . 17 (2)
Section 27 (1), part, PA. . पु . . पु 18 (2)
Section 27 (2), PA. . . पु . . . 18 (2)
Section 28 (1), PAL. : . . : . 14 (4)
Section 28 (2), part, PA. . . . . . 19, part
Section 28 (2), part, PA. . पु . . . 48 (2), part
Section 28 (3), PA. . पु . : . . 51
Section 28 (4), PA. . . . : . . 48 (2), part

For reasons, see notes to clause 15.

*Section 26, P.A., is omitted, as it is considered that the matter would be covered by
the general provision applying the Civil Procedure Code. See s. 35A, C.P.C., inserted in
1922.


205

Provincial
Provision in the Provincial Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1920 1 कक in

x ~ 2
Section 28 (5), P.A. . . . पु . . 48 (1)
Section 28 (6), PA. . पु . पु पु . 19, part
Section 28 (7), PA. - . . . . . 23
Section 28A, P.A. . . . न पु पु 48 (2), part
Section 29, P.A. . . . . . . . 20 (3)
Section 30, P.A. पु . . . . . 22
Section 31, P.A. . . + पु पु पु 24
Section 32, P.A. . . . . . . 25
Section 33 (1), main para. P.A. . . . . 47
Section 33 (1), proviso, P.A. पु + . . 44 (4), part
Section 33 (2), P.A. - . . पु . . Omitted?
Section 33 (3), PA. - . : . . . Second Schedule,

rule 28

Section 34(1), part, PA. . : : . . 44 (1)
Section 34 (1), part, PA. . . : . : 44 (4), part
Section 34 (2), PA. - : पु . . पु 44 (3)
Section 35, part, P.A. पु . . : . 30 (1)
Section 35, part, P.A. . . पु . पु 30 (2)
Section 35, part, P.A. . . . . . 30 (3)
Section 36, P.A. . . . . . . 31
Section 37 (1), PA. . . . . . . 32 (1)
Section 37 (2), PA. - : . . . . 32(2)
Section 38 (1), PAD  - +- eet 33(1)

3966 notes to clause 47.


206

Provincial

Provision in the Provincial Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1920 provision in
Appendix I
१६ ~ ~ 2

Section 38 (2), part, P.A. 33(2)
Section 38 (2), part, P.A. 33 (4)
Section 38 (3), P.A. 33 (3)
Section 38 (4), part, P.A. 34 (4)
Section 38 (4), part, P.A. 34 (5)
Section 38 (5), P.A. 34 (6)
Section 38 (6), P.A. 34)
Section 38 (7), P.A. 34 (8)
Section 39, P.A. . 35 (1)
Section 40, earlier part, P.A. 36 (1)
Section 40, latter part, P.A. 36 (2)
Section 41 (1), P.A. 37 (1)
Section 41 (2), P.A. 37 (2)
Section 42 (1), part, P.A. 38 (1)
Section 42 (1), part, P.A. 38 (2)
Section 42 (2), P.A. 38 (3)
Section 42 (3), P.A. 37 (3)
Section 43 (1), 9.3. . . . 39

Section 43 (2), PA. . . . Omitted?
Section 44 (1), P.A. 43 (1)
Section 44 (2), P.A. 43 (2)
Section 44 (3), P.A. 43 (4)

notes to clause 39.


207

Provincial
Provision in the Provincial Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1920 provision in
Appe ndix I
हु I 2
Section 45, 7.2. . पु पु पु पं : : Second Schedule,
rule 24
Section 46, P.A. . पु पु . . . . 45
Section 47(1), PA. . पु . : : . Second Schedule,
rule 9
Section 47 (2), PA. . . . . . . Second Schedule,
rule 10
Section 47 (3), PA. . . + . . : Second Schedule,
rule Ir
Section 47 (4), PA. . . . . . . Second Schedule,
rule 12
Section 47 (5), PAL. . . . . . Second Schedule,
rule 15
Section 47 (6), PA. . . . . . . Second Schedule,
rule 16
Section 48, P.A. . . . : . . Second Schedule,
rule 23
Section 49 (1), PA. . . . . : . Second Schedule,
rule 2
Section 49 (2), part, PAL. . . . . Second Schedule,
. rules 4 and 5
Section 50, part, P.A. . . . . . . Second Schedule,
rules 26-27
Section 51, P.A. . . . . . . 52
Section 52, P.A. . . . . . . 53
Section 53, P.A. . . . woe . 54
Section 54, P.A. . . . . . . 55
Section 540५ PA, . - 7 ww, 56
Section 55, P.A. . . . . पु . 57
Section 56(1), PA. . . . . पु . Omitted as
| unnecessary
Section 56(2), PA. . . पु . . . Omitted as
हु unnecessary
Section 56 (3), PA. . . : पु पु पु 602)
Section 56 (4), PA. . . पु . पु . Omitted as

unnecessary



208

Provincial

Provision in the Provincial Insolvency

Corresponding

Act, 1920 provision in
Appendix I
I 2
Section 56(5), P.A. Omitted as
unnecessary
Section 57070), P.A. 88, part.
Section 57(2), P.A. Omitted as
fw unnecessary
Section 57(3), P.A. Omitted as
unnecessary
Section 57(4), P.A. . Omitted as
unnecessary
Section 58, P.A. . Omitted as
unnecessary
Section 59, P.A. . QI, part
Section 59A(1), P.A. 70, part
Section 59A(2), P.A. 70, part
Section 59A(3), P.A. . 79, part
Section 60, P.A. Omitted?
Section 61, P.A. 72
Section 62, P.A. . 75
Section 63, P.A. 76
Section 64, earlier part, P.A. 77 (1)
Section 64, latter part, PAL 77 (2)
Section 65, P.A. 7B
Section 66, P.A. 79
Section 67, P.A. 80
Section 67A, P.A. 82
Section Section 68 PAL + 8 8 tS क्‍प PA. 115

1gection 60, Provincial Insolvency Act, 1 s been
‘of Civil Procedure, 1908, with which it is linked up,

hhas been omitted, as section 68 of the Code

has been repealed.


209

Provincial
Provision in the Provincial Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1920 . provision in
Appendix I
_ : पर --
Section 69, P.A. 119
Section 70, P.A. 127
Section 71, P.A. 128
Section 72(1), PA. 125
Section 72(2), P.A. Omitted?
Section 73, P.A. 129
Section 74, opening lines, P.A. 83(1)> opening
Section 74(i), P.A. Oma
Section 74४), P.A. 830)0)
Section 7407), P.A. Omitted?
Section 74(iv), P.A. 83(1)(iti)
Section 74(v), P.A. 83(1)(iv)
Section 74(vi), P.A. 83 (vii)
Section 74, proviso, P.A. . . . 83 (2)
Section 75, P.A. 116
Section 76, P.A. (Costs) Omitted®
Section 77, P.A. 113
Section 78(1), P.A. 130(T)
Section 78(2), P.A. 130(2)

3566 notes to clause 125.
3566 notes to clause 83.

Section 76, P.A., is omitted, as it is considered that the general provision applying

CP.C. would suffice. (See s. 35, C-P.C.)


210

Provincial
Provision in the Provincial Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1920 provision in.
Appendix I
I 2
Section 79, P.A. . . . पु . : 138
Section 80(1), PAL. . . . . . 96
Section 802), PA. . . . . . . Omitted?
Section 81, P.A. : . . . . . Omitted as un-
necessary
Section 82, P.A. + . . . . . 137
Section 83, P.A. . . . . . . Omitted as
unnecessary

First Schedule, PA. . . पु . . : Third Schedule
Second Schedule, P.A. . . : . . Omitted?

+For reasons, see notes to clause 96.
In consequence of omission of section 31, Provincial Act.


TABLE B

Showing the provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909;
and the corresponding provision, if any, in Appendix I.

Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1909 provision in
Appendix I
~ ~ 1 ~~ 2
Section 1, P.T.A. : पु पु : . . I
Section 2, P.T.A. : . . . पु + 2
Section 3, P.T.A. . . . . . . 97
Section 4, P.T.A. . . . . . . r10(r), part
Section 5, P.T.A. . . . . . . 1IO(I), part
Section 61), P.T.A. . . . . . . 1102)
Section 6(2), P.T.A. . पु . . . . 110(3)
Section 6(3), P.T.A. . . . . . . 110(4)
Section 7, main para., P.T.A. . . . . 99 (1), main para.
Section 7, proviso, P.T.A. . . . . . 991), second
proviso.
Section 8(1), P.T.A. . . . . . . uk
Section 8(2) (a), P.T.A. . . . . . 117, part
Section 8(2) (0), P.T.A.’ . . . . . 117, part

Section 9, main para., P.T.A. . . . . 30)

Section 9, Expl., P.T.A. . . 3, Expl.

Section 70, P.T.A. . . . . . . 4
Section 11, P.T.AL. . . . . + 98, part
Section 12 (1), P.T.A. . . 50)
Section 12 (2), P.T.A. . . . . . 5(2)

211


212

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1909 provision in
Appendix I
I 2
Section 13(1), P.T.A. . . . 8
Section 13(2), P.T.A. 15, part
Section 13(3), P.T.A. Omitted?
Section 13(4), P.T.A. 16 (1)
Section 13(5), P.T.A. 16 (2)
Section 13(6), P.T.A. 16 (3)
Section 13 (7), P.T.A. 16 (4)
Section 13(8), P.T.A. 103, part
Section 14, P.T.A. 6
Section 15(1), part, P.T.A. . 1§, part
Section 15(1), part, P.T.A. . 7(1)
Section 15(1), part, P.T.A. . 17 (2)
Section 15(2), P.T.A. 103, part
Section 15(3), P.T.A. 14 (7), part
Section 16, P.T.A. 9
Section 17, main para., P.T.A. 19, part
Section 17, proviso, P.T.A. 19, part
Section 18(1), P.T.A. 20, part
Section 18 (2), P.T.A. 20 (2), part
Section 18 (3), P.T.A. 20, part
Section 18-A, P.T.A. - 102

1See notes to clause 10.


213

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1909 provision in
Appendix I
I 2
Section 19, P.T.A.  « . . . . . 95
Section 20, P.T.A.  - . . . . . 22
Section 21(1), P.T.A. . न न . . 30(1)(2)(3)
Section 21(2), P.T.A. . . . . . 30 (5)
Section 22, P.T.A.  - . . . . . 31

Section 23 (1), P.T.A. . . . . . 32 (I)

Section 23(2), P.T.A. . . . . . 32 (6)
Section 23(3), P.T.A. . . . . . 32 (2)
Section 24(1), P.T.A. + + . . . 27 (1)
Section 24(2), P.T.A. . . . . . 27 (2)
Section 24(3), P.T.A. . + : + . 27 (3)
Section 24(4), P.T.A. . . . पु + 27 (4)
Section 25(1) to (4), P.T.A. . . पु पु 24

Section 25(5) P.T.A. . . . . . Omitted?
Section 26, P.T.A.  - . . . . . 28

Section 27, P.T.A.  - पु पु . . . 29

Section 28(x), P.T.A. . . . + . 33 (1), part
Section 28(2), P.T.A- . . . . . 33 (2) and 33(4)
Section 28(3), P.T.A. . पु पु . . 33 (3)
Section 28(4), P.T.A. . . . . . 33 (5)
Section 29 (x), P.T.A. पु पु + पु पु 34 (7)

Section 292), ९.7.3., pat. +. + +s 34 (2)

4For reasons see notes to clause 24.


214

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1909 provision in
Appendix I
I 2
Section 29(2), part, P.T.A. . . . . : 34(3)
Section 29(3), P.T.A. . . . . . 34(4)
Section 29(4), P.T.A. . . . . : 34(5)
Section 29(5), P.T.A. . पु . . . 34(6)
Section 29(6), P.T.A. . . . . : 34(7)
Section 29(7), P.T.A. . . : . . 34(8)
Section 30(1), P.T.A. . . . . . 35(1)
Section 30(2), P.T.A. . . . पु पु 3502)
Section 31(1), P.T.A. . . . . . 36(1)
Section 31(2), P.T.A. . . . . . 36(2)
Section 32,P.T.A. . . . : : : 35(3)
Section 33(1), P.T.A. : . . : पु 1403), part
Section 33(2), P.T.A. . . . . . 14(3), part
Section 33(3), P.T.A. . . . . . 14(4)
Section 33(4), P.T.A. . . . . . 119
Section 34(1), P.T.A. . . . . पु 25
Section 34(2), P.T.A. . . . . . Omitted!
Section 35, P.T.A. . . + . + . 26
Section 36(1), P.T.A. . : . . . 70, part
Section 36(2), P.T.A. . . . . . 70(3), part
Section 36(3), P.T.A. . . . . . 70(4), part
Section 36(4), P.T.A. . . . . . 7०6), part

*For Teasons see notes to clause 25.


215

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1909 provision in
Appendix I
~ I 2

Section 36 (5), P.T.A.
Section 36 (6), P.T.A.
Section 36 (7), P.T.A.
Section 37, P.T.A.

Section 38 (1), P.T.A. . . . . .

Section 38 (2), P.T.A.

Section 39 (1), part, P.T.A.

Section 39 (2), part, P.T.A.

Section 39 (2), part, P.T.A.

Section 39 (2), part, P.T.A.

Section 39 (3), P.T.A.

Section 39 (4), P.T.A. . : . .
Section 4o, P.T.A. . . . . .
Section 41, part, P.T.A. . . . .

Section 41, part (i.e., last 11 words), P.T.A., read
with section 23(2) (As to re-commitment).

Section 42, P.T.A.

Section 43, P.T.A.

Section 44, P.T.A. . .
Section 45(1), P.T.A. .
Section 45(2), P.T.A. .
Section 45(3), P.T.A.

70 (5), part
70 (8), part
7० (9), part
71

37 (1), part
37 (2)

38 (1), part
38 (2), part
38 (1), part
38 (2), part
37 (3)

38 (3)

37 (1), part
39

Covered! by
clause 39

40
का

3866 notes to clause 39.


216

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Aes 79% ‘Appendix I

I 2
Section 45(4), P.T.A. 43 (4)
Section 46(1), P.T.A.
Section 46(2), P.T.A.
Section 46(3), P.T.A. 44
Section 46(4), P.T.A.
Section 46, Expl., P.T.A.
Section 47, main para, P.T.A.
Section 47, proviso, P.T.A. . hs
Section 48, P.T.A. 47
Section 49, P.T.A. 72
Section 50, P.T.A. . . 73
Section 51, P.T.A.  . . . 23
Section 52 (1), P.T.A. 48 (1)
Section 52 (2) (a), earlier part, P.T.A. 48 (2)(ay
Section 52 (2)(a), latter part, P.T.A. 48 (2)(c)
Section 52 (2)(), P.T.A. 48 (2)(8)
Section 52 (2) (c), P.T.A. SI
Section 52 (2), Ist proviso,P .T.A. Omitted.
Section 52 (2), 2nd proviso, P.T.A. Omitted.
Section 53, P.T.A. 52
Section 54, P.T.A. 53
Section 55, P.T.A. 54



217

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency towns Insolvency हक
Appendix I
I 2 ——
Section 56, P.T.A. 55
Section 57, P.T.A. 57
Section 58(1), P.T.A. 60(1)
Section 58(2), P.T.A. 6०2)
Section 58(3), P.T.A. 60(3)
Section 58(4), P.T.A. 60(4)
Section 58(5), P.T.A. 60(5)
Section 59, P.T.A. 61
Section 60, P.T.A. . . . + . 62
Section 61, P.T.A. Covered by

Section 62, P.T.A.
Section 63, P.T.A.
Section 64, P.T.A.
Section 65, P.T.A.
Section 66, P.T.A.
Section 67, P.T.A.
Section 68(1), P.T.A.
Section 68(2), P.T.A.
Section 69, P.T.A.
Section 70, P.T.A.
Section 71, P.T.A.
Section 72, P.T.A.

clauses 88-89
65

66
67

68

69

46

91(1), part
91(4)

92

14

75

76



218

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1909 provision in
Appendix I
I या का 2
Section 73(1), P.T.A. . : : : : 77(1), part
Section 73(2), P.T.A. Se 772)
Section 74, P.T.A. . + . . . . 78
Section 75, P.T.A. + . . . . . 79
Section 76, P.T.A.  . : . . . . 80
Section 77(1), part, P.T.A. . . . . . 88(1)(a)
Section 77(1), part, P.T.A. . . . . : 88(1)(0)
Section 77(1A)(2)(3), P.T.A. . . . : . Omitted?
Section 78, P.T.A. . . . . . . 90
Section 791), P.T.A. . . . . . QI, part
Section 79(2)(a), part, P.T.A. . : . : करा, part
Section 79(2)(a), part, P.T.A. . . . . QI, part
Section 79(2)(b), P.T.A. पु . : . . QI, part
Section 79(2\(c), P.T.A. पु . पु . . Ql, part
Section 80, P.T.A. . . . . . . QI, part
Section 81, P.T.A, + + . . . . Omitted as un-
necessary
Section 82, P.T.A. . . . . . पु 134
Section 83, part, P.T.A.  . . . . . 89 (1)
Section 83, part, P.T.A.  . . . . . 89 (2)
Section 84, P.T.A.  . . . . . . Omitted as un-
. necessary
Section 85(2)(1), P.T.A. . न . . . 93, part

1See notes to clause 88.


219

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1909 provision in
Appendix I
Oy ~ 2
Section 85(3)(4), P.T.A.  . . . . : 93, part
Section 86, P.T.A.  . : पु पु . : 15
Section 87, P.T.A. . . . पु पु . 94
Section 88, P.T.A. . . . . + . 82, part
Section 89, P.T.A. . . . . . . 82, part
Section 9०1), P.T.A. . . . . . 100
Section 90(2), P.T.A. (Costs) . . . . Omitted!
Section 90(3), P.T.A. . . . . . पु Omitted?
Section 90(4) to 9०7), P.T.A.  . . . पु IOI
Section 91, P.T.A.  . . : : पु : 104(1)
Section 92, P.T.A.  . . . . : . 105
Section 93, P.T.A. . . . पु . . 112
Section 94, P.T.A.. . . . : . 109
Section 95, P.T.A. . . . . . . 107
Section 96, P.T.A. . . . . . . TIL
Section 97, P.T.A. . . . . . . 104(2)
Section 98, P.T.A. . . . . . . 2r
Section 99, P.T.A. . . . . . . 108
Section 100, P.T.A. . . . . : . m4
Section 101, part, P.T.A. . . . . . 11s,
Section ror, part, P.T.A. . : . . . 3117(3)(4)

3 Section 90 (2), P. T. A., is omitted as it is considered that the general provisions as to
procedure would suffice to cover costs also.

3866 notes to clause 15.
42 MofL—t5s


220

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Ace 7909 Appendix T
a a
Section 1018, P.T.A. पु . . . पु 130(2)
Section 102, P.T.A. - . : . . : 125(1)
Section 103, P.T.A.  . . . . . . 11g, part
Section 103A, P.T.A. . . . . . 129
Section 104, P.T.A.  . . : . . पु 127
Section 105, P.T.A. . पु पु पु पु . 128
Section 106({1), opening lines, P.T.A. . . : 83, opening lines
Section 106(1)(a), P.T.A.  . . . . पु 83, part
Section 106(1)(6), P.T.A. . . . . . 83, part
Section 106(1)(c), P.T.A. . : . : पु 83, part
Section 106(1)(d), P.T.A. - : पु पु . 83, part
Section 106(1), proviso, P.T.A. . . . . Omitted?
Section 106(2), P.T.A. . : . पु पु 83(2)
Section 107, P.T.A.. . . . . . 106
Section 108, P.T.A.  . . . . . . 84
Section 109, P.T.A. . . . . . . 85
Section 110, P.T.A. . . . . : : 86
Section 111, P.T.A.  . . . . + पु 87
Section 112, P.T.A. . पु . . . : 138, part
Section 113, P.T.A. . . . . : . 138, part
Section 114, P.T.A. . . . . . : : 138, part

1See notes to clause 83.


221

Presidency
Provision in the Presidency-towns Insolvency Corresponding
Act, 1909 provision in
Appendix I
Se पु ----

Section 115, P.T.A. . . . . . . Omitted?

Section 116(1), P.T.A. : : : . . 133

Section 116(2), P.T.A. . . . . . 22, part

Section 117, P.T.A. . . . . . : Omitted as
unnecessary

Section 118, P.T.A. . : . : . . 135

Section 119, P.T.A. . : . पु : पु Omitted as
unnecessary

Section 120, P.T.A. . . . . . . 136

Section 121, P.T.A. . . : : . : Omitted as
unnecessary

Section 122, P.T.A. . . . : . . 81)

Section 123, 0.13... . : . . . 81(2)

Section 124,P.T.A.  . . . . . . 131

Section 125, P.T.A. . . . मु . : 132

Section 126, P.T.A. . . . . : पु 1I3

Section 127,P.T.A. . . . . . . Omitted as
unnecessary

First Schedule, P.T.A. . . . . . First Schedule

Second Schedule, P.T.A.  . . . . . Second Schedule

‘Section 115, P. T. A., relates to stamp and appears to fall mostly under State List,
entry 63.


APPENDIX IV

Number of undischarged insolvents under the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act,
1909 in the three High Courts

TABLE No. 1.—BOMBAY

Number of undis-

Adjudicated in Total charged insolvents Remarks
Nos. under the P.T.I.
Act as on

31-12-62 D RS.

19355» + + + 794 5 — 1 4
1936 + . . . 853 7 जज जज 7
1937 . . . : 611 7 I— 6
1938. eB 7 — 2 $
1939 - + + + 292 5 — 1 4
1940 : : - 342 5 302 -
1941 . . . . 296 3 2 Low
1942 पु पु : . 188 I Ii—- —
1943 : पु : : 145 3 2 r=
1944 पु : . 152 I तर काया
1945 : : : : 145 I —- i1-
1946 . . : + 139 4 जा 4
1947 : पु 6 6 3 3“:
1948 . : . . 144 3 —- 3-
1999.  ) e139 5 1 3 ८
1९ : : : 153 3 —- 3-
1951 . . . . 128 4 2 1—
1952 पु : पु . 176 6 3 14 न
1953 . . . : 165 7 Io3 41
1954 . . . . 160 5 3 I TF
1955 . . . . 169 2 Ir —
1956 + . + . 133 9 Io—- —
1957 - -  - + 143 7 जा 4 1
1958 . . . . 107 2 — I I
1959 : : : : 99 20 — 3 2
1960 . : . : 135 48 — 2 2
1961 . . . . 119 57 जे 7 7
1962, 134 98 -- =

D-—Insolvents dead after the passing of the order of adjudication.
R—Insolvents’ discharge refused, but not applied for renewal of discharge
under Section 42(1) of the said Act.

$—Discharge suspended until a dividend of not less than twenty-five naye
paise in the rupee has been paid to the creditors.

222


JOW Ch

TABLE No. 2.—CALCUTTA

Total $eREFSSESCSAARREKREeEEeAaGaa
Number of Yer मे 2 SSF Pegs ss egg Rg Ssgegggg gs
= undischarged
insolvents —
under the
Presidency- Number 60 31 14 14 5 13 13 8 17 14 21 19 13 7 19 15 22 21 I1§ 9 20 24 23
towns In- —_adjudi-
solvency cated
Act as on
3-12-62, “Number 5 7 3 I 2 7 193093 5 1 4 7 7 7 5 5 72 19 23
_ —— remaining
IIs undischar-
ged

806


TABLE No. 3—MADRAS

Adjudicated in

1960)

|
1940 to 1956 | 1957 1938}1959

1961 |

1962 ॥ Total
1

Number of

undischarged

insolvents

under the Nil 2 4 19 32
Presidency-

towns In-

solvency

Act (Act TIT

of 1909) as

on 31-12-1962

64

82 203

224
GMGIPND—TSS—42 M of Law (7979)--9-7-65--1,850