     
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
Report No.261 
 
 
Need to Regulate Pet Shops and 
Dog and Aquarium Fish Breeding  
 
 
 
 
August 2015 
 
  


ii 
 
U;k;ewfrZ vftr izdk'k 'kgk 
HkwriwoZ eq[; U;k;k/kh'k] fnYyh mPp U;k;ky; 
v/;{k 
Hkkjr dk fof/k vk;ksx 
Hkkjr ljdkj 
14ok¡ ry] fgUnqLrku VkbZEl gkÅl] 
dLrwjck xk¡/kh ekxZ 
ubZ fnYyh&110 001 
 
Justice Ajit Prakash Shah 
Former Chief Justice of Delhi High court 
Chairman 
Law Commission of India 
Government of India 
14th Floor, Hindustan Times House 
Kasturba Gandhi Marg 
New Delhi – 110 001 
D.O. No.6(3)/279/2015-LC(LS)                                           28 August, 2015 
 
Dear Shri Sadananda Gowda ji, 
  
      The Law Commission of India received a letter from the Animal Welfare Board of India 
in May this year, seeking guidance regarding the Central Government’s authority to enact 
rules regulating certain animal shops and breeders.  Though at first the Commissio n felt it 
difficult to take up the issue for study, on receipt of several representations from across the 
country, it was felt prudent to go into the matter in detail.   
 
      The issue relates to the question as to whether the Government is empowered to notify 
three sets of rules regarding pet shops, dog breeding and aquarium fish breeding.  The 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, in consultation with Ministry of Law 
and Justice had pleaded helplessness in notifying these rules quoting the absence of enabling 
provision in the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.  The recommendation of the 
Commission in the matter is sent herewith in the form of Commission’s Report No.261 titled 
“Need to Regulate Pet Shops and Dog and Aquarium Fish Breeding”, for consideration by 
the Government. 
 
      In his letter dated 24 August 2015, one Ex -Officio Member, Shri P K Malhotra, Law 
Secretary, has expressed his view that “it may not be appropriate on the part of the Law 
Commission to give any Report on the subject” as the Department of Legal Affairs is reviewing 
its advice given in 2012 on the matter. While the Commission has taken this letter on record, 
it is of the view that even if the Department is reviewing its earlier advice, the present Report 
will only act as a supporting document. Further, so much of manpower and efforts will go 
waste if the report is not issued after completion.  Moreover, it is the prerogative of the 
Government to accept or not to accept the Report. Another Ex -Officio Member, Dr. Sanjay 
Singh, Secretary, Legislative Department, suggested certain changes to the Report, which 
were carried out.  However, he has returned the Report without affixing his signature.   
 
          With warm regards, 
Yours sincerely, 
 
Sd/-    
[Ajit Prakash Shah] 
Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi – 110 015  


iii 
 
Report No.261 
Need to Regulate Pet Shops and 
Dog and Aquarium Fish Breeding 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter  Title Pages 
I BACKGROUND TO THE REPORT 1-10 
A. Introduction 1-3 
B. Representations received by the 
Commission 
3-9 
C. Present Report of the Commission 9-10 
II LEGAL FRAMEWORK GOVERNING 
PET SHOPS, DOG BREEDING AND 
AQUARIUM FISH BREEDING IN 
INDIA 
11-26 
A. Question 1 13-19 
B. Question 2 19-26 
III RECOMMENDATIONS 27-28 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
BACKGROUND TO THE REPORT 
 
 
A. Introduction 
 
1.1.1  In May 2015, the Law Commission of India 
(“the Commission”) received a letter from Major General 
(Retd) Dr R.M. Kharb, the Chairman of the Animal 
Welfare Board of India (“AWBI”), which is a statutory 
body established under the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals Act, 1960 (“the P CA Act”). The letter from the 
AWBI Chairman sought guidance regarding the Central 
Government’s authority to enact rules regulating 
certain animal shops and breeders.  
 
1.1.2  The AWBI had drafted three sets of rules 
regarding pet shops (“Pet Shop Rules, 20 10”), dog 
breeding (“Dog Breeding, Marketing and Sale Rules, 
2010”), and aquarium fish breeding (“Aquarium Fish 
Breeding and Marketing Rules”), and sent it onward to 
the Animal Welfare Division of the Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change (“MoEF”) for 
scrutiny. But the Animal Welfare Division, MoEF 
indicated that it was not empowered to notify such rules 
under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 
(“the PCA Act”).  
 

2 
 
1.1.3  MoEF had also sought the opinion of the 
Ministry of Law and Justice (“MLJ”) on the issue, a copy 
of which was also forwarded to the Commission. 
According to the MLJ, the PCA Act is silent with respect 
to pet shops, dog breeding and aquarium fish breeding, 
and that rules cannot be framed unless there is an 
enabling pr ovision that confers power on the Central 
Government to do so. The MLJ further noted that, 
although section 38 of the PCA Act provides that “the 
Central Government may make rules providing for all or 
any of the following matters, namely: . . . (l) any othe r 
matter which has to be, or may be prescribed,” there 
must still be a specific enabling/substantive provision 
regarding the matter to be regulated, and section 38 
does not mention pet shops, dog breeding, or aquarium 
fish breeding.  
 
1.1.4  On his part, the AWBI Chairman pointed out 
that the Government had earlier notified rules regarding 
performing animals, slaughter houses, animal birth 
control, draught and pack animals, and the licensing of 
farriers, and therefore, requested guidance from the 
Commission regarding the rules in question relating to 
pet shops, dog breeding, and aquarium fish breeding. 
 
1.1.5  In its response to the AWBI Chairman  dated 
28 May 2015, the Commission expressed its inability to 
take up the study on the subject at that time. However, 

3 
 
the Commission received several representations 
around the same time, urging it to take up the issue, 
and, therefore, the Commission decided that it would be 
prudent to examine the issue in further detail. 
 
B. Representations received by the Commission 
 
1.2.1  The Commission received a large number of 
representations on the issue from animal rights and 
animal welfare organisations from across the country. A 
summary of the information relating to pet shops, dog 
breeding and aquarium fish breeding based o n 
information received through representations as well as 
news reports, is provided in the following paragraphs.  
 
1.2.2  The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 (“WPA”), 
prohibits sale of certain animals1 in pet shops. However 
these sales are continuing.2 All kinds of animals can be 
found for sale in animal markets across the country, 
and they are kept in terribly inhumane conditions. 
Puppies are drugged to prevent them from crying, large 
birds are stuffed into small cages and fish become 
stressed and some times die because of confinement, 
crowding, contaminated water and unnatural 
                                                        
1 Animals mentioned in Schedule I and II of the Wildlife (Protection) of the Act, 1972. 
2 See Jose Louies, Taming the Wild: An Overview of Pet Trade in India, in WWF-INDIA, 
ILLEGAL WILDLIFE TRADE IN INDIA 3 (2014), available at  
http://awsassets.wwfindia.org/downloads/traffic_panda_8_oct.pdf; HC Seeks Status of 
Rules on Regulating Sale o f Animals, Birds , New Indian Express (Apr. 14, 2015), 
http://www.business-standard.com/article/pti-stories/hc-seeks-status-of-rules-on-
regulating-sale-of-animals-birds-115041400770_1.html. 

4 
 
temperatures. 3  Other common harmful practices 
include de -beaking birds, docking the tails of dogs, 
selling unweaned pups, and de -clawing kittens. 4 
Animal breeding is also cruel. M any animals do not 
survive the trauma of being transported in small cages 
without adequate water or food, and estimates suggest 
that, overall, 40% of animals die in captivity or 
transportation.5 Moreover, even star tortoises and other 
protected animals are  sold openly, 6 and wild animals 
(including parakeets, munias and mynas) are caught 
and sold in complete violation of the WPA.7  
 
1.2.3  It is estimated that for every bird sold in the 
market, two die en route. Fledglings are stolen from their 
nests and smu ggled to market in cartons and tiny 
boxes, and some are even rolled up inside socks during 
transport to cities. Captive birds’ wings are crudely 
clipped with scissors to prevent them from flying. 8 The 
                                                        
3 Animals Used for Entertainment , PETA http://www.petaindia.com/iss ues/animals-in-
entertainment/ (last visited Aug. 5, 2015).  
4 Cruelty in Pet Shops: Plea to Law Panel for Rules , Times of India (July 3, 2015), 
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Cruelty-in-pet-shops-Plea-to-law-panel-
for-rules/articleshow/47918728.cms. 
5 Cruelty in Pet Shops: Plea to Law Panel for Rules , Times of India (July 3, 2015), 
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Cruelty-in-pet-shops-Plea-to-law-panel-
for-rules/articleshow/47918728.cms. 
6 Animals Used for Entertainment , PETA http://www.petaindia.com/issues/animals-in-
entertainment/ (last visited Aug. 5, 2015). 
7 Cruelty in Pet Shops: Plea to Law Panel for Rules , Times of India (July 3, 2015), 
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Cruelty-in-pet-shops-Plea-to-law-panel-
for-rules/articleshow/47918728.cms. 
8 In Abdulkadar Mohamad Azam Sheikh v. Gujarat  (2011), a similar issue was raised 
before the Gujarat High Court. See also Chief Forest Conservator (Wildlife) v. Nisar 
Khan, (2003) 4 S.C.C. 595; Sansar Chand v. Rajasthan, (2010) 10 S.C.C. 604. In these 
cases, the Court has looked at the illegal trade of wildlife.  

5 
 
birds are doomed to a lifetime in cramped cages in 
which they can hardly stretch their wings. 
 
1.2.4  Despite the WPA, which bans the trade and 
trapping of all indigenous birds, and Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild 
Fauna and Flora (“CITES”),9 which restricts the trade in 
foreign birds, a black market in birds thrives openly, 
involving many of the country’s estimated 1,200 
species.10 Laws designed to protect India’s birds are well 
intentioned but rarely enforced. In addition, there is a 
clandestine network of extremely well -organized 
persons, from pet-store owners to other dubious sellers, 
who use the internet to service their clients. 11 ‘Wildlife 
pet lovers’ spend exorbitant amounts to get such exotic 
pets, so much so that the global illegal pet trade 
industry is estimated to be worth millions of US 
dollars.12 
 
                                                        
9 The United Nations Convention on International Trade In Endangered Species of Wild 
Fauna And Flora (CITES) came into effect in order to protect rare and endangere d 
species of wild fauna and flora against over -exploitation. The convention ensures that 
international trade does not pose a threat to the survival of species in the wild. The 
convention also provides strict regulation of exports of those species threatene d by 
trade. Even the keeping of a permissible bird must be in conformity with the provisions 
of Section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, which stipulates that any 
person who keeps and confines any animal in any cage which does not measure 
sufficiently to permit the bird a reasonable opportunity of movement or does not provide 
the bird with sufficient food, drink and shelter shall be guilty of treating that bird cruelly. 
10  Pallava Bagla, India's Black Market in Birds Threatening Rare Species , NAT’L 
GEOGRAPHIC (Oct. 2, 2002), 
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2002/10/1002_021002_indiabirds.html.  
11 See Jose Louies, Taming the Wild: An Overview of Pet Trade in India, in WWF-INDIA, 
ILLEGAL WILDLIFE TRADE IN INDIA 3, 3 (2014). 
12 See Jose Louies, Taming the Wild: An Overview of Pet Trade in India, in WWF-INDIA, 
ILLEGAL WILDLIFE TRADE IN INDIA 3, 3 (2014). 

6 
 
1.2.5  People for the Ethical Treatment for Animals 
(“PETA”) India submitted that India had a “multi -crore 
but essentially unregulated pet trade,” growing at a rate 
of about 20% per year, with the Indian pet-care market 
alone estimated to reach about Rs 800 crore in 2015. 
PETA pointed out that there were thousands of breeders 
and pet shops in the India market, but no specific law 
protected the animals they used. Without any 
regulations, pet shops suffered from various problems, 
such as “poor housing [for animals], terrible [animal] 
hygiene, cruel breeding practices, a lack of veterinary 
care, cruel transport, high rates of morbidity, illness, 
disease, untrained workers, [and] rough handling”. 
Further, the poor conditions in pet shops and a lack of 
basic veterinary care “also place pet shop employees 
and general public at risk of contracting zoonotic 
diseases such as salmonellosis and psittacosis”. 
Besides the terrible conditions, pet shops also  trade in 
animals and birds that are protected under law, e.g., 
under WPA and CITES.  
 
1.2.6  In his representation, Shri Sharath Babu R, 
Honorary Wildlife Warden Bangalore, and the 
Environment Advisor, Bruhath Bangalore Mahanagara 
Palike, Forest Cell, pointed out that because pet shops 
and breeders are not regulated, there are a host of 
problems. Birds, animals and fish are sold in an 
unscientific and cruel manner; there are no records of 

7 
 
sale/purchase or inventory of species; endangered 
species are freely  sold; the pet shop industry is not 
taxed, and so on.  
 
1.2.7  Blue Cross of Hyderabad, in its 
representation to the Commission, pointed out that 
many animals sold in pet trade are illegally captured or 
bred; animals in pet shops (there are over 3 lakh pet  
shops in India) are confined to unnatural and 
unsuitable conditions and develop severe irreversible 
psychological problems; and protected wildlife are sold 
in open markets without any record -keeping or 
inventories. 
 
1.2.8  Blue Cross of India Madras point ed out that 
the rules under question were made after extensive 
consultations with many in the trade and industry and 
members of the kennel clubs as well as veterinarians 
and other professionals.  
 
1.2.9  In its representation, Friendicoes-SECA said 
that no pet shop in Delhi or across the country gives a 
receipt for the sale of animals, and that varied prices are 
quoted for the same breed depending upon opportunity. 
Further, it said that since pet shops do not pay any kind 
of service or value added tax, huge  losses were being 
caused to the government, especially since the industry 
turnover ran into several thousand crores per year (Rs. 

8 
 
80,000 crore, as cited by several representations). It 
said that there was an urgent need to regulate this 
trade, and set specific rules on what could be sold and 
how it could be sold.  
 
1.2.10 PFA Balotra (Rajasthan) provided some 
insights into pet trading practices in India. Its 
representation said that there are approximately 450 
pet shops in Delhi alone, and every tier -II ci ty in the 
country has at least 200 shops where live animals of 
various species can be bought as pets. Besides these, 
there are websites where trading of pets happens on a 
large scale. Some shops also offer “home delivery” or 
“book in advance” options. Acco rding to its 
representation, there is no licensing authority for these 
shops: for example, the (Delhi) Municipal authority 
licenses only meat shops; the Animal Husbandry 
Department licenses only cattle; the Forest Department 
does not regard pet shops as being within its mandate. 
As a result, pet shops end up obtaining licenses to 
operate as medical stores, general merchandise stores, 
pet supplies stores, etc., but in practice, continue to 
store and sell live animals. Its representation also 
pointed out that  while dog breeders are specifically 
required to obtain a registration certificate from AWBI, 
none of them in fact obtain such certificates, and their 
practices continue unregulated.  
 

9 
 
1.2.11 PFA Fatehabad unit, besides several others, 
drew attention to the practice of disposal of waste from 
pet shops. Waste from pet shops is allowed to mix with 
household waste that pollutes the neighbourhood as 
well as the ground water. Dead animals are dumped 
with household waste or buried in the neighbourhood, 
which lead s to more contamination, and no post 
mortem is conducted to rule out infectious diseases that 
could spread to humans. They suggest that the spread 
of avian/bird flu may have a close relation with the 
manner in which animals are indiscriminately bred and 
sold in the country. 
 
C. Present report of the Commission 
 
1.3.1  The 20th Commission took note of the letter 
from AWBI and the various representations received by 
animal rights and animal welfare organisations 
throughout the country in this regard. The Commission 
recognised the need to examine whether the Central 
Government is empowered to issue rules under the 
relevant legislation for the purpose of regulating pet 
shops, dog breeding and aquarium fish breeding. In 
light of this, the Commission has undertake n the 
present study on “Need to Regulate Pet Shops and 
Dog and Aquarium Fish Breeding” in order to provide 
the Government with its views on the scope of its 

10 
 
powers, and examine the necessity of regulating such 
practices.  
 
1.3.2  In order to undertake the present study, the 
Commission formed a sub -committee comprising  the 
Chairman; Ms Dipika Jain, Associate Professor; Mr 
Brian Tronic, Assistant Professor; and Ms Swati Malik, 
Research Associate, Jindal Global Law School; and Ms 
Sumathi Chandrashekaran, Consu ltant, Law 
Commission of India, which finalised this report.  
  

11 
 
CHAPTER II 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK GOVERNING PET SHOPS, 
DOG BREEDING AND AQUARIUM FISH  
BREEDING IN INDIA 
 
 
2.1  The Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change had published draft pet shop rules 
prepared by Animal Welfare Board of India 13 in 2010. 
According to the Preamble to the Draft Pet Shop Rules, 
2010, as available on the website of MoEF (a slightly 
different version of which is also available on the website 
of AWBI14): 
 
“[L]ive animals are often showcased, exhibited and 
traded like commodities in pet shops or other shops 
selling animals alive. The ways in which many 
animals and birds are handled or managed are not 
always ideal. Many pet shops are established next 
to butcher shops where, c arcasses of slaughtered 
animals/ birds are hung for sale in full vision of the 
live animals waiting to be sold. Cages are often 
crammed with animals or birds and exhibited out 
side the shops along with hoardings or in front of 
shops in open sun light. Ther e is presently no 
deterrent law specific to ensure humane handling 
and comfort to animals in pet shops. The power to 
close shops lies with local bodies who grant 
permission to open shops (license). These rules are 
                                                        
13 Section 9 of the Prevention of Cruelty against Animals Act, 1960 states that the 
functions of the Board shall be to advise the Central Government on the making of 
rules under this Act with a view to preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to animals 
generally, and more particularly when they are being transported from one place to 
another or when they are used as performing animals or when they are kept in captivity 
or confinement. Section 10 states that the Board may, subject to the previous approval 
of the Central Government, make such regulations as it may think fit for the 
administration of its affairs and for carrying out its functions. 
14  ANIMAL WELFARE BOARD OF INDIA, DRAFT PET SHOP RULES, 2010, available at 
http://www.awbi.org/awbi-pdf/draftpetshoprules.pdf. 

12 
 
made to ensure that live animals sold as pets or as 
commodity, receive proper care and stress free 
humane treatment so long as they are in the 
possession of shop keepers.” 15 
 
2.2  These rules, once notified, would be enforced 
in all pet shops in India. Similarly, the rules relating to 
dog breeding  and aquarium fish breeding would be 
enforced on respective breeders. However, the Ministry 
of Law and Justice found that Centre did not have the 
authority to enact these rules under the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. 
 
2.3  As a result of the same, the following legal 
questions have been raised: 
 
1. Has Parliament delegated power to the Central 
Government under the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals Act, 1960 to frame rules to regulate pet 
shops, dog breeding and aquarium fish 
breeding, and other wildlife not governed by the 
Wildlife Protection Act, 1972?  
 
2. How has the rule making power of the Centre 
been construed by the courts? 
 
                                                        
15MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS, DRAFT PET SHOP RULES 2010, available at 
http://www.moef.nic.in/downloads/public-
information/Pet%20Shop%20Rules%202010.pdf (last accessed on Aug. 12, 2015, 
3.30 
pm)
  

13 
 
A. Question 1.  
 
2.4.1  In its response to MoEF  on the issue, as 
discussed above, the MLJ suggested that, because pet 
shops, dog breeding, and aquarium fish breeding are 
not listed in section 38(2) of the PCA Act among the 
enumerated areas of regulation, the PCA Act does not 
confer authority on the Central Government to regulate 
them. However, the AWBI’s proposed rules appear to fall 
under section 38(2)(c) and 38(2)(l) of the PCA Act, which 
empower the Central Government to make rules 
concerning “the conditions to be observed for preventing 
the overcrowding of animals; the period during which, 
and the hours between which, any class of animals shall 
not be used for draught purposes” and “any other 
matter which has to be, or may be prescribed.” 
 
2.4.2  More importantly, section 38(1) confers 
general power on the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the purposes of the PCA Act.16 Section 38(2) 
of the PCA Act lists specific areas that the Central 
Government may regulate, but these are merely non -
exclusive examples, and this list cannot be read to limit 
the generality of the Central Government’s authority. 17  
                                                        
16 See Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act § 38(1): “The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.”. 
17 See Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act § 38(2): “In particular, and without prejudice 
to the generality of the foregoing power , the Central Government may make rules 
providing for all or any of the following matters, namely . . . ” [emphasis added]. 

14 
 
Thus, despite the fact that pet shops, dog breeding or 
aquarium fish breeding are not listed in section 38(2), 
the Central Government can make rules regulating 
these issues as long as the rules are intended to carry 
out the purposes of the Act.  
 
2.4.3  The purpose of the PCA Act, as stated in its 
preamble, is “to prevent the infliction of unnecessary 
pain or suffering on animals.” The purpose of the PCA 
Act can be further ascertained from the variou s forms 
of “cruelty” listed under section 11(1).  This section 
covers the following under the purview of cruelty:  
 
(a) Beating, kicking, over -riding, over-driving, over-
loading, torturing, causing unnecessary pain or 
suffering; 
(b) Employing any animal which is unfit to be so 
employed; 
(c) Wilfully and unreasonably administering any 
injurious drug or injurious substance; 
(d) Conveying or carrying an animal in such a 
manner as to subject it to unnecessary pain or 
suffering; 
(e) Keeping or confining any animal in any cage or 
receptacle which does not measure sufficiently in 
height, length and breadth to permit the animal 
a reasonable opportunity for movement; 

15 
 
(f) Keeping for an unreasonable time any animal 
chained or tethered upon an unreasonably heavy 
chain or chord; 
(g) Neglecting to  exercise or cause to be exercised 
reasonably any dog habitually chained up or kept 
in close confinement; 
(h) Failing to provide an animal with sufficient food, 
drink or shelter; 
(i) Abandoning any animal without reasonable 
cause in circumstances which render it l ikely 
that it will suffer pain by reason of starvation or 
thirst; 
(j) Wilfully permitting any animal to go at large in 
any street while the animal is affected with a 
contagious or infectious disease, or without 
reasonable excuse permits any diseased or 
disabled animal to die in any street; 
(k) Offering for sale or without reasonable cause, 
having any animal which is suffering pain by 
reason of mutilation, starvation, thirst, 
overcrowding or other ill treatment; 
(l) Mutilating any animal or killing any animal 
(including stray dogs) through strychnine 
injections in the heart or any other unnecessarily 
cruel method; 
(m) Solely with a view to providing entertainment: 
 

16 
 
(i) confining or causing to be confined any animals 
(including tying an animal as bait in a tiger or 
other sanctuary) so as to make it an object of prey 
for any other animal; or 
(ii) inciting any animal to fight or bait any other 
animal. 
 
(n) Organizing, keeping, using or acting in the 
management of any place for animal fighting or 
for the purpose of baiting any  animal or 
permitting or offering any place to be so used or 
receiving money for the admission of any other 
person to any place kept or used for any such 
purposes; 
(o) Promoting or taking part in any shooting match 
or competition wherein animals are released from 
captivity for the purpose of such shooting. 
 
2.4.4  The preamble of the AWBI’s Draft Pet Shop 
Rules, 2010 makes clear that the proposed rules fall 
under the purposes of Act — “In the last decade, with 
the liberalization of the economy and the increase in 
purchasing power, several new trades have come into 
being. One of these is the mushrooming, and yet 
unregulated pet trade in live animals, that are 
capable of experiencing discomfiture, pain, hunger 
and thirst  just as humans do. Live animals are 
exhibited and traded like commodities in pet and pet 

17 
 
product shops. These Rules are intended to ensure 
their humane handling, and to regulate this trade. 
Since the mute cannot complain, the responsibility to 
ensure compassionate and empathetic handling is 
greater. Since pet shops are commercial 
establishments, they have to be regulated with 
licenses, and parameters of operational standards. 
Uniform practices and procedures have to be 
prescribed, and adhered to by those partaking in the 
profits derived from this br and of commercial activity. 
Consequently, the Pet Shop Rules have been formulated 
. . . .”18 [emphasis added]. 
 
2.4.5  The rules on pet shops, dog breeding and 
aquarium fish breeding  are also justified under the 
principles of the Indian Constitution. Artic le 51A(g) of 
the Constitution states that “It shall be the duty of every 
citizen of India . . . . to protect and improve the natural 
environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild 
life, and to have compassion for living creatures.”19  
 
2.4.6  It must also be noted that the PCA Act has a 
built-in check to ensure that the Central Government 
does not exceed its authority when drafting rules. 
                                                        
18  ANIMAL WELFARE BOARD OF INDIA, DRAFT PET SHOP RULES, 2010, available at 
http://www.moef.nic.in/downloads/public-information/rev-draft-pet-shop-rules.pdf (last 
accessed on Aug. 12, 2015).  
19 India Const. art. 51A(g). 

18 
 
Section 38A provides that all rules and regulations must 
be laid before each House of Parliament.20 
 
2.4.7  Section 3 of the PCA Act further 
substantiates the purpose of the Act. The section 
provides for the duties of persons having charge of 
animals, and states that, “It shall be the duty of every 
person having the care or charge of any animal to take 
all reasonable m easures to ensure the well -being of 
such animal and to prevent the infliction upon such 
animal of unnecessary pain or suffering.” 
 
2.4.8  Regarding the issue of species covered under 
the WPA, 21 there is a clear and complete prohibition on 
the trade or rearing of such species and therefore, the 
provisions of the WPA must be strictly enforced to 
ensure their implementation. The present opinion, 
therefore, in its reference to the rules on pet shops, dog 
breeding and aquarium fish breeding, relates only to 
                                                        
20 Prevention of Cruelty To Animals Act, 1960, § 38A. 
21 Section 39(1) states that every wild animal (other than vermin) is considered state 
property, and Section 39(3) provides that no person is allowed to (a) acquire or keep 
in his possession, custody, or control, (b) transfer to any person, whether by way of  
gift, sale or otherwise, or (c) destroy or damage such Government property without 
previous permission from the Chief Wild Life Warden. According to Section 40(2) of the 
Act, no person shall “acquire, receive, keep in his control, custody or possession, s ell, 
offer for sale, or otherwise transfer or transport any animal specified” in Schedule I or 
Part II of Schedule II of the Act, unless granted an authorization to do so by “the Chief 
Wildlife Warden or the authorised officer.” (Schedule I and Schedule II  of the Act lists 
animals that are protected under the WPA.) Further, Section 43(a) further prohibits the 
trade, commerce, and transfer of certain rare and endangered wild animals. 
Additionally, the Act, under Section 49, prohibits the purchasing or acquir ing of any 
captive or wild animal from anyone except a licensed dealer or person otherwise 
authorized to sell the animal.  

19 
 
those species that are not regulated or prohibited under 
the WPA. 
 
2.4.9  Based on this analysis of the legal position, 
the representations received by the Commission in this 
regard, as well as the large number of reports on the 
issue, it appears that the provisions of the law are 
violated with impunity by pet shops and breeders . In 
these circumstances, the Central Government must 
seriously take cognizance of the issue and regulate the 
trade in pet shops, and practices followed in dog 
breeding and aquarium fish breeding.  
 
B. Question 2. 
 
2.5.1  This interpretation is supported by a leading 
treatise, which explains how to construe delegated 
rulemaking authority: 
  
“A normal feature of enabling Acts is first to grant 
the power to make rules etc., in general terms, e.g., 
‘to carry out the purposes of this Act’ and then to 
say that ‘in particular and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing provisions’, such rules 
etc., may provide for a number of enumerated 
matters. If power is conferred to make subordinate 
legislation in general terms, the particularization of 

20 
 
topics is construed as merely illustrative and does 
not limit the scope of the general power.”22 
 
2.5.2  Similarly, discussing the scope of authority 
delegated by the Industrial Employment (Standing 
Orders) Act, 1946, the Supreme Court stated, “Section 
15(1) confers wide powers on the appropriate 
Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of 
the Act; and s. 15(2) specifies some of the matters 
enumerated by clauses (a) to (e), in respect of which 
rules may be framed. It is well -settled that the 
enumeration of the particular matters by sub-s. (2) will 
not control or limit the width of the power conferred on 
the appropriate Government by sub -s. (1) …” 23  The 
Court reiterated this in Afzal Ullah v. Uttar Pradesh ,24 
where it considered the delegation of authority under  
the United Provinces Municipalities Act. Section 298(1) 
of the said Act stated that a board was empowered to 
make any bye -laws “consistent with this Act,” while 
Section 298(2) dealt with bye -laws which can be made 
in specific situations (e.g., markets, sl aughterhouses, 
sale of food). The Court held that: “It is now well-settled 
that the specific provisions such as are contained in the 
several clauses of s. 298(2) are merely illustrative and 
they cannot be read as restrictive of the generality of 
                                                        
22 JUSTICE G.P. SINGH, PRINCIPLES OF STATUTORY INTERPRETATION 1008−09 (12th ed. 
2010) (and cases cited therein). 
23 Rohtak and Hissar Districts Electric Supply Co. v. U.P., (1966)  2 SCR 863. 
24 (1964) 4 SCR 991 

21 
 
powers prescribed by s. 298(1) … If the powers specified 
by s. 298(1) are very wide and they take in within their 
scope bye -laws like the ones with which we are 
concerned in the present appeal, it cannot be said that 
the powers enumerated under s. 298(2) control the  
general words used by s. 298(1). These latter clauses 
merely illustrate and do not exhaust all the powers 
conferred on the Board …”  
 
2.5.3  In addition, the Supreme Court has made 
clear that the express text of a statute is not 
determinative of the scope of authority it delegates, but 
rather the purpose (inferred from the statute’s text) 
must also be considered. In Commissioner of Central 
Excise and Customs v. Venus Castings Ltd.,25 the Court 
noted that, “In holding whether a relevant rule to be 
ultra vire s it becomes necessary to take into 
consideration the purpose of the enactment as a whole, 
starting from the preamble to the last provision thereto.” 
Similarly, in Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and 
Higher Secondary Education v. Paritosh Bhupesh 
Kumar,26 the Court stated that “the question whether a 
particular piece of delegated legislation … is in excess of 
the power … conferred on the delegate has to be 
determined with reference … to the specific provisions 
contained in the relevant statute conferring t he power 
                                                        
25 (2000) 4 SCC 206. 
26 (1984) 4 SCC 27. 

22 
 
to make the rule, regulation, etc. and also the object and 
purpose of the Act as can be gathered from the various 
provisions of the enactment.” The Court noted that a 
subsidiary body has the proper authority so long as “the 
rules or regulations ma de by it have a rational nexus 
within the object and purpose of the Statute.” 27 The 
Court applied a three -pronged test to uphold the 
regulation in that case: (1) whether the provisions of the 
regulations fall within the scope and ambit of the power 
conferred on the delegate; (2) whether the regulations 
made are to any extent inconsistent with the provisions 
of the enabling Act; and (3) whether they infringe any of 
the fundamental rights or other restrictions or 
limitations imposed by the Constitution.28  
 
2.5.4  For a delegation of legislative authority to be 
valid, the legislative policy and principle must be 
adequately laid down. 29  But this is not an onerous 
requirement—the legislative policy can be determined 
from the text of the statute in question. In Makhan Singh 
v. State of Punjab , 30 for example, the Supreme Court 
                                                        
27  (1984) 4 SCC 27; see also General Officer Commanding -in-Chief v. Subhash 
Chandra Yadav , (1988) 2  SCC 351 (rules “must also come within the scope and 
purview of the rule making power of the authority framing the rule”). 
28 JUSTICE G.P. SINGH, PRINCIPLES OF STATUTORY INTERPRETATION 1012 (12th ed. 2010) 
(and cases cited therein). 
29 Tata Iron and Steel Co. ltd. V. Workmen, (1972) 2 SCC 383; see also Makhan Singh 
v. State of Punjab, (1964) 4 SCR 797 (“[I]f the legislature lays down its legislative policy 
in clear and unambiguous terms and leaves it to the delegate to execute that policy by 
means of making appropriate rules, then such delegation is not impermissible.”). 
30 Makhan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1964) 4 SCR 797 (“Not only is the legislative 
policy broadly indicated in the preamble to the Act, but the relevant provisions of the 
impugned section itself give such detailed and specific guidance to the rule making 
authority that it would be idle to contend that the Act has delegated essentially 
legislative function to the rule making authority.”). 

23 
 
looked to both the preamble of The Defence of India Act, 
1962 and the list of particular delegated powers in 
Section 3(2) to determine the legislative policy and 
uphold the general grant of rule making authority in 
Section 3(1). Similarly, in D K Trivedi v. State of 
Gujarat, 31  the Court found sufficient guidelines for 
exercising rulemaking power under Section 15(1) of the 
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 
1957 by looking at the object for which the power was 
conferred and the illustrative matters set forth in other 
sections. 
 
2.5.5  In the UK, courts have similarly held that the 
doctrine of ultra vires “ought to be reasonably, and not 
unreasonably, understood and applied, and that  
whatever may fairly be regarded as incidental to, or 
consequential upon, those things which the Legislature 
has authorized, ought not (unless expressly prohibited) 
to be held, by judicial construction, to be ultra vires.”32 
A subsidiary body (like the MoEF ) is empowered “to do 
not only that which is expressly authorized but that 
which is reasonably incidental to or consequential upon 
that which is in terms authorized.” 33 Other cases use 
similar language. In Commissioners of Customs and 
Excise v. Cure & Deeley Ltd.,34 it was held that “a court 
                                                        
31 1986 AIR SC 1323. 
32 Attorney General v. Fulham Corporation , [1921] 1 Ch. 440, 450 (Chancery Div. 
1920).  
33 Id  
34 [1962] 1 Q.B. 340. 

24 
 
is bound before reaching a decision on the question 
whether a regulation is intra vires to examine the 
nature, objects, and scheme of the piece of legislation 
as a whole, and in the light of that examination to 
consider exactly what is the area over which powers are 
given by the section under which the competent 
authority is purporting to act.” 
 
2.5.6  Indian courts have also deliberated on the 
specific issue of the scope and meaning of the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. In the case 
of AWBI vs A Nagaraja,35 the Supreme Court considered 
whether Jallikattu and bullock-cart races in Tamil Nadu 
and Maharashtra violate the PCA Act. The Court noted 
that the Act is a welfare legislation and, as such, should 
be liberally construed in favour of the weak and infirm.36 
The Court also stated Section 11 of the Act, which 
prohibits cruel treatment, “is a beneficial provision 
enacted for the welfare and protection of the animals 
and it is penal in nature. Being penal in nature, it 
confers rights on the animals and obligations on all 
persons, including those who are in -charge or care of 
the animals . . . to look after their well -being and 
welfare.” 37 After considering in -depth reports of how 
animals are treated during these events, the Court held 
that the Jallikattu, bullock -cart races, and similar 
                                                        
35 Animal Welfare Board of India vs A Nagaraja & Others, (2014) 7 SCC 547  
36 Id. at ¶ 33. 
37 Id. at ¶ 37. 

25 
 
events per se violate Sections 3, 11(1)(a), and 11(1)(m)(ii) 
of the Act. The Court rejected arguments that these 
events were part of local culture and tradition because 
the PCA Act, being a welfare legislation, “over-shadows 
or overrides the so -called tradition and culture.” 38 The 
Court reiterated, “every species has an inherent right to 
live and shall be protected by law, subject to the 
exception provided out of necessity. Animal has also 
honour and dignity which cannot be arbitrarily deprived 
of and its rights and privacy have to be respected and 
protected from unlawful attacks.”39 
 
2.5.7  The Court also observed, among other things, 
that AWBI and state and central governments must take 
steps to (a) see that the persons-in-charge of the care of 
animals, take reasonable measures to ensure the well -
being of animals; and (b) to prevent the infliction of 
unnecessary pain or suffering on the animals. The 
Court further noted that it expected that Parliament, 
“would elevate rights of animals to that of constitutional 
rights, as done by many of the countries around the 
world, so as to protect their dignity and honour.”40 
 
2.5.8  In the present case, rules regarding pet 
shops, dog breeding, and aquarium fish breeding clearly 
fall within and have a rational nexus to the object and 
                                                        
38 Id. at ¶ 54. 
39 Id. at ¶ 61. 
40 Id. at ¶ 91.9. 

26 
 
purpose of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, i.e., 
they are intended to prevent cruelty and har m to 
animals. Neither are the rules inconsistent with the 
enabling Act, nor do they infringe any fundamental 
rights or constitutional provisions. Thus, the MoEF has 
authority to make these rules. 
 
  

27 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
3.1 In light of the above discussion, the Commission 
is of the opinion that firstly, based on an analysis of the 
legal position, the representations received by the 
Commission, and the large number of reports on the 
issue, it appears that the provisions of the  law are 
violated with impunity by pet shops and breeders. In 
these circumstances, the Commission recommends that 
the Central Government must seriously take cognizance 
of the issue and regulate the trade in pet shops, and 
practices followed in dog breeding  and aquarium fish 
breeding. Secondly, rules regarding pet shops, dog 
breeding, and aquarium fish breeding clearly fall within 
and have a rational nexus to the object and purpose of 
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, and the MoEF 
has authority to make these rules.  
 
 
3.2  Given the gravity of the issue, and the fact 
that the rules on pet shops, dog breeding and aquarium 
fish breeding have been drafted in consultation with  
 

28 
 
stakeholders and lying pending since 2010, the 
Commission recommends that the rules be notified and 
implemented at the earliest. 
 
 
Sd/- 
 [Justice A.P. Shah] 
Chairman 
 
 
  
Sd/- 
 [Justice S.N. Kapoor] 
Member 
Sd/- 
[Prof. (Dr.) Mool Chand Sharma] 
Member 
 
 
Sd/- 
[Justice Usha Mehra] 
Member 
-- 
[P.K. Malhotra] 
Member (Ex-officio) 
-- 
[Dr. Sanjay Singh] 
Member (Ex-officio) 
 
Sd/- 
[Dr. G. Narayana Raju] 
Member-Secretary 
  
 
 