 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
Report No.263 
 
 
 
The Protection of Children (Inter-Country 
 Removal and Retention) Bill, 2016 
 
 
 
 
October 2016  


ii 
 
 


iii 
 
 
 
 
 


iv 
 
Report No. 263 
 
The Protection of Children (Inter-Country 
 Removal and Retention) Bill, 2016 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Sl. No. Title 
 
Page 
1 Background  
 
1 
2 Introduction 
 
2-3 
3 Some Judgements of   the Supreme Court of 
India. 
 
4-6 
4 Judgements  of the Supreme Courts of 
Canada, United Kingdom and United States 
of America 
 
7 
 
5 Domestic Violence Impacting Children 
 
8 
6 Salient features of the Hague Convention, 
1980 
 
9 
7 Initiatives of the Government of India 
 
10-11 
8 Child Abduction Distinguished from Inter-
Country Removal of Children 
 
12-13 
9 Recommendations 
 
14 
 Comparative Statement showing the 
provisions of the - Draft Bill placed on the 
website of  the Ministry of  Women and Child 
Development and the revised Bill 
recommended by the Law Commission of India 
(Annexure-I) 
15-32 
 The Protection of Children (Inter-Country 
Removal and Retention) Bill, 2016 as 
recommended by the Law Commission of 
India (Annexure-II) 
33-43 
 References 44 

 
1. BACKGROUND 
 
1.1  The High Court of Punjab and Haryana, in Seema Kapoor 
& Anr. v. Deepak Kapoor & Ors. , CR No.6449/2006 vide order dated 
24.02.2016, referred the matter to the Law Commission of India “ to 
examine multiple issues involved in inter -country, inter -parental child 
removal amongst families and thereafter to consider whether 
recommendations should be made for enacting a suitable law for signing 
the Hague Convention on child abduction.”    
 
1.2  After receiving this reference, the Law Commission 
examined the issues involved and found that the Law Commission had 
already examined the said issues and submitted the 218 th Report titled 
“Need to accede to the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of 
International Child Abduction (1980)” on 30 March 2009, advising the 
Government of India to sign the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects 
of International Child Abduction, 1980, which came into force on 1 st 
December, 1983 (hereinafter referred to as Hague Convention, 1980).  
 
1.3  During the examination of the issues, the Commission also 
found that the Government of India has already prepared a draft of the 
“Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction Bill, 2016” 
(hereinafter referred to as the Bill),  which is broadly in consonance and 
conformity with the Hague Convention, 1980.  The said Bill has been put 
on the website of Ministry of Women and Child Development so that 
stakeholders may file their comments or make suggestions for improving 
the same.   
 
 
  

2 
 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
2.1  The world has become a global village. There is an increased 
movement of  people from all cultures and backgrounds, due to the 
globalized job market. Thus, people from different countries and cultural 
backgrounds have optimistically created family units. More than three 
crores of Indians live in the foreign countries, having cross border 
matrimonial relationships.  When such a kind of  diverse family unit 
breaks down, children (sometimes babies) suffer, as they are dragged 
into international legal battle between their parents.  Inter-spousal child 
removal can be termed as most unfortunate as the children are abducted 
by their own parents to India or to other foreign jurisdiction in violation 
of the interim/final orders of the competent courts or in violation of 
parental rights of the aggrieved parent. In such an eventuality, the child 
is taken to a S tate with a different legal system, culture and language.  
The child loses contact with the other parent and is transplanted in an 
entirely different society having different traditions and norms of life. 
 
2.2  The preamble and object of the Hague Convention, 1980 and 
the International Child Abduction Bill, invokes the principle of ‘best 
interests of the child’.   In other words, the object of the aforementioned 
laws in obtaining the return of the child must be subordinate when 
considered against the child’s interest. The desire to protect children 
must be based upon a true interpretation of their best interests. 
 
2.3  The principle of ‘best interests of the child’ can also be found 
in the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989, 
which came into force on 2nd September 1990 . India ratified the 
Convention on 11th  December, 1992.  The Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2000, (as re-enacted by Act 2 of 2016) defines 
the term ‘best interests of the child’ in clause (9) of section 2 as under: 
‘ “best interest of child”  means the basis for any decision taken 
regarding the child, to ensure fulfilment of his bas ic rights and 

3 
 
needs, identity, social well -being and physical , emotional and 
intellectual development.’. 
 
  

4 
 
3. SOME JUDGEMENTS OF THE SUPREME COURT OF 
INDIA 
 
3.1  In re: McGrath (Infants), [1893] 1 Ch 143 Lindley LJ said: 
 
“The dominant matter for the con sideration or the Court is the 
welfare of the child. But the welfare of a child is not to be measured 
by money only, nor by physical comfort only. The word welfare must 
be taken in its widest sense. The moral and religious welfare of the 
child must be considered as well as its physical well-being. Nor can 
the ties of affection be disregarded.” 
 
3.2  These words are relevant even a century later, and have 
found place in various Indian judicial pronouncements. The Courts 
referred to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989  and 
emphasized the importance of the principle of best interests of the child 
in Laxmi Kant Pandey v. Union of India , AIR 1984 SC 469 ; Gaurav 
Jain V. Union of India , AIR 1997 SC 2021 ; and Nil Ratan Kundu v. 
Abhijit Kundu, (2008) 9 SCC 413. 
 
3.3  The Supreme Court in Dr. V. Ravi Chandran v. Union of 
India, (2010) 1 SCC 174 ; and Arathi Bandi v. Bandi Jagadrakshaka 
Rao, AIR 2014 SC 918, directed to return the respective children to the 
country of their ‘habitual residence’ on the principle of ‘comity of courts’ 
principle for the determination of their best interests and welfare which 
is the prime consideration. 
 
3.4  In Roxann Sharma v. Arun Sharma, AIR 2015 SC 2232, the 
Apex Court deprecated the practice of ‘forum shopping’ requi ring the 
entitlement of custody rights of the other spouse to be judicially 
determined. The Court observed that: 

5 
 
“...the child is not a chattel or a ball that is bounced to and fro the 
parents. It is only the child’s welfare which is the focal point for 
consideration”. 
 
3.5  In such cases, the Court exercises its parens patriae  
jurisdiction to decide the best interests and welfare of the child. In view 
thereof, the issue of conflicting interests of the contesting parents remain 
insignificant. The Court exercise this extraordinary jurisdiction de hors 
the statutory right of the parties. 
 
3.6  In Ruchi Majoo v. Sanjeev Majoo , AIR 2011 SC 1952 , the 
Supreme Court emphasised that in case the child is not ‘ordinarily 
resident’ in the territorial limits of the C ourt, the Court must examine 
the matter independently.  
 
3.7  Recently, the Supreme Court succinctly re iterated all 
principles, the C ourts have applied over the course of years to judge 
cases of international parental abduction, in the case of Surya Vadanan 
v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2015 SC 2243. The Court stated that: 
 principle of ‘comity of c ourts and nations’ must be respected and 
the principle of ‘best interest and welfare of the child’ should apply; 
 rule of ‘comity of c ourts’ should not be jettisoned except for 
compelling special reasons to be recorded in writing by a domestic 
court; 
 interlocutory orders of foreign courts of competent jurisdiction 
regarding child custody must be respected by domestic courts; and  
 an elaborate or summary enquiry by local courts when there is a 
pre-existing order of a competent foreign court must be based on 
reasons and should not be ordered as routine when a local court 
is seized of a child custody litigation. 
 

6 
 
3.8  To state it simply, the welfare of the child must have primary 
importance and secondly, the ‘principle of comity of courts’ – a principle 
of ‘self –restraint’, must be considered.  
 
3.9  In cases, where the jurisdiction of the foreign court in not in 
doubt, the “first strike” principle could be applicable, namely, whichever 
court seized the matter first, ought to have prerogative of jurisdiction in 
adjudicating the welfare of the child. Further, whenever  the matter is 
pending in a foreign court and interim order has been passed by the said 
court, the Indian court should not proceed with the matter.  
  
3.10  It has repeatedly been held by the Courts that repatriation 
of the child to the foreign land should not (a) cause any moral, physical, 
social, cultural  or  psychological harm to the child; (b) cause any legal 
harm to the parent with whom the child is in India; (c) violate the 
fundamental principles of human rights and freedoms of the receiving 
country, i.e., where the child is being held and; (d) considering the child 
welfare principle, due importance must be given to the primary care-giver 
of the child. 
 
3.11  More so, in such matters, it is of primary importance to 
decide whether the foreign court has  jurisdiction over the child  in 
question if the child is ‘ordinarily resident’ in the foreign court’s territorial 
jurisdiction, and, then the order of the foreign court must be given due 
weight and respect . No litigant can be permitted to defy and decline 
compliance to an interim or final order of a court merely, because one of 
the parents  is of the opinion  that the order is incorrect.   (vide Surya 
Vandanan v. State of Tamil Nadu) 
 
 
  

7 
 
4. JUDGEMENTS OF SUPREME COURTS OF CANADA, 
UNITED KINGDOM AND UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
 
4.1  In Thomson v. Thomson, (1994) 3 SCR 551 , the Supreme 
Court of Canada while dealing with the issue as what should be the 
magnitude of physical, moral or cultural harm, which may justify refusal 
of the order of return of the child to his or her ‘habitual residence’, 
explained that harm must be “to a degree that also amounts t o 
intolerable situation”.  It must be a “weighty” risk of “substantial” 
psychological harm. “Something greater than that would normally be 
expected on taking a child away from one parent and passing him to 
another.” 
 
4.2  In the matter of S (a Child) , (2012) UKSC 10,  the UK 
Supreme Court referred to its own judgment in Re E (Children) 
(Abduction: Custody Appeal) ,(2011) UKSC 27 , and observed that a 
defence under Article 13 (b) of the Hague Convention, 1980  could be 
founded upon the anxieties of a parent about a return with the child to 
the state of ‘habitual residence’, which were not based upon objective 
risk to her, but nevertheless of such intensity as to be likely to destabilise 
the parenting of that ch ild to the point at which the child’s situation 
would become intolerable.  
 
4.3  The United States Supreme Court in Lozano v. Montoya 
Alvarez, 34 S.Ct. 1224 (2014) , a Hague Convention , 1980, case in US, 
relating to domestic violence, recognized the impact of domestic violence 
on the child, observing: 
 
“the return of the child may be refused if doing so would contravene 
fundamental principles …… relating to the protection of human 
rights and fundamental freedom.” 
 
  

8 
 
5. DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IMPACTING CHILDREN 
 
5.1  In case, a woman suffers from domestic v iolence and runs 
away along with the child from the place of ‘habitual residence', though 
violence may not be against the child, it may have very serious impact 
and repercussions on the child.  Thus, in such a case, the Court has to 
consider whether repatriation of the child would cause any moral, 
physical, social, cultural or psychological harm to the child or any other 
legal harm to the  mother, with whom the child is in India or violates 
fundamental rights or human rights, as provided in the Hague 
Convention, 1980, itself. 
 
5.2  Unfortunately, women involved in cross-jurisdictional 
divorces, ‘holiday marriages’ or ‘limping marriages’ have to face 
additional challeng es in the custody battle, which  also relate to 
jurisdiction, access to judicial recourse and resources. This may be 
viewed as a bias against the inter ests of women.  The woman must not 
be put in a situation where she has to make the impossible choice 
between her children and putting up with abusive relationship in a 
foreign country. This kind of discord between the husband and wife also 
creates apprehension as to risk to the lives of the wife and her family 
members at the hands of the husband or others, and many a times, the 
party seeks police protection and the help of civil society/social workers. 
 
5.3  Interestingly, the statistics, of particular impo rt to the 
developing countries, where the conditions of women battling for divorce 
is deplorable, shows that globally, 68 per cent of the taking parents were 
mothers; 85 per cent of these respondent mothers were the primary 
caregivers of their children and 54 per cent had gone home to a country 
in which they held citizenship -even if that was not their ‘habitual 
residence’. 
 
 

9 
 
6. SALIENT FEATURES OF THE  
 HAGUE CONVENTION, 1980 
 
6.1  Essentially, the Hague Convention, 1980 seeks to achieve 
two objectives namely—to protect a child from the harmful effect of such 
removal; and to secure prompt return and re-integration of the child in 
an environment of his or her ‘habitual residence’; and both these 
objectives correspond to the specific idea as to what constitutes the ‘best 
interest of the child’. 
 
6.2  Salient features of the Hague Convention, 1980 are: 
 
 It ensures rapid procedure for the return of the child wrongly 
removed to or retained in contracting party to its country of 
‘habitual residence’; 
 It ensures that rights of custody and of access under the law of one 
of the C ontracting States are ef fectively respected in another 
Contracting State; 
 It re -establishes status quo ante  by returning the child to the 
country of ‘habitual residence’;  
 A return order is not a final determination of the issue of custody, 
rather, it provides for return of the child to the jurisdiction which 
is most appropriate to determine the issues of custody and access; 
and 
 Each country that has signed the C onvention must have 
established a Central Authority, which processes such 
applications. The Convention lays down certain roles and 
functions of the Central Authority. This Authority must, inter alia, 
help locate children; encourage amicable solutions and; help 
process requests for return of children. 
  

10 
 
7. INITIATIVES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
7.1  The recently drafted Indian Bill on International Parental 
Abduction is broadly in conformity with the Hague Convention, 1980 and 
mirrors its provisions. India is currently not a signatory to the Hague 
Convention, 1980.  The Bill is an attempt to set the stage for India to sign 
the Convention. 
 
 The Bill provides for the constitution of a Central Authority.  
 A decision under the Hague Convention, 1980 concerning the 
return of the child is not a final determination on merits of the 
issue of custody. 
 It outlines the role of the Central authorities with regard to a child, 
who is removed to India, and from India to another Contracting State 
of the Hague Convention, 1980.  
 It lays down procedure for securing  the return of a child and 
provides for the Central Authority to apply to the High Court for 
restoring custody of the child.  
 It empowe rs the Court to deny custody on certain grounds. It 
allows the Courts in India to recognise decisions of State of the 
‘habitual residence’ of the child. It also states that the Indian Court 
that wants to disregard the interim/final order of the foreign court 
must record reasons for the same.  
 
7.2  The B ill empowers Indian Courts to seek a decision from 
Central Authorities of the Contracting State from which the child was 
removed. 
 
7.3  So far as the Indian law as reflected in the provision of the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (8 of 1890) are concerned, the issue of 
custody of a child, remains always open and does not attain finality as it 
is always being considered to be temporary order made in existing 
circumstances. With the changed condition s and circumstances, 

11 
 
including the passage of time, the Court may vary such an order, if, it is 
so necessary in the interests and welfare of the child. The doctrines of 
‘estoppel’ and ‘res judicata’ have no application in such a case (vide Rosy 
Jacob v. Jacob A. Chakramakkal, AIR 1973 SC 2090; and Dr. Ashish 
Ranjan v. Dr. Anupama Tandon, (2010) 14 SCC 274;) 
 
 
  

12 
 
8. CHILD ABDUCTION DISTINGUISHED FROM  
INTER-COUNTRY REMOVAL OF CHILDREN 
 
8.1  Child abduction is dealt with stringently by most countries; 
but ‘abduction’ of the child across borders by his or her own parent is 
governed by a rather arcane corpus of laws.  The heterogeneity of rules 
applicable to cases traditionally qualified as “child abd uction cases” at 
both the national and the supranational level, add to the complexity of 
the legal treatment of “parental child abductions”. 
 
8.2  ‘Abduction’ is explained under section 362  of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 as an act compelling or taking away  a person by 
deceitful means inducing him to go from any place.   Abduction as such, 
is not simply an offence rather is an auxiliary act not punishable in itself, 
but when it is accompanied by an intention to commit another offence, 
it per se becomes punishable as an offence.    In the case of ‘parental 
abduction’, these so -called ‘abductors’, are most of the times,  loving 
parents.  The child is taken away by a parent to any other place because 
of the fear of losing his/her custody i.e. such an  abduction, as stated 
earlier, is out of overwhelming love and affection and not to harm the 
child or achieve any other ulterior purpose.  Therefore, the Hague 
Convention, 1980, although uses the word ‘abduction’, it is not intended 
as in an ordinary case of abduction under criminal jurisprudence.  As 
such, the word ‘abduction’ within the Hague Convention, 1980, is to be 
considered as short hand for a more appropriate terminology, “wrongful 
removal or retention” which appears throughout in the text of the Hague 
Convention, 1980.  Hence, at the outset, the Law Commission is of the 
Opinion that the word ‘abduction’ in the current Bill, be dispensed with. 
 
8.3  Be that as it may, wrongful removal and retention not only 
causes serious prejudice to the other pare nt, but may have a serious 
impact on the over-all development of the child. More so, such wrongful 
removal and retention may be in utter disregard or in violation of the 

13 
 
order of the competent court regarding custody of the child. In this 
backdrop, many co untries have made such wrongful removal and 
retention a punishable offence.  In United Kingdom, the Child Abduction 
Act, 1984 has very stringent provisions making such wrongful removal 
and retention, as an offence punishable with the imprisonment up  to 
seven years. 
 
  

14 
 
9. RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
9.1  As the Law Commission of India has already submitted the 
Report and the Ministry of Women and Child Development has also 
drafted the Bill, we are of the considered opinion that submission of 
detailed report would not serve any purpose.  However, on perusal of the 
draft Bill, the Law Commission is of the opinion that it requires revision 
keeping in view the foregoing discussions, the legislative precedents and 
practices followed in the drafting of Bill s, and to suitably harmonise its 
provisions with the Hague Convention, 1980.  A Comparative Statement 
showing the provisions of the draft Bill placed on the website of the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development and the Revised Bill 
recommended by the Law Commission of India indicating the 
changes/modifications made by the Law Commission is attached as 
Annexure-I.  The text of the Protection o f C hildren (Inter -Country 
Removal a nd Retention) Bill, 2016  as recommended by the Law 
Commission of India, is attached as Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 


15 
 
Annexure-I 
Comparative Statement showing the provisions of the draft Bill placed on the website of Ministry of Women and 
Child Development (WCD) and the Revised Bill recommended by the Law Commission of India 
Bill prepared by WCD Revised Bill 
THE CIVIL ASPECTS OF INTERNATIONAL CHILD ABDUCTION 
BILL, 2016 
 
A 
BILL 
 
to secure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to or 
retained in any Contracting State, to ensure that the rights of custody and 
access under the law of one Contracting State are respected in other 
Contracting States, and to establish a Central Authority and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
 
WHEREAS the interests of children are of paramount importance 
in matters relating to their custody; 
 
AND WHEREAS India is a party to the Hague Convention on the 
Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction; 
 
AND WHEREAS the said Convention entered into force on the 
1st  December, 1983; 
 
And WHEREAS the said Convention has for its main objective, to 
secure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed or retained in any 
contracting state, to ensure that rights of custody and of access under the 
law of one contracting state are respected in other contracting states;  
 
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to provide for the 
prompt return of children wrongfully removed or retained in a contracting 
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN (INTER-COUNTRY REMOVAL AND 
RETENTION) BILL, 2016 
 
A 
Bill 
 
to ensure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to, or retained in any 
Contracting State, to ensure that the rights of custody and access under the law of one 
of the Contracting States are effectively respected in another Contracting States, and 
to establish a Central Authority, inter alia, for the purposes of providing assistance 
to help locate such children, encourage amicable solutions and help process of 
requests for return of children  and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
 
 
WHEREAS the best interests of children are of paramount importance in matters 
relating to their custody in view of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989 
which came into force on 2nd September, 1990; 
 
 
 
AND WHEREAS  the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International 
Child Abduction, 1980, came into force on the 1st December, 1983; 
 
 AND WHEREAS it would be necessary to implement the said Convention in 
so far as they relate to an expeditious return of a child who has been wrongfully 
removed or retained in contracting party to its country of his or her habitual 
residence in violation of the custody rights or access rights;  
 
  
 

16 
 
state, and to ensure that rights of custody and of access under the law of 
one contracting state are respected in other cont racting states, and 
thereby to give effect to the provisions of the said Convention; 
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the sixty -fifth year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- 
 
Chapter I 
Preliminary 
 
1. (1) This Bill may be called the Civil Aspects of International Child 
Abduction Bill, 2016  
(2) It extends to the whole of India (except Jammu and Kashmir)  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:  
 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act and any reference in such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of that provision. 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-  
 
(a) “Applicant” means any person who, pursuant to the 
Convention, files an application with the Central Authority or 
a Central Authority of any other party to the Convention for 
the return of a child alleged to have been wrongfully removed 
or retained or for arrangements for organizing or securing the 
effective exercise of rights of access pursuant to the 
Convention;  
(b) “Central Authority” means the Central Authority established 
under Section 4;  
(c) “Contracting State” means a state signatory to the Hague 
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child 
Abduction;  
 
 
 
 
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the (_____) year of the Republic of India as follows:- 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
   Preliminary 
 
1.  Short title, extent, application and commencement. 
(1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children (Inter -Country Removal 
and Retention) Act, 2016. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to every child who has not completed 
sixteenth year of age and has either wrongfully removed to, or retained in 
India, irrespective of his or her nationality, religion, or status in India. 
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:  
 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as 
a reference to the  commencement of that provision. 
 
2. Definitions 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “applicant” means any person who, pursuant to the Convention, files an 
application with the Central Authority or a Central Authority of any other 
State party to the Convention for the return of a child alleged to have 
been wrongfully removed or retained, or for arrangements for organising 
or securing the effective exercise of rights of access pursuant to the said 
Convention;  
 
(b) “Central Authority”  means the Central Authority  constituted under 
section 4;  
(c) “Contracting State” means a State signatory to the Hague Convention on 
the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction;  
 

17 
 
(d) “Convention” means the Hague Convention on the Civil 
Aspects of International Child Abduction which was signed at 
the Hague on 25 th October, 1980, as set out in the First 
Schedule;  
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Central 
Authority;  
(f) “Habitual residence” of a child is the place where the child 
resided with both parents; or, if the parents are living 
separately and apart, wit h one parent under a separation 
agreement or with the implied consent of the other parent or 
under a court order; or with a person other than a parent on a 
permanent basis for a significant period of time, whichever 
last occurred.  
(g) “Member” means a member of the Central Authority and 
includes the Chairperson, if any;  
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “Right of access” in relation to a child includes the right to take 
a child for a limited period of time to a place other than the 
child's habitual residence;  
(j) “Right of custody” in relation to a child includes rights relating 
to the care of the person of the child and, in particular, the 
right to determine the child's place of residence.  
 
3. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the removal to or the retention in 
India of a child is to be considered wrongful where –  
 
(a) it is in breach of rights of custody attributed to a person, an 
institution or any other body, either jointly or alone, under the 
law of the Contracting State in which the child was habitually 
resident immediately before the removal or retention; and  
 
(b) at the time of removal or retention those rights were actually 
exercised, either jointly or alone, by a person, an institution or 
any other body, or would have been so exercised, but for the 
removal or retention.  
 
(2) The rights of custody mentioned in Sub-section (1)above, may 
arise in particular: 
 
(d) “Convention” means the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of 
International Child Abduction which was signed at the Hague on the 25th 
October, 1980, as set out in the Schedule;  
 
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Central Authority;  
 
(f)  “habitual residence” of a child is the place where the child resided with 
both parents; or, if the parents are living separately and apart, with one 
of the parent under a separation agreement or with the implied consent 
of the other parent or under a court order; or with a person other than a 
parent on a permanent basis for a significant period of time, whichever 
occurred last.  
 
(g) “member” means a m ember of the Central Authority and includes the 
Chairperson; 
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “right of access” in relation to a child includes the right to take a child for 
a limited period of time to a place other than the chi ld's habitual 
residence; 
(j) “right of custody” in relation to a child includes the right to  take care of 
the person of the child, to make long -term decisions about child’s 
development and well-being and, in particular,  to determine the child’s 
place of residence. 
 
3. Wrongful removal or retention 
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the removal to or the retention in India of a child is 
to be considered a wrongful act where –  
(a) such an act is in breach of rights of custody attributed to a person, an 
institution or any other body, either jointly or alone, under the law of the 
Contracting State in which the child was habitually resident immediately 
before the removal or retention; and  
 
(b) at the time of removal or retention those rights were actually exercised, 
either jointly or alone, by a person, an institution or any other body, or 
shall have been so exercised, but for the removal or retention.  
 
 
(2) The rights of custody specified in the Act, may arise in particular—  
 

18 
 
(a) by operation of law;  
 
(b) by reason of judicial or administrative decision; or  
 
(c) by reason of an agreement having legal effect under the law 
of the Contracting State in which the child was habitually 
resident immediately before the removal or retention.  
 
Chapter II 
 
Constitution, Powers and Functions of the Central Authority 
 
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be 
appointed by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act, 
an officer of the Central Government not below the rank of Join t 
Secretary to the Government of India, to be called as the Central 
Authority.  
 
(2) Such Central Authority shall, unless removed from office 
under Section xx, hold office for a period not exceeding three 
years or until he attains the age of sixty years, which ever is 
earlier.  
 
(3) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Central 
Authority, whether by reason of his death, termination or 
otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled within a period of ninety 
days by making afresh appointment in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-section (1) and the person so appointed shall 
hold office for the remainder of the term of office for which the 
Central Authority in whose place he is so appointed would have 
held that office. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)by operation of law; or  
 
(b)by reason of judicial or administrative decision; or  
 
(c)by reason of an agreement having legal effect under the law of the 
Contracting State in which the child was habitually resident immed iately 
before the removal or retention.  
 
 
CHAPTER II 
Constitution, Powers and Functions of Central Authority 
 
4. Constitution of Central Authority.  
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute an Authority to be called as the Central Authority to exercise 
the powers conferred on, and perform the functions assigned to it, 
under this Act. 
 
(2) The Central Authority shall consist of ,- 
(a) a Chairperson, who is an officer not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India, and 
(b) two members out of which at least one shall be an advocate with 
ten years of practicing experience and another member having 
such qualification, experience and expertise in matters related to 
inter-country removal or retention of child and child welfare as may 
be prescribed,  
to be appointed by the Central Government. 
 
(3) The tenure of the Chairperson or any member of the Central Authority 
shall be three years from the date on which he assumes office as such or 
till the age of his superannuation, whichever is earlier.   
 
(4) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a member in 
the Central Authority, whether by reason of his death, resignation or 
inability to discharge his functions owing to illness or other  incapacity, 
such vacancy shall be filled within a period of ninety days by making a 
fresh appointment in accordance with the provisions of sub -section (2) 
and the person so appointed shall hold the office for the remainder of the term 

19 
 
 
 
 
 
(5 - No such section proposed by WCD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. The Central Authority or any other authority on its behalf shall take 
all appropriate measures to perform all or any of the following 
functions, namely:-  
 
(a) To discover the whereabouts of a child who has been wrongly 
removed to, or retained in, India, and where the child’s place 
of residence in India is unknown, the Central Authority may 
obtain the assistance of the police to locate the child;  
 
(b) To prevent further harm to any such child or prejudice to any 
other interested parties, by taking or causing to be taken, 
such provisional measures as may be necessary;  
 
(c) To secure the voluntary return of any such child to the country 
in which such child had his or her habitual residence or to 
bring about an amicable resolution of the differences between 
the person claiming that such child has been wrongfully 
removed to, or retained in, India, and the person opposing the 
return of such child to the Contracting State in w hich such 
child has his or her habitual residence;  
 
(d) To exchange, where desirable, information relating to any 
such child, with the appropriate authorities of a Contracting 
State;  
 
(e) To provide, on request, information of a general character, as 
of office of the person in whose place he is appointed.  
 
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may 
be prescribed. 
 
5. Appointment of officers and other staff of Central Authority:- 
(1) The Central Government may provide to the Central Authority, such 
officers and other staff as it considers necessary, for its efficient 
discharge of functions under this Act. 
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other staff of the Central Authority shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 
 
 
6. Functions of Central Authority. 
The Central Authority or any other officer authorized by the Central Authority 
in this behalf, shall take all appropriate measures while performing all or any of 
the following functions, namely— 
(a) to discover the whereabouts of a child who has been wrongfully removed 
to, or retained in, India, or outside India, and in case where the child’s 
place of residence in India is not known, the Central Authority may obtain 
the assistance of the police to locate the child;  
 
 
(b) to prevent further harm to any such child or prejudice to any other 
interested parties, by taking or causing to be taken, such measures as 
may be considered necessary;  
 
(c) to secure the voluntary return of any such child to the country in which 
the child had his or her habitual residence, or to bring about an amicable 
resolution of the differences between the person claiming that such child 
has been wrongfully removed to, or retained in, India, and the person 
opposing the return of such child to the  contracting State in which the 
child has his or her habitual residence;  
 
 
(d) to exchange, where desirable, information relating to any such child, with 
the appropriate authorities of a contracting State. 

20 
 
to the law of India in connection with the implementation of 
the Convention in any Contracting State;  
 
(f) To institute judicial proceedings with a view to obtaining the 
return of any such child to the Contracting State in which that 
child has his or her habitual residence, and in appropriate 
cases, to make arrangements for organising or securing or to 
institute judicial proceedings for securing the effective 
exercise of rights of access to a child who is in India;  
 
(g) Where circumstances so require, to facilitate the provision of 
legal aid or advice;  
 
(h) To provide such administrative arrangements as may be 
necessary and appropriate to secure the safe return of any 
such child to the Contracting State in which the child has his 
or her habitual residence;  
 
(i) Such other functions as may be necessary to ensure the 
discharge of India’s obligations under the Convention.  
 
6. The Central Authority shall, while inquiring into any matter 
referred to in Section 5, have all the powers of a civil court trying 
a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and in particula r, 
in respect of the following matters, namely:  
 
(1) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath;  
 
(2) discovery and production of any document;  
 
(3) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
 
(4) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court 
or office;  
 
(5) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents.  
 
 
 
(e) to provide, on request, information of a general ch aracter, as to the law 
of India in connection with the implementation of the Convention in any 
contracting State;  
 
(f) to institute judicial proceedings with a view to secure the return of any 
such child to the contracting State in which that child has his or  her 
habitual residence, and in appropriate cases, to make arrangements for 
instituting judicial proceedings for securing the effective exercise of rights 
of access to a child who is in India;  
 
 
 
(g) where circumstances so require, to facilitate providing legal aid or 
advice; 
 
(h) to make such administrative arrangements as may be necessary and 
appropriate to secure the safe return of any such child to the contracting 
State in which the child has his or her habitual residence;  
 
 
(i)  such other functions as may be necessary to ensure the discharge of 
India’s obligations under the Convention. 
 
7. Powers of Central Authority. 
The Central Authority shall, have for the purposes of discharging its functions 
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)  while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely:- 
(1) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him 
on oath;  
(2) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(3) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(4) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or 
document or a copy of such record or document, from any office; 
(5) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
 

21 
 
Chapter III 
Procedure for Applications to Central Authority 
 
7. (1) The appropriate authority of a Contracting State, or a person, 
institution or other body claiming that a child has been wrongfully 
removed to or retained in India in breach of rights of custody, may 
apply to the Central Authority for assistance in secu ring the return of 
such child.  
 
(2) Every application made under Sub -section (1) shall substantially 
be in the form prescribed in the rules to this Act.  
 
(3) The application under Sub-section (1) may be accompanied by -  
 
(a) A duly authenticated copy of any relevant decision or 
agreement giving rise to the rights of custody claimed to have 
been breached;  
(b) A certificate or affidavit from a Central Authority or other 
competent authority of the Contracting State in which that 
child has his or her habitual residence or from a qualified 
person setting out the law of that Contracting State relating to 
the rights of custody alleged to have been breached;  
 
(c) Any other relevant document.  
 
8. Where, on receipt of an application under Sectio n 6, the Central 
Authority has reason to believe that the child in respect of whom the 
application is made is in another Contracting State, it shall forthwith 
transmit the application to the appropriate authority of that Contracting 
State, and shall accord ingly inform the appropriate authority or the 
applicant, as the case may be. 
 
 
 
9. Where the Central Authority is requested to provide information 
relating to a child under Section 5 (d), it may request a police officer 
to make a report to it in writing with respect to any matter relating to 
the child that appears to it to be relevant.  
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
Procedure for Application to Central Authority 
 
8. Procedure for making application to Central Authority. 
(1) The appropriate authority of a contracting State, or a person, institution or any 
other body claiming that a child has been wrongfully removed to, or retained in 
India in breach of the rights of custody, may apply to the Central Authority for 
assistance in securing the return of the child.  
 
(2) Every application made under sub -section (1) shall be in such form as may 
be prescribed.   
 
(3) The application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by— 
 
(a) a duly authenticated copy of relevant decision or agreement giving rise 
to the rights of custody claimed to have been breached;  
 
(b) a certificate or affidavit from a Central Authority or any other competent 
authority of the contracting State in which that ch ild has his or her 
habitual residence or from an attorney or a qualified person setting out 
the law of that contracting State relating to the rights of custody alleged 
to have been breached;  
 
(c) any other relevant document.  
 
9. Transfer of applications to contracting State. 
Where, on receipt of an application under section 8, the Central Authority has 
reason to believe that the child in respect of whom the application has been made 
is in another contracting State, it shall forthwith transmit the application to the 
appropriate authority of that contracting State, and shall accordingly inform the 
appropriate authority or as the case may be, the applicant referred to in sub -
section(1) of section 8.  
 
 
10. Calling Report from Police. 

22 
 
 
 
Chapter IV 
Refusal by Central Authority to accept Applications 
 
 
10. The Central Authority may refuse to accept an application made to it 
under Section 7 if it is manifest that the requirements of this 
Convention are not fulfilled or that the application is otherwise not well 
founded. On its refusal to accept an application, the Central Authority 
shall forthwith inform the appropriate authority or person, institution, 
or other body making the application, the reasons for such refusal.  
 
11. The Central Authority should not reject an application solely on the 
basis that additional documents or information are needed. Where 
there is a need for such additional information or documents, the 
requested Central Authority may ask the applicant to pro vide these 
additional documents or information. If the applicant does not do so 
within a reasonable period specified by the requested Central 
Authority, the requested Central Authority may decide that it will no 
longer process the application.  
 
12. Any party aggrieved by the refusal of the Central Authority to accept 
an application made under Section 7 may appeal against such refusal 
to the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, 
Government of India. Such appeal shall be made within 14 days from 
the date of receipt of the decision of the Central Authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter V 
Procedure for Application to High Court 
 
13. Without prejudice to any other means for securing the return of a child 
in respect of whom an application has been made under Section 6, 
the Central Authority may apply to the High Court within whose 
Where the Central Authority is requested to provide information relating to a child 
under clauses (a) and (d) of  section 6, it may call for a report from the  police 
in writing with respect to any matter relating to the child that appears to the 
Central Authority to be relevant.  
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Refusal by Central Authority to accept Applications 
 
 
11. Refusal by Central Authority to accept Applications. 
 
(1) The Central Authority may refuse to accept an application made to it under 
section 8, if it is manifest that the requirements of the Convention are not fulfilled 
or that the application is otherwise not complete.   
(2)  The Central Authority on its refusal to accept an application , shall forthwith 
inform the appropriate authority or person, institution, or any other body making 
the application, the reasons for such refusal.  
 
12. Additional  Information. 
(1) The Central Authority shall not reject an application solely on the ground that 
additional documents or information are needed.  
(2) The Central Authority may, where there is a need for such additional 
information or documents , ask the applicant to provide these additional 
documents or i nformation, and if the applicant does not do so within a 
reasonable period specified by the Central Authority, it may decide not to  
process the application. 
 
13. Appeal to Central Government. 
(1) Any party aggrieved by the refusal of the Central Authority to a ccept an 
application made under section 8, may appeal against such refusal to the  
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.   
(2) Such an appeal shall be made within a period of fourteen days from the date of 
receipt of the decision of the Central Authority; and the appeal shall be 
disposed off as early as possible but not later than six weeks from the date 
of receiving of the appeal. 
 
 
CHAPTER V 

23 
 
territorial jurisdiction the child is physically present  or was last known 
to be present for an order directing the return of such child to the 
Contracting State in which the child has his or her habitual residence.  
 
14. Where an application is made to a High Court under Section 14, the 
Court may, at any time before the application is determined, give such 
interim directions as it thinks fit for the purpose of securing the welfare 
of the child concerned, or of securing the child’s residence pending 
the proceedings, or to prevent the child’s return for being obstruc ted, 
or of otherwise preventing any change in the circumstances relevant 
to the determination of the application.  
 
15. Where the High Court is satisfied, upon an application made to it 
under Section 10, that:-  
 
(a) The child in respect of whom the application has been made has 
been wrongfully removed to or retained in India within the 
meaning of Section 3; and,  
 
(b) A period of one year has not yet elapsed between the date of the 
alleged removal or retention and the date of such application;  
 
It shall forthwith order the return of such child to the Contracting State 
in which the child had his or her habitual residence; 
 
Provided that the High Court may order the return of a child 
to the Contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual 
residence even in a case where more than one year has elapsed 
between the date of the alleged removal or retention and the date of 
such application, unless it is satisfied that the child is settled in his or 
her new environment. 
16. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sect ion 15, the High Court is 
not bound to order the return of the child if the person, institution or 
other body which opposes its return establishes that: 
 
(a)      the person, institution or other body having the care of the 
person of the child was not actually exercising the custody 
rights at the time of removal or retention, or had consented 
to or subsequently acquiesced in the removal or retention; 
Procedure for Application to High Courts 
 
14. Power of Central Authority to apply to the High Court. 
Without prejudice to any other means for securing the return of a child in respect 
of whom an application has been made under section 8, the Central Authority 
may apply to the High Court wi thin whose territorial jurisdiction the child is 
physically present or was last known to be present for an order directing the return 
of such child to the contracting State in which the child has his or her habitual 
residence.   
 
15. Interim Order by High Courts. 
Where an application is made to the High Court under section 14, the Court may, 
at any time before the application is determined, give such interim directions as 
it thinks fit for purpose of securing the welfare of the child concerned, or for 
making such provisions for the child , pending the proceedings, or to prevent 
the child’s return, or for otherwise preventing any change in the circumstances 
relevant to the determination of the application. 
 
16. Power of High Courts to return child to contracting State. 
 Where the High Court is satisfied, upon an application made to it under section 
14, that— 
(a) the child in respect of whom the application has been made has been 
wrongfully removed to or retained in India within the meaning of section 
3; and,  
 
(b) a period of one year has not elapsed between the date of the alleged 
removal or retention and the date of such application;  
 
 
it may order the return of such child to the contracting State in which the child 
has his or her habitual residence: 
 
Provided that the High Court may order the return of a child to the contracting 
State in which that child has his or her habitual residence even in a case where 
more than one year has elapsed between the date of the alleged removal or 
retention and the date of such application, if the High Court is satisfied that the 
child is not settled in his or her new environment. 
 
17. Possible exceptions to the return of the child  

24 
 
or 
 
(b)      there is a grave risk that his or her return would 
expose the child to physical or psychological harm or 
otherwise place the child in an intolerable situation. 
 
 
 
(2) The High Court may also refuse to order the return of the child if 
it finds that the child objects to being returned and has attained an 
age and degree of maturity at which it is appropriate to take account 
of its views.  
 
(3) The return of the child may be re fused if this would not be 
permitted by the fundamental principles of the requested State 
relating to the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.  
 
(4) In exercising its powers under this Section, the High Court shall 
have regard to any information relating to the social background of the 
child provided by the appropriate authority of the Contracting State in 
which that child has his or her habitual residence.  
 
(5) The High Court shall not refuse to make an order under this 
Section for the return of a child to the Contracting State in which that 
child has his or her habitual residence, on the grounds only that there 
is in force, a decision of a court in India  or a decision entitled to be 
recognised by a court in India relating to the custody of such a child, 
but the High Court shall, in making an order under Section 10, take 
into account the reasons for such decision.  
 
17. (1) The appropriate authority, or a person, institution or other body of 
a Contracting State, may make an application to the Central Authority 
for assistance in securing effective exercise of rights of access of a 
person specified in the application to a child who is in India.  
 
(2) An application made under Sub -section (1) shall be in such form 
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
 
 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 16, the High Court may not 
pass the order of return of the child if the person, institution or any other body, 
opposing the return, establishes that-  
(a) the person, institution or any other body having the care of the person of 
the child was not act ually exercising the custody rights at the time of 
removal or retention, or has consented to or subsequently acquiesced in 
the removal or retention; or 
(b) there is a grave risk that the return of the child would expose the child 
to physical or psychological h arm or otherwise place the child in a non-
conducive situation. 
(c) the person who is allegedly involved in wrongful removal or 
retention, was fleeing from any incidence of ‘domestic violence’ as 
defined in section 3 of the Protection of Women from Domestic 
Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005). 
 
(2) The High Court may refuse to order the return of the child if -  
(a) the court finds that the child objects to being returned and has attained 
an age and level  of maturity at which it is appropriate to take into 
account of his or her views; 
(b) the return is not permitted under the fundamental principles of the 
requested State relating to the protection of human rights and 
fundamental freedoms; 
(c) the High Court, while exercising powers under this section, considers 
any information relating to the social background of the child provided 
by the appropriate authority of the contracting State in which that child 
has his or her habitual residence, as inappropriate;  
 
 
 
 
(3) The High Court may not refuse to make an order under this section for the 
return of a child to the contracting State in which that child has his or her 
habitual residence, on the grounds only-  
(i)  that there is in force, a decision of a court in India or, 
(ii) a decision entitled to be recognised by a court in India relating to the 
custody of such child:  
Provided that the High Court shall record reasons while passing such 
orders relating to the return of a child. 
18. Rights of access of person, institution or any other body to a child in India.  

25 
 
 
18. (1) Without prejudice to any other means for securing the exercise of 
rights of access of any person to a child in India, the Central Authority 
may apply to the High Court for an order of the Court for securing the 
effective exercise of those rights.  
 
(2) Where the High Court is satisfied, on an application made to it 
under Sub-section (1), that the person who, or on whose behalf, such 
application is made has rights of access to the child specified in the 
application, it may make such order as may be necessary to secure 
the effective exercise of those rights of access, and any conditions 
to which they are subject. 
 
 
19. (1) In ascertaining whether there ha s been a wrongful removal or 
retention within the meaning of Section 3, the High Court may take 
notice directly of the law of, and of judicial or administrative decisions, 
formally recognised or not in the State of the habitual residence of the 
child, without recourse to the specific procedures for the proof of that 
law or for the recognition of foreign decisions which would otherwise 
be applicable.  
 
(2) The High Court may, before making an order under Section 13 
for the return of a child to the Contracting State in which that child has 
his or her habitual residence, request the central Authority to obtain 
from the relevant authorities of the Contracting State in which that 
child has his or her habitual residence, a decision or determination as 
to whether the r emoval to, or retention in, India, of that child, is 
wrongful under Section 3.  
20. Upon making an order under Section 13 for the return of a child to 
the Contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual 
residence, the High Court may order the person who removed that 
child to India, or who retained that child in India, to pay the expenses 
incurred by the Central Authority. These expenses may include costs 
incurred in locating the child, costs of legal representation of the 
Central Authority, and costs incurred in returning the child to the 
Contracting State in which that child  has his or her habitual 
residence.  
 
(1) The appropriate authority, or a person, institution or any other body of a 
contracting State, may make an application to the Central Authority for assistance 
in securing effective exercise of rights of access of a person, specified in the 
application, to a child, who is in India.  
 
(2) An application made under sub -section (1) shall be in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
19. Application to the High Court for exercise of rights of access of any person to 
a child in India. 
(1) Without prejudice to any other means for securing the exercise of rights of access 
of any person, institution or any other body of the contracting State to a child in 
India, the Central Authority may apply to the High Court, for an order of the Court, 
for securing the effective exercise of those rights.  
 
(2) Where the High Court is satisfied, on an application made to it under sub-section 
(1), that the person who, or on whose behalf, such application is made has rights 
of access to the child specified in the application, the court may, subject to 
such conditions as may be considered necessary, make an order to secure 
the effective exercise of those rights of access.  
 
20. Relaxation of requirements of proof of foreign law. 
(1) The High Court, while ascertaining whether there has been a wrongful removal 
or retention within the meaning of section 3, may take notice of the law of, and 
of judicial or administrative decisions, formally recognised or not in the State of 
the habitual residence of the child, without recourse to the specific procedures 
for the proof of that law or for the recognition of foreign decisions which would 
otherwise be applicable.  
 
(2) The High Court may, before making an order under section 15 for the return of 
a child to the Contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual 
residence; direct the Central Authority , to obtain from the concerned 
authorities of the Contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual 
residence, a decision or determination as to whether the removal to, or retention 
in, India, of that child, is wrongful within the meaning of section 3. 
 
21. Costs. 

26 
 
 
21. An order made by the High Court under Section 13 shall not be 
regarded as a decision or determination on the merits of any question 
relating to the custody of the child to whom an order relates.  
 
 
22. Where an order is m ade under Section 13 for the return of a child to 
the Contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual 
residence, the Central Authority shall cause such administrative 
arrangements as are necessary to be made in accordance with the 
order for the return of such child to such Contracting State.  
 
 
Chapter VI 
Application in respect of child removed from India 
 
23. (1) A person, institution or other body in India claiming that a child has 
been wrongfully removed to a Contracting State or is being wrongfully 
retained in a Contracting State in breach of rights of custody of such 
person, institution or other body, may a pply to the Central Authority 
for assistance in securing the return of that child to India.  
 
(2) On receipt of an application under Sub -section (1), the Central 
Authority shall apply in the appropriate manner to the appropriate 
authority in the Contracting State to which such child is alleged to have 
been removed or in which such child is alleged to be retained, for 
assistance in securing the return of that child to India.  
 
(3) The rights of custody mentioned in Sub-section (1)above, include 
rights of custody acc ruing to any person, institution or other body by 
operation of law;  
(a) by reason of judicial or administrative decision; or  
 
(b) by reason of an agreement having legal effect under 
the law of India.  
 
24. The High Court may, on application made by or on behalf of the 
appropriate authority of the Contracting State, declare that the 
removal of a child to that Contracting State or the retention of that 
(1) The High Court may, while making an order under section 15 for the return 
of a child to the contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual 
residence, order the person who removed that child to India, or who 
retained the child in India, to pay the expenses incurred by the Central 
Authority.  
(2) The expenses referred to in sub-section (1), may include costs incurred in 
locating the child, costs of legal proceedings incurred by the Central 
Authority, and costs incurred in returning the child to the contracting State 
in which that child has his or her habitual residence. 
 
22. Adjudication not to cover determination of custody rights of parent.  
An order made by the High Court under section 16 shall not be regarded as a 
decision or determination on the merits of any question relating to the custody of 
the child to whom the order relates.  
 
 
23. Arrangements to return a child to Contracting State. 
Where an order is made under section 16  for the return of a child to the 
contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual residence, the Central 
Authority shall cause such administrative arrangements, as are necessary, to be 
made in accordance with the order for the return of the child to such contracting 
State within a period of sixty days  from the date of such order. 
CHAPTER VI 
Application in respect of child removed from India 
 
24. Application to Central Authority for return of child to India. 
(1) A person, institution or any other body in India claiming that a child has been 
wrongfully removed to, or is being retained in, a Contracting State in breach of 
rights of custody of such person, institution or any other body, may apply to the 
Central Authority for assistance in securing the return of that child to India. 
(2) Every application made under sub -section (1) shall be made in such form 
as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section (1), the Central Authority shall 
forthwith apply to the appropriate authority, in the manner, if any, specified in 
the contracting State to which the child is alleged to have been removed or 
retained, for assistance in securing the return of that child to India. 
 
 
 

27 
 
child in that Contracting State is wrongful within the mea ning of 
Section 3.  
 
Chapter VII 
Rights of Access 
 
25. A person, institution or other body in India claiming that a child has 
been wrongfully removed to a Contracting State or is being 
wrongfully retained in a Contracting State in breach of rights of 
access of such person, institution or other body, may apply to the 
Central Authority for assistance in organising or securing the 
effective exercise of rights of access.  
 
26. An application to make arrangements for organising or securing the 
effective exercise of rights of access may be presented to the 
Central Authorities of Contracting States in the same way as an 
application for the return of a child.  
 
 
 
27. On receipt of an application under Sub -section (1), the Central 
Authority shall apply in the appropriate manner to the appropriate 
authority in the Contracting State to which such child is alleged to 
have been removed or in which such child is alleged to be retained, 
for assistance in making arrangements to organise or secu re the 
effective exercise of rights of access.  
 
 
 
 
 
(28. No such provision made by WCD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Provision relating to Declaratory Powers of High Court no t necessary in view of clause 
16) 
 
 
 
. 
CHAPTER VII 
Rights of Access 
 
25. Rights of access of person, institution or body in India. 
A person, institution or any other body in India claiming that a child has been 
wrongfully removed to, or is being retained in, a Contracting State in breach of 
the rights of access of such person, institution or any other body, may apply to 
the Central Authority for assistance in or ganising or securing the effective 
exercise of the rights of access, in such form as may be prescribed. 
 
26. Application to Central Authority of Contracting State to exercise rights of 
access of any person, institution or body in India. 
An application to make arrangements for organising or securing the effective 
exercise of rights of access under section 25  shall be presented forthwith to 
the Central Authority of the Contracting State in the same manner as an 
application for the return of a child under section 24. 
  
27. Coordination between Central Authorities to secure rights of access.  
On receipt of an application under section 2 6, the Central Authority shall 
forthwith apply to the appropriate authority, in the manner if any, specified, in 
the Contracting State to which the child is alleged to have been wrongfully 
removed, or retained, for assistance in making arrangements to secure, or  
organise the effective exercise of rights of access. 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 

28 
 
(29. No such provision made by WCD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter VIII 
Miscellaneous 
 
28. (1) The judicial or administrative authorities of Contracting States 
shall act expeditiously in proceedings for the return of children. 
  
(2) If the judicial or administrative authority concerned has not reached 
a decision within six weeks from the date of commencement of the 
proceedings, the applicant or the Central Authority of the requested 
State, on its own initiative or if asked by the Central Authority of the 
requesting State, shall have the right to request a statement of the 
reasons for the delay. If a reply is received by the Central Authority 
of the requested State, that Authority shall transmit the reply to the 
Central Authority of the requesting State, or to the applicant, as the 
case may be.  
 
 
29. The Central Authority shall submit an annual report to the Central 
Government through the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
in such form as may be prescribed.  
 
 
 
 
 
(clauses 29 & 33 made by WCD – has been merged in clause 31 prepared 
by the Commission) 
 
 
Offences and Penalties 
 
28. Punishment for wrongful removal or retention. 
 
Whoever wrongfully removes or retains a child either himself or through other 
person from the custody of a parent in terms of sub-section (2) of section 3 of this 
Act, is said to commit the offence of wrongful removal or retention, and shall, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with 
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both. 
 
29. Punishment for willful misrepresentation or concealment of fact. 
 
 Whoever, by willful misrepresentation, or by concealment of a material fact, which 
he is bound to disclose, related to the location or information of the child under 
clause (a) of section 6, voluntarily causes to prevent the safe return of the child 
in pursuance to an order made under section 15 or section 16 of this Act shall be 
guilty of an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both. 
 
CHAPTER IX 
Miscellaneous 
 
30. Expeditious process. 
(1) The judicial or administrative authorities of contracting States shall act 
expeditiously in proceedings for the return of children. 
 
(2) If the judicial or administrative authority concerned has not reached a decision 
within a period of  six weeks from the date of commencement of the 
proceedings, the applicant or the Central Authority of the requested State, on its 
own motion or if asked by the Central Authority of the requesting State, shall 
have the right to request a statement of the reasons for delay.  
 
(3) If any information or reply is received by the Central Authority of the requested 
State, that Authority shall transmit the same to the Central Authority of the 
requesting State, or to the applicant, as the case may be. 
 
31. Reports and returns 
(1) The Central Authority shall submit an annual report giving full account of its 
activities under this Act to the Central Government in such form as may be 

29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(32. No such provision made by WCD) 
 
 
 
 
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government, Central Authority or any member thereof or any 
person acting under the direction of the Central Authority, in respect 
of anything which is in good faith done or intend ed to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder.  
 
 
31. Every member of the Central Authority and every officer appointed in 
the Central Authority to exercise functions under this Act shall be 
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of Section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code.  
 
 
 
32. (1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Central 
prescribed. 
(2)  The Central Authority shall in addition to the report under sub -section (1) 
furnish such returns or other relevant information with respect to its 
activities as the Central Government may from time to time require.  
(3) The report submitted under sub-section (1) shall contain a full account of 
- 
(a) a brief record of applications for the return of children submitted by 
applicants to the Central Authority.  
(b) detailed information on applications for the return of children that 
remain pending for more than one year aft er the date of filing and 
information on the current status of such children and specific 
actions taken by the Central Authority to resolve such cases. 
(c) A list of countries to which the children mentioned in clause (b) 
have been wrongfully removed to or retained in, countries which 
have failed to comply with their obligations set out in the 
Convention with respect to, return of children, access to children 
by applicants in India. 
(4) The Central Authority shall inform to the parent, who has requested 
assistance regarding a wrongfully removed or retained child, once in 
every six months, except where the case has been closed by the Central 
Authority and the reason for the same has been conveyed to the person, 
institution or body seeking such assistance.  
32. Maintenance of Records. 
The Central Authority shall maintain detailed and updated records 
concerning the applications, and, or cases brought to its notice under this 
Act in such manner as may be prescribed.  
 
33. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government, Central Authority or any member or officer thereof or any officer 
acting under the authorization of the Central Authority in respect of anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of 
any rules made thereunder.  

30 
 
Authority shall be guided by such directions on question of policy 
relating to national interest, as may be given to it by the Central 
Government.  
 
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the 
Central Authority as to whether a question is or is not a question of 
policy relating to national purposes, the decision of the Central 
Government thereon shall be final.  
 
33. The Central Authority shall furnish to the Central Government, such 
returns or other information with respect to its activities as the Central 
Government may from time to time require.  
 
34. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:- 
 
(a) Form of application to Central Authority for assistance in 
securing the return of a child that has been wrongfully removed 
to or retained in India 
 
(b) Form of application to Central Authority for assistance in 
securing the return of a child that has been wrongfully removed 
to or retained outside India 
 
(c)  Procedure  for  appointment  of  Chairman  and  Members  
of  Central  Authority/recruitment of staff of Central Authority 
 
(d) Procedure in case of refusal to accept an application by 
Central Authority under Section 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34. Members and officers of  Central Authority to be public servants  
Every member and officer of the Central Authority and the officer authorized 
by the Authority to p erform functions under this Act  shall be deemed to be 
a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(45 of 1860). 
 
 
35. Power to give directions. 
(1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Central Authority sha ll be 
guided by such directions on question of policy relating to national interest, as 
may be given to it by the Central Government. 
 
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Central Authority 
as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy relating to national 
interests, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
 
 
 
 
36. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules 
to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- 
 
 
(a) qualifications and experience for appointment of  Members of 
Central Authority under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 4 ; 
(b) the salary and allowances and terms and conditions of service of 
Chairperson and Members under sub-section (5) of section 4; 
(c) the salary and allowances and terms and conditions  of service of 
officers and staff of the Central Authority under sub -section (2) of 
section 5; 
(d)  form of application to Central Authority for assistance in securing 
return of child wrongfully removed or retained in India, under sub -
section (2) of section 8; 
(e) procedure for making appeal to the Central Government in case of 
refusal to accept the application by the Central Authority under sub-

31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) Every rule made under this Act (Sub-section (1))shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before t he expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 
35. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or  
expedient for removal of the difficulty: 
 
Provided that no order shall be made under this Section after 
the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of 
this Act. 
 
 
(2) Every order made under this Section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 
section (1) of section 13; 
(f) form of application to Central Authority for assistance in securing 
exercise of rights of access to a child in India, under sub-section (2) 
of section 18; 
(g) form of application to Central Authority for assistance in securing 
return of child wrongfully removed to or retained in the Contracting 
State under sub-section (2) of  section 24; 
(h) the form of application for assistance in organizing or securing the 
rights of access to a child wrongfully removed to or retained in a 
Contracting State under section 25; and 
(i) the form in which annual report shall be prepared un der sub -
section(1) of section 31; 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
37. Power to remove difficulties.  
(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to 
be necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty. 
 Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 

32 
 
 

33 
 
ANNEXURE-II  
 
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN (INTER-COUNTRY REMOVAL AND RETENTION) 
BILL, 2016 
 
A 
Bill 
 
to ensure the prompt return of children wrongfully removed to, or retained in any 
Contracting State, to ensure that the rights of custody and access under the law of one of the 
Contracting States are effectively  respected in another Contracting States, and to establish a 
Central Authority, inter alia, for the purposes of providing assistance to help locate such children, 
encourage amicable solutions and help process of requests for return of children and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
WHEREAS the best interests of children are of paramount importance in matters relating 
to their custody in view of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989 which came into force 
on 2nd September, 1990; 
 
AND WHEREAS  the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child 
Abduction, 1980, came into force on the 1st December, 1983; 
 
 AND WHEREAS it would be necessary to implement the said Convention in so far as 
they relate to an expeditious return of a child who has been wrongfully removed or retained in 
contracting party to its country of his or her habitual residence in violation of the  custody rights 
or access rights;  
 
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the (_____) year of the Republic of India as follows: - 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
   Preliminary 
 
2.  Short title, extent, application and commencement. 
 
(1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children (Inter-Country Removal and Retention) 
Act, 2016. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to every child who has not completed sixteenth year 
of age and has either wrongfully removed to , or retained in India, irrespective of his or 
her nationality, religion, or status in India. 
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint:  
 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a 
reference to the commencement of that provision. 
 
2. Definitions 
 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “applicant” means any person who, pursuant to the Convention, files an 
application with the Central Authority or a Central Authority of any other State 
party to the Convention for the return of a child alleged to have  been wrongfully 
removed or retained, or for arrangements for organising or securing the effective 
exercise of rights of access pursuant to the said Convention;  
(b) “Central Authority” means the Central Authority  constituted under section 4;  
(c) “Contracting State” means a State signatory to the Hague Convention on the 
Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction;  
 

34 
 
(d) “Convention” means the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International 
Child Abduction which was signed at the Hague on the 25th October, 1980, as 
set out in the Schedule;  
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Central Authority;  
(f)  “habitual residence” of a child is the place where the child resided with both 
parents; or, if the parents are living separately and apart, wit h one of the parent 
under a separation agreement or with the implied consent of the other parent or 
under a court order; or with a person other than a parent on a permanent basis 
for a significant period of time, whichever occurred last.  
(g) “member” means a member of the Central Authority and includes the 
Chairperson; 
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “right of access” in relation to a child includes the right to take a child for a limited 
period of time to a place other than the child's habitual residence; 
(j) “right of custody” in relation to a child includes the right to  take care of the person 
of the child, to make long -term decisions about child’s development and well -
being and, in particular,  to determine the child’s place of residence. 
 
3. Wrongful removal or retention 
 
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the removal to or the retention in India of a child is to be 
considered a wrongful act where –  
(a) such an act is in breach of rights of custody attributed to a person, an institution 
or any other body, either jointly or alone, under the law of the Contracting State 
in which the child was habitually resident immediately before the removal or 
retention; and  
(b) at the time of removal or retention those rights were actually exercised, either 
jointly or alone, by a person, an institution or any other body, or shall have been 
so exercised, but for the removal or retention.  
 
(2) The rights of custody specified in the Act, may arise in particular— 
  
(a) by operation of law; or  
(b) by reason of judicial or administrative decision; or  
(c) by reason of an agreement having legal effect under the law of the Contracting 
State in which the child was habitually resident immediately before the removal 
or retention.  
 
 
CHAPTER II 
Constitution, Powers and Functions of Central Authority 
 
4. Constitution of Central Authority. 
  
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an 
Authority to be called as the Central Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, 
and perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 
 
(2) The Central Authority shall consist of ,- 
(a) a Chairperson, who is an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India, and 
(b) two members out of which at least one shall be an advocate with ten years of 
practicing experience and another member having such qualification, 
experience and expertise in matters related to inter-country removal or retention 
of child and child welfare as may be prescribed,  
to be appointed by the Central Government. 
 
(3) The tenure of the Chairperson or any member of the Central Authority shall be three 
years from the date on which he assumes office as such or till the age of his 
superannuation, whichever is earlier.   

35 
 
 
(4) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a member in the Central 
Authority, whether by reason of his death, resignation or inability to discharge his 
functions owing to illness or other incapacity, such vacancy shall be filled within a period 
of ninety days by making a fresh appointment in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (2) and the person so appointed shall hold the office for the remainder of the 
term of office of the person in whose place he is appointed.  
 
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
 
5. Appointment of officers and other staff of Central Authority. 
 
(1) The Central Government may provide to the Central Authority, such officers and other 
staff as it considers necessary, for its efficient discharge of functions under this Act.  
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and other staff of the Central Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
6. Functions of Central Authority. 
 
The Central Authority or any other officer authorized by the Central Authority in this 
behalf, shall take all appropriate measures while performing all or any  of the following 
functions, namely— 
 
(a) to discover the whereabouts of a child who has been wrongfully removed to, or 
retained in, India, or outside India, and in case where the child’s place of 
residence in India is not known, the Central Authority may obtain the assistance 
of the police to locate the child;  
 
(b) to prevent further harm to any such child or prejudice to any other interested 
parties, by taking or causing to be taken, such measures as may be considered 
necessary;  
 
(c) to secure the voluntary return of any such child to the country in which the child 
had his or her habitual residence, or to bring about an amicable resolution of the 
differences between the person claiming that such child has been wrongfully 
removed to, or retained in, India, and the pe rson opposing the return of such 
child to the contracting State in which the child has his or her habitual residence;  
 
(d) to exchange, where desirable, information relating to any such child, with the 
appropriate authorities of a contracting State. 
 
(e) to provide, on request, information of a general character, as to the law of India 
in connection with the implementation of the Convention in any contracting State;  
 
(f) to institute judicial proceedings with a view to secure the return of any such child 
to the contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual residence, and 
in appropriate cases, to make arrangements for instituting judicial proceedings 
for securing the effective exercise of rights of access to a child who is in India;  
 
(g) where circumstances so require, to facilitate providing legal aid or advice;  
 
(h) to make such administrative arrangements as may be necessary and 
appropriate to secure the safe return of any such child to the contracting State 
in which the child has his or her habitual residence;  
 
(i)  such other functions as may be necessary to ensure the discharge of India’s 
obligations under the Convention. 
 
7. Powers of Central Authority. 

36 
 
 
The Central Authority shall, have for the purposes of discharging its functions under this 
Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908)  while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: - 
 
(1) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(2) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(3) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(4) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
(1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record 
or document, from any office; 
(5) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
 
 
Chapter III 
Procedure for Application to Central Authority 
 
8. Procedure for making application to Central Authority. 
 
(1) The appropriate authority of a contracting State, or a person, institution or any other 
body claiming that a child has been wrongfully removed to, or retained in India in breach 
of the rights of custody, may apply to the Central Authority for assistance in  securing 
the return of the child.  
 
(2) Every application made under sub -section (1) shall be in such form as may be 
prescribed.   
 
(3)  The application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by— 
(a) a duly authenticated copy of relevant decision or agreement giving rise to the 
rights of custody claimed to have been breached;  
(b) a certificate or affidavit from a Central Authority or any other competent authority 
of the contracting State in which that chi ld has his or her habitual residence or 
from an attorney or a qualified person setting out the law of that contracting State 
relating to the rights of custody alleged to have been breached;  
(c) any other relevant document.  
 
 
9. Transfer of applications to contracting State. 
 
Where, on receipt of an application under section 8, the Central Authority has reason to 
believe that the child in respect of whom the application has been made is in another 
contracting State, it shall forthwith transmit the application to the appropriate authority of 
that contracting State, and shall accordingly inform the appropriate authority or as the 
case may be, the applicant referred to in sub-section(1) of section 8.  
 
 
10. Calling Report from Police. 
 
Where the Central Authority is requested to provide information relating to a child under 
clauses (a) and (d) of  section 6,  it may call for a report from the  police in writing with 
respect to any matter relating to the child that appears to the Central Authority to be 
relevant.  
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Refusal by Central Authority to accept Applications 
 
11. Refusal by Central Authority to accept Applications. 
 
(1) The Central Authority may refuse to accept an application made to it under section 8, if 

37 
 
it is manifest that the requirements of the Convention are not fulfilled or that the 
application is otherwise not complete.   
(2)  The Central Authority on its refusal to accept an application, shall forthwith inform the 
appropriate authority or person, institution, or any other body making the application, the 
reasons for such refusal.  
 
12. Additional  Information. 
 
(1) The Central Authority shall not reject an application solely on the ground that additional 
documents or information are needed.  
(2) The Central Authority may, where there is a need for such additional information or 
documents, ask the applicant to provide these additional documents or information, and 
if the appli cant does not do so within a reasonable period specified by the Central 
Authority, it may decide not to process the application. 
 
13. Appeal to Central Government. 
 
(1) Any party aggrieved by the refusal of the Central Authority to accept an application made 
under section 8, may appeal against such refusal to the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed.   
(2) Such an appeal shall be made within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt 
of the decision of the Central Authority; and the appeal shall be disposed off as early as 
possible but not later than six weeks from the date of receiving of the appeal.  
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Procedure for Application to High Courts 
 
14. Power of Central Authority to apply to the High Court. 
 
Without prejudice to any other means for securing the return of a child in respect of whom 
an application has been made under section 8, the Central Authority may apply to the 
High Court within whose territorial jurisdiction the child is physically present or was last 
known to be present for an order directing the return of such child to the contracting State 
in which the child has his or her habitual residence.   
 
 
15. Interim Order by High Courts. 
 
Where an application is made to the High Court under section 14, the Court may, at any 
time before the application is determined, give such interim directions as it thinks fit for 
purpose of securing the welfare of the child concerned, or for making such provisions for 
the child, pending the proceedings, or to prevent the child’s  return, or for otherwise 
preventing any change in the circumstances relevant to the determination of the 
application. 
 
16. Power of High Courts to return child to contracting State. 
 
 Where the High Court is satisfied, upon an application made to it under section 14, that— 
(a) the child in respect of whom the application has been made has been wrongfully 
removed to or retained in India within the meaning of section 3; and,  
(b) a period of one year has not elapsed between the date of the alleged removal 
or retention and the date of such application;  
 
it may order the return of such child to the contracting State in which the child has his 
or her habitual residence: 
 
Provided that the High Court may order the return of a child to the contracting State in 
which that child has his or her habitual residence even in a case where more than one 

38 
 
year has elapsed between the date of the alleged removal or retention and the date of 
such application, if the High Court is satisfied that the child is not settled in his or her 
new environment. 
 
 
17. Possible exceptions to the return of the child  
 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 16, the High Court may not pass the 
order of return of the child if the person, institution or any other body, opposing the 
return, establishes that-  
(a) the person, institution or any other body having the care o f the person of the 
child was not actually exercising the custody rights at the time of removal or 
retention, or has consented to or subsequently acquiesced in the removal or 
retention; or 
(b) there is a grave risk that the return of the child would expose the child to physical 
or psychological harm or otherwise place the child in a non-conducive situation. 
(c) the person who is allegedly involved in wrongful removal or retention, was fleeing 
from any incidence of ‘domestic violence’ as defined in section 3 of the 
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 2005). 
 
(2) The High Court may refuse to order the return of the child if -  
(a) the court finds that the child objects to being returned and has attained an age 
and level of maturity at which it is appropriate to take into account of his or her 
views; 
(b) the return is not permitted under the fundamental principles of the requested 
State relating to the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms;  
(c) the High Court, while exercising powers under this sec tion, considers any 
information relating to the social background of the child provided by the 
appropriate authority of the contracting State in which that child has his or her 
habitual residence, as inappropriate;  
 
(3) The High Court may not refuse to make an order under this section for the return 
of a child to the contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual 
residence, on the grounds only-  
(i)  that there is in force, a decision of a court in India or, 
(ii) a decision entitled to be recognised by a court in India relating to the custody 
of such child:  
Provided that the High Court shall record reasons while passing such orders 
relating to the return of a child. 
 
 
18. Rights of access of person, institution or any other body to a child in India. 
 
(1) The appropriate authority, or a person, institution or any other body of a contracting 
State, may make an application to the Central Authority for assistance in securing 
effective exercise of rights of access of a person, specified in the application, to a child, 
who is in India.  
 
(2) An application made under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 
 
 
19. Application to the High Court for exercise of rights of access of any person to a child 
in India. 
 
(1) Without prejudice to any other means for securing the exercise of rights of access of any 
person, institution or any other body of the contracting State to a child in India, the Central 
Authority may apply to the High Court, for an order of the Court, for securing the effective 
exercise of those rights.  
 

39 
 
(2) Where the High Court is satisfied, on an application made to it under sub -section (1), 
that the person who, or on whose behalf, such application is made has rights of access 
to the child specified in the application, the court may, subject to such conditions as may 
be considered necessary, make an order to secure the effective exercise of those rights 
of access.  
 
 
20. Relaxation of requirements of proof of foreign law. 
 
(1) The High Court, while ascertaining w hether there has been a wrongful removal or 
retention within the meaning of section 3, may take notice of the law of, and of judicial or 
administrative decisions, formally recognised or not in the State of the habitual residence 
of the child, without recourse to the specific procedures for the proof of that law or for the 
recognition of foreign decisions which would otherwise be applicable.  
 
(2) The High Court may, before making an order under section 15 for the return of a child to 
the Contracting State in wh ich that child has his or her habitual residence; direct the 
Central Authority, to obtain from the concerned authorities of the Contracting State in 
which that child has his or her habitual residence, a decision or determination as to 
whether the removal to, or retention in, India, of that child, is wrongful within the meaning 
of section 3. 
 
 
21. Costs. 
 
(1) The High Court may, while making an order under section 15 for the return of a child to 
the contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual residence, order the 
person who removed that child to India, or who retained the child in India, to pa y the 
expenses incurred by the Central Authority.  
(2) The expenses referred to in sub -section (1), may include costs incurred in locating the 
child, costs of legal proceedings incurred by the Central Authority, and costs incurred in 
returning the child to the  contracting State in which that child has his or her habitual 
residence. 
 
22. Adjudication not to cover determination of custody rights of parent.  
 
An order made by the High Court under section 16 shall not be regarded as a decision 
or determination on the merits of any question relating to the custody of the child to whom 
the order relates.  
 
 
23. Arrangements to return a child to Contracting State. 
 
Where an order is made under section 16 for the return of a child to the contracting State 
in which that c hild has his or her habitual residence, the Central Authority shall cause 
such administrative arrangements, as are necessary, to be made in accordance with the 
order for the return of the child to such contracting State within a period of sixty days  
from the date of such order. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
Application in respect of child removed from India 
 
24. Application to Central Authority for return of child to India. 
 
(1) A person, institution or any other body in India claiming that a child has been wrongfully 
removed to, or is being retained in, a Contracting State in breach of rights of custody of 
such person, institution or any other body, may apply to the Central Authority for 

40 
 
assistance in securing the return of that child to India. 
(2) Every application made u nder sub-section (1) shall be made in such form as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section (1), the Central Authority shall forthwith 
apply to the appropriate authority, in the manner, if any, specified in the contracting State 
to which the child is alleged to have been removed or retained, for assistance in securing 
the return of that child to India. 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
Rights of Access 
 
25. Rights of access of person, institution or body in India. 
 
A person, institution or any other body in India claiming that a child has been wrongfully 
removed to, or is being retained in, a Contracting State in breach of the rights of access 
of such person, institution or any other body, may apply to the Central Authority for 
assistance in organising or securing the effective exercise of the rights of access, in such 
form as may be prescribed. 
 
26.  Application to Central Authority of Contracting State to exercise rights of access 
of any person, institution or body in India. 
 
An application to make arrangements for organising or securing the effective exercise 
of rights of access under section 25 shall be presented forthwith to the Central Authority 
of the Contracting State in the same manner as an application for the return of a child 
under section 24. 
  
27.  Coordination between Central Authorities to secure rights of access.  
 
On receipt of an application under section 26, the Central Authority shall forthwith apply 
to the appropriate authority, in the manner if any, specified, in the Contracting St ate to 
which the child is alleged to have been wrongfully removed, or retained, for assistance 
in making arrangements to secure, or organise the effective exercise of rights of access. 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
Offences and Penalties 
 
28. Punishment for wrongful removal or retention. 
 
Whoever wrongfully removes or retains a child either himself or through other person 
from the custody of a parent in terms of sub-section (2) of section 3 of this Act, is said to 
commit the offence of wrongful removal or retention, and shall, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees or with both. 
 
 
29. Punishment for wilful misrepresentation or concealment of fact. 
 
 Whoever, by wilful misrepresentation, or by concealment of a material fact, which he is 
bound to disclose, related to the location or information of the child under clause (a) of 
section 6, voluntarily causes to prevent the safe return of the child in pursuance to an 
order made under section 1 5 or section 16 of this Act shall be guilty of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both. 
 
 

41 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
30. Expeditious process. 
 
(1) The judicial or administrative authorities of contracting States shall act expeditiously in 
proceedings for the return of children. 
 
(2) If the judicial or administrative authority concerned has not reached a decision within a 
period of six weeks from the date  of commencement of the proceedings, the applicant 
or the Central Authority of the requested State, on its own motion or if asked by the 
Central Authority of the requesting State, shall have the right to request a statement of 
the reasons for delay.  
 
(3) If any information or reply is received by the Central Authority of the requested State, 
that Authority shall transmit the same to the Central Authority of the requesting State, 
or to the applicant, as the case may be. 
 
31. Reports and returns 
 
(1) The Central Authority shall submit an annual report giving full account of its activities 
under this Act to the Central Government in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2)  The Central Authority shall in addition to the report under sub -section (1) furnish such 
returns or other relevant information with respect to its activities as the Central 
Government may from time to time require.  
(3) The report submitted under sub-section (1) shall contain a full account of - 
(a) a brief record of applications for the return of children submitted by applicants to 
the Central Authority.  
(b) detailed information on applications for the return of children that remain pending 
for more than one year after the date of filing and information on the current 
status of such children and specific  actions taken by the Central Authority to 
resolve such cases. 
(c) A list of countries to which the children mentioned in clause (b) have been 
wrongfully removed to or retained in, countries which have failed to comply with 
their obligations set out in the Convention with respect to, return of children, 
access to children by applicants in India. 
(4) The Central Authority shall inform to the parent, who has requested assistance 
regarding a wrongfully removed or retained child, once in every six months, except 
where the case has been closed by the Central Authority and the reason for the same 
has been conveyed to the person, institution or body seeking such assistance.  
 
 
32. Maintenance of Records. 
 
The Central Authority shall maintain detailed and updated records concerning the 
applications, and, or cases brought to its notice under this Act in such manner as may 
be prescribed.  
 
33. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
 

42 
 
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, 
Central Authority or any member or officer thereof or any officer acting under the 
authorization of the Central Authority in respect of anything which is in good faith  done 
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder.  
 
34. Members and officers of  Central Authority to be public servants  
 
Every member and officer of the Central Authority and the officer authorized by the 
Authority to perform functions under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).  
 
 
35. Power to give directions. 
 
(1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Central Authority shall be guided by 
such directions on question of policy relating to national interest, as may be given to it 
by the Central Government. 
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Central Authority as to 
whether a question is or is not a question of policy relating to national interests, the 
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
 
 
36. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules to carry 
out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- 
 
(a) qualifications and experience for appointment of Members of Central Authority 
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 4 ; 
(b) the salary and allowances and terms and conditions of service of Chairperson 
and Members under sub-section (5) of section 4; 
(c) the salary and allowances and terms and conditions of service of officers and 
staff of the Central Authority under sub-section (2) of section 5; 
(d)  form of application to Central Authority for assistance in securing return of child 
wrongfully removed or retained in India, under sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(e) procedure for making appeal to the Central Government in case of refusal to 
accept the application by the Central Authority under sub -section (1) of section 
13; 
(f) form of application to Cen tral Authority for assistance in securing exercise of 
rights of access to a child in India, under sub-section (2) of section 18; 
(g) form of application to Central Authority for assistance in securing return of child 
wrongfully removed to or retained in the Contracting State under sub-section (2) 
of  section 24; 
(h) the form of application for assistance in organizing or securing the rights of 
access to a child wrongfully removed to or retained in a Contracting State under 
section 25; and 
(i) the form in which annual report shall be prepared under sub-section(1) of section 
31; 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 

43 
 
37. Power to remove difficulties.  
(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of th is Act as may appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removal of the difficulty. 
 Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this se ction shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
  

44 
 
REFERENCES: 
 
 Pam Sanghera, International Child Abduction – A Harsh Reality 
 Chiacone et al., US Department of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and 
Delinquency Programs, Issues in Resolving Cases of International Child 
Abduction by Parents, 2001 
 Neeta Misra, International Child Abduction And Domestic Violence: Why 
Children Are Sent Back To Violent Homes, Business Standard, 2016. 
 Adam Pipe, What do we mean by best interests of a child?, 2014. 
 Anil Malhotra, Rights of Abducted Children, The Hindu, 2016.  
 Anil and Ranjit Malhotra, India, Inter -Country Parental Child Removal And 
The Law.  
 European Parliament, Directorate -General For Internal Policies Policy 
Department C: Citizens’ Rights And Constitutional Affairs Civil Liberties, 
Justice And Home Affairs Cross -border parental child abduction in the 
European Union, 2015 
 Goldberg and Shetty, Representing Battered Respondents Under The Hague 
Convention On The Civil Aspects Of International Child Abduction, Berkley, 
2015. 
 Marie Crawford, Wrongful removal, Counsel Magazine, 2015 
 US Department of State, Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of 
International Child Abduction, Legal Analysis of the Convention, 51 Federal 
Register 10494. 
 US, Department of State, Report on Compliance with the Hague Convention 
on the Civil Apsects of International Child Abduction, 2007 
 Weiner, International Child Abduction and the Escape from Domestic 
Violence, Fordham Law Review, 2000. 
 Weiner, Intolerable Situations and Counsel for Children: Following 
Switzerland's Example in Hague Abduction Cases, American University Law 
Review, 2008. 
 Henry Brookman, How International Issues Further Complicate Child 
custody Cases, Telegraph, 2012. 
 Elisa Pérez-Vera Explanatory Report to the Hague Convention on the Civil 
Aspects of International Child Abduction. 