  
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
    
Report No.264 
 
 
 The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2017 
(Provisions dealing with  
Food Adulteration) 
 
 
 
 
January, 2017 
  


ii 
 
 
  


iii 
 
  


iv 
 
Report No.264 
   
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2017  
(Provisions dealing with Food Adulteration) 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter Title Page 
I Background 1-3 
II Judgement of the Supreme Court 4 
III Reference of the Proposal 5 
IV Present Framework governing Food 
Safety Regulation 
6-18 
A Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 6 
B Food Adulteration and the Indian Penal 
Code 
9 
C Certain words and expressions defined only 
in the Food Act 
11 
V Proportionality of Punishments in 
Sections 272 and 273 of the IPC 
19-33 
VI Incoherency in Laws 
 
34-37 
Annexure   
A Comparative Statement showing the 
changes proposed in the IPC and 
CrPC 
38-44 
Part-I Amendments suggested in IPC 38-41 
Part-II Amendments suggested in CrPC 42-44 
B The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 
2017 
45-50 

     
1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Background 
 
1.1. Our increasing daily need and fast growing lifestyle has resulted 
in availability of innumerable ‘food’ and ‘food products’ in the market, 
instant food and instant cooking has become a common requirement 
in every household today.  Regional to multinational brands of food 
and food products are expanding their markets day by day; and are 
welcomed at home s on the note of instant servings for our needs.  
Various processes along the way transform and modify the food 
product so as to enhance or customize its characteristics.  This is an 
inexorable process linked to the increased specialisation of functions 
in society and cannot be reversed. 
 
1.2. Securing the ‘wholesome food ’ for human consumption has  
since long been secured through laws.  Food legislations are brought 
into place to ensure that the acceptable minimum level of food safety 
is ensured; and the standar ds that secure such safety are strictly 
enforced. The ever growing food and food products market bring along 
with it, the greed of antisocial persons engaged in food adulteration, 
which is a serious crime against society. The increasing menace of 
food adul teration in the country is driving the citizens to health 
hazards that ultimately result in various ailments and even premature 
deaths. 
 
1.3. The Law Commission’s Report is to address such threats and 
covers two provisions in the Indian Penal Code 1860 (hereina fter 
referred to as the IPC) that deal with food adulteration: Sections 272 
and 273. As this Report will briefly explain, the present framework on 
food safety which is enshrined in the Food Safety and Standards Act, 
2006 (hereinafter referred to as the Foo d Act); where the food 

     
2 
 
adulteration is dealt with under the provisions of the  Act by creating 
an offence relating to “unsafe food” and creating a basis for standard -
setting in the industry.  
 
1.4. The object of this Report is to create a uniform scheme of 
punishment for food adulteration offences.  Most significantly, the 
suggested amendments aims at eliminating the low quantum of 
punishment provided in the IPC; and updates it to bring it in line with 
the provisions of the Food Act as well as the punishments as found in 
the amendments of the IPC made by Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal.  Appropriate amendments to the relevant Schedule of the 
Criminal Procedure Code are also proposed. These proposals are 
appended at the end of the Report as an ‘Amendment Bill’. 
 
1.5. It is necessary to present the events briefly that resulted in this 
project being taken up by the Law Commission. The Supreme Court 
judgement in Swami Achyutanand Tirth & Ors. v. Union of India  & 
Ors.1  and the Ministry of Home Affairs ’ reference are brought into 
focus to explain the objective with which the Commission undertook 
this study.  
 
1.6. This Report precisely provides a description of the current 
framework on food safety laws in India and how they have changed , 
not too long ago to m eet the increasing demands of food regulations 
keeping in view the best practices followed in the world all over. This 
will contextualize the IPC provisions and show/reflect the importance 
of the proposed changes. This role is made clear in the section 
immediately following the discussion on the relation between the IPC 
and food adulteration. 
 
                                                        
1 AIR 2016 SC 3626. 

     
3 
 
1.7. Certain alternative proposal is presented in relation with the 
incoherent nature of those two sections and this is followed by a 
justification for the proposed application of the ‘principle of 
proportionality’ in the punishments. In a perspective, the Repo rt is 
aimed at removing perceived incoherency and reinforcing the deterrent 
intent behind our food safety laws. 
 
 
  

     
4 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Judgement of the Supreme Court 
 
2. While dealing with a writ petition filed in public interest 
highlighting the menace of growing sales of adulterated and synthetic 
milk in different parts of the country and the inability of concerned 
State Governments and the Union to take effective measures for  
combating the adulteration of milk with hazardous substances, the 
Supreme Court (supra) directed the Central Government to come up 
with suitable amendments in the Food Act and the IPC. Reiterating its 
stance in its orders dated 5.12.2013 and 10.12.2014, t he Court 
highlighted that, ‘it was desirable to make penal provisions of IPC at 
par with the provisions contained in the State Amendments made by 
Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, wherein the punishment for 
adulteration of food and products is enhanced to imprisonment for life 
and also fine’.2 Further, it suggested that it was desirable if the Union 
of India revisits the Food Act , revise the punishment for adulteration 
making it more deterrent in cases whe re the adulterant can have 
adverse impact on health. 
 
  
                                                        
2 Paragraph 19 of the Judgment. 

     
5 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Reference of the Proposal 
 
3. The Law Commission of India has received from Ministry of 
Home Affairs, a letter dated 2.11.2016 making reference  of the 
Supreme Court Judgement in Swami Achyutanand Tirth & Ors. (supra) 
requested the Law Commission to examine the specific issue of 
amending penal provisions as contained in sections 272 and 273 of 
IPC at par with the State Amendments made in sections 272 and 273 
by the States of Odisha, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. In the  letter, 
it is also stated that “many States are also contemplating amendment 
to the section pursuant to the court case. As the Law Commission of 
India is already carrying out a comprehensive review covering all 
aspects of criminal law so that comprehensiv e amendments can be 
made in the various laws viz. Indian Penal Code, Code of Criminal 
Procedure and the Indian Evidence Act, etc. It is therefore, requested 
that the Commission may also examine the amendment to section 272 
of IPC as observed by the Supreme Court.” 
 
  

     
6 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Present Framework governing Food Safety Regulation 
 
A. Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
4.1 In our country, there were a number of pre -constitutional and 
post-constitutional laws, orders, rules that aim at the protection of the 
consumer interests with special reference to safeguard food safety and 
the health of the consumer. They were introduced to complement and 
supplement each other in achieving total food safety and quality. 
However due to multiplicity in the specifications/st andards in 
different Acts/Orders, and administration by different Departments 
and agencies, there were implementation problems and a lack of 
importance given to safety standards over a period of time. The food 
industries were facing problems as different p roducts we re governed 
by different orders, rules and regulations in the Country which needed 
consolidation. 
 
4.2 With the aim to consolidate all the previous existing laws, the 
Food Act  was enacted by Parliament which establishes a single 
reference point for all matters relating to food safety and standards, by 
moving from multi- level, multi-departmental control to a single line of 
command.3 To this effect, the Food Act establishes an independent 
statutory Authority – the Food Safety and Standards Authori ty of 
India (Food Authority), 4  which has been created for laying down 
science based standards for articles of food and to regulate their 
manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure 
availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption. 
 
                                                        
3 Please see: http://www.Food Acti.gov.in/home/about -us/introduction.html (last accessed on 22nd 
December, 2016). 
4 Section 4, The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 

     
7 
 
4.3 The Food Act which came into effect in 2011, subsumes various 
central Acts like the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 
1954); the Fruit Products Order, 1955; the Meat Food Products Order, 
1973; the Vegetable Oil Products (Control) Order, 1947; the Edible 
Oils Packaging (Regulation)Order, 1998; the Solvent Extracted Oil, De-
Oiled Meal and Edible Flour (Control) Order, 1967; the Milk and Milk 
Products Order, 1992 and also any order issued under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955) relating to food.5 
 
4.4 For the purposes of the enforcement of the Food Act, the Food 
Authority along with the State Food Safety Authorities are responsible 
for monitoring and verifying the relevant requirements under the Act 
and its enforcement. 6 The Act also provides for the appointment of a 
Commissioner of Food Safety of the State by the respective State 
Governments for efficient implementation of food safety and standards 
and other r equirements laid down under the Food  Act and the rules 
and regulations made thereunder. 7 The Commissioner of Food Safety 
for each State is responsible for appointing Food Safety Officers for 
local areas who are responsible for enforcement and execution of the 
provisions of the Act.8 The Food Safety Officer also has been entrusted 
with the power of search, seizure, investigation as well as prosecution 
for the purposes of enforcement of the provisions of the Food Act.9  
 
4.5 The Food Act in chapter IX deals with offences and penalties 
which provides for punishments for contravention of the provisions of 
the Act. While section 48 describes how an offence may be committed 
in regard to food adulteration, sections 50 to 67 prescribes 
punishments in case an offence is committed. In particular, section 59 
prescribes punishment  for unsafe food .  Section 3(1)(zz) defines 
                                                        
5 Please refer to Sections 89 [Overriding effect of this Act over all other food related laws], 97 (1) & 97 
(2) [Repeal and savings] of the Act. 
6 Chapter VII, Section 29 (1) & (2), Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 . 
7 Section 30 (1), Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
8 Section 37, Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
9 Section 41, Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 

     
8 
 
“unsafe food” as any article of food whose nature, substance or quality 
is so affected as to render it injurious to health.   It provides for a 
graded system of punishment which is mentioned as under: 
 
Section 59 - “Any person who, whether by himself or by 
any other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or 
stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food 
for human consumption which is unsafe, shall be 
punishable,- 
 
(i) where such failure or contraven tion does not result 
in injury, with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months and also with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees; 
 
(ii) where such failure or contravention results in a 
non-grievous injury, with imprisonment for a term 
which ma y extend to one year and also with fine 
which may extend to three lakh rupees; 
 
(iii) where such failure or contravention results in a 
grievous injury, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six years and also with fine 
which may extend to five lakh rupees; 
 
(iv) where such failure or contravention results in 
death, with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than seven years but which may extend 
to imprisonment for life and also with fine which 
shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.” 
 
4.6 The Food Act also provides for adjudication by an Adjudicating 
Officer 10 and establishes an alternative forum  known as the Food 
Safety Appellate Tribunal. 11 The procedures to be followed and the 
powers of the adjudicating officer as well as the Appellate tribunal are 
provided for in the Act12. 
 
4.7 The Food Authority has the power, with the prior approval of the 
Central Government and after pre -publication, by  notification, to 
make regulations consistent with the Food Act and the rules made 
                                                        
10 Section 68, Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
11 Section 70, ibid. 
12 Sections 71-80 - Chapter X, ibid . 

     
9 
 
there under to carry out the provisions of the  Act.13 For the same, the 
Food Authority has made the Food Safety and Standards Rules, 2011 
as well as the following regulations: 
 
1. The Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and 
Registration of Food businesses) Regulation, 2011 
2. The Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labelling) 
Regulation, 2011  
3. The Food Safety and Standards (Food Product Standards 
and Food Additives) Regulation, 2011  
4. The Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and 
Restriction on Sales) Regulation, 2011 
5. The Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins 
and Residues) Regulation, 2011 
6. Food Safety and Standards (Laboratory and Sampling 
Analysis) Regulation, 2011 
 
B. Food Adulteration and the Indian Penal Code 
 
4.8 The IPC in chapter XIV (Of Offences Affecting the Public Health, 
Safety, Convenience, Decency and Morals ) prescribes punishment for 
adulteration of food or drink intended for sale (Section 272) and sale 
of noxious food or drink (Section 273).  
 
Section 272 states that: 
“Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to 
make such article noxious as food or drink,  intending to 
sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to be likely 
that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.” 
 
 
Section 273 states that: 
“Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as food or 
drink, any article which has been rendered or has become 
noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink, knowing or 
having reason to  believe that the same is noxious as food 
                                                        
13 Section 92, Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 

     
10 
 
or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both.” 
 
4.9 Subsequently, the States of U ttar Pradesh, West Bengal and 
Odisha have made amendments to sections 272 and 273 wherein the 
term of imprisonment which could have been extended up to 6 
months has been substituted with imprisonment for life along with 
fine. The State Amendments are produced as under: 
 
(1) State of Uttar Pradesh 
In sections 272, 273, 274, 275 and 276 of IPC for the words "shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or  with both" the following shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
"shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable 
to fine: 
Provided that the court may, for adequate reason to be mentioned in 
the judgement, impose a sentence of imprisonment wh ich is less than 
imprisonment for life."14 
 
(2) State of West Bengal 
In its application to the State of West Bengal in sections 272, 273, 
274, 275 and 276 of IPC for the words "of either description for, a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which  may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both" the following shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
"for life with or without fine: 
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be 
mentioned in the judg ement. impose a sentence of imprisonment  
which is less than imprisonment for life."15 
                                                        
14 U.P. Act No. 47 of 1975. 
15 W.B. Act No. 42 of 1973, w.e.f. 29th. April, 1973. 

     
11 
 
 
(3) State of Odisha 
In its application to the State of Odisha in sections 272, 273, 274, 275 
and 276 of IPC for the words "of either description for, a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may ex tend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both" the following shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
“shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable 
to fine:  
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be 
mentioned in the ju dgement impose a sentence of imprisonment 
which is less than imprisonment for life."16 
 
C. Certain words and expressions defined only in the Food Act 
 
4.10 An article of food shall be deemed to be adulterated--- 
 
Section 3(1)(zz) of the Food Act defines when an article of food shall be 
deemed to be  “unsafe food” -  
‘(zz) “unsafe food” means an article of food whose nature, 
substance or quality is so affected as to render it 
injurious to health: 
 
(i) by the article itself, or its package thereof, which is 
composed, whether wholly or in part, of poisonous 
or deleterious substances; or  
 
(ii) by the article consisting, wholly or in part, of any 
filthy, putrid, rotten, decomposed or diseased 
animal substance or vegetable substance; or 
 
(iii) by virtue of its unhygienic processing or the 
presence in that article of any harmful substance; 
or  
 
(iv) by the substitution of any inferior or cheaper  
substance whether wholly or in part; or 
 
                                                        
16 Orissa Act 3 of 1999, sec. 2, w.e.f. 27th January, 1999. 
 

     
12 
 
(v) by addition of a s ubstance directly or as an 
ingredient which is not permitted; or 
 
(vi) by the abstraction, wholly or in part, of any of its 
constituents; or  
 
(vii) by the article being so coloured, flavoured or 
coated, powered or polished, as to damage or 
conceal the article or to make it appear better or of 
greater value than it really is; or 
 
(viii) by the presence of any colouring matter or 
preservatives other than that specified in respect 
thereof; or 
 
(ix) by the article having been infected or infested with 
worms, weevils or insects; or 
 
(x) by virtue of its being prepared, packed or kept 
under insanitary conditions; or  
 
(xi) by virtue of its being mis -branded or sub-standard 
or food containing extraneous matter; or  
 
(xii) by virtue of containing pesticides and oth er 
contaminants in excess of quantities specified by 
regulations.’  
 
4.11 The words “unwholesome” and “noxious” when used in relation 
to an article of food mean respectively that the article is harmful to 
health or repugnant to human use. 
 
4.12 The necessity of highlighting this nexus between the repealed 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as 
PFA Act) and sections 272 & 273 of IPC is to bring forward the issue 
that the Food Act (which repeals the PFA Act), does not  provide 
definitions for the above mentioned terms and instead defines the 
words ‘adulterant’17 and ‘unsafe food’18 which do not find any mention 
in Sections 272 and 273 of IPC.  
 
                                                        
17 Section 3 (1) (a), Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
18 Section 3 (1) (zz), Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 

     
13 
 
4.13 The Supreme Court in the matter of Swami Achyutanand Tirth & 
Ors. (supra) while pronouncing its judgement refers to the interplay of 
section 59 of the Food Act and sections 272 & 273 of the IPC. It refers 
to the judgement passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad 
in the matter of M/s Pepsico India Holdings (Pvt) Ltd. & Anr.v. State of 
U.P. & Ors.19  wherein the Court stated that invoking of sections 272 & 
273 of IPC in relation to adulteration of food was considered to be 
unjustified as the authorities could have taken action only under the 
Food Act. However, the Supreme Court decided not to go into the said 
question at this stage and delisted the appeals preferred by the State 
of U.P in the above mentioned matter (Criminal Appeals No. 476 -478 
of 2012) which are pending and thus the matter is sub judice.20 
 
4.14 In the matter of M/s Pepsico In dia Holdings (Pvt) Ltd. & 
Anr.(supra), petitioners therein questioned the validity of the Orders 
issued by the State Government directing the police to register cases 
and initiate action under Sections 272/273 IPC inter alia  on the 
grounds;  
 
(i) The authorities had chosen to invoke Sections 272/ 273  IPC 
without even waiting for the report of the public analyst. 
Since the alleged offence as disclosed in the FIR are covered 
under the provisions of Food Act and as such there cannot 
be any violation of sections 272/273 IPC, and 
 
(ii) There are certain ingredients which are required for 
constituting an offence under Section  272 IPC. Similarly 
Section 273 requires certain ingredients to be fulfilled before 
the offence of adulteration can be said to be made. The 
ingredients are, ‘that somebody selling food article or drinks 
which has been rendered noxious/ unfit for consumption ’, 
with such knowledge or having reasons to believe that the 
same is a noxious food item. To put it differently, Secti ons 
272/273 IPC are only attracted if it is shown that the 
adulteration is deliberate, intentional or with knowledge.  
                                                        
19 2011 (2) Crimes 250, 2010(6)ALJ 30. 
20 Paragraph 13, of Swami Achyutanand Tirth Judgment. 

     
14 
 
 
(iii) A special law prevails over general law. Provisions of PFA Act, 
1954 on coming into force eclipsed the provisions of Sections 
272 & 273 IPC. 
 
(iv) The Food Act, repealed the PFA Act and occupied the entire 
field in respect of adulteration of food and drinks for sale. 
The Food Act, provisions would operate and provisions of 
Sections 272 & 273 were not attracted, and 
 
(v) There was nothing on record to show that food material, 
seized, was meant for sale, rather a board “not for sale” had 
been put there. 
 
4.15 The Allahabad High  Court upheld the said contentions relying 
upon Section 5 of the IPC21 and observed; 
 
“Section 272 IPC, reproduced hereinabove is attracted 
when a person adulterates an article of food with the 
intention to sell such an article or knowing that it is 
likely that the article will be sold as food or drink. In the 
instant case, there is no  allegation in the FIR that the  
petitioner-company or its employees or agents had kept 
its products with the intention to sell the same or 
knowing that the products are likely to be sold as food or 
drink or that the said products were exposed or offered 
for sale.  The definite stand of the company was  the 
articles seized were kept in the godown where even a 
board “not for sale” was also hang ing at the time  when 
the search was conducted...... 
 
One thing is crystal clear that nothing in the Penal Code 
shall affect any provisions of any Special Act and when 
for any act or omission in a particular subject, a special 
set of rules have been framed, in that situation, the 
provisions of the IPC have to be ignored or overlooked. In 
the cases at hand FIRs have been registered under 
Sections 272 and 273 IPC pursuant to the impugned 
Government Order although adulteration of Food Stuff is 
                                                        
21 Section 5 states that:  Certain laws not to be affected by this Act - Nothing in this Act shall affect the 
provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny and desertion of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in 
the service of the Government of India or the provisions of any special or local law. 

     
15 
 
covered by a Special Act i.e. The Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006.” 
 
4.16 It also added that: 
 
“...PFA Act was enacted for the prevention of adulteration 
of food, being a special Act, it eclipsed Sections 272 and 
273 of IPC. In other words, the said Act made Sections 
272 and 273 of IPC redundant as punishment provided 
under the PFA Act was much more (sic) man what was 
provided under Sections 272 and 273 IPC.”  (Emphasis 
added) 
 
4.17 The Court concluded observing: 
 
“...that for adulteration of food or misbranding, after 
coming into force of the provisions of FSSA vide 
notification dated 29th July, 2010, the authorities can 
take action only under the FSS as it postulates an over - 
riding effects over all other food related law including the 
PFA Act...Therefore, invoking Sections 272 and 273 of 
the Indian Penal Code in the matter relating to 
adulteration of food pursuant to the impugned 
Government order is wholly unjustified and non est. 
Furthermore, it appears that the impugned Government 
Order has been issued without application of proper 
mind and examining the matter minutely and thus the 
State Government travelled beyond the jurisdiction.” 
 
4.18 The aforesaid observations / findings make it clear that , firstly 
‘the subject matter of prosecution was not for sale ’ and secondly, t he 
provisions of Foo d Act would prevail and the procedure prescribed 
under the State Act would be applicable as the provisions of s.272 and 
s.273 IPC stood eclipsed. 
 
4.19 It is a legal proposition that there is a presumption against an 
implied repeal. 22  Whenever the legislat ure enacts a statute, it is 
                                                        
22 Municipal Council Palai v. T.J. Joseph & Ors.  AIR 1963 SC 1561; Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
v. Sheo Shankar,  AIR 1971 SC 815; Justiniano Augusto De PiedadeBarreto v. Antonio  Vicente Da 

     
16 
 
presumed that it proceeds with legislation with a complete knowledge 
of all existing laws pertaining to the same subject and the failure to 
add any particular law or part thereof in a repealing clause, would 
indicate that the in tent was not to repeal a particular existing 
legislation or a part thereof.  In case the two laws – earlier and later 
enacted laws – cannot stand together, the implied repeal may be 
inferred for the reason that the later laws abrogate earlier contrary 
laws.  I t is to be kept in mind that the repugnancy between the two 
statutes must exist in fact and not depend merely on a possibility. 
 
4.20 It is a well-established principle that a special Act shall prevail 
over a gene ral Act.  It provides that the ‘ provisions’ more specifically 
directed to the matter at issue prevails as an exception to or 
qualification of the provision which is more general in nature provided 
that the specific or special statute clearly includes the matter in 
controversy.  This doctrine envisa ges the same as generalia 
specialibus non derogant (the provisions of a general statute must 
yield to those of a special one). 
 
4.21 Where the special subsequent legislation is a complete code 
dealing with the entire subject matter, it will exclude the provision of a 
general law.23   
 
4.22 The Food Act puts on guard any running food industry from 
indulging into any activity that may be detrimental to public health 
and safety.  More so, the Food Act is still in the preliminary stage of 
                                                                                                                                                               
Fonseca, AIR 1979 SC 984; R.S. Raghunath v. State of Karnataka,  AIR 1992 SC 81; Om Prakash 
Shukla v. Akhilesh Kumar Shukla & Ors., AIR 1986 SC 1043; Kanwar Lal v. IInd Additional District 
Judge, Nainital, AIR 1995 SC 2078; Syndicate Bank v. Prabha D. Naik , AIR 2001 SC 1968; Union 
of India v. Venkateshan S. , AIR 2002 SC 1890; D.R. Yadav v. R.K. Singh,  AIR 2003 SC 3935; and 
Lal Shah Baba Dargah Trust v. Magnum Developers & Ors., AIR 2016 SC 381. 
 
23 Secretary of State for India, in Council v. Hindustan Cooperative Insurance Society Ltd. , AIR 1931 
PC 149; Sriram Mandir Sanstha v. Vatsalabai , AIR 1999 SC 520; Jeevan Kumar Raut & Anr. v. 
Central Bureau of Investigation  AIR 2009 SC 2763; Jamruddin Ansari v. Central Bureau of 
Investigation & Ors.  (2009) 6 SCC 316; and Commercial Tax Officer Raj . v. M/s. Binani Cement 
Ltd. & Anr., 2015 (3) SCR 1. 

     
17 
 
implementation.  The powers of the police under the Food Act will 
have to be reviewed to make its provisions more effective.  In view of 
the above, if the Food Act is compared with  sections 272 and  273 of 
IPC, the following picture emerges: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Basis of 
differentiation 
the Food Act IPC 
1. Object To regulate food industry as 
reflected from the long title, 
provisions contained in 
section 2 of the said Act 
and provisions mentioned 
thereinafter indicating the 
object underlying the Act. 
These provisions 
have been enacted 
for protecting 
public health and 
safety 
2. Nature Most of the provisions are 
regulatory to streamline the 
food industry and imp rove 
quality of food articles.  Its 
contraventions have been 
made offences but from the 
scheme of the Act, it 
reflects that the making of 
such offences is incidental 
in nature which is to 
achieve the object of the 
Act. 
 
Preventive and 
deterrent. 
3. Procedure In Food Act, for enhancing 
quality of food articles, 
elaborate scheme has been 
given. For bringing 
awareness, emphasis has 
been laid on publicity and 
preventive measures and 
contraventions have been 
taken note of as a 
mechanism to fulfil the 
above. 
 
Prompt action by 
the police on spot 
to prevent  mass 
mishappening. 
4. Target Group In view of the provisions 
contained in section 3 (n), 
(o) and (zd), manufacturers 
and persons connected 
therewith, as also food 
operators including 
organized vendors are 
subject to the provisions 
contained in Food Act, 
especially the penal ones. 
Any person. 

     
18 
 
5. Nature of the 
offence 
Under section 69 of Food 
Act, the offences are 
compoundable.  It shows 
offences have been created 
for brining improvement in 
the quality of food articles. 
Under section 320  
of Cr.PC, these 
sections do not find 
place.  It shows 
that these offences 
are aga inst the 
State and society 
at large. 
6. Effectiveness The Food Act aims to 
improve the quality of food 
articles and conspicuously 
it is silent about arrest / 
detention of the offender 
and grant of bail to such an 
accused irrespective of 
seriousness of the offence. 
Under the 
provisions of 
Cr.PC, the offence 
is cognizable.  
Police can take 
prompt action, 
arrest the accused, 
keep him in 
custody and he can 
be detained in jail 
till the bail is 
granted. 
  

     
19 
 
CHAPTER- V 
 
Proportionality of Punishments in Sections 272 and 273 
of the IPC 
 
5.1 In comparison to the Food Act, the IPC prescribes inadequate 
punishments firstly for adulteration that results in making food 
articles noxious and secondly for actual sale of noxious food articles. 
The inadequacy of the quantum of punishment prescribed in the Code 
necessitated the present reform initiative. Given the importance of 
hygienic, nutritious food for the maintenance of healthy lives, it would 
appear that the maintenance of its safety is essential to public health 
in a c ommercialized world where individuals obtain their nutrition 
from food articles produced by others. A legal system must be 
comprehensive enough to meet the demands of this significan t health 
and other social issue, providing protection against anti -social 
elements endangering health and human lives by adulteration.  
 
5.2 The threat to the safety of food is its adulteration by individuals 
for profit and the mode of defence against this threat is the effective 
criminal justice system equipped with penal provisions for such act s. 
Much is written about the appropriate method by which penalties 
should be provided for a criminal legislation.  The law generally 
provides ample scope for discretion on the part of judges to modulate 
punishment to meet the peculiar cir cumstances of each case. In some 
instances, however, the penal provisions are made more restrictive so 
that the circumstances under which punishments are inflicted are 
laid down in the law itself. This limitation on judicial discretion is 
aimed to ensure that a vital message of deterrence goes to society, 
undiminished by any circumstance which may be put forward for 
lenient sentencing. In such instances, the law prescribes criteria that 
must be met for different ranges of punishment and streamlines the 
law for its effective application by foreclosing the scope of 
consideration of these circumstances in sentencing.  

     
20 
 
 
5.3 In our country, the foremost aide in determining the appropriate 
quantum of punishment is the judicial decisions that has evolved in 
course of time. The Law Commission proposes modification of 
Sections 272 and 273 of the IPC so as to bring the penal framework in 
it on par with the existing punishments scheme provided in the Food 
Act and the State Amendments to the Code. Whereas the State 
Amendments made in section 272, 273 of the IPC enhance the overall 
quantum of punishment, the proposal in this Report is the 
prescription of punishment that is graded according to the nature of 
the act (intentional or otherwise) and the extent of harm suffered by 
the victims of adulterated food. This is apposite, as merely raising the 
overall punishment may leave the matter free for courts to adopt 
lenient or otherwise attitudes from time to time. The State 
amendments do make an attempt to restrain such attitude s. We may, 
for example, see the Odisha amendment, which reads as follows: 
 
In section 272 for the words “shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both”, the following shall be substitut ed, 
namely:— 
  “shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall also be 
liable to fine: 
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons 
to be mentioned in the judg ement, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for life.”24 
 
The Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal amendments to section 272 
of IPC run along the same lines. 
 
                                                        
24 Orissa Act 3 of 1999, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 27-1-1999). 

     
21 
 
5.4 On examination of the issue  the law Commission is of the view 
that the appropriate punis hment scheme to be adopted is , the one 
that exist in section 59 of the Food Act. The State amendments do 
raise the overall limit of punishments but the  mode of restraining 
leniency do es not create an appropriate framework. The 
individualisation of punishme nt require drawing a balance  between 
‘the punishment ’ with ‘the gravity of the offence ’, designing the 
penalties as per the social challenges that the offences may raise. The 
governing principle in this area is the principle of proportionality of 
punishments. By prescribing a maximum punishment of life 
imprisonment and requiring courts to give “adequate and special 
reasons” for deviation from the same, the provisions of the State 
amendments would push up the aggregate quantum of sentences for 
this crime. Mo reover, by leaving open the range of punishment from 
few months all the way up to life imprisonment with no guiding 
principle except the words “adequate and special reasons”, the 
provision may allow  for the evolution of an alternative punishment 
framework in which case law could fix upon various contingencies 
that may be used as mitigating  factors. Therefore, as stated above, 
there is a clear requirement that the relevant provisions must have 
enhanced punishments that are meted out with certainty so that th e 
required deterrent effect persists.  
 
5.5 The ‘principle of proportionality ’ works side by side with the 
principle of deterrence by making clear the situation and 
circumstances under which leniency of punishment is to be adopted. 
The listing of punishmen ts in the proposed amendments to Sections 
272 and 273 is as follows: 
 
“(i) where such adulteration does not result in injury, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months 
and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;  
 

     
22 
 
(ii) where such adulteration results in non -grievous injury, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year 
and also with fine which may extend to  three lakh rupees; 
 
(iii) where such adulteration results in a grievous injury, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six  years and 
also with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees;  
 
(iv) where such adulteration results in death, with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven 
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and also 
with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees: 
 
Provided that the court may, for adequate reason to be 
mentioned in the judg ement, impose a sen tence of 
imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for life: 
 
Provided further that such fine shall be just and 
reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation 
of the victim: 
 
Provided also that any fine imposed under this section 
shall be paid to the victim.”. 
 
5.6 The quantum of imprisonment and fine both enhances as the 
gravity of the harm arising from the offence rises. There is no denial of 
the fact that prescribing the “appropriate penalty” is a very complex 
and difficult tasks. However, in view of the demands of society, the law 
must fix a particular criteria as the foremost principle guiding the 
quantum of harsher punishment. In such a case, the gravity of harm 
from the offence has been chosen as the appropriate criteria; and the 
intent is to put individuals on guard that their act would be measured 
in light of  the consequences that may arise from them. The Supreme 

     
23 
 
Court has made extensive reference to appropriate sentencing and the 
role of proportionality in sentencing. Here, we may loo k into extracts 
from judgements that the Commission has considered in adopting the 
abovementioned punishment scheme. 
 
5.7 In Alister Anthony Pareira v. State of Maharashtra ,25, the Apex 
Court was considering the enhancement of sentence for an offence 
under Section 304 Part II. It stated, regarding the method to be 
adopted: 
“The courts have evolved certain principles: the twin 
objective of the sentencing policy is deterrence and 
correction. What sentence would meet the ends of justice 
depends on the facts and  circumstances of each case and 
the court must keep in mind the gravity of the crime, 
motive for the crime, nature of the offence and all other 
attendant circumstances. 
 
The principle of proportionality in sentencing a crime -doer 
is well entrenched in criminal jurisprudence. As a matter of 
law, proportion between crime and punishment bears most 
relevant influence in determination of sentencing the 
crime-doer. The court has to take into consideration all 
aspects including social interest and consciousness of  the 
society for award of appropriate sentence.”. 
 
5.8 It may be relevant to say that without any legislative 
guidance, the courts usually consider a wide range of 
circumstances in determining the appropriate penalty. This 
proposition, as well as the requirement that all relevant criteria 
be considered thoroughly, may however be taken care of by the 
legislature to create adequate deterrence through certainty of 
punishments.  
 
5.9 The judicial and legislative search for appropriate penalties in 
the case of intractable and grave crimes like rape is instructive. In the 
                                                        
25 AIR 2012 SC 3802. 

     
24 
 
case of State of Kar nataka v. Krishnappa , 26, the Apex Court has 
stated: 
 
“The measure of punishment in a case of rape cannot 
depend upon the social status of the victim or the accused. 
It must depend upon the conduct of the accused, the state 
and age of the sexually assaulted female and the gravity of 
the criminal act. Crimes of violence upon women need to be 
severely dealt with. Socio -economic status, religion, race, 
caste, or creed of the accused or the victim are irrelevant 
considerations in sentencing policy. Protection of society 
and deterring the criminal is the avowed object of law and 
that is required to be achieved by imposing an appropriate 
sentence. The sentencing Courts are expected to consider 
all relevant facts and circumstance bearing on the question 
of sentence a nd proceed to impose a sentence 
commensurate with the gravity of the offence. Courts must 
hear the loud cry for justice by the society in cases of 
heinous crimes of rape on innocent helpless girls of tender 
years as in this case, and respond by imposition of proper 
sentence. Public abhorrence of the crime needs reflection 
through imposition of appropriate sentence by the Court.”. 
 
5.10 Such expositions are significant because the set of criteria that 
courts have found to be relevant to the question of sente ncing has 
always been limited to ensure that irrelevant considerations do not 
result in uncertain, variable punishments that arbitrarily allow some 
perpetrators to go scot -free; while others are greeted with heavier 
burdens. It is also significant that the  punishment is more 
individualized to the characteristics of the offence than the 
characteristics of the perpetrator. This operation of limiting matters of 
relevance to the quantum of punishment may be taken forward so 
that only the most relevant facts reg arding the gravity of the offence 
hold sway over other considerations.  
 
                                                        
26 AIR 2000 SC 1470. 

     
25 
 
5.11 This offence-centric approach to punishment may also be seen 
in allied jurisprudence regarding probation, for example in Dalbir 
Singh v. State of Haryana,27: 
 
“Parliament made it clear that only if the court forms the 
opinion that it is expedient to release him on probation 
for his good conduct regard being had to the 
circumstances of the case. One of the circumstances 
which cannot be sidelined in forming the said opinion  is 
"the nature of the offence. 
........  
 
In State of Gujarat v. Jamnadas G. Pabri and Ors. [1975] 2 
SCR 330 a three Judge Bench of this Court has 
considered the word "expedient". Learned Judges have 
observed in paragraph 21 thus: 
 
Again, the word 'expedient' used in this provisions, 
has several shades of meaning. In one dictionary 
sense, 'expedient' (adj.) means 'apt and suitable to 
the end in view'; 'practical and efficient'; 'politic'; 
'profitable'; 'advisable', 'fit, proper and suitable to 
the circumstances of t he case'. In another shade, it 
means a device 'characterised by mere utility rather 
than principle conductive to special advantage 
rather than to what is universally right' (see 
Webster's New International Dictionary). 
 
10. It was then held that the court must construe the said 
word in keeping with the context and object of the 
provision in its widest amplitude. Here the word 
"expedient" is used in Section 4 of the PO Act in the 
context of casting a duty on the court to take into account 
"the circumstances of the case including the nature of the 
offence...". This means Section 4 can be resorted to when 
the court considers the circumstances of the case, 
particularly the nature of the offence, and the court forms 
its opinion that it is suitable and appropriate  for 
accomplishing a specified object that the offender can be 
released on probation of good conduct.” 
                                                        
27 AIR 2000 SC 1677. 

     
26 
 
 
5.12 State of Uttar Pradesh v. Sanjay Kumar ,28 is yet another case of 
the Supreme Court that presents a clear picture of the role of 
sentencing policies: 
 
“The principle of proportionality, ...., prescribes that, the 
punishments should reflect the gravity of the offence and 
also the criminal background of the convict. Thus, the 
graver the offence and the longer the criminal record, the 
more severe is the p unishment to be awarded. By laying 
emphasis on individualised justice, and shaping the result 
of the crime to the circumstances of the offender and the 
needs of the victim and community, restorative justice 
eschews uniformity of sentencing. Undue sympathy to 
impose inadequate sentence would do more harm to the 
public system to undermine the public confidence in the 
efficacy of law and society could not long endure under 
serious threats. 
 
Ultimately, it becomes the duty of the courts to award 
proper sentence, having regard to the nature of the offence 
and the manner in which it was executed or committed, 
etc. The courts should impose a punishment befitting the 
crime so that the courts are able to accurately reflect 
public abhorrence of the crime. It is the nature and gravity 
of the crime, and not the criminal, which are germane for 
consideration of appropriate punishment in a criminal 
trial. Imposition of sentence without considering its effect 
on social order in many cases may be in reality, a futile 
exercise.” 
 
5.13 Articulating upon the policy surrounding death sentence and 
life imprisonment punishments, the case explains the objective for 
guidelines to sentencing. In doing so, it also explains the aspect of 
criminal justice that allows it to reflect the public natur e of the 
consequences of criminal activity. It is difficult to gauge the extent of 
damage caused by a crime to society as a whole; and yet, this very 
public effect must be considered in determining punishments. Where 
the public abhorrence for a crime is si gnificantly higher, sentencing 
                                                        
28 (2012) 8 SCC 537. 

     
27 
 
policy should be moulded to reflect the source of the abhorrence. In 
the instance of food adulteration, it is the risk that such offence 
creates for all persons. Those who adulterate food often do so behind a 
perverse veil of  ignorance that makes their victims into faceless, 
unseen sources of profit. By linking the punishment to the gravity of 
the injury resulting from the adulteration, the proposed provision 
brings home to the criminal the reality of the consequences of crime.  
 
5.14 The objective in all such endeavours has been to bolster the 
deterrent effect of the punishment. The inadequacy of the judicial 
response to a particular form of crime is difficult to gauge, when 
working case to case, as the effects of leniency are  seen finally when 
crime levels as a whole are altered due to encouragement or 
discouragement of criminals. Such foreclosure of lenient judicial 
behaviour through the application of proportionality was pointed out 
by the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Babulal & Ors.29, 
later reiterated in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Surendra Singh,30: 
 
“that one of the prime objectives of criminal law is the 
imposition of adequate, just, proportionate punishment 
which is commensurate with the gravity and nature of  the 
crime and manner in which the offence is committed. The 
most relevant determinative factor of sentencing is 
proportionality between crime and punishment keeping in 
mind the social interest and consciousness of the society. It 
is a mockery of the crimi nal justice system to take a lenient 
view showing misplaced sympathy to the Accused on any 
consideration whatsoever including the delay in conclusion 
of criminal proceedings. The Punishment should not be so 
lenient that it shocks the conscience of the soci ety being 
abhorrent to the basic principles of sentencing. 
 
Thus, it is the solemn duty of the court to strike a proper 
balance while awarding sentence as awarding a lesser 
                                                        
29 (2013) 12 SCC 308. 
30 (2015) 1 SCC 222. 

     
28 
 
sentence encourages a criminal and as a result of the same 
society suffers.”. 
 
5.15 A leading case on the matter is Sevaka Perumal, etc. v. State of 
Tamil Nadu ,31 which makes an illuminating discussion on the social 
function of punishments. The case draws our attention to the existing 
and felt needs of society with regards to a particular crime: 
 
“The law regulates social interests, arbitrates conflicting 
claims and demands. Security of persons and property of the 
people is an essential function of the State. It could be 
achieved through instrumentality of criminal law. 
Undoubtedly, there is a cross cultural conflict where living 
law must find answer to the new challenges and the courts 
are required to mould the sentencing system to meet the 
challenges. The contagion of lawlessness would undermine 
social order and lay it in ruins. Protectio n of society and 
stamping out criminal proclivity must be the object of law 
which must be achieved by imposing appropriate sentence. 
Therefore, law as a corner -stone of the edifice of "order" 
should meet the challenges confronting the society. 
Friedman in his "Law in Changing Society" stated that, 
"State of criminal law continues to be - as it should be - a 
decisive reflection of social consciousness of society". 
Therefore, in operating the sentencing system, law should 
adopt the corrective machinery or the  deterrence based on 
factual matrix. By deft modulation sentencing process be 
stern where it should be, and tempered with mercy where it 
warrants to be. The facts and given circumstances in each 
case, the nature of the crime, the manner in which it was 
planned and committed, the motive for commission of the 
crime, the conduct of the accused, the nature of weapons 
used and all other attending circumstances are relevant 
facts which would enter into the area of consideration. 
… 
Therefore, undue sympathy to imp ose inadequate sentence 
would do more harm to the justice system to undermine the 
public confidence in the efficacy of law and society could not 
long endure under such serious threats. It is, therefore, the 
duty of every court to award proper sentence havi ng regard 
                                                        
31 (1991) 3 SCC 471. 

     
29 
 
to the nature of the offence and the manner in which it was 
executed or committed etc.” 
 
5.16 The above proposition is reproduced in Shailesh Jasvantbhai & 
Anr. v. State of Gujarat & Ors .32 which f urther elaborates upon the 
principle of proportionality and also presents an incisive and sincere 
examination of judicial discretion which is ordinarily a necessary evil: 
 
“After giving due consideration to the facts and 
circumstances of each case, for deciding just and 
appropriate sentence to b e awarded for an offence, the 
aggravating and mitigating factors and circumstances in 
which a crime has been committed are to be delicately 
balanced on the basis of really relevant circumstances in a 
dispassionate manner by the Court. Such act of balancing  
is indeed a difficult task. It has been very aptly indicated in 
Dennis Councle MCG Dautha v. State of California (402 US 
183: 28 L.D. 2d 711) that no formula of a foolproof nature is 
possible that would provide a reasonable criterion in 
determining a just  and appropriate punishment in the 
infinite variety of circumstances that may affect the gravity 
of the crime. In the absence of any foolproof formula which 
may provide any basis for reasonable criteria to correctly 
assess various circumstances germane to the consideration 
of gravity of crime, the discretionary judgment in the facts of 
each case, is the only way in which such judgment may be 
equitably distinguished.”. 
 
5.17 A similar view has been reiterated in Bantu v. State of U.P 33. In 
the case of State o f Punjab v. Bawa Singh, 34 the significance of the 
burden of judicial discretion in sentencing is highlighted and, relying 
upon the judgment in Hazara Singh v. Raj Kumar, 35 the importance of 
the principle of proportionality in alleviating that burden is also set 
out. 
 
                                                        
32 (2006) 2 SCC 359. 
33 2008 (10)SCALE 336. 
34 (2015) 3 SCC 441. 
35 (2013) 9 SCC 516. 

     
30 
 
5.18 Similarly, the Supreme Court in Jameel v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh36, also describes the process of proportional sentencing when 
it explains that “ [b]y deft modulation, sentencing process be stern 
where it should be, and tempered with mercy where it warrants to be .” 
It further highlights the relevant criteria and facts that are significant 
in carrying out this modulation process. 
 
5.19 These cases all raise the important question of the relationship 
between the demands of a deterrent theory o f criminal justice and a 
principle of proportionality. The Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. 
Prem Sagar & Ors. 37 while dealing with the case a ffecting the public 
health referred to the object of enacting A rticle 47 of the Constitution 
and held: 
 
“There are certain offences which touch our social fabric. We 
must remind ourselves that even while introducing the 
doctrine of plea bargaining in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, certain types of offences had been kept out of the 
purview thereof. While imposing sen tences, the said 
principles should be borne in mind.”. 
 
5.20 Arguably, the two principles are not in opposition to each other 
and should indeed be applied together. After all, the measure of a 
proportionate response to crime cannot be taken with a blinkered view 
only to the specific circumstances of a case but keeping in mind the 
effect of the crime upon society, specifically the deterrent effect. This 
form of proportionality ensures that punishments are meted out in a 
forward-looking manner. Nonetheless, i t is true that proportionality 
forms an alternative to a uniformly harsh policy aimed purely at 
deterrence. This is, however, eschewed for a more measured response 
because, as noted in Shailesh Jasvantbhai , “uniformly 
disproportionate punishment has some v ery undesirable practical 
consequences”. This understanding highlights the manner in which 
                                                        
36 (2010) 12 SCC 532. 
37 (2008) 7 SCC 550. 

     
31 
 
uniformity of harsh punishments inequitably places the burden of 
deterrence on perpetrators of less grave crimes and also incentivizes 
petty criminals to scale up th eir operations as the punishment 
remains the same in any case.  
 
5.21 In Dhananjoy Chatterjee @ Dhana v. State of West Bengal ,38 the 
Supreme Court has stated: 
 
“In our opinion, the measure of punishment in a given case 
must depend upon the atrocity of the crime; the conduct of 
the criminal and the defenceless and unprotected state of 
the victim. Imposition of appropriate punishment is the 
manner in which the courts respond to the society's cry for 
justice against the criminals. Justice demands that courts 
should impose punishment fitting to the crime so that the 
courts reflect public abhorrence of the crime. The courts 
must not only keep in view the rights of the criminal but also 
the rights of the victim of crime and the society at large while 
considering imposition of appropriate punishment.” 
 
5.22 In Ahmed Hussein Vali Mohammed Saiyed & Anr. v. State of 
Gujarat,39, the Supreme Court explained  the scope of  considerations 
involved in terms of taking a view to the long term effects of leniency 
and the holistic  effects on society as opposed to the individual 
criminal and victim: 
 
“…Any liberal attitude by imposing meagre sentences or 
taking too sympathetic view merely on account of lapse of 
time in respect of such offences will be result -wise 
counterproductive in the long run and against the interest of 
society which needs to be cared for and strengthened by 
string of deterrence inbuilt in the sentencing system. Justice 
demands that courts should impose punishment befitting 
the crime so that the courts reflect pu blic abhorrence of the 
crime. The court must not only keep in view the rights of the 
victim of the crime and the society at large while considering 
the imposition of appropriate punishment. The court will be 
failing in its duty if appropriate punishment is  not awarded 
                                                        
38 (1994) 2 SCC 220. 
39 (2009) 7 SCC 254. 

     
32 
 
for a crime which has been committed not only against the 
individual victim but also against the society to which both 
the criminal and the victim belong.”. 
 
5.23 In Guru Basavaraj @ Benne Settapa v. State of Karnataka ,40, the 
Apex Court explai ned the demands upon courts when faced with a 
question that requires them to consider the needs of society over those 
of particular persons: 
 
“The cry of the collective for justice, which includes adequate 
punishment cannot be lightly ignored.”. 
 
5.24 A similar appeal is made in Gopal Singh v. State of 
Uttarakhand,41, but is appropriately pla ced alongside a counterpoint 
on the necessity of proportionality: 
 
“The principle of just punishment is the bedrock of 
sentencing in respect of a criminal offence. A  punishment 
should not be disproportionately excessive. The concept of 
proportionality allows a significant discretion to the Judge 
but the same has to be guided by certain principles.”. 
 
5.25 In conclusion, it is clear that punishment schemes and 
sentencing policies must adhere to a general principle of 
proportionality and as such the required deterrence be achieved 
without arbitrary slips into leniency; and at the same time 
unnecessary distress is not created through uniformly high 
punishments. 
 
5.26 Much of the case law makes a listing of relevant criteria to be 
considered when determining appropriate punishment. However, 
notably, the proposed amendment limits these relevant criteria and 
forwards the gravity of harm resulting from the offence as the 
foremost standard of differentiation. The reasons for this have been 
made clear above: the appropriate level of deterrence has not been 
                                                        
40 (2012) 8 SCC 734. 
41 JT 2013 (3) SC 444. 

     
33 
 
achieved by allowing for judicial discretion and the consideration of all 
relevant criteria. The low quantum of punishment an d uncertainty 
surrounding sentencing lends itself to and encourages the 
commission of food safety offences.  Raising the overall limit of 
punishment cannot be enough, however, and a graded framework is 
hence proposed. At the same time, the relevant criteri a for the 
quantum of the punishment have been limited so as to achieve the 
requisite certainty that would ensure that the increased quantum of 
punishment is inflicted without exceptions.   

     
34 
 
CHAPTER – VI 
 
Incoherency in Laws 
 
6.1 The Law Commission reviewed sections 272 and 273 of IPC to 
address the concern of the  Supreme Court in matters relating to food 
adulteration. It also revisited the punishment with reference to 
sections 272 and 273 of IPC stipulated for food adulteration, which is 
not only inadequate but also incompatible in the present scenario,  
and thus requires  to be made more stringent.  The Law Commission 
considers that the provisions to deal with production and sale of 
adulterated food, which is harmful to human beings be made more 
stringent keeping in view the gravity of offence, the existing maximum 
punishment of six months for such offences under the IPC is grossly 
inadequate. 
 
6.2 In view of above, the Law Commission is of the opinion that the 
punishment essentially be graded with reference to the harm caused 
to the consumer due to consumption of adulterated food and  drinks.  
Therefore, it is recommendable that the provisions contained in 
sections 272 and 273 of the IPC may be suitably modified on the lines 
of the provisions of the Food Act for the reasons discussed 
hereinabove.   
 
6.3 While considering the amendments  to sections 272 and 273 of 
the IPC, the Law Commission considered imbibing compensation 
aspect into the provisions taking into account various elements that 
constitutes the seriousness of the offence and harm caused to the 
persons upon consumption of the adulterated foods.  In this regard, 
the Commission considered provisions of sections 357, 357A and 
357B of Cr.P.C. which deal with compensation in general and in 
specific cases.  Section 357 makes a general provision for 

     
35 
 
compensation applicable to all case s other than those provided in 
sections 357A & 357B.  Section 357 reads as under:- 
 
“357. Order to pay compensation.- 
 
(1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a 
sentence (including a sentence of death) of which fine 
forms a part, the Court may, when  passing judgment, 
order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be 
applied- 
…. 
 
(b) in the payment to any person of compensation for 
any loss or injury caused by the offence, when 
compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, 
recoverable by such person in a Civil Court; 
….. 
 
(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine 
does not form a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the accused person to pay, by way of 
compensation, such amount as may be specified in the 
order to the person who has suffered any loss or injury 
by reason of the act for which the accused person has 
been so sentenced.” 
 
6.4 The provisions for compensation contained in sections 357A 
and 357B of Cr.P.C. apply to cases covered under sections 326A of 
IPC (voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid etc.) and section 
376D of IPC (gang rape).  Keeping in view the heinous nature of crime 
in those provisions, two proviso have been provided with the intent 
that the amount of fine to be imposed by the court shall be ju st and 
reasonable to meet the medical expenses of treatment of victim and in 
the latter case for rehabilitation of the victim as well; and any such 
fine shall be paid to the victim.  The quantum of compensation is 
always determined by taking into account t he nature of the crime, the 
manner in which it has been committed, the justness of claim by the 
victim and the ability of the accused to pay.   
 
6.5 As we are aware that adulteration of food causes several health 
problems in humans.  Most of the food adult erants are very harmful 

     
36 
 
and toxic; yet, the greed and profit motive encourages anti -social 
persons for adulteration. Therefore, the tackling of food adulteration is 
required to be given due importance for its serious effect on the health 
of the public.  Fr om the above, it may be seen that though the 
offences covered under sections 357A and 357B of Cr.P.C. stand at a 
different pedestal than the food adulteration; yet, in case where the 
food adulteration causes grievous injury or where such adulteration 
results in death seems to be the cases which can be squarely covered 
under section 357B keeping in view the health hazards due to food 
adulteration which results in various ailments and premature deaths.  
Thus, keeping in view the serious nature of the crime, t he aforesaid 
two cases be covered under section 357B of Cr.P.C. 
 
6.6 In strict legal sense crime generally takes in its sweep 
intentional invasion of personal rights and not those which are 
accidental, mistaken or irrational or provoked. Chapter XIV of the  IPC 
deals with offences affecting public health, safety, convenience and 
morals etc. Sections 272 & 273 deals with adulterated or noxious 
(unfit for human consumption) food or drinks intended for sale, etc. 
As discussed in Chapter IV, the Food Act may not  be occupying the 
entire field and thus may not render provisions of sections 272 and 
273 IPC redundant.  The Supreme Court while deciding the case in 
Swami Achyutanand Tir th & Ors.  (supra) had taken note of the 
judgement of the Allahabad High Court in M/s Pepsico India Holdings 
Pvt. Ltd & Anr.  (supra) and further noticed that against  the said 
judgement Criminal Appeals no. 472, 476 - 478 and 479 of 2012, etc., 
are pending consideration. Appeals against the said judgements of the 
Allahabad High Court have be en de -tagged from the writ petition in 
Swami Achyutanand Tirth & Ors. (supra).  
 
6.7 In such a fact situation as the issue as to whether criminal 
proceedings can be initiated under sections 272 and 27 3 IPC after 
commencement of the PFA Act or the Food Act in force, is sub judice it 

     
37 
 
is not appropriate for the Commission to comment upon the merits of 
the said judgement. Be that as it may, in compliance with the 
Supreme Court order,  a draft Amendment Bill is prepared 
recommending it for the consideration of th e Government.  
Accordingly, a comparative statement showing the changes proposed 
in the IPC and CrPC and a draft Amendment Bill prepared by the Law 
Commission is enclosed at Annexures-A and B respectively.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sd/- 
Sd/- 
 
[Justice Dr. B.S. Chauhan] 
Chairman 
 
 
Sd/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sd/- 
[Justice Ravi R. Tripathi] 
Member 
 
 
Sd/- 
[Prof. (Dr.) S. Sivakumar] 
Member 
 
 
[Dr. Sanjay Singh] 
Member-Secretary 
 
 
Sd/- 
 
[Suresh Chandra] 
Ex-officio Member 
 [Dr. G. Narayana Raju] 
Ex-officio Member 

     
38 
 
ANNEXURE-A 
Comparative Statement showing the changes proposed in the IPC and CrPC 
(Part-I Amendments suggested in IPC) 
Provisions under IPC Amendments suggested by Law Commission of India 
272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale. —
Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to 
make such article noxious as food or drink, intending to 
sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to be likely 
that the same will be sold a s food or drink, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
 
The text of the State Amendment in respect of Orissa is as 
under:  
 
Orissa.- In section 272 for the words “shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both”, the following shall 
be substituted, namely:— 
  “shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall 
also be liable to fine: 
 Provided that the Court may,  for adequate and special 
reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a 
sentence of imprisonment which is less than 
imprisonment for life.” 
[Vide Orissa Act 3 of 1999, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 27.1.1999)]. 
Substitution of new section for section 272. In the 
Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860) (herein after referred to as 
the  Penal Code), for section 272, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely :- 
 
 “272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale. - 
Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to 
make such article noxious as food  or drink, intending to 
sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to be likely 
that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be 
punished, -  
 
(i) where such adulteration does not result in injury, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months and also with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees;  
 
(ii) where such adulteration results in non -grievous 
injury, with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year and also with fine which may 
extend to  three lakh rupees; 
 
(iii) where such adulteration results in a grievous 
injury, with imprisonment  for a term which may 

     
39 
 
 
Uttar Pradesh . – In section 272 for the words “shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both”, 
substitute the following words, namely:- 
“shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall 
also be liable to fine: 
Provided that the court may, for adequate reasons to be 
mentioned in the judgement, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for life.” 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 47 of 1975, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 
15.9.1975)]. 
 
West Bengal. -In section 272 for the words “of either 
description for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which mays extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both”, substitute the following words, namely:- 
“for life with or without fine: 
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special 
reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a 
sentence of imprisonment which is less than  
imprisonment for life.” 
{Vide West Bengal Act 42 of 1973, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 29.4.1973] 
 
extend to six  years and also with fine which shall not 
be less than five lakh rupees;  
 
(iv) where such adulteration results in death, with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for 
life and also with fine which shall not be less than ten 
lakh rupees: 
 
Provided that the court may, for adequate reason to be 
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for life: 
 
Provided further that such fine shall be just and 
reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation 
of the victim: 
 
Provided also that any fine imposed under this section 
shall be paid to the victim.”. 
 
273. Sale of noxious food or drink. - Whoever sells, or 
offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink, any article 
which has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in 
a state unfit for food or drink, knowing or having reason 
to believe that the same is nox ious as food or drink, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
Substitution of new section for section 273. In the 
Penal Code, for section 273, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-  
 
“273. Sale of noxious food or drink. - Whoever sells, or offers 
or exposes for sale, as  food or drink, any article which has 

     
40 
 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
 
 In section 273, State Amendments are the same as 
under section 272 
been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit 
for food  or drink, knowing or having reason to believe that 
the same is noxious as food or drink, shall be punished, -  
 
(i) where the sale, offer for sale or exhibition for sale of 
such food or drink, does not result in injury, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months and also with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees;  
 
(ii) where the sale of such food or drink, results in 
non-grievous injury, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year and also with fine which 
may extend to  three lakh rupees; 
 
(iii) where the sale of such food or drink, results in a 
grievous injury, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six  years and also with fine which shall 
not be less than five lakh rupees;  
 
(iv) where the sale of such food or drink, results in 
death, with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than seven years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and also with fine which shall 
not be less than ten lakh rupees:  
 
Provided that the court may, for adequate reason to be 
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for life: 
 
Provided further that such fine shall be just and 

     
41 
 
reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation 
of the victim: 
 
Provided also that any fine imposed under this section 
shall be paid to the victim.”. 
 
 
  

     
42 
 
(Part-II Amendments suggested in CrPC) 
Sec-
tion 
Offence Punishment Cognizable 
or non-
cognisable 
Bailab
le or 
non-
bailab
le 
By what 
court 
triable 
Section Offence Punishment Cogniza
ble or 
non-
cognisa
ble 
Baila
ble 
or 
non-
baila
ble 
By what court 
triable 
1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 
“272. Adulterating food 
or  drink intended 
for sale, so as to 
make the same 
noxious - 
 
Imprisonment 
for 6 months, 
or fine of 
1,000 rupees, 
or both. 
Non-
cognizable 
Bailab
le 
Any 
Magistrate 
 “272. Adulterating food or  
drink intended for 
sale, so as to make 
the same noxious - 
(i) where such 
adulteration does not 
result in injury 
 
 
 
 
Imprisonment which 
may extend to six 
months and with fine 
to be paid to the victim  
 
 
 
 
Cogniza
ble 
 
 
 
 
Baila
ble 
 
 
 
 
Any 
Magistrate 
       (ii) where such 
adulteration results 
in non-grievous 
injury 
Imprisonment which 
may extend to one year 
and with fine to be paid 
to the victim 
Cogniza
ble 
Baila
ble 
Any 
Magistrate 
       (iii) where the sale of 
such food or drink, 
results in a grievous 
injury 
Imprisonment which 
may extend to six  
years and with fine to 
be paid to the victim 
 
Cogniza
ble 
Non 
Baila
ble 
Any 
Magistrate 
       (iv) where the sale of 
such food or drink, 
results in death 
Imprisonment of not 
less than seven years 
but which may extend 
to life and with fine to 
be paid to the victim  
Cogniza
ble 
Non 
Baila
ble 
 
Court of 
Sessions 
273.   
 
Selling any food 
or drink as food 
or drink, knowing 
the same to be 
noxious- 
Imprisonmen
t for 6 
months, or 
fine of 1,000 
rupees, or 
both. 
Non-
cognizable 
Bailab
le 
Any 
Magistrate 
273.   
 
 
Selling any food or 
drink, as food or 
drink knowing the 
same to be noxious-  
(i) where the sale, 
offer for sale or 
exhibition for sale of 
such food or drink, 
does not result in 
injury 
 
 
 
 
Imprisonment which 
may extend to six 
months and with fine 
to be paid to the victim 
 
 
 
 
Cogniza
ble 
 
 
 
 
Baila
ble 
 
 
 
 
Any 
Magistrate 
       (ii) where the sale of 
such food or drink, 
results in non-
grievous injury 
Imprisonment which 
may extend to one year 
and with fine to be paid 
to the victim 
 
Cogniza
ble 
Baila
ble 
Any 
Magistrate 

     
43 
 
       (iii) where the sale of 
such food or drink, 
results in a grievous 
injury 
 
Imprisonment which 
may extend to six  
years and with fine to 
be paid to the victim 
Cogniza
ble 
Baila
ble 
Any 
Magistrate 
       (iv) where the sale of 
such food or drink, 
results in death 
Imprisonment of not 
less than seven years 
but which may extend 
to life and with fine to 
be paid to the victim 
Cogniza
ble 
Non 
Baila
ble 
Court of 
Sessions.”. 
         
 
   
 State Amendment 
 
         
 Orissa 
 
          
272 Adulterating food 
or drink intended 
for sale, so as to 
make the same 
noxious. 
 
Imprisonment 
for life, and 
fine. 
Cognizable Non-
bailab
le 
Court of 
Session 
      
273 Selling any food or 
drink as food and 
drink, knowing the 
same to be 
noxious 
 
Imprisonment 
for life, and 
fine 
Cognizable Non-
bailab
le 
Court of 
Session 
      
 Uttar Pradesh 
 
          
272 Adulterating food 
or drink intended 
for sale, so as to 
make the same 
noxious. 
 
Imprisonment 
for life, with 
or without 
fine 
Cognizable Non-
bailab
le 
Court of 
Session 
      
273 Selling any food or 
drink as food and 
drink, knowing the 
same to be 
noxious 
 
 
 
 
 
Imprisonment 
for life, with 
or without 
fine 
Cognizable Non-
Bailab
le 
Court of 
Session 
      

     
44 
 
 West Bengal 
 
          
272 Adulterating food 
or drink intended 
for sale, so as to 
make the same 
noxious. 
 
Imprisonment 
for life with or 
without fine 
Cognizable Non-
Bailab
le 
Court of 
Session 
      
273 Selling any food or 
drink, as food and 
drink, knowing the 
same to be 
noxious 
 
Imprisonment 
for life, with 
or without 
fine 
Cognizable Non-
Bailab
le 
Court of 
Session 
      
 

     
 45 
ANNEXURE-B 
 
THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017 
 
A 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973   
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:- 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. Short title.  This Act may be called the Criminal Law 
(Amendment) Act, 2017. 
 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 
 
2. Substitution of new section for section 272. In the 
Indian Penal Code, (45 o f 1860) (hereinafter referred to as 
the  Penal Code), for section 272, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely :- 
 
“272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale. - 
Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to 
make such article noxious as food  or drink, intending to 
sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to be likely 
that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be 
punished, -  

     
 46 
 
(i) where such adulteration does not result in injury, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months and also with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees;  
 
(ii) where such adulteration results in non -grievous 
injury, with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year and also with fine which may 
extend to  three lakh rupees; 
 
(iii) where such adulteration results in a grievous 
injury, with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six  years and also with fine which shall not 
be less than five lakh rupees;  
 
(iv) where such adulteration results in death, with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for 
life and also with fine which shall not be less than ten 
lakh rupees: 
 
Provided that the court may, for adequate reason to be 
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for life: 
 
Provided further that such fine shall be just and reasonable 
to meet the medical expenses and re habilitation of the 
victim: 
Provided also that any fine imposed under this section shall 
be paid to the victim.”. 
  

     
 47 
3. Substitution of new section for section 273. In the 
Penal Code, for section 273, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-  
 
“273. Sale of noxious food or drink. - Whoever sells, or 
offers or exposes for sale, as  food or drink, any article 
which has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in 
a state unfit for food  or drink, knowing or having reason 
to believe that the same is  noxious as food or drink, shall 
be punished, -  
 
(i) where the sale, offer for sale or exhibition for sale of 
such food or drink, does not result in injury, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months and also with fine which may extend to  one 
lakh rupees;  
 
(ii) where the sale of such food or drink, results in non-
grievous injury, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year and also with fine which may 
extend to  three lakh rupees; 
 
(iii) where the sale of such food or drink, results in a 
grievous injury, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six  years and also with fine which shall 
not be less than five lakh rupees;  
 
(iv) where the sale of such food or drink, results in 
death, with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than seven years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and also with fine which shall 
not be less than ten lakh rupees:  
 

     
 48 
Provided that the court may, for adequate reason to be 
mentioned i n the judgment, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for life: 
 
Provided further that such fine shall be just and 
reasonable to meet the medical expenses and 
rehabilitation of the victim: 
 
Provided also that any fine imposed under this secti on 
shall be paid to the victim.”. 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 
1973 
 
4. Substitution of new section for section 357B. - In the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (herein after 
referred to as the Code of Criminal Procedure), for section 
357B, the following section shall be substituted, namely:-  
 
“357B. Compensation to be in addition to fine under section 
272, section 273, section 326 or section 376D of Indian 
Penal Code .- The compensation payable by the State 
Government under section 357A shall be in addition to 
the payment of fine to the victim under section 272, 
section 273, section 326A or section 376D of the I ndian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
 
Explanation.- For the purposes of  this section, the 
expression “victim” shall be construed as defined in 
clause (wa) of section 2.”. 
 
 

     
 49 
5. Amendment of First Schedule . In the First Schedule to 
the Code of Criminal Procedure under the heading  “ I. – 
OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (45of 
1860)”, for the entries relating to sections 272 and 273, 
the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
 “272. Adulterating 
food or  drink 
intended for 
sale, so as to 
make the same 
noxious - 
(i) where such 
adulteration 
does not result 
in injury 
 
 
 
 
 
Imprisonment 
which may extend 
to six months and 
with fine to be 
paid to the victim.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognizable 
 
 
 
 
 
Bailable 
 
 
 
 
 
Any 
Magistrate 
 (ii) where such 
adulteration 
results in non-
grievous injury 
Imprisonment 
which may extend 
to one year and 
with fine to be 
paid to the victim.  
 
Cognizable Bailable Any 
Magistrate 
 (iii) where the 
sale of such food 
or drink, results 
in a grievous 
injury 
Imprisonment 
which may extend 
to six years and 
with fine to be 
paid to the victim.  
 
Cognizable Non 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate 
 (iv) where the 
sale of such food 
or drink, results 
in death 
Imprisonment of 
not less than 
seven years but 
which may extend 
to life and with 
fine to be paid to 
the victim.  
 
Cognizable Non 
Bailable 
Court of 
Sessions 
273.   
 
 
Selling any food 
or drink, as food 
or drink 
knowing the 
same to be 
noxious-  
(i) where the 
sale, offer for 
sale or 
exhibition for 
sale of such food 
or drink, does 
not result in 
injury 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Imprisonment 
which may extend 
to six months and 
with fine to be 
paid to the victim.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognizable 
 
 
 
 
 
Bailable 
 
 
 
 
 
Any 
Magistrate 

     
 50 
 (ii) where the 
sale of such food 
or drink, results 
in non-grievous 
injury 
 
Imprisonment 
which may extend 
to one year and 
with fine to be 
paid to the victim.  
 
Cognizable Bailable Any 
Magistrate 
 (iii) where the 
sale of such food 
or drink, results 
in a grievous 
injury 
Imprisonment 
which may extend 
to six years and 
with fine to be 
paid to the victim.  
 
 
Cognizable Bailable Any 
Magistrate 
 (iv) where the 
sale of such food 
or drink, results 
in death 
Imprisonment of 
not less than 
seven years but 
which may extend 
to life and with 
fine to be paid to 
the victim.  
 
Cognizable Non 
Bailable 
Court of 
Sessions.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 