GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA’

Report No.265

Prospects of Exempting Income arising out of
Maintenance Money of ‘Minor’

March, 2017



Dr. Justice 5. 8. Chauhan | j डा० न्यायमूर्ति बलबीर सिंह ater
Former Judge Supreme Court of India ; पूर्व न्‍्यायधीश सर्वोच्च न्यायालय

Chairman
‘hairme 4 | i अध्यक्ष
Law Commission of India ee भारत का विधि आयोग
Government of India ye भारत सरकार
Hindustan Times House asta ome हिन्दुस्तान टाइम्स हाउस

K. G. Marg, New Dethi-110001

Telephone: 23736758, Fax: 23355741 oegeaT weit मार्ग, नई दिल्‍ली-110001

दूरभाष: 23736758, PRT 23355741

D.O.No.6(3)/307/2016-LC(LS)
March20" 2017

Dear gra Row Stenkoy Pararad H,

The Punjab and Haryana High Court, while dealing with
the case Payal Mehta v. Sanjay Sarin referred the subject
matter to the Law Commission of India for consideration as to
whether the provisions of section 64(1A) of the Income Tax Act,
1961 require an amendment to provide for exemption from
clubbing of minor’s income accruing by way of interest on the
amount deposited by one of the parents of the minor child as
maintenance, at the hands of parent/guardian, under -an order
of the Court. The plea taken in this case is that the interest on
the amount of maintenance deposited in the narne of minor child
should not be subjected to tax.

2. The Commission examined the issue and is of the view that
the income earned by way of interest on the amount of
maintenance deposited in favour of the child does not require to
be exempted from being clubbed with the income of the
parent/guardian, as such exemption, if granted, would open
flood gatés of tax evasion and would defeat the very object of
inserting the provisions of section 64(1A), which had been
brought to plug in the loophole to prevent the avoidance of tax,
causing substantial loss or leakage of revenue.

3. The Law Commission would like to place on record, the
valuable suggestions given by Shri M.R. Venkatesh, Chartered
Accountant and Shri Arvind Modi, Chief Commissioner of
Income Tax, New Delhi, on the subject under examination.

il



4. A report titled “Prospects of Exempting Income arising
out of Maintenance Money of ‘Minor’ ” is placed for
consideration of the Government.

Yours sincerely

\asvih पे तार फ्री ५ gore, ech stow

[Dr. Justice B.S, Chauhan]

Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad

Hon’ble Minister for Law and Justice
-Government of India

Shastri Bhawan,

New Delhi- 110 115

iti



Prospects of Exempting Income arising out

Report No.265

Maintenance Money of ‘Minor’

Table of Contents

of

| Para | Title Page
1. Reference to the Commission 1
2. Revisiting the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1-3

1961

3. Interpretation of Taxation Laws 3
4, Legislative history of section 64 of the Act, 1961 3-5
5, Report of Dr. Raja J. Chelliah Committee 5-6
| 5. | Transfer of Assets 6
7. Finance Act, 2012 7
| & | Nature. of Custody and Maintenance Order 7
| 9. | Arguments for seeking the exemption 8
10. Arguments for not granting exemption 8-11
11. Recommendations ll

iv



Prospects of Exempting Income arising out of
Maintenance Money of ‘Minor’

1. Reference to the Commission

The Punjab and Haryana High Court, while dealing with the
case Payal Mehta v. Sanjay Sarin,! referred the matter to the Law
Commission of India for consideration as to whether the provisions of
section 64(1A) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter called the Act,
1961) require an amendment to provide for exemption from clubbing
of minor’s income accruing by way of interest on the amount
deposited by one of the parents of the minor child as maintenance, at
the hands of the other parent / guardian under an order of the Court.
The plea taken in this case is that the interest on the amount of
maintenance deposited in the name of minor child should not be
subjected to tax, ie., such income be not clubbed with the income of

either of the parent for the purpose of imposing the tax.
2. Revisiting the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961

2.1. Section 64 (1A) of ‘the Act, 1961 reads as under:

(1A) In computing the total income of any individual, there
shall be included all such income as arises or accrues to his
minor child, not being a minor child suffering from any
disability of the nature specified in section 80U: |

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
apply in respect of such income as arises or accrues to the
minor child on account of any—

(8) manual work done by him ; or

(b) activity involving. application of his. skill, talent or
specialised knowledge and experience.

19016 SCC online P&H 4989, vide its judgment and order dated 27.01.2016.


2.2

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the
income of the minor child shall be included,—

(a) where the marriage of his parents subsists, in the income
of that parent whose total income (excluding the income
includible under this sub-section) is greater; or

(b) where the marriage of his parents does not subsist, in the
income of that parent who maintains the minor child in the
previous year, and where any such income is once included
in the total income of either parent, any such income arising
in any succeeding year shall not be included in the total
income of the other parent, unless the Assessing Officer is
satisfied, after giving that parent an opportunity of being
heard, that it is necessary so to do.

In this regard two other relevant provisions of the Act, 1961 also

deserved to be considered:

“2.3

6) As to deduction:- Under section 10(32) of the Act, 1961,
the parents in whose hands the minor’s income is
clubbed is entitled to an exemption up to Rs. 1500/-
per child.

(ii) As to transfer of property: Under section 27 of the Act,
"1961, income out of property transferred for no

consideration to a minor married daughter.

The provisions of the Act, 1961 do. not allow exemption to

clubbing. of income of the minor in the form of interest on

maintenance amount, ‘to one of the parent’s income. Therefore, the

High Court observed as under:

It was opinion of the court that the exception should also
be created in such cases where the maintenance is provided
for the minor children.

In the opinion of the court, the circumstances of the
minor having received maintenance money are different from
say a minor in whose name some business has been started
by either of the parent or who has been advanced some gift
during the subsistence of marriage. of parents. Therefore, an
exception against clubbing of income from maintenance
money is a desirable thing, in case of minor children residing
with a single parent.



2.4 The Court also suggested insertion of a clause providing for
exemption in such a situation, as a proviso to section 64(1A) of the
Act, 1961.

Interpretation of Taxation Laws

It is not possible to interpret the provisions of s. 64(1A) of the
Act, 1961 in any other manner as the language used therein is neither
ambiguous nor open to two interpretations. In interpretation of fiscal
statutes, equitable considerations are not relevant at all. More so,
logic or reason cannot be of much avail in interpreting the taxing
statute. None of the parties, ie., the assesse or the revenue, can
plead or rely on equity or hardships. Thus, nothing can be read in or
implied therein, nor there can be any subtraction. Only a fair look at
the language used therein is required. Considerations of anomalies or
injustice do not play any useful role in construing taxing statutes
unless there is some real ambiguity. Fiscal statutes cannot be
considered on any presumptions or assumptions and it cannot imply
anything which is not expressed nor can any assumed deficiency be

supplied.?
Legislative history of section 64 of the Act, 1961
4.1 The purpose of enacting section 64(1A) was to design a

mechanism to overtake and circumvent the tendency of the assesses

to avoid or reduce tax liability by entering into settlements or

2 The Express Mill Nagpur v. Municipal Committee Wardha,, AIR 1958 SC 341; CIT'v.

+ Karamchand Premchand Ltd, AIR 1960 SC 1175; Board of Revenue, Uttar Pradesh
ज, Rai Saheb Sidhnath Mehrotra, AIR 1965 SC 1092; Commissioner of Income-tax,
West Bengal I, Calcutta v. Central India Industries Lid., AIR 1972 SC 397; Collector
of Estate Duty v. R. Kanakasabai, AIR 1973 SC 1214; Diwan Brothers v. Central
Bank of India, Bombay, AIR 1976 SC 1503; State Bank of Travancore v.
Commissioner of Income Tax, AIR 1986 SC 757; Petron ‘Engineering Construction”
Put, Lid. v. Central Board of Direct Taxes, AIR 1989 SC 501; Commissioner of
Income-tax v. Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing Company Ltd., AIR 1992.SC 1782;
Kapil Mohan v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Delhi, AYR 1999 SC 573; Indure Ltd. v.
Commercial Tax Officer, (2010) 9 SCC 461; and Bansal Wire Industries Ltd. v. State
of UP., (2011) 6 SCC 545.



transferring the properties in such a way that he could retain the
control over or interest in the same or its income, but it may reduce
the tax liability. Such transfers were purposely made in favour of the
member of the family who was ordinarily under the protection of the

assessee or was dependent on him.4

4.2 The constitutional validity of section 64(1A) of the Act 1961was
upheld by the Madras High Court in K.M. Vijayan & Ors. v. Union Of
India &Ors. — The legislative history of section 6418) has been
detailed by the Court as under:

The Finance Bill, 1992, (38 of 1992), was introduced in the Lok
Sabha and the same was enacted by Parliament with effect from
April 1, 1993. In terms of section 35(b) of the said Finance
Act, amendments were introduced in the Income-tax Act,
whereby sub-section (1A) to section 64 was introduced, which
reads as under:

(18) ne

It remains to be seen that section 16 of the 1922 Act and section
64 of the 1961 Act were enacted to prevent avoidance of tax
through transfer of assets directly or indirectly. Section
64(1A) includes income of the minor child irrespective of its
source, in the hands of the parent having the larger income. The
proviso carves out two exceptions to this case. The: earlier
provisions relating to clubbing were held to be valid by the
Supreme Court and various other High Courts. The provisions
of section 16(3)(a)(i) and (ii) of the Act which were corresponding
to unamended section 64(1)(i) and (ii) of the Act of 1961 were
held to be valid and not in violation of articles 14 and 19(1)(b) of
the Constitution of India as can be seen from the decision of the
Supreme Court in Balaji v. ITO, (1961) 43 ITR 393 (SC). The .
provisions of section 16(3){a)(iv) of the 1922 Act corresponding to
the unamended section 64(1)(iv) of the 1961 Act were held to be
valid and not in contravention of article: 14 of the Constitution
as can be seen from G, K. Devarajulu Naidu v. CIT, (1963) 48 ITR
756 (Mad.) The unamended section 64(1)(i) and (ii) did not violate

*Tulsidas Kalichand v. CIT, (1961) 42 ITR 1 (SC).
‘Balaji v. ITO., (1961) 43 ITR 393 (50),
51995) 215 ITR 371.


articles 14 and 19(1)(b) and (g) of the Constitution of India as
can be seen from the decisions in Smt. Shreekunwardevi Daga v.
L. G. Trivedi, ITO, (1972) 85 ITR 451; and Smt. Savitri Devi v.
CIT, (1974) Tax LR 74 (All). Section 64(1)(iii) as substituted with
effect from April 1, 1976, providing for clubbing of income of a
minor who was admitted to the benefits ofa partnership firm
was held to be valid as can be seen from the decision in K.
Krishnaveni v. AAC (1985) 151 ITR 83 (Mad.).

4.8 It can be seen that while introducing the Finance Bill (38 of
1992) in Parliament, the Finance Minister in his speech stated as

under:6

It is said that the child is the father of man, but some of our
taxpayers have converted children into tax shelters for their
fathers. The tax law provides for clubbing of income from gifts
given by parents but this does not apply to other. income,
including income from other gifted assets, and the practice of
cross-gifting is widely used to evade clubbing. The Chelliah
Committee has recommended that in order to plug this
loophole, which accounts for a substantial leakage of revenue,
the income of a minor child should be clubbed with that of the
parent. There is merit in this suggestion and 1 propose to accept
it. Recognising, however, the existence of a number of child
prodigies, especially child artistes in our country, I propose to
exchide their professional income, as also any. wage income of
minors, from the purview of such clubbing. The practice. of
clubbing the income of minor children with that of the parent
for tax purposes is in vogue in a number of countries,

5. Report of Dr. Raja J. Chelliah Committee

The interim report on Tax Reforms for December, 1991,

submitted by Dr. Raja J. Chelliah Committee’ reads as under:

See: [1992] 194 ITR 17.
7 At para 6.38 of the Report.


At present, in India the income of the minor admitted to
the benefits of any partnership is included in the income
of the parent, irrespective of whether or not either parent
is a partner in the same firm. Further, any income
accruing to a minor from any asset transferred to him by
the parents or the grandparents is included in the income
of the parent or grandparent who has transferred such
income-generating asset. However, in respect of all other
income accruing to him, the minor is a separate taxable
entity. Keeping in view the rationale for aggregation of the
minor's income with that of the parents, the Committee
recommends that -

(a) All incomes of a minor, other than wage income,
should be aggregated with the total income of -

(i) the parent having the higher income, where the
total income of one parent or of both the parents
happens to fall below the exemption limit for
individuals;

(ii} any one of the parents at the option of the parents
where the income of both the parents exceeds the
exemption limit; and

(iii) if over time the income of the parent, with whom
the income of the minor was aggregated earlier, goes
below the exemption limit, the parent having the
higher income.

(b) It follows that the income of the minor arising from
assets transferred to him or her by any one including his
grandparents should be aggregated with the income of the
parent as recommended above.

6. Transfer of Assets

6.1 In case of transfer of assets, whatever may be its nature
and whatever. may be its mode of transfer, the transfer is

generally intentional and by free will.


6.2 The indirect transfer, by its very nature, would involve
more than one transaction with an ultimate object being, to give
effect to original intention of transferring assets by an individual

to his or her spouse or minor child.8
7. The Finance Act, 2012

The word ‘transfer’ has been defined under section 2(47) of the
Act 1961. Explanation II thereof was inserted by. the Finance Act
2012 (w.e.f. 1.4.1962), It defines the term transfer so as to include
and shall be deemed to have always inchided disposing of or
parting with an asset or any interest therein, or creating any
interest in an asset, in any manner whatsoever directly or
indirectly, absolutely + or conditionally, voluntarily or
involuntarily, by way of agreement (whether entered into in India
or outside India}, or otherwise not withstanding that such transfer
of rights has been characterised as being effected or dependent
upon or flowing from the transfer of a share or shares of a

company registered or incorporated outside India.

- 8, Nature of Custody and Maintenance Order

It would be worth mentioning that the issue of custody of the child
and determination of the amount of his / her maintenance are of
temporary nature. Both these issues are decided taking into
consideration the welfare and interest of the child and not the right of
either of the parent under any statute. Each case has to be decided
on its own facts and welfare of the child is of paramount importance.

The issue of res judicata is unknown in such cases as the order of

3566: D M Naterwala v. CIT, (1979) 120 ITR 848 (Bombay).


custody as well as the amount of maintenance can be varied by the

court at any stage on application by either of the parents/parties.®

©

Arguments for seeking the exemption

The arguments which such an assessce could advance would be
that the amount had been put in fixed deposit by the other spouse on
the direction of the court. Thus, the said spouse had acted under
legal compulsion and not under free will. The assessee had not made
any transfer or deposit in favour of such minor, rather he or she is
bound by the order of the court. Being the guardian, the assesse
cannot use or derive any benefit from the income or part thereof for
the reason that such deposit had been made for the welfare of the
child as per the direction of the Court. It requires to be treated like the
self-earned income of the minor, which is not to be clubbed with the
income of either of the parents at par with the provisos(a) and (b) to
section 64(1A) of the Act, 1961. The addition of any income arising
out of maintenance money provided for the minor in such cases would
adversely affect the parent/ guardian. If the income of the minor is
chabbed with the income of parent/ guardian then, the tax liability will
stand enlianced. Therefore, minor’s income from the maintenance
amount, should not be clubbed with the income of the parent/ |

guardian.
10. Arguments for not granting exemption

10.1 The Explanation to section 64(1)A of the Income Tax Act
provides for clubbing the income of the minor with the income of
the guardian under both situations- when the marriage of the
parents subsists and also when it does not subsist. The High Court
made the reference considering the circumstances where deposit
for maintenance is entirely different from transfer of asscts by

2 See: Rosy Jacob v, Jacob A. Chakramakkal, AIR 1973 SC 2090; Dr. Ashish Ranjan ५. Dr. Anupama

Tandon, (2010) 14 SCC 274; Athar Hussain ॥. Syed Siraj Ahmed, AIR 2010 SC 1417; and Shilpa
Aggarwal v. Aviral Mittal, (2010) 1 SCC 591.


parents or grandparents or starting some business in the name of
minor by either of the parents or who has been given some gifts
when marriage of the parents subsists. The reference has been
made on principles of equity and justice which have no application
in determination of tax liability. If the exemption from clubbing of
income from maintenance money is granted following marital
discord, based on such considerations, the same should apply to
all other genuine cases. Assets are generally placed in the hands of
the minor for securing the minor’s future. It is true that human
ingenuity has in many cases, resulted in transfer of assets to
minors or spouses for the sole purpose of tax avoidance. Very
frequently the grand parents of minor children place substantial
assets in their name for a variety of reasons such as love and
affection, absence of financial discipline on the part of parents
where they may not be capable of protecting family properties and
other assets. Making a minor entitled to benefits of partnership

may also be dictated by such circumstances.

10.2 The High Court seems to have failed in appreciating the statutory
requirement according to which the liability of paying tax seems
to be of the father in view of the provisions of section 64(1A) of
Act, 1961. Even otherwise the money deposited under the order
of the Court by the father would have remained with him along
with the liability to pay tax on income from such money if it had
not been so deposited in the name of the minor. The word used
therein by the legislature in its wisdom is ‘maintain’, that means
the allowance covering the basic cost of maintaining a child or
providing with necessities for life or existence and it also means
to “sustain”, “support”, and to “bear” or “to pay or furnish the
means of keeping up of’. There is a distinction between having

the custody of the child and liability to maintain him / her.!9

10 See: Shorter Oxford English Dictionary; Section 3(b) of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act,
1956; and State of Bihar v. Mangal Sao, ATR 1963 SC 445.


In view thereof as the father had paid the money for maintaining the
child, the mother could have taken a plea that income of interest on
maintenance money could be clubbed with income of the father and

no cause of action could have arisen for her.

“10.3, The Supreme Court in Balaji (Supra) dealt with the issue of
classification in such cases under article 14 of the Constitution and
held:

It was then said that there might be genuine partnerships
between an individual and his wife and, therefore, there is
no reasonable relation between the classification and the
object sought to be achieved, at any rate to the extent of
those genuine cases. But there is no classification between
genuine and non-genuine cases the classification is
between cases of partnership between husband, wife and/
or minor children, whether genuine or not’, and partnership
between others. In demarcating a group, the net was cast a
little wider, but it was necessary, as any further sub-
classification as genuine and non-genuine partnerships
may defeat the purpose of the Act.

10.4 In the context of clubbing the income of minor child from

partnership, the Court explained as follows:

It may be that‘a father or a husband may have to pay tax
at a higher rate than ordinarily he would have to pay if
the addition of the wife’s or children’s income to his own
brings his total income to a higher slab. But it may not
necessarily be so in a case where the income of the
former is not appreciable; even if it is appreciable, he can
debit a part of the excess payment to his wife and
children. In short, the firm, though registered, would be
treated as a distinct unit of assessment, with the
difference that, unlike in the case of a registered firm, the
entire income of the unit is added to the personal income
of the father or the husband as the case may be. This
mode of taxation may be a little hard on a husband or a
father in the case of genuine partnership with wife or
minor children but that is offset, to a large.extent by the
beneficent results that flow therefrom to the public, namely

10


the Prevention of Evasion of Income Tax, and also be the
fact that, by and large, the addition payment of tax made
on the income of the wife or the minor children will
ultimately be borne by them in the final accounting
between them. (Emphasis supplied)

10.5 The aspect of equity or fairness has been addressed by the
Supreme Court in the above mentioned cases. The guardian/parent
can meet the tax liability directly from the income accruing to the

minor without having to look for other sources.
11. Recommendations

The Commission is of the view that income earned by way of
interest on the amount of maintenance deposited in favour of the child
does not. require to be exempted from being clubbed with the income
of the parent/ guardian; as such exemption, if granted, would open
flood gates of tax evasion and would defeat the very object of inserting
the provisions of section 64(1A), which had been brought to plug-in
the loopholes to prevent the avoidance of tax, causing substantial loss

or leakage of revenue.

Bs fod on

[Justice Dr. B.S. Chauhan]

Capit ER eee sos Sil

[Justice Ravi rit Tripathi Tripathi] [Prof. (07) S, Sivakumar] Dr. Sanjay Singh]
Member Member Member-Secretary
—Szceh Cp: Aton (Abn
ene eet ०
[Suresh Chandra, [Dr. 6. NarayanaRaju]
Ex-officio Member Ex-officio Member

11