  
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
    
 
 
Report No.266 
 
 
 
 
The Advocates Act, 1961   
(Regulation of Legal Profession) 
 
 
 
 
 
March, 2017 
 
 
  


ii 
 
 


iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


iv 
 
 
 
Report No.266 
 
The Advocates Act, 1961: Regulation of Legal Profession  
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter Title Page 
I Background – Inception of the Legal 
Profession 1-2 
II Advent of the Constitution 3-4 
III Era of the Advocates Act, 1961 5-6 
IV Period of Aberration 7-8 
V Judicial Pronouncements and the Law 9-10 
VI Law Commission’s Initiative 11-12 
VII Loss of Courts’ Working Days : A Staggering 
Fact 13-14 
VIII Supreme Court Judgements on Strike -  
Reprehensible act 15-23 
IX Denouncing the Contemptuous acts of 
Advocates 24-29 
X Propriety of performing public functions by 
convicted persons  30-32 
XI Advocacy Lurking in the shadows 33 
XII Legal Education in India 34-39 
A Historic Perspectives 35 
B Constitutional Framework 35-36 
C Reports of previous Law Commissions 36-37 
D Legal Position 37-39 
E Conclusion 39 
XIII Pre-enrolment Training of Advocates 40 
XIV Prospects of Foreign Law Firms and Lawyers 
in India 41-45 
XV Need for Defining Misconduct 46-47 
XVI The Relevance of Framework of Regulation of 48-51 

v 
 
Legal Profession in the United Kingdom 
XVII Need of Reviewing Regulatory Mechanism 
 52-56 
Annexures   
I Bar Council of India – Proposed 
Amendments to the Advocates Act, 1961 57-87 
II Analysis of the Responses Received by the 
Law Commission of India 88-92 
III The Advocates (Amendment) Bill, 2017 93-112 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
Background – Inception of the Legal Profession 
1.1 The dawn of Legal Profession in our country could be seen 
in the Indian High Courts Act, 1861 (commonly known as the 
Charter Act) which authorised establishment of the High Courts 
under the Letter s Patent and those Letters Patent empowered 
the High Courts to make rules for enrolment of Advocates and 
attorneys who were also known as solicitors.  In the early days 
three Acts, namely, the Legal Practi tioners Act, 1879 (18 of 
1879), the Bombay Pleaders Act, 1920 (17 of 1920) and the 
Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926 (38 of 1926) rel ating to legal 
Practitioners were enacted.  The importance of legal profession 
in the Judicial Administration while dispensing justice with the 
aid of those who could effectively present the case of a litigant, 
was designed to usher in bringing the rule of  law.  The legal 
profession was acknowledged as the noble profession as it 
catered to, and contributed to lay the firm founda tions of a 
system that dispenses  fair and impartial justice.  The desire of 
common man to receive justice was taken care of by maki ng 
provisions for the presentation of a case and its redressal 
through persons in whom trust was reposed. 
 
1.2 Roscoe Pound, an eminent jurist  states that “historically, 
there are three ideas involved in a profession: organization, 
learning, and a spirit of public service.”1 While considering these 
elements essential, he states that the idea of gaining a livelihood 
through profession is nothing more than an incidental element. 
However, amongst the three elements, the most important with 
regards to a profession is the spirit of public service. The ethical 
compunctions of the professional s are similarly exemplified in a 
                                                        
1 Roscoe Pound, “What is a Profession - The Rise of the Legal Profession in Antiquity”, 19 
Notre Dame L. Rev. 203 (1944), at p. 204. 

2 
 
European Union Directive in which “liberal professions” were 
described as “those practised on the basis of relevant 
professional qualif ications in a personal, responsible and 
professionally independent capacity by those providing 
intellectual and conceptual services in the interest of the client  
and the public”2 (emphasis added). 
 
1.3 In this background, the founding fathers of our 
Constitution while adopting a federal governmental system, 
entrusted a duty on the  judiciary to strike a balance between 
the functioning of the other organs of the Government while 
protecting the life and liberty of the citizens.  With the avowed 
objective of co nforming to the rule of law and dispensation of  
justice as contained in it , the elements of a perfect system  of 
constituting courts on different tiers together with the system of 
advocates in the legal profession, who  have been conferred with 
right to prac tice under the Constitution which now stands 
embedded in the Advocates Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as 
the Advocates Act).  
                                                        
2 Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Recognition of 
Professional Qualifications (7 September 2005). 

3 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Advent of the Constitution 
 
2.1. Our judicial system is enshrined in the Constitution with 
powers to dispense justice, including their constitution and 
jurisdictions, and with powers to make their own rules. The 
Supreme Court has been described as a court of record and 
conferred with all powers including the powers to punish for its 
contempt under article 129 of t he Constitution.  The power to 
frame rul es, subject to the provisions of  any law made by 
Parliament and with the approval of the President, has been 
conferred on the Supreme Court under a rticle 145 of the 
Constitution.  Sub -clause (a) of clause (1) of a rticle 145 
specifically empowers the Supreme Court to frame rules 
regarding the persons who can practice before it.   
 
2.2. There exists a distinction in the conferment of powers on 
the High Courts. While conferring the powers on the High 
Courts, rules as to the persons practicing before the Court have 
not been provided for under the Constitution as compared to 
the Supreme Court referred to hereinabove.  Th e power to enact 
a law pertaining to the right to  practice before a High Court has 
been retained under En try 78 of List I of the VII th Schedule to 
the Constitution, with Parliament itself.  However, t he High 
Court, being a court of record and has been conferred with 
powers to punish for its contempt under a rticle 215 of the 
Constitution.  This a rticle ha s sig nificance as it confers the 
power in relation to the proceedings of criminal contempt that 
extends to awarding a sentence of punishment in the event of a 
breach by an advocate vis -à-vis his professional misconduct in 
the Court.  The power, however, to frame a law on contempt and 
to make provisions for the same are available with Parliament 

4 
 
and the State Legislatures under Entry 14 of List III of Schedule 
VII to the Constitution. 
 
2.3 The expression ‘administration of justice’ also occur in 
Entry 11-A of List III ( Concurrent List).  Whenever , it comes to 
taking a broad view of the terminology aforesaid, the same can 
also include within its fold the role of advocates in the 
administration of justice.  Entry 13 of List III, empowers 
Parliament as well as the State Legislatures to frame rules 
regarding procedure.   Order 3 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 and section 303 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 make exhaustive provisions for representati on 
of litigants through recognis ed agents and ple aders.  Thus, the 
statute has given a legal status to the participation of an 
advocate in judicial proceedings.   Separate sets of rules govern  
engagement of advocates as empaneled lawyers on behalf of the 
Central Government and State Governments as well as  their 
undertakings and such other bodies that are within their 
control.  Thus, the presence of advocates as part of the justice 
delivery system is ingrained in our laws.  With this in view Entry 
26 in List III  of Schedule VII was incorporated in the 
Constitution, empowering Parliament and the State Legislatures 
to frame laws with regard to the legal profession as well.  
 
  

5 
 
CHAPTER-III 
Era of the Advocates Act, 1961 
3.1 With the passage of time, it was felt that the Judicial 
Administration should be changed according to the needs of the 
time.  The First Law Commission examined and made a Report 
on Reforms of Judicial Administration.  The All India Bar 
Committee also examined the matter and made its 
recommendations in 1953.  To implement th e recommendations 
of All India B ar Committee after taking into account the Law 
Commission’s recommendations made in its Fourteenth Report 
in so far as they relate to the Bar and to legal education, the 
Advocates Act was enacted. 
 
3.2 The Advocates Act amalgamates, codifies and consolidates 
the law relating to the regulation of practice by advocates and 
the system of the legal profession.  This regulatory law with the 
various bodies constituted under it, including the Bar Council 
of India and the State Bar Councils, has been controlling the 
legal profession for more than half a century with many 
amendments in the past. 
 
3.3 The effectiveness of our judicial system and growing legal 
awareness amongst the masses,  has seen  a corresponding 
growth in the enrolment of advocates throughout the country 
compared to that existed in the pre-independence era.  The legal 
profession has now become one of the most sought after 
professions and not as a secondary profession by any means.   
The nature of litigation in our multi -dimensional legal system 
with a variety of laws and redressal mechanisms has brought 
forward the participation of advocates in every field of socio-
economic growth and development .  T he advocate s have now 

6 
 
become an i ndispensable part of our judicial system at all 
levels, including courts, tribunals, quasi-judicial authorities and 
administrative authorities as well.  

7 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Period of Aberration 
 
4.1 The opening of new vistas in the legal profession has 
brought with it the inherent problems of deficiency in 
professionalism, ethical decline and lack of devotion. The inter-
rivalry between professionalism and competition with a 
materialistic approach in a growing society affected by social, 
political and economic changes has led to the legal profession 
acquiring a mantle that it did not possess long before.  The 
fraternity of advocates had in the past actively been 
participating on all social fronts but th is dimension has now 
become multi-faceted.  This holistic form of participation in all 
walks of life, therefore, demands more responsibility and 
obligations requiring observance of moral and ethical values for 
preserving the basic ethos of this legal profession.  
 
4.2 In recent years, t he role of  advocates, particularly in the  
dispensation of justice through courts of law , has come under 
sharp criticism and is being viewed as an eyesore by the public.  
A news item published in the Indian Express dated 09 Ma rch 
2009, titled ‘Laws for Lawyers ’, spoke of the crumbling 
regulatory structure after having witnessed a decline in the 
conduct of advocates; and lawyers that was unprofessional and 
inconvenienced by a variety of instances . More particularly,  it 
referred to lawyers resorting to strikes and boycotts to the 
detriment of the litigants.  The news item refers to the Sri 
Krishna Commission’s Interim Report that has brought out the 
kind of violent incident that took place in the Madras High 
Court. It also quoted regulations adopted abroad, particularly in 
the United Kingdom by passing of the Legal Services Act, 2007 

8 
 
with an express purpose to set up an independent Board to 
examine allegations of lawyers’ misconduct.  It also refers  to the 
systems prevalent in other democracies i.e., in the United States 
of America.  The item concludes that the time had come to 
reform the Bar Council s in India and to revisit the laws 
regulating the professional conduct of advocates. 
 
4.3 Several un pleasant incidents in the past, som e of them 
occasional in nature, and most of them organized, have led to a 
severe criticism by the society and the members of the legal 
profession by reason of their behaviour and misconduct are now 
being looked upon with distrust.  Th e a dvocates’ conduct i n 
courts, behaviour with litigants and their unprofessional 
conduct, including the act of going on frequent strikes as a 
measure of protest for irrelevant issues has reached to terrifying 
proportions.  This has resulted in the loss of opportunity to 
litigants to get their grievances redressed, coupled with the 
introduction of greater violence, both in courts and outside, in 
various forms.  This has e ven forced working advocates to 
absent themselves from work, a fact that has come in the notice 
of the courts through its judicial pronouncements.  In spite of 
repeated pronouncements of the Supreme Court and the High 
Courts declaring strikes and boycotts to be illegal, the same has 
continued unabated, coupled with violence and ins tances of 
misconduct. This issue has been addressed in certain instances 
with severe punishments,  including debarment of lawyers from 
even practicing in courts.   
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
Judicial Pronouncements and the Law 
 
5.1 The full bench judgment of the Jharkhand High Court in 
the case of K K Jha “Kamal” & Anr. v. Pankaj Kumar & Anr.3, the 
full bench judgment of the Allahabad High Court in the case of 
Sadhna Upadhyay  v. State of U.P. 4, and the recent judgment of 
the Apex Co urt in the case of Mahipal Singh Rana v. State of 
UP 5 , are pointers in relation to professional misconduct of 
lawyers that ultimately resulted in a direction by the Supreme 
Court asking the Law Commission of India to go into all relevant 
aspects relating to regulation of legal profession in consultation 
with all concerned at an early date.  It also requested 
Parliament to consider enactment of the  law that would 
effectively empower the authorities for such effective regulation. 
 
5.2 The Courts have been making observations and 
commenting on the effective application and working of the 
provisions of the Advocates Act, particularly in respect of 
regulation of disciplinary proceedings against advocates.  In 
Mahipal Singh Rana 6, the appellant therein was found guilty of 
criminal contempt for intimidating and threatening a Civil 
Judge (Sr. Division), by the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad. He was awarded a sentence of a short term 
imprisonment along with fine and was also restrained from 
entering the court premises, and was debarred from appearing 
and practicing  in the District Court of Etah,  in U.P.  He 
preferred an appeal before the Supreme Court and the Court 
                                                        
3 AIR 2007 Jhar 67. 
4 2009 (4) ADJ 434. 
5 AIR 2016 SC 3302. 
6 Ibid. 

10 
 
considering that an important legal issue was involved, referred 
it to a larger bench.   
 
5.3 The Supreme Court upheld the judgment and order of the 
High Court observing that superior courts have supervisory 
powers to regulate the right of an  advocate to appear in court, 
and even in the absence of any rule framed under section 34(1)  
of the Advocates Act, the Court can restrain an advocate from 
appearing for a specific period of time.  The Court further 
observed that it was undesirable for a convicted person to 
perform important public functions in view of section 24A of the 
Advocates Act and that there was an urgent need to amend the 
provisions so that the bar applicable at the entry level could be 
extended to a situation post enrolment where the delinquent 
advocate had already been enrolled by the Bar Council 
concerned.  Further, due  to failure of the State Bar Council to 
take action against the appellant therein, the Court exercised its 
suo motu powers under section 38 of the Advocates Act and 
suspended the licence of the appellant for a period of 5 years. 
 
5.4 Being dismayed with the unsatisfactory regulatory 
mechanism governing the advocates, the Supreme Court 
expressed its anguish observing that there was an urgent need 
to review the provisions of the Advocates Act, particularly 
dealing with the regulatory mec hanism for the legal profession 
and other identical issues in consultation with all concerned.  
And, thus the matter has been referred to the Law Commission 
of India asking to go into all relevant aspects relating to 
regulation of the legal profession and submit its report. 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
Law Commission’s Initiative 
 
6.1 The Commission invited suggestions from all stakeholders 
by putting on its website a notice dated 22 nd July, 2016, as to 
how the system could be improved.  The attention of the Bar 
Council of India was drawn to the said notice by writing a letter 
on 3 rd August, 2016.  The Registrar General of all High Courts 
were addressed a similar email on 4 th August, 20 16.  
Simultaneously, an email was sent to all the State Bar Councils, 
Supreme Court Bar Association  and Supreme Court Advocates 
on Record Association.  On the same day, the Chairman 
addressed a letter to the Chief Justices of all the High Courts, 
requesting them to use their good offices to give wide publicity 
to the endeavour of the Commission among st the various 
associations of Advocates’ (in whatever name they exist), with a 
request to send their response directly to the Commission by 
email at the earliest. 
 
6.2 In pursuance of the aforesaid, the Bar Council of India, 
the highest body in the hierarchy under the Advocates Act, 
appointed an Advisory Committee headed by Mr. Justice Shivraj 
Patil, f ormer Judge, Supreme Court of India.  The BCI made 
comprehensive recommendations on various issues relating to 
the Advocates Act and also submitted a draft Bill for 
consideration of the Commission.  The Bar Council of India was 
of the view that in addition to the regulatory mechanism, other 
inter-related issues, i.e., constitution of the BCI and the State  
Bar Councils are also required to be revisited.  The BCI made 
some suggestions in this regard.  The draft Bill prepared by the 
Bar Council of India is annexed as Annexure I to this Report. In 
response to the request of the Commission, several stakeholders 

12 
 
like Bar Associations, individual advocates and judicial officers 
have sent their valuable suggestions. A summary of their 
responses is annexed as Annexure II to this Report.   
 
6.3 The Law Commission, while reviewing the Advocates Act, 
felt that the conduct of the advocates, directly as well indirectly 
affects the functioning of the c ourts, and thereby contributes to 
the pendency of cases.  The Commission felt that some 
provisions would be necessary to regulate the conduct of 
advocates in the court, which affects the functioning of the 
court as well as the expectations of the aggrieved, alike.  
Keeping this in view, all the High Courts through the Chief 
Justices were requested to send data on loss of working days by 
call of strikes in their respective jurisdiction s, during the last 
five years.  The Commission was astonished on going through 
the responses received pursuant to its request, as it was found 
that the strikes by the advocates were rampant throughout the 
length and breadth of the country with little variation in degree.   
  

13 
 
CHAPTER-VII 
 
Loss of Courts’ Working Days: A Staggering Fact 
 
7.1 Every High Court, on its administrative side, takes a 
decision fixing the minimum number of working days for 
subordinate courts which varies from State to State.   
 
7.2. In the State of Uttarakhand, the information sent by the 
High Court for the years 2012 -2016 shows that in Dehradun 
District, the Advocates were on strike for 455 days during 2012-
2016 (on an average, 91 days per year).  In Haridwar District, 
515 days (103 days a year) were wasted on account of strike.   
 
7.3 In the case of the State of Rajasthan, the High Court of 
Judicature at Jodhpur saw 142 days of strike during 2012 -
2016, while the figure stood at 30 for the Jaipur Bench.  In 
Ajmer District courts, strikes remained for 118 days in the year 
2014 alone, while in Jhalawar, 146 days were lost in 2012 on 
account of strike. 
 
7.4 The case of Uttar Pradesh appears to be the worst.  The 
figures of strike for the years 2011 -2016 in the subordinate 
courts are alarmingly high.    In the State of Uttar Pradesh, the 
District courts have to work for 265 days in a year. The period 
of strike in five years period in worst affected districts has been 
as - Muzaffarnagar (791 days), Faizabad (689 days), Sultanpur 
(594 days), Varanasi (547 days), Chandauli (529 days), 
Ambedkar Nagar (511 days), Saharanpur (506 days) and 
Jaunpur (510 days).  The av erage number of days of strike in 
eight worst affected districts comes to 115 days a year.  Thus, it 
is evident that the courts referred to hereinabove could work on 
an average for 150 days only in a year. 

14 
 
7.5 In this regard, the situation in subordinate c ourts in 
Tamil Nadu had by no means, been better. The High Court of 
Tamil Nadu has reported that there are 220 working days in a 
year for the courts in the State.  During the period 2011 -2016, 
districts like Kancheepuram, 687 days (137.4 days per year); 
Kanyakumari, 585 days (117 days per year); Madurai, 577 days 
(115.4 days per year); Cuddalore, 461 days (92.2 days per year); 
and Sivagangai, 408 days (81.6 days per year),  were the most 
affected by strike called by advocates.  
 
7.6 As per the responses rec eived from the High Court s of 
Madhya Pradesh and Odisha, the picture does not emerge to be 
satisfactory.   
 
7.7 The Commission noted that the strike by advocates or 
their abstinence from the court were hardly for any justifiable 
reasons.  It could not find  any convincing reasons for which the 
advocates resort ed to strike or boycott of work in the courts.  
The reasons for strike call or abstinence from work varied from 
local, national to international issues, having no relevance to 
the working of the courts.  To mention a few, bomb blast in 
Pakistan sch ool, amendments to Sri Lanka’s C onstitution, 
interstate river water disputes,  attack on / murder of advocate , 
earthquake in Nepal, to condole the death of their near relatives, 
to show solidarity to advocates o f other State Bar Associations, 
moral support to movements by social activists, heavy rains, or 
on some religious occasions such as shraadh, Agrasen Jayanti,  
etc. or even for kavi sammelan. 
 
7.8 The Commission is of the view that unless there are 
compelling circumstances and the approval for a symbolic strike 
of one day is obtained from the Bar Council concerned, the 
advocates shall not resort to strike  or abstention from the c ourt 
work.  

15 
 
CHAPTER-VIII 
 
Supreme Court Judgements on Strike –  
Reprehensible act 
 
8.1 The prevailing situation in the courts are a real eye -
opener and ironically it is one of the reasons for pendency of 
about 2.5 crores cases in subordinate courts.  The Supreme 
Court had consistently been declaring that advocates do not 
have a right to call for strikes and held that the lawyers’ strikes 
are illegal and that effective steps should be taken to stop the 
growing tendency. In  numerous cases beginning from  
Pandurang Dattatraya Khandekar  v. Bar Council of 
Maharashtra, Bombay 7; to Ex Capt. Harish Uppal  v. Union of 
India8, it was held that the advocates have no right to go on 
strike. The Courts are under no obligation to adjourn matters 
because lawyers are on strike. On the contrary, it is the duty of 
all Courts to go on with matters on their  boards even in the 
absence of lawyers. In other words, Court must not be privy to 
strikes or calls for boycotts. It was held that if a lawyer, holding 
a vakalatnama of a client, abstains from attending Court due to 
a strike call, he shall be personally li able to pay costs which 
shall be in addition to damages which he might have to pay his 
client for loss suffered by him.  
 
8.2 It is relevant to mention here that the Supreme Court, in 
Ex-Capt. Harish Uppal , 9  dealt extensively with strikes by  
advocates.  The Court held: 
 
“… that lawyers have no right to go on strike or give a 
call for boycott, not even on a token strike. The 
protest, if any is required, can only be by giving press 
                                                        
7 AIR 1984 SC 110. 
8 AIR 2003 SC 739. 
9 Ibid. 

16 
 
statements, TV interviews, carrying out of Court 
premises banners and/or placa rds, wearing black or 
white or any colour arm bands, peaceful protest 
marches outside and away from Court premises, 
going on dharnas or relay fasts etc. … only in the 
rarest of rare cases where the dignity, integrity and 
independence of the Bar and/or the Bench are at 
stake, Courts may ignore (turn a blind eye) to a 
protest abstention from wo rk for not more than one 
day…” 
 
8.3 In spite of all these , the strikes have continued unabated. 
The dispensation of justice must not stop for any reason. The 
strike by lawyers have lowered the image of the courts in the 
eyes of the general public. The Supreme Court has held that 
right to  speedy justice is included in a rticle 21 of the 
Constitution. I n Hussainara Khatoon v. Home Secy., State of 
Bihar10; and in some other cases , it was held that the litigant  
has a right to speedy justice. The lawyers’ strike, however, 
result in denial of these rights to the citizens in the State.  
 
8.4 Recently, the Supreme Court while disposing off the 
Criminal Appeal of Hussain & Anr. v. Union of India11 deprecated 
the practice of boycotting the Court observing that:  
 
“One other aspect pointed out is the obstruction of Court 
proceedings by uncalled for strikes/ abstaining of work 
by lawyers or frequent suspension of court work after 
condolence references. In view of judgment of this Court 
in Ex. Captain Harish Uppal versus Union of India, such 
suspension of work or strikes are clearly illegal and it is 
high time that the legal fraternity realizes its duty to the 
society which is the foremost. Condolence references can 
be once in a while periodically say once in two/three 
months and not frequently. Hardship faced by witnesses 
if their evidence is not recorded on th e day they are 
summoned or impact of delay on under trials in custody 
on account of such avoidable interruptions of court 
proceedings is a matter of concern for any responsible 
                                                        
10 AIR 1979 SC 1360. 
11 Criminal Appeal No. 509 of 2017 decided on 9th March 2017. 

17 
 
body of professionals and they must take appropriate 
steps. In any case, this n eeds attention of all concerned 
authorities – the Central Government/State 
Governments/Bar Councils/Bar Associations as well as 
the High Courts and ways and means ought to be found 
out to tackle this menace. Consistent with the above 
judgment, the High Cou rts must monitor this aspect 
strictly and take stringent measures as may be required 
in the interests of administration of justice.”.  
 
8.5 In Ramon Services Pvt. Ltd. v. Subhash Kapoor12, the apex 
Court observed that  if any advocate claims that his right to 
strike must be without any loss to him, but the loss must only 
be borne by  his innocent client, such a claim is repugnant to 
any principle of fair play and canons of ethics. Therefore, when 
he opts to strike or boy cott the Court he must as well be 
prepared to bear at least the pecuniary loss suffered by the 
litigant client who entrusted his brief to that advocate with all 
confidence that his cause would be safe in the hands of that 
advocate. 
 
8.6 The Constitution pr ovides for an independent and 
efficient justice delivery system. Any d elay in disposal of cases 
not only creates disillusionment amongst the litigants, but also 
undermines the capability of the system to impart justice in an 
effective manner. 13   The Supreme  Court disapproved the 
conduct of the party resorting to dilatory tactics before the court 
seeking adjournments on one or other pretext and observed that 
the party acted in a manner to cause colossal insult to justice 
and to the concept of speedy disposal of cases14.  
 
8.7 In addition to the issue of strikes, the Supreme Court has 
also dealt with a large number of cases of browbeating of courts 
by advocates for getting a favourable order. As a rule, an 
                                                        
12 AIR 2001 SC 207. 
13 Syed Gulzar Hussain v. Dewan Syed Ale Ramul Ali Khan, (2014) 10 SCC 825. 
14 Gayathri v. M.Girish, (2016) 14 SCC 142. 

18 
 
Advocate, as an officer of the court, cannot be adamant on any 
unwarranted and uncalled for issue. 
 
8.8 The Supreme Court in Vishram Singh Raghubanshi  v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh15 held: 
 
“The Superior Courts have a duty to protect the 
reputation of judicial officers of subordinate courts, 
taking note of the growi ng tendency of maligning 
the reputation of judicial officers by unscrupulous 
practising advocates who either fail to secure 
desired orders or do not succeed in browbeating for 
achieving ulterior purpose. Such an issue touches 
upon the independence of not o nly the judicial 
officers but brings the question of protecting the 
reputation of the Institution as a whole.” 
 
8.9 In M.B. Sanghi v. High Court of Punjab and Haryana 16, it 
has been opined that: 
 
“The tendency of maligning the reputation of 
judicial officers by disgruntled elements who fail to 
secure the desired order is ever on the increase 
and it is high time it is nipped in the bud. And, 
when a member of the profession resorts to such 
cheap gimmicks with a view to browbeating the 
Judge into submission, it  is all the more painful. 
When there is a deliberate attempt to scandalise 
which would shake the confidence of the litigating 
public in the system, the damage caused is not 
only to the reputation of the Judge concerned but 
also to the fair name of the judiciary.” 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
15 AIR 2011 SC 2275. 
16 AIR 1991 SC 1834. 

19 
 
8.10 In R.D. Saxena v. Balram Prasad Sharma 17, the Supreme 
Court held: 
 
“In our country, admittedly, a social duty is cast 
upon the legal profession to show the people 
beckon (sic beacon) light by their conduct and 
actions. The poor, uneducated and exploited mass 
of the people need a helping hand from the legal 
profession, adm ittedly, acknowledged as a most 
respectable profession. No effort should be made or 
allowed to be made by which a litigant could be 
deprived of his rights, statutory as well as 
constitutional, by an advocate only on account of 
the exalted position conferre d upon him under the 
judicial system prevalent in the country.”  
 
8.11 In Mahabir Prasad Singh  v. Jacks Aviation Pvt. Ltd. 18, the 
Supreme Court held that it is the solemn duty of every Court to 
proceed with the judicial business during court hours and no 
Court should yield to pressure tactics or boycott calls or any 
kind of browbeating. The Court held: 
 
“At any rate, no advocate can ask the Court to 
avoid a case on the ground that he does not want 
to appear in that Court.” 
 
8.12 In M/s. Chetak Construction L td. v. Om Prakash 19, the  
Court deprecated the practice of making allegations against the 
Judges observing as under: 
 
“Lawyers and litigants cannot be allowed to 
“terrorize” or “intimidate” Judges with a view to 
“secure” orders which they want. This is basic  and 
fundamental and no civilised system of 
administration of justice can permit it.” 
 
                                                        
17 AIR 2000 SC 2912. 
18 AIR 1999 SC 287. 
19 AIR 1998 SC 1855. 

20 
 
Similar view has been reiterated in Radha Mohan Lal  v. 
Rajasthan High Court20. 
 
8.13 In view of the observations by the Courts, in the event of a 
strike, a court is not obliged to become complicit in the illegality 
by adjourning the case for the absence of counsel, i t may 
proceed to pass orders ex parte . Litigation work requires the 
representatives and authorities to systematically engage in legal 
proceedings at various points over sustained periods of tim e so 
as to arrive at resolution to the disputes. To use this situation of 
necessity to claim increased bargaining power is a wanton 
perversion of the aims of the justice delivery system. To forcibly 
prevent other advocat es from appearing in their respective 
proceedings is even worse. The act of going on strike amounts to 
a violation of an advocate’s duty as an officer of the court and 
his duty to maintain standards of professional conduct and 
ethics. It also results in a violation of his agreement with the 
client. At the same time, it is also contempt of court and a 
violation of the right of speedy trial for litigants. The 
unacceptable actions of advocates have not shown any 
significant improvement despite the establishmen t of competent 
authorities to regulate the conduct of advocates. The reasons for 
strikes reported in case law have n ot been found to justify 
organised violence directly prejudicial to the vital function of 
justice delivery. 
 
8.14 The unacceptable trend of making false allegations 
against judicial officers and humiliating them requires to be 
curbed, otherwise the judicial system would  lose its credibility . 
The Bench and the Bar have to avoid unwarranted situations on 
trivial issues that hamper the cause of j ustice and are in the 
interest of none. “Liberty of free expression is not to be 
                                                        
20 AIR 2003 SC 1467. 

21 
 
confounded or confused with license to make unfounded 
allegations against any institution, much less the Judiciary” 21. 
An Advocate in a profession as well in his conduct should  be 
diligent and conform to the requirements of the law by which an 
Advocate plays an important role in the preservation of justice 
system. Any violation of the principles of professional ethics by 
an Advocate is unfortunate and unacceptable. Any kind of 
deviance not only affects the system but corrodes the faith of 
the people at large22.   
 
8.15 In Arun Kumar Yadav  v. State of Uttar Pradesh Through 
District Judge23, the Supreme Court observed: 
 
“The judicial proceeding has its own solemnity and 
sanctity. No one has any authority to sully the 
same. It is the obligation of everyone to behave 
with propriety when a judicial proceeding is 
conducted. Any kind of deviancy not only affects 
the system but corrodes the faith of the collective 
at large. Neither any coun sel nor a litigant can 
afford to behave in this manner.” 
 
8.16 The lawyer who presents the application before the court 
making unfounded allegations against a judicial officer, 
impleading him by name, though not permissible in law as 
explained by the Court  in Savitri Devi  v. District Judge, 
Gorakhpur24, without reasonably satisfying himself about the  
prima facie existence of adequate grounds, is equally 
responsible for contempt for scandalizing the court for the 
reason that he cannot be a mouthpiece of his c lient and cannot 
associate himself with his client in maligning the reputation of 
judicial officer merely because his client failed to secure the 
desired order from the said officer. A deliberate attempt to 
                                                        
21 Dr.D.C. Saxena v. Hon’ble Chief Justice of India, (1996) 5 SCC 216, 220. 
22 O.P. Sharma v. High Court of Punjab and Haryana, AIR 2011 SC 2101. 
23 (2013) 14 SCC 127. 
24 AIR 1999 SC 976. 

22 
 
scandalise the court which would shake the confid ence of the 
litigating public in the system would cause a very serious 
damage to the name of the judiciary25.  
 
8.17 In Re: Ajay Kumar Pandey26, the Supreme Court held: 
 
“No one can be permitted to intimidate or terrorize 
judges by making scandalous unwarranted and 
baseless imputations against them in the discharge of 
their judicial functions so as to secure orders which 
the litigant ‘wants’ …The liberty of expression canno t 
be treated as a licence to scandalize the court...” 
 
8.18 In Bar Council of India  v. High Court of Kerala 27, the  
Supreme Court observed, “An advocate in no circumstances is 
expected to descend to the level of appearing to support his view 
in a vulgar brawl.” 
 
8.19 In Re: S. Mulgaokar28, the Supreme Court observed that  
public interest and public justice require that whenever there is  
an attack on the judge, it is scurrilous, offensive, intimidatory 
or malicious,  the law must strike a blow on him as he 
challenges the supremacy of law by fouling the source and 
stream. 
 
8.20 The legal profession requires the safeguarding of moral 
standards. As an officer of the court , a lawyer has a duty to the 
court towards his profession and to the public. Since the prime 
duty of a lawyer is to assist the court in dispensing justice, the 
members of the Bar cannot behave in a manner which is  
                                                        
25 M.Y. Shareef v. Hon’ble Judges of Nagpur High Court  AIR 1955 SC 19; Shamsher Singh 
Bedi v. High Court of Punjab & Haryana  AIR 1995 SC 1974; Tushar D. Bhatt v. State of 
Gujarat (2009) 11 SCC 678 and R.K.Anand v. Registrar, Delhi High Co urt (2009) 8 SCC 
106. 
26 AIR 1998 SC 3299. 
27 AIR 2004 SC 2227. 
28 AIR 1978 SC 727. 

23 
 
doubtful, or full of  scruples or which strives to thrive on 
litigation. Lawyers must remember that they are to assist the 
court in the administration of justice. If lawyers do not perform 
their function properly, it would be degenerative to the rule of 
law.  
 
8.21 A suggestion has been made that at ev ery district 
headquarters, the District Judge may constitute an Advocates’ 
Grievance Redressal Committee headed by a Judicial Officer 
which will deal with the day to day routine matters, as large 
number of issues and grievances arise in the smooth working of 
the advocates.  In this regard, the High Court may issue a 
circular in exercise of its power under article 235 of the 
Constitution providing for redressal of grievances of the 
Advocates which will help in improving their efficiency.  
 
8.22 In case there is some grievance against a Judicial Officer, 
the Bar may raise the grievance before the Chief Justice of the 
concerned High Court. 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-IX 
 
Denouncing the Contemptuous acts of Advocates 
 
9.1 In a case, where the attitude of a lawyer is contemptuous, 
the Court may initiate the proceeding for contempt against the 
lawyer and restrain him from appearance. In Supreme Court Bar 
Association v. Union of India 29 , the Su preme Court held as 
under: 
 “In a given case it may be possible, for the Court or 
the High Court, to prevent the contemnor Advocate 
to appear before it till he purges himself of the 
contempt but that is much different from suspending 
or revoking his licence or debarring him to practice 
as an Advocate….” 
 
9.2 Similarly in Ex Capt. Harish Uppal  v. Union of India 30, the 
Supreme Court held as under: 
 
  “One last thing which must be mentioned is that the 
right of appearance in Courts is still within the 
control and jurisdiction of courts. Section 30 of the 
Advocates Act has not been brought into force and 
rightly so. Control of conduct in Court can only b e 
within the domain of courts. Thus, article 145 of the 
Constitution of India gives to the Supreme Court and 
section 34 of the Advocates Act gives to the High 
Court power to frame rules including rules regarding 
condition on which a person (including an ad vocate) 
can practice in the Supreme Court and/or in the 
High Court and Courts subordinate thereto. Many 
Courts have framed rules in this behalf. Such a rule 
would be valid and binding on all. Let the Bar take 
note that unless self -restraint is exercised, C ourts 
may now have to consider framing specific rules 
debarring advocates, guilty of contempt and/or 
unprofessional or unbecoming conduct, from 
appearing before the courts. Such a rule if framed 
would not have anything to do with the disciplinary 
                                                        
29 AIR 1998 SC 1895. 
30 Supra note 8. 

25 
 
jurisdiction of the Bar Councils. It would be 
concerning the dignity and orderly functioning of the 
courts. The right of the advocate to practice 
envelopes a lot of acts to be performed by him in 
discharge of his professional duties. Apart from 
appearing in the Cou rts he can be consulted by his 
clients, he can give his legal opinion whenever 
sought for, he can draft instruments, pleadings, 
affidavits or any other documents, he can participate 
in any conference involving legal discussions, he can 
work in any office o r firm as a legal officer, he can 
appear for clients before an arbitrator or arbitrators 
etc. Such a rule would have nothing to do with all 
the acts done by an advocate during his practice. He 
may even file vakalatnama on behalf of a client even 
though his  appearance inside the Court is not 
permitted. Conduct in Court is a matter 
concerning the Court and hence the Bar Council 
cannot claim that what should happen inside the 
Court could also be regulated by them in exercise 
of their disciplinary powers.” (Emphasis Added) 
 
9.3 In R.K. Anand  v. Registrar, Delhi High Court 31 , the 
Supreme Court upheld the judgment of the Delhi High Court 
debarring the advocate to appear in Courts for a particular 
period for proved mi sconduct, observing that unless  a person 
purges himself of contem pt or is permitted by the court  
conviction results in debarring an advocate  from appearing in 
the court even in absence of suspension or termination of the 
licence to practice.  In Amit Chanchal Jha v. High Court of 
Delhi32, the Supreme Court reiterated the same  view upholding 
the order debarring the advocate from appearance in court on 
account of his conviction for criminal contempt. 
 
9.4 The Supreme Court in R.K. Anand v. Registrar, Delhi High 
Court33, directed that the contemnor shall not do any kind of 
professional work charging any fees or for any personal 
considerations for one year from the date of judgment . He shall 
                                                        
31 (2009) 8 SCC 106. 
32 (2015)  13 SCC 288. 
33 AIR 2013 SC 670. 

26 
 
exclusively devote his professional services to help pro bono the 
accused who, on a ccount of lack of resources, are not in a 
position to engage any lawyer to defend themselves and have no 
means to have their cases effectively presented before the court. 
The contemnor shall place his professional services at the 
disposal of the Delhi Lega l Services Authority which, in 
coordination with the Delhi High Court Legal Services Authority, 
will frame a scheme to avail of the contemnor’s services for 
attending the case of undefended accused either at the trial or 
at the appellate stage. The contemnor shall appear in court only 
in cases assigned to him by the Legal Services Authority.   The 
Delhi Legal Services Authority shall keep a record of all the 
cases assigned to the contemnor and the result/progress made 
in those cases. At the end of the year, the Delhi Legal Services 
Authority shall submit a report to Supreme Court in regard to 
all the cases done by the contemnor at its instance which shall 
be placed before the Judges for perusal.   At the end of one year 
it will be open to the contemnor to resu me his private law 
practice. But he shall not leave any case assigned to him by the 
Legal Services Authority incomplete. He shall continue to do 
those cases, free of cost, till they come to a close. 
 
9.5 Keeping in view the aforesaid judgments, most of the High 
Courts have framed the rules under s.34(1) of the Advocates 
Act, empower ing High Courts as well as the d istrict judges 
concerned to pass an order debarring an advocate from 
appearing in court.  The relevant parts of the Allahabad High 
Court Rules, read as under: 
 
“10. Suspension of advocate under C.P.C.: - No 
advocate who has been debarred or suspended or 
whose name has been struck off the Roll of 
Advocates shall be permitted to act as a recognised 
agent of any party within the meaning of Order III 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 

27 
 
 
11. Appearance of ad vocate after committing 
contempt:- No advocate who has been found guilty 
of contempt of Court shall be permitted to appear, 
act or plead in any Court unless he has purged 
himself of contempt, either by tendering apology 
which is accepted or by suffering pu nishment 
imposed on him or where, in case of an appeal, a 
stay order is in operation. 
 
[Explanation: For the purpose of purging of 
contempt under this Rule, the suffering of 
punishment or payment of fine or both shall not 
necessarily be sufficient.]” 
 
9.6. The Madras High Court, on 20 May 2016 published 
amendments to rules framed under section 34(1) of the Act, 
1961.  The relevant portions are reproduced below: 
 
“14-A: Power to Debar:-  
…. 
(vii) An Advocate who is found to have accepted 
money in the name of a Judge or on the pretext of 
influencing him; or  
 
(viii) An Advocate who is found to have tampered with 
the Court record or Court order; or  
 
(ix) An Advocate who browbeats and/or abuses a 
Judge or Judicial Officer; or  
 
(x) An Advocate who is found to have sent or spread 
unfounded and unsubstantiated allegations/petitions 
against a Judicial Officer or a Judge to the Superior 
Court; or  
 
(xi) An  Advocate who actively participates in a 
procession inside the Court campus and/or involves 
in gherao inside the Court Hall or holds placard 
inside the Court Hall; or  
 
(xii) An Advocate who appears in the Court under the 
influence of liquor;  
 
shall be de barred from appearing before the High 
Court or Subordinate Courts permanently or for such 
period as the Court may think fit and the Registrar 

28 
 
General shall thereupon report the said fact to the 
Bar Council of Tamil Nadu.  
 
14-B: Power to take action:-  
… 
(iv) Where any such misconduct referred to under 
Rule 14 -A is committed by an Advocate before the 
High Court, the High Court shall have the power to 
initiate action against the Advocate concerned and 
debar him from appearing before the High Court and 
all Subordinate Courts.  
 
(v) Where any such misconduct referred to under 
Rule 14 -A is committed by an Advocate before the 
Court of Principal District Judge, the Principal 
District Judge shall have the power to initiate action 
against the Advocate concerned and  debar him from 
appearing before any Court within such District.  
 
(vi) Where any such misconduct referred to under 
Rule 14 -A is committed by an Advocate before any 
subordinate court, the Court concerned shall submit 
a report to the Principal District Cour t within whose 
jurisdiction it is situate and on receipt of such report, 
the Principal District Judge shall have the power to 
initiate action against the Advocate concerned and 
debar him from appearing before any Court within 
such District.  
 
14-C: Procedure to be followed:-  
 
The High Court or the Court of Principal District 
Judge, as the case may be, shall, before making an 
order under  Rule 14 -A, issue to such Advocate a 
summon returnable before it, requiring the Advocate 
to appear and show cause against the matters alleged 
in the summons and the summons shall if 
practicable, be served personally upon him.  
 
14-D: Power to pass Interim Order:-  
 
The High Court or the Court of Principal District 
Judge may, before making the Final Order under 
Rule 14 -C, pass  an interim order prohibiting the 
Advocate concerned from appearing before the High 
Court or Subordinate Courts, as the case may be, in 
appropriate cases, as it may deem fit, pending 
enquiry.”  
 

29 
 
9.7. Other High Courts, like the Gujarat High Court, have also 
framed similar set of rules under section 34(1) of the Advocates 
Act. 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER-X 
 
Propriety of performing public functions by 
convicted persons 
 
10.1 The Law Commission considered the desirability of 
suggesting modifications in section 24 A of the Advocates Act 
which provides for disqualification for enrolment in certain 
cases.  Section 24 A provides that any person who has been 
convicted of an offence, may become eligible to be enrolled as an 
advocate after the expiry of two years from completion of the 
sentence.  Further, it is also seen that section 26 A, which 
makes provision for Bar Councils  to remove names from the 
rolls, does not provide for removal of names of advocates, who 
stands convicted for  an offence . These aspects need 
examination, keeping in view the judgment given by the Gujarat 
High Court in ‘ C’ v. Bar Council of Gujarat 34 which was quoted 
and reiterated by the Supreme Court in Mahipal Singh Rana  
(supra),  as under: 
 
“... We, however, wish to avail of this opportunity to 
place on record our feeling of distress and dismay at the 
fact that a public servant who is found guilty of an 
offence of taking an illegal gratification in the discharge 
of his official duties by a competent court can be enrolled 
as a member of the Bar even after a lapse of two years 
from the date of his release from imprisonment.  It is for 
the authorities who are concerned with this question to 
reflect on the question as to whether such a provision is 
in keeping with the high stature which the profession 
(which we so often describe as the noble profession) 
enjoys and from which even the members of highest 
judiciary are drawn. It is not a crime of passion 
committed in a moment of loss of equilibrium. 
Corruption is an of fence which is committed after 
deliberation and it becomes a way of life for him. . ..  It is 
for the legal profession to consider whether it would like 
such a provision to continue to remain on the statute 
book and would like to continue to admit persons w ho 
                                                        
34 (1982)2Guj LR 706. 

31 
 
have been convicted for offences involving moral 
turpitude and persons who have been found guilty of 
acceptance of illegal gratification, rape, dacoity, forgery, 
misappropriation of public funds, relating to counterfeit 
currency and coins and other offe nces of like nature to 
be enrolled as members merely because two years have 
elapsed after the date of their release from 
imprisonment. Does passage of 2 years cleanse such a 
person of the corrupt character trait, purify his mind 
and transform him into a pe rson fit for being enrolled as 
a member of this noble profession?  Enrolled so that 
widows can go to him, matters pertaining to properties of 
minors and matters on behalf of workers pitted against 
rich and influential persons can be entrusted to him 
without qualms, court records can be placed at his 
disposal, his word at the Bar should be accepted? 
Should a character certificate in the form of a black 
gown be given to him so that a promise of probity and 
trustworthiness is held out to the unwary litigants 
seeking justice?  A copy of this order may, therefore, be 
sent to the appropriate authorities concerned with the 
administration of the Bar Council of India and the State 
Bar Council, Ministry of Law of the Government of India 
and Law Commission in order tha t the matter may be 
examined fully and closely with the end in view to 
preserve the image of the profession and protect the 
seekers for justice from dangers inherent in admitting 
such persons on the rolls of the Bar Council.”. 
 
10.2.  The Law Commission is of the view that wiping out the 
bar after enrolment, in case of conviction of an advocate after 
two years in the nature of cases mentioned in section 24A , does 
not render the person in any way desirable to plead on behalf of 
a person seeking redressal of his grievance through the justice 
delivery system.  The legal profession, as such, has been placed 
on a very high pedestal acknowledging advocates’ legal status 
and authority to plead o n behalf of a person in court  of law.  
Similarly, there can be hardly any justification for wiping out 
such disqualification , which is otherwise applicable for 
enrolment, after the enrolment is made.  Having regard to the 
broader objective of the provision , the said bar should certainly 
operate post enrol ment.  With this in view, the Commission 

32 
 
recommends the substitution of section 24A and 26 A with new 
provisions to take car e of the objectives of undesirability of a 
convicted person being allowed to perform important public 
functions. 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER-XI 
 
Advocacy lurking in the shadows 
 
11.1 As per recent media reports 35, the Bar Council of India 
conducted verification of advocates under the Bar Council of 
India Certificate and Place of Practice (Verification) Rules, 2015, 
and it was reported that a very high percentage (33 to 45%) of 
lawyers were fake.  Such lawyers were practicing either with the 
fake law degree or without any degree at all.  The process of 
verification is not yet complete and the so -called bogus lawyers 
could be identified only b y scrutiny.  Apprehension has been 
raised that the alleged bogus lawyers could have succeeded in 
making entry in the judiciary, government services and some of 
them could have been appo inted as Government pleaders, Law 
Officers, etc.  Such persons might have succeeded in mission by 
impersonation and entering into criminal conspiracy.  Thus 
legal advice offered by such persons could affect the deliverance 
and quality of justice and their mere existence in legal system 
would definitely erode the public trust. 
 
11.2 This is a crucial matter casting shadow on the nobility of 
the legal profession.  As such, to establish the probity of 
advocacy, it requires a thorough scrutiny and verification.  
Towards this end , the Law Commission recommends a specific 
rule making power for Bar Council of India to make rules for 
verification of certificates of Advocates and for periodical 
verification of antecedents, conduct, place of practice of 
Advocates; and to make a data based web -portal of all the 
advocates. 
  
                                                        
35 The Times of India, Delhi dated 23.01.2017 , The Hindu dated 26.01.2017  and Hindustan 
Times dated 19.03.2017. 

34 
 
CHAPTER – XII 
 
Legal Education in India 
 
12.1 The mandate to the Commission is centred on regulating 
the conduct of advocates in the profession . It is necessary to 
point out that it would only be a piecemeal effort of addressing 
the iss ues involved if , we do not realis e that the regulatory 
scheme for the maintenance of standards should run in a 
straight line from the stage of education and training to 
enrolment and active practice. Any laxity in standard-setting at 
the foundational level would multiply the problems at later 
stages. 
 
12.2 Lawyers have been in the vanguard of a country’s 
progress and have always zealously guarded human liberties 
and t he rule of law. Having specialis ed in the legal field, they 
champion the cause of victims of violations of fundamental and 
legal rights; protect the civil a nd human rights of the citizens.   
They also canvass before the  courts that the action of the State 
cannot be arbitrary .  Therefore, legal education should also 
prepare professionals equipped to meet the new challenges and 
dimensions of internationalisation where the nature and 
organization of law and legal practice are undergoing a 
paradigm shift.  Further, there is need for original and path -
breaking legal research to create new legal knowledge and ideas 
that will help meet these challenges in a manner responsive to 
the needs of the country and the ideals and goals of our 
Constitution.  Today, legal education derives its impetus from 
the economic, socio-economic and political setup of the society. 
 
 
 

35 
 
A. Historic perspective 
 
12.3 Legal education plays an important role in promoting 
social justice. Education or awareness of laws, characterises the 
lawyers as Social Engineers .  Legal education was formally 
introduced in 1855 when it was started in Government Hindu 
College, Calcutta, Elphinstone College, Madras and Government 
Law College, Bombay.   
 
12.4 Felix Frankfurter observed, “In the last analysis, the law is 
what the lawyers are.  And the law and the lawyers are what the 
law schools make them.36”  
 
12.5 The University Education Commission was appointed by 
Government of India under the chair manship of Dr. S 
Radhakrishnan, “to report on Indian University Education and 
suggest improvements and extensions that might be desirable to 
suit the present and future requirements of the country 37.”  The 
Commission in its report submitted in August 1949 inter alia  
recommended substantial improvement in legal education. 
 
B. Constitutional framework 
 
12.6 The Constitution initially laid down the duty of imparting 
education on the States by putting the matter pertaining to 
education in List II of the Seventh Schedule.  But it now forms 
part of List III, giving concurrent legislative powers to the Union 
and the States.  Legal professi on along with the medical and 
other professions also falls under List III (Entry 26).  However, 
                                                        
36 Letter from Felix Frankfurter to Mr. Rosenwold, (May 13, 1927) cited in Benjamin H. 
Barton, The Lawyer -Judge Bias in the American Legal System (Cambridge University 
Press, New York, 2011) 273. 
37  Ministry of Education, Government of India, “The Report of the University Grants 
Commission” (Dec.1948 -Aug.1949), Vol. I (1950), available at : www.academics-
india.com/Radhakrishnan%20Commission%20Report%20of %201948-49.pdf. at page 1. 

36 
 
the Union is empowered to coordinate and determine standards 
in institutions for higher education or research and scientific 
and technical education besides hav ing exclusive power, inter 
alia, pertaining to educational institutions of national 
importance, professional, vocational or technical training and 
promotion of special studies or research. 
 
12.7 The Supreme Court, taking into account the provisions of 
articles 21 and 39A of the Constitution, directed the State 
Governments to provide grants -in-aid to the institutions 
imparting legal education38.   
 
C. Reports of previous Law Commissions 
 
12.8 The Law Commission of India, in its 14th Report published 
in 1958, titled “Reform of Judicial Administration”, emphasised 
on the standard of legal education and portrayed a dismal 
picture and lamented the system observing that legal education 
was imparted in large number of schools by part time teachers 
of mediocre ability and indifferent merits. There was mushroom 
growth of law colleges.  Most of the schools had skeleton 
libraries.  Students were taught how to pass LL.B. examinations 
by cramming short summaries published by enterprising 
publishers.  Colleges were housed in dingy rooms without 
adequate trained staff.  Such institutions were basically fee 
collecting centres as there was no institution with proper 
facilities. There was no regular attendance of students.  Thus, 
the law college had be en producing half-baked lawyers who did 
not even have basic knowledge of law and were considered as 
drones and parasites. 
 
                                                        
38 Prem Chand Jain & Anr.  v. R K Chhabra,  AIR 1984 SC 981; University of Delhi v. Raj 
Singh, AIR 1995 SC 336; and V. Sudeer v. Bar Council of India, AIR 1999 SC 1167. 

37 
 
12.9   On the question of the Bar Council’s involvement in the 
regulation of legal education, it is worth noting that there has 
been some scrutiny given to the issue of what the appropriate 
body should be for the governance in higher education. As 
mentioned in the 184 th Report of the Law Commission, the 
composition of the Legal Education Committee may need to be 
changed to accommodate s pecialized and dedicated persons in 
the education sector while also ensuring that legal education 
remains relevant to rapid developments in legal practice. The 
Commission also examined questions relating to standar d-
setting in legal education, skills and values, globalization and 
accreditation, ADR training, adjunct teachers from the Bar and 
the Bench, processes for establishment of law schools, 
apprenticeship, etc.  However, the suggestions contained in the 
184th Report have not been taken forward.  
 
12.10  A similar line of reasoning is found in the National 
Knowledge Commission’s Report in 2009 39 which proposed and 
explained the need for an Independent Regulatory Authority in 
Higher Education as well as a Standing C ommittee for Legal 
Education with 25 persons representing all stakeholders. As 
part of this set -up, the Commission also made a number of 
suggestions regarding quality of education, rating systems, 
curriculum development, examination system, legal research,  
faculty talent, legal education finance, international dimensions 
and usage of Information and Communication Technologies.  
 
D. Legal Position 
 
12.11   The Supreme Court, through its decision in the matter 
of Bar Council of India v. Board of Management, Dayanand 
                                                        
39 National Knowledge Commission, Report to the Nation 2006 -2009, March 2009, at pp. 79 -
81. 

38 
 
College of Law40, surveyed the statutory powers available to BCI 
under the provisions of the Advocates Act, as well as the Rules 
framed thereunder, and concluded that BCI was concerned with 
the standards of the legal profession and legal education in the 
country. 
 
12.12  In Prem Chand Jain  & Anr.  v. R K Ch habra 41,  the 
Supreme Court emphasised at length the role and responsibility 
of University Grants Commission (UGC) vis-à-vis the regulation 
of standards of higher education in India. 
 
12.13  The dec ision of the Supreme Court in the matter of 
University of Delhi  v. Raj Singh 42, is illuminative in this regard. 
The Supreme Court held that regulations framed by UGC 
prescribing qualifications for teaching staff would override and 
prevail over all ot her leg islations in this regard .  UGC’s 
regulatory character was succinctly reaffirmed by the Supreme 
Court in the case of Prof. Yashpal v. State of Chhattisgarh 43, as 
well. 
 
12.14  The BCI is envisaged as a body for regulating the 
minimum standards to be maintained by institutions imparting 
legal education, and the Rules framed by BCI in exercise of its 
powers under the Advocates Act, indeed provide for a 
comprehensive framework for the evaluation of institutions on 
de minimis criteria.  However, a need for the qualitative 
improvement of the Bar has been long felt, and has also been 
the subject matter of judicial attention in V. Sudeer  v. Bar 
Council of India 44 . Two measures have been recogni sed as 
                                                        
40 AIR 2007 SC 1342. 
41 AIR 1984 SC 981. 
42 AIR 1995 SC 336. 
43 AIR 2005 SC 2026. 
44 AIR 1999 SC 1167. 

39 
 
imperative for the melioration of the standards of the legal 
profession, i.e., introduction of a bar examination as well as 
compulsory requirement of apprenticeship under a senior 
lawyer prior to admission to the Bar.   
 
12.15  In 1994, in order to check the declining standards of the 
legal profession, a High Powered Committee on Legal Education, 
headed by Justice A.H.Ahmadi was constituted. This Committee 
recommended and reiterated the requirement for apprenticeship 
and a bar examination.  The Bar Council of India (Training) 
Rules, 1995, were, therefore, framed by BCI in furtherance to 
the recommendations of the said Committee, which were struck 
down by the Supreme Court in V. Sudeer45.  
 
E. Conclusion 
 
12.16   The law colleges require transformation in infrastructure 
and resources.  Library facilities in our law colleges need to be 
upgraded, for which resources have to be mobilised.   
 
12.17  Legal education in India should be structured in a 
manner where the BCI, along with legal academics may 
endeavour to inn ovate, experiment and compete globally. A 
balance should be maintained in order to change the entire 
fabric of legal education system in India, keeping in mind the 
necessity of globalisation.   
 
  
                                                        
45 Ibid. 

40 
 
CHAPTER-XIII 
 
Pre-enrolment Training of Advocates 
 
13.1 Another problem that requires to be highlighted is that 
without undergoing any training or facing subordinate courts, 
fresh graduates start appearing before the superior courts.  
Counsel engaged by litigants do not appear in the court, rather 
send raw hand s to deal with the matters. While dealing with 
such a situation, the Supreme Court in Sanjay Kumar v. State 
of Bihar46, deprecated such practice b y observing that an “arji”, 
“farji” half -baked lawyer under the label of “proxy counsel”, 
without any acquainta nce with or authorisation from the 
litigant use, abuse or misuse the process of the court under the 
false impression that he has a right to waste public time.  
 
13.2 In an unprecedented step, the Supreme Court in In re: 
Rameshwar Prasad Goyal 47, held that conduct of Shri Goyal,  
AOR, lending his signature for petty amount without appearing 
in court had been reprehensible and not worth pardoning, and 
he was censured. The court also put him on probation for a 
year.  
 
13.3 In view of above, the Law Commission r ecommends a 
specific clause in section 7(1) of the Advocates Act to provide for 
the r ule making power of the Bar Council of India  for pre -
enrolment training and apprenticeship before the induction of a 
person as an advocate.  
  
                                                        
46 (2014) 9 SCC 203. 
47 AIR 2014 SC 850. 

41 
 
CHAPTER-XIV 
 
Prospects of Foreign Law Firms and Lawyers in 
India 
 
14.1 In recent years, fast transformation has been experienced 
in every field, whether it is social or economic.  With the opening 
of new vistas, the world is increasingly shrinking.  Countries are 
becoming more and more inter-dependent.  The opening of the 
economy to other count ries and widening of the international 
trade and commerce has brought the dire necessity of reviewing 
various municipal laws relating  to “ease of doing business” and 
other relevant laws which also includes the Advocates Act.  The 
increase in the quantum of import and export , formation of new 
companies and concerns with import of technology and 
invitation to  multi-national companies to establish their 
subsidiary companies in India and have their commercial 
establishment here, necessitated the beginning of international 
arbitration.  In arbitration matters, very often foreign lawyers 
appear on behalf of companies and their establishments in 
India from time to time.   
 
14.2 At times, the issue of a llowing foreign firms and lawyers 
in India and having vice -a-versa arrangement for advocates 
practicing law in India in other counties ha s been raised in 
different forums.  In this context, sections 17, 29 and 47 of the 
Advocates Act require a passionate e xamination.  In terms of 
section 17, a person desirous of taking up the profession of 
advocacy is required to be enrolled on the  rolls of the advocates 
maintained by the State Bar Council.  Section 29 visualises that 
only the advocates registered under the  Advocates Act  are 
considered to be  the recognised class of persons entitled to 
practice law.  Section 47 relates to reciprocity whereunder the 

42 
 
nationals of any other country may also be admitted as an 
advocate on the State roll, if citi zens of India duly qualified are 
permitted to practice law in such other country.  
 
14.3 In the matters of allowing foreign lawyers and law firms to 
practice law in India, the basic objections  raised at different 
forums over the time is that the law grad uates from India are 
allowed to practice the profession of law in U.K., USA, Australia 
and other countries subject to following their cumbersome 
procedure which is very costly  also.  Further, there are many 
restrictions like qualifying tests, prior experience, work permit 
etc. which is not contemplated under the Advocates Act in 
respect of foreign lawyers who intend to practice in India.  
Therefore, issue of allowing entry of foreign law firms and 
lawyers without any reciprocal arrangements similar to that of 
arrangements prevailing in those foreign countries should not 
be entertained.   
 
14.4 An examination of the issue in its correct perspective of  
allowing the foreign law firms carrying on its business in India 
requires consideration as to h ow this necessity has arisen.  
From the past practices , it can be seen that the foreign law 
firms are carrying on consultancy/support services in the field 
of protection and management of business and industrial 
proprietary rights, and carrying out market survey and market 
research.  They also protect their intellectual property rights. 
The foreign lawyers usually visit India for giving advices on their 
own system of law.  The foreign law firms do also come with the 
objective of taking part in negotiations, for settling documents 
and conducting arbitrations in India. 
 
14.5 International arbitration is growing in India and in almost 
all countries across the world.  India is a signatory to the 

43 
 
General Agreement on Trade  in Services (GATS) , which has 
opened up the gates for many international business 
establishments based in different parts of the world to come and 
set up their own respective business in India.  The large number 
of Indian companies even reaching out to foreign destination by 
mergers, acquisitions or direct investm ent.  There may be 
several transactions in which an Indian company or a per son of 
Indian origin may enter into transaction with a foreign company 
and the laws applicable to such transaction are the laws of the 
said foreign country.  In this context, seeking legal advice on the 
manner in which the foreign law would be applied to said 
transaction from a foreign lawyer cannot be considered as 
inappropriate. 
 
14.6 Besides the on-going discussions, the issue of foreign law 
firms establishing their place of busin ess in India (liaison office) 
and related issues have been raised in certain High Courts.  The 
High Court of Madras in A.K. Balaji v. Government of India48 has 
observed, as under: 
 
“(i) Foreign law firms or foreign lawyers cannot practice 
the profession of law in India either on the litigation or 
non-litigation side, unless they fulfil the requirement 
of the  Advocates Act, 1961 and the Bar Council of 
India Rules. 
 
(ii) However, there is no bar either in the Act or the Rules 
for the foreign law firms or foreign lawyers to visit India 
for a temporary period on a fly in and fly out  basis, for 
the purpose of giving legal advic e to their clients in 
India regarding foreign law or their own system of law 
and on diverse international legal issues. 
 
 
(iii) Moreover, having regar d to the aim and object of the 
International Commercial Arbitration introduced in the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, foreign lawyers 
                                                        
48 WP No.5614 of 2010 decided on 21.02.2012. 

44 
 
cannot be debarred to come to India and conduct 
arbitration proceedings in respect of disputes arising 
out of a co ntract relating to international commercial 
arbitration. 
 
(iv) The B.P.O. Companies providing wide range of 
customised and integrated services and functions to its 
customers like word -processing, secretarial support, 
transcription services, proof -reading services, travel 
desk support services, etc. do not come within the 
purview of the Advocates Act, 1961 or the Bar Council 
of India Rules. However, in the event of any complaint 
made against these B.P.O. Companies violating the 
provisions of the Act, the Ba r Council of India may 
take appropriate action against such erring 
companies.”. 
 
14.7 In Lawyers Collective v. Bar Council of India & Ors.49, the 
High Court of Bombay quashed the permission granted by the 
Reserve Bank of India to foreign law firms to establish their 
place of business in India (liaison office) under section 29 of the 
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 .  On the issue as to 
whether these foreign law firms could carry on their liaison 
activities in India only on being enrolled as advocates under the 
Advocates Act , the Court  held that the expression  “to practice 
the profession of law” in section 29 of the Advocates Act is wide 
enough to cover the persons practising in litigious matters as 
well as persons practising in non-litigious matters. Therefore, to 
practice in non-litigious matters in India, the foreign lawyer and 
law firms were bound to follow the provisions contained in the 
Advocates Act. 
 
14.8 The judgment referred to hereinabove was challenged 
before the Supreme Court in Bar Council of India v. A K Balaji & 
Ors. 50 , wherein the S upreme Court granted leave and 
                                                        
49 WP No.1526 of 1995 decided on 16.12.2009. 
50 Civil Appeal No.7875-7879 of 2015.  

45 
 
maintained the interim order passed on 4 July 2012, which 
reads as under: 
 
“In the meanwhile, it is clarified that Reserve Bank 
of India shall not grant  any permission to the 
foreign law firms to open liaison offices in India 
under section 29 of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1973.  It is also clarified that the 
expression “to practice the profession of law” under 
section 29 of the Advocates Act, 19 61 covers the 
persons practicing litigious matters as well as non -
litigious matters other than contemplated in para 
63(ii) of the impugned order and, therefore, to 
practice in non-litigious matters in India the foreign 
law firms, by whatever name called or  described, 
shall be bound to follow the provisions contained in 
the Advocates Act, 1961.”.  
 
14.9 In view of the developments that have taken place, if the 
foreign law firms are not allowed to take part in negotiations, 
settling up documents and arbitrati ons in India, it may have a 
counter-productive effect on the policy of the government to 
make India a hub of International Arbitration. In this regard, it 
may be stated that many arbitrations with Indian Judges and 
Lawyers as Arbitrators are held outside I ndia, where both 
foreign and Indian Law Firms advise their clients. If foreign law 
firms are denied entry to deal with arbitrations in India, then 
India may lose many of the arbitrations to Singapore, Paris and 
London. It may be contrary to the declared po licy of the 
government and against the national interest. With this in view 
and judgement of the High Courts , the Law Commission 
considers it necessary to have enabling provisions in the 
Advocates Act which will enable the Bar Council of India to 
frame rules to recognise and register foreign law firms  and 
lawyers in India, as and when a decision is taken in this regard, 
particularly in view of the reciprocity provisions.  

46 
 
CHAPTER-XV 
 
Need for Defining Misconduct 
 
15.1. The question of creating a conducive environment for the 
effective regulation of the profession requires a statutory 
framework. This statute provides for the regulator’s powers in 
many subtle ways. The specificity of the words employed in the 
statute is one such subtle way in which powers and duties are 
framed. Neither the  Advocates Act nor the Bar Council of India 
Rules, defines professional misconduct.  However, the Apex 
Court has elucidated on the concept of “misconduct”. 
 
15.2 Misconduct means a wrongful action and not mere error 
of judgment. A transgression of some well -established and 
definite rule of action, where no discretion is left. It is a 
forbidden act, carelessness, an unlawful behaviour or neglect by 
which the right of a party h as been affected e.g. allegation of 
disproportionate asset; misappropriation; and criminal breach 
of trust; not working diligently; an action which is detrimental 
to the prestige of the institution and acting beyond authority.  It 
may be synonymous to an improper behaviour or 
mismanagement. It is detrimental to public interest. Misconduct 
is to be construed and understood with  reference to the subject 
matter and c ontext wherein the term occurs  taking into 
consideration the scope and object of the statute involved.51 
 
15.3 Professional misconduct refers to disgraceful or 
dishonourable conduct, not befitting to the profession 
                                                        
51 Black’s Law Dictionary, Sixth Edition; P Ramanatha Aiyar’s Law Lexicon, Reprint Edition 
1987 at page 821;  N.G.Dastane v. Shrikant S. Shivde  AIR 2001 SC 2028 , Baldev Singh 
Gandhi v. State of Punjab AIR 2002 SC 1124; General Manager, Appellate Authority, Bank 
of India v. Mohd. Nizamuddin  AIR 2006 SC 3290; Ravi Yashwant Bhoir v. Distt.  
Collector, Raigarh AIR 2012 SC 1339; and Vijay Singh v. State of U.P AIR 2012 SC 2840. 

47 
 
concerned.  Legal profession is not a trade or business.  
Therefore, it must remain a de -contaminated profession.  
Advocates have a duty to uphold the integrity of the profession 
and to discourage corruption so that justice may be secured by 
the citizenry in a legal manner. 52 A lawyer must strictly adhere 
to the norms of profession which make him worthy as an officer 
of court 53. Dignity of the judiciary is to be maintained, failing 
which the institution itself will collapse. 54 Indulging in practices 
of corrupting the judiciary or offering bribe to the Judge 55; 
retaining money deposited with the advocate for the decree 
holder even after executi on proceedings 56 ; scandalizing the 
Judges 57; constant abstention from the conducting of cases; 
misappropriation of the amount paid 58 ; attesting forged 
affidavit 59; failure to attend trial after accepting the brief 60; 
taking money from client in the name of the Judge61; gross 
negligence involving moral turpitude 62 ; indecent cross -
examination63; breach of trust 64; conducting fraud and forgery65 
by the advocates, have been held to be serious misconduct by 
the Supreme Court. 
 
15.4 In light of the above decisions, the Law  Commission 
considered and provided the definition of “Professional 
Misconduct” in the Amendment Bill recommended by it.   
                                                        
52 Shambhu Ram Yadav v. Hanuman Das Khatry, AIR 2001 SC 2509. 
53 Noratanmal Chouraria v. M R Murli & Anr., AIR 2004 SC 2440. 
54 In Re : Vinay Chandra Mishra, AIR 1995 SC 2348. 
55 Shanbhu Ram Yadav Supra. 
56 Prahlad Saran Gupta v. Bar Council of India, AIR 1997 SC 1338. 
57 Dr. D C Saxena v. Chief Justice of India, AIR 1996 SC 2481. 
58 D S Dalal v. State Bank of India , AIR 1993 SC 1608; and J S Jadhav v. Mustafa Haji 
Mohamed Yusuf, AIR 1993 SC 1535. 
59 M Veerabhadra Rao v. Tek Chand, AIR 1985 SC 28. 
60 S J Chaudhary v. State, AIR 1984 SC 618. 
61 Chandra Shekhar Soni v. Bar Council of Rajasthan, AIR 1983 SC 1012. 
62 In the matter of P an Advocate, AIR 1963 SC 1313; and V P Kumaravelu v. the Bar Council 
of India,  AIR 1997 SC 1014. 
63 Shiv Narain Jafa v. The Hon’ Judges of the High Court, Allahabad, AIR 1953 SC 368. 
64 Bapurao Pakhiddey v. Suman Dondey, AIR 1999 SC 916. 
65 LC Goyal v. Nawal Kishore , (1997) 11 SCC 258; and Devender Bhai Shanker Mehta v. 
Ramesh Chandra Vithal Dass Seth , AIR 1992 SC 1388; See also: Dr. Elbe Peter, MDS, 
LL.B, DCR, Professional misconduct of lawyers in India. 

48 
 
CHAPTER – XVI 
 
The Relevance of Framework of Regulation of  
Legal Profession in the United Kingdom  
 
16.1 After undertaking a review of the regulatory framework of 
legal profession in 2002, 66  based on the report titled 
“Competition and Regulation in the Legal Services Market” ,67 the 
Department of Constitutional Affairs (UK Government) 
concluded that the regulatory framework for legal services in 
England and Wales was out -dated, inflexible, over -complex and 
insufficiently accountable or transparent. 68  As a result, Sir 
David Clementi was appointed on 24 th July 2003, to conduct a 
Review of the Regulatory Framework for Legal Services in 
England and Wales with the terms of reference being: 
 
 “To consider what regulatory framework would best 
promote competition, innovation and the public and 
consumer interest in an efficient, effective and 
independent legal sector.  
 To recommend a framework which will be independent in 
representing the public and consumer interest, 
comprehensive, accountable, consistent, flexible, 
transparent, and no more restrictive or burdensome than 
is clearly justified.69 
 
16.2 As a result of the Clementi Report and implementation of 
the recommendations made therein, the Legal Services Act 
2007 (hereinafter referred to as the Act, 2007) came into force 
which liberalises and regulates the  market for legal 
                                                        
66 In the Public Interest?,  A Consultation following the Office of Fair Trading's report on 
Competition in Professions, A Lord Chancellor’s Department Consultation paper, July 
2002. 
67 A report following the consultation "In the public interest?", July 2003. Available at 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.dca.gov.uk/consult/general/oftreptc
onc.htm (Last Accessed 3rd November, 2016). 
68 Ibid. 
69 Sir David Clementi, “Review of The Regulatory Framework For Legal Services In England 
And Wales Final Report”, (Clementi Report) Foreword, at p.1. 

49 
 
services in England and Wales so as to encourage  
more competition and to provide a new route for  consumer 
complaints. Accordingly a Legal Services Board, an independent 
statutory body, wa s established under the Act 2007 70, which is 
responsible for overseeing legal regulators in England and 
Wales. It is independent of government and the legal profession , 
and is the oversight regulator for eight separate bodies, named 
as ‘Approved Regulator’’71 in the Act, 2007. 
 
16.3 While the Act, 2007 also deals with other kinds of legal 
practitioners such as Legal Executives, Licensed Conveyancers, 
Patent Attorneys, Trade Mark Attorneys, Law Cost s Draftsmen 
as well as Notaries. F or the present purposes, the regulatory 
mechanisms for Solicitors and Barristers have only been 
analysed.  
 
16.4 The enactment of the Act, 2007 has ushered in a new era 
of regulation of legal profession in the United Kingdom which 
has recogn ised the short-comings of ‘self -regulation’ and has 
shifted its focus towards the interests of consumers. 
Emphasising on the need for independence of legal profession 
from outside influences (especially government) as well as the 
call for a regulatory framework whi ch was independent in 
representing the public and consumer interest, a statutory 
oversight body (Legal Services Board  – in short, LSB ) has been 
created for consistent oversight of Front-line regulators (who are 
responsible for regulation of their own profe ssionals). Being an 
Independent Statutory body, the provisions of the Act, 2007 
have ensured that the Board comprises of a lay majority as a 
whole with the Chairman of the Board also mandated to be a lay 
member. For the protection of Consumer interests, an  
                                                        
70 Section 2, Legal Services Act, 2007. 
71 Section 20, Legal Services Act, 2007; Body designated as an approved regulator by Part I of 
Schedule 4 or Part 2 of the Schedule (or both). 

50 
 
independent arm of the LSB such as Consumer Panel has been 
established which acts as an advisory body to the LSB so as to 
help them make decisions that are shaped around the needs of 
users.  
 
16.5 With regard to the functioning of the front -line regulators 
for solicitors and barristers, it has been made imperative that 
the representative and regulatory functions are separated and 
distinguished. For the same purpose, the Law Society acts as a 
representative body for solicitors whereas , the Solicitors 
Regulation Authority ( in short, SRA) discharges the regulatory 
functions. While acting as an independent regulatory arm of the 
Law society, the composition of the Board of SRA is diluted 
wherein out of the 15 members, seven members are solicitors 
and remaining e ight are lay persons out of whom one is 
appointed as the Chairman. Such a setup is inclusive in nature 
wherein through dilution in the composition of the board, 
specific problems in regard to disciplinary action against 
lawyers by lawyers are avoided. The same principle has also 
been applied with regard to the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal , 
whose composition includes both solicitor members as well as 
persons who are neither solicitors nor barristers (lay members).  
Similar set up also exists for the regulation of barristers wherein 
the Bar Council takes care of the representative functions and 
Bar Standard Board along with Professional Conduct Committee 
and Disciplinary Tribunals discharge the regulatory obligations 
as prescribed under the Act , 2007. Similar ratios of practicing 
barristers as well as lay members are ensured in Professional 
Conduct Committee whereby a lay member majority is 
mandated. In regard to the composition of the Disciplinary 
Tribunals for barristers, along with the presence of a barr ister 
(having experience of not less than seven years), the presence of 

51 
 
a Judge (as Chairman) and at least one lay member is 
mandated.  
 
16.6 It is important to note here that in India, the Ministry of  
Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs floated a draft bill 
namely Legal Practitioners (Regulations and Maintenance of 
Standards in Professions, Protecting the Interest of Clients and 
Promoting the Rule of Law) Bill, 2010 , which intended to 
establish a Lega l Services Board on the lines of the Legal 
Services Board in UK suitable in the Indian situation.  However, 
no further progress has been reported on the draft Bill. 
 
  

52 
 
CHAPTER-XVII 
 
Need of Reviewing Regulatory Mechanism 
 
17.1 There is a dire necessity of reviewing the regulatory 
mechanism of the Advocates Act, not only in matters of 
discipline and misconduct of the advocates, but in other areas 
as well, keeping in view the wide expanse of the legal profession 
being involved in almost all areas of life.  Th e very constitution 
of the Bar Councils and their functions also require  the 
introduction of a few provisions in order to consolidate the 
function of the bar councils in its internal matters as well. The 
globalization of the legal profession has brought fo rth the issues 
of the participation of foreign lawyers and foreign law firms in 
Indian legal system.   
 
17.2 With the Bar Council of India creating the All India Bar 
Examination Rules, 2010 ; the Certificate of Practice and 
Renewal Rules, 2014  (which now stands repealed) , and the 
Certificate and Place of Practice (Verification) Rules, 2015, it has 
become evident that this basic function has not been performed 
adequately. While it is understandable that lawyers in India 
constitute an improperly organised group, the inability of the 
Bar Councils to even keep a count on the number of advocates 
practicing in the country is indicative of the need to expand the 
institutional capacity of these authorities. 
 
Regulatory bodies: 
 
17.3 It may be pertinent to compare t he composition of 
Governing Body of the Bar Council of India with other 
institutions like Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 

53 
 
(ICAI), Medical Council of India (MCI), Council of Architects 
(CoA), etc. The position of the MCI is that there are 17 ele cted 
representatives of professionals, 53 elected from educational 
institutions, 34 Central Government nominees, totaling to 104.  
The Council of Architects has 5 elected representatives from 
professionals, 5 elected members from educational institutions, 
1 Central Government nominee and 35 State Government 
nominees.  It also contains 5 other nominees, and 2 ex -officio 
members (from the Central Government).  Thus, they have total 
strength of 53.  
 
17.4 So far as the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 is 
concerned, it provides that in the Council of the Institute, there 
would be not more than 32 persons elected by the members of 
the Institute and not more than eight persons nominated by the 
Central Government. 
 
17.5 Recently, the Constitution of the Governing Co uncil of the 
Indian Law Institute has been changed vide decision dated 8 
December 2016 and the number of members of the Governing 
Council has been reduced to nearly half; and all members of the 
Governing Council will be either nominated or ex -officio.  There 
is not even a single elected person in the Council. 
 
17.6 Thus, from the above it may be concluded that t he 
composition of the body should be determined on four 
parameters: 
 
(1) The elected -to-nominated member ratio should be 
determined based on whether elected representatives from 
the profession can be expected to function without 
excessive bias in favour of their colleagues. There may be 
a majority of nominated members if there is a need to 

54 
 
accommodate and have representation of a wide variety of 
bodies, governmental or technical. However, the ratio 
must at least be loaded with sufficient nominees where 
there are essential questions of public interest that 
cannot be left to members of the profession itself. 
 
(2) The professional -to-lay member ratio should be 
determined on similar criteria but with greater emphasis 
towards client welfare and interaction with allied fields, 
and less emphasis on representation of public bodies.  
 
(3) The ide ntity of the electors and nominators determines 
the extent of control exercised by groups and bodies over 
a regulator. Nominations indicate direct control and 
elections indicate diffused and indirect control. A good 
practice would be to split seats across different groups to 
accommodate regional and technical knowledge -based 
diversity and split seats across bodies so that each body 
has a say but does not exercise complete control. For this, 
it is necessary to identify all groups that require 
representation in the regulatory body and all bodies that 
need to be given a share of control over the body.  
 
 
(4) Where a particular public office or department must be 
given representation in the regulatory body, provision may 
be made to appoint them ex -officio. However, the body 
appointing the office -holder may gain further say in the 
regulator’s decisions, depending on the independence of 
that office. 
 
 
17.7 The Commission is of the view that the nominated/co -
opted members would have a right to participate in all 

55 
 
proceedings and to vote therein  except on the issue of removal 
of office-bearers of the Councils. 
 
17.8  Further, in relation to regulatory mechanism, it is 
necessary to address the mushrooming of bar associations right 
from the Taluka level, up to the ape x bodies also requires a 
regulatory mechanism including their recognition and control 
by the bar council.  This is obviously coupled with special 
emphasis of not only controlling the advocates but the collective 
actions of bar associations that has a local  and even a nation -
wide implication on issues that are concerned with proceedings 
of the court and with regard to the organization of lawyers 
entering into other fields of activities.  Towards this, the 
measures of punishments, the inclusion of other types  of 
misconducts and the disciplinary control with its effective 
mechanism, both reformatory and deterrent, deserves to be 
introduced.  This has become necessary as the present law is 
gradually losing its effectiveness due to lack of appropriate 
empowerment.  The standards of professional ethics and 
behaviour, the training of lawyers and facets of continuing legal 
education are other areas as well that require a passionate 
consideration.   
 
17.9  It is with the aforesaid objective in view that the Law 
Commission called upon the Bar Council of India to make 
available its suggestions in particular and upon having received 
the same, the Commission has deliberated upon the 
suggestions that have been received from the stakeholders 
throughout the country that the p roposal to reform the 
Advocates Act has become imperative. 
 
17.10 The Commission, therefore, recommends that 
comprehensive amendment should be brought forth in the 

56 
 
Advocates Act, not only keeping in view the present 
requirements,  but such other requiremen ts that may arise in 
future for the better management and regulation of the legal 
profession.  The Advocates (Amendment) Bill, 2017 as 
recommended by the Law Commission is annexed as Annexure-
III of the Report for consideration of the Central Government. 
 
 


57 
 
ANNEXURE –I 
 
 
  


58 
 
SUGGESTED AMENDMENTS TO THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
1 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
2 No Provision/Clause (o) “Misconduct” means and includes an act of a legal 
practitioner whose conduct is found to be in breach of 
or wanting in observance of the standard of 
professional conduct or etiquette prescribed by the 
Rules framed und er Section 49(1) I of the Act or his 
conduct is a disqualification under Section 24A of the 
Act. 
 
(p) Electoral college means and consists of:- 
 
(a) The Chairmen of all the State Bar Councils or 
their nominee members; and 
 
 (b) One member elected by each State Bar Council 
to be a member of electoral college. 
 
3 
(1) State Bar Council 
No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
3(2) (a) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

59 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 (b) in the case of a State Bar Council with an 
electorate not exceeding five thousand, fifteen 
members, in the case of a State Bar Council with 
an electorate exceeding five thousand but not 
exceeding ten thousand, twenty members, and in 
the case of the State B ar Council with an 
electorate exceeding ten thousand, twenty-five 
members, elected in accordance with the system 
of proportional representation by means of the 
single transferable vote from amongst advocates on 
the electoral roll of the State Bar Council. 
(b) in the case of a State Bar Council with an electorate 
not exceeding five thousand, eleven members, in the 
case of a State Bar Council with an electorate 
exceeding five thousand but not exceeding fifteen 
thousand, fifteen members , and in the case of the  
State Bar Council with an electorate exceeding fifteen 
thousand, twenty-one members , elected in 
accordance with the system of proportional 
representation by means of the single transferable vote 
from amongst advocates on the electoral roll of the 
State Bar Council after undertaking the process of 
verification of certificate and place of practice of 
advocates under the relevant Rules. 
 
 No Provision/Clause (c) Co-option of senior and experienced members:- 
 
In every Bar Council, in addition to the elected 
members, three designated senior advocates with at 
least 35 years of practice from the bar and in case of 
non-availability of such senior advocates, three 
advocates having experience of a minimum of thirty 
five years shall be co -opted as members of the Council 
by the elected members, soon after the declaration of 
result of elections, but prior to the elections of the 
Office Bearers.   
 
In the matter of co -option if there is no unanimity 
amongst the elected me mbers, co -option shall be by 
decision of the majority of the members. 
 

60 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
Proviso 
to 
Section 
3(2)(b) 
Provided that as nearly as possible one-half of such 
elected members shall subject to any rules that may be 
made in this behalf by the Bar Council of India, be 
persons who have for at least ten years  been advocates 
on a State roll, and in computing the said period of ten 
years in relation to any such person, there shall be 
included any period during which the person has been an 
advocate enrolled under the Indi an Bar Councils Act, 
1926 (38 of 1926).” 
 
Provided that as nearly as possible one half of such elected 
members shall subject to any rules that may be made in this 
behalf by the Bar Council of India, be persons who have for 
at least twenty years  been advocates on a State roll  and 
who are in practice as per Verification Rules. 
 
Note:- Verification Rules mean Bar Council of India 
Certificate and place of Practice(Verification) Rules, 2015 
and amendments made thereto from time to time. 
 
3(3) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
3(4) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
3(5) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
3(6) Nothing in clause (b) of sub -section (2) shall affect the 
representation of elected members in any State Bar 
Council as constituted immediately before the 
commencement of the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1973 
(60 of 1973), until that State Bar Council is reconstituted 
in accordance with the provision of this Act. 
Nothing in clause (b) of sub -section (2) s hall affect the 
representation of elected members in any State Bar Council 
as constituted immediately before the commencement of this 
amendment, until that State Bar Council is reconstituted 
in accordance with the provisions of this Amendment Act 
of 2017. 
 
4 
(1) 
Bar Council of India 
(a) No Change 
 
No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(b) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

61 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 (c) one member elected by each State Bar Council 
from amongst its members. 
 
(c) one member elected by each State Bar Council from 
amongst its members having at least 35 years of 
experience at the Bar.  
 
 Provided that where the number of Advocates 
enrolled in any Bar Council is less than five 
thousand, a cluster of not more than three  Bar 
Councils of such nearby State Bar Councils shall be 
made and representation to the Bar Council of 
India from such cluster shall be made by rotation 
from amongst the Bar Councils within the cluster, 
as per the Rules prescribed in this behalf by Bar 
Council of India. 
 

62 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 No Provision/Clause (d) Three members co -opted by the members specified in 
clauseI in the following manner: - 
 (i) Two Senior Advocates whose names have been on 
any State roll for at least 35 years. 
 
 Provided that in case of non-availability of Senior Advocates 
with 35 years of standing at the Bar, the senior Advocates 
with lesser length of practice shall be co -opted as prescribed 
under the Rules of Bar Council of India. 
 (ii) One Senior Advocate whose name has been on any 
State roll for at least 35 years and having a 
minimum of 5 years experience as member of Bar 
Council of India. 
 
 Provided that where there are more than one such senior 
Advocates with 5 years of experience as member of Bar 
Council of India are available, then the Senior Advocate with 
longer experience as the member, Bar Council of India, shall 
be co-opted. 
 
 Provided further that where no Senior Advocate with 5 years 
experience as member, Bar Council of India is available, any 
other Advocate with 35 years of p ractice with 5 years of 
experience as member of Bar Council of India shall be co -
opted. 
 
 In the matter of co -option, in absence of unanimity amongst 
the elected members, co -option shall be by decision of the 
majority of the members. 
 
 The term of members of Bar Council of India mentioned in 
this clause(d) and I of this sub -section shall be six years 
from the date of publication of result of such members. 
 
 Bar Council of India shall co -opt its members under clause 
(d) and hold elections  under clause I of this sub -section 
under this clause within a period of 6 months from the date 
of commencement of this amendment Act of 2017. 
 

63 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
  (e) One member whose name has been on the State roll 
for atleast 35 years and who has been a member of the 
Bar Council of India for at least 5 years shall be co -
opted by the electoral college. 
 
 Provided that where there are more than one such 
Advocate with 5 years of experience as member of Bar 
Council of India are available, then the senior amongst 
them shall be co-opted. 
 
The co -option of such member shall be held as 
provided under the Rules in this regard. 
 
4(1A) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
4(2) No Change No suggestion received in this regard.  
4(2A) No Change 
No suggestion received in this regard. 
But in place of Amendment Act 1977, 2017 shall be 
substituted. 
Proviso 
to 
Section 
4(2A) 
No Change 
No suggestion received in this regard. 
But in place of Amendment Act 1977, 2017 shall be 
substituted. 
4(3) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
5 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
6 
(1) 
Functions of State Bar Councils- 
(a) No Change 
 
No suggestion received in this regard 

64 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 
(b) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(c) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(d) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(dd) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(e) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(ee) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(eee) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(f) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(g) No Change 
To provide for the elections of its members as prescribed 
under the Rules framed by the Bar Council of India in this 
regard. 
 
 (gg) to visit and inspect Universities in accordance with 
the directions given under clause (i) of sub -section 
(1) of section 7;] 
(gg) to visit and inspect Universities and Institutions 
imparting Legal Education  in accordance with the 
directions given under clause (i) of su b-section (1) of 
section 7; 
 
 
(h) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

65 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 
(i) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 No Provision/Clause (j) to organize compulsory Continuing Legal 
Education either directly or through Bar 
Associations, Bar Council of India Trust, the State 
Bar Councils, Lawyers’ Society and any institute of 
repute recognized by Bar Council of India for this 
purpose in accordance with the rules made in this 
behalf. 
 
 
6(2) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
6(3) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
7 
(1) 
Functions of Bar Council of India- 
(b) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(c) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(d) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(e) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(f) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(g) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

66 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 
(h) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (i) to recognize Universities whose degree in law shall 
be a qualification for enrolment as an advocate 
and for that purpose to visit and inspect 
Universities [or cause the State Bar Councils to 
visit and inspect Universities in accordance with 
such directions as it may given in this behalf]; 
(i) to recognize Universities and Institutions imparting 
Legal Education  leading to a degree in law, 
constituting a qualification for enrolment as an 
advocate, and for that purpose to visit and inspect 
Universities and Institutions imparting Legal 
Education [or cause the State Bar Councils to visit 
and inspect Universities and Institutions imparting 
Legal Education  in accordance with such directions 
as it may given in this behalf]; 
 
 
(ia) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(ib) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(ic) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(j) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(k) No Change To provide for elections of its members and co -option in state 
Bar Councils and Bar Council of India. 
 
(l) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(m) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

67 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 No Provision/Clause (n) to provide for pre -enrolment training and 
apprenticeship of a person who has obtained 
degree in a law course, which is recognized as a 
qualification for enrolment as an advocate under 
the Act, for a period of one year. 
 
(o) to provide for Verification of Certificates or Places 
of Practice of the Advocates; either directly or 
through State Bar Council 
 
(p) to prescribe conditions for enrolment of persons as 
advocate with a State Bar Council including the 
one as to clearing of All India Bar Examination of 
the Bar Council of India as may be prescribed by 
the Rules. 
 
(q) to provid e for, organize and monitor compulsory 
Continuing Legal Education through Bar Council of 
India Trust, a society or association recognized by 
it and as prescribed by guidelines/rules. 
 
(r) to provide mechanism for resolving election 
disputes in relation to any election to Bar Council 
of India and State Bar Council. 
 
(s) to provide common entrance test for admission in 
the institutions imparting legal education in the 
country. 
 
(t) to register Indian and Foreign Law Firms and to 
regulate such Firms. 
 
(u) to regulate Foreign Lawyers registered and allowed 
to practice in India under the Rules prescribed by 
it.  
 

68 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
  (v) t o register and regulate Bar Associations or other 
Associations, Societies, Trusts of Advocates 
operating within the territory of India. 
  
(w) to register and regulate the Law Firms, Limited 
Liability Partnerships operating within the 
territorial jurisdiction of the State Bar Council. 
 
7(3) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
7(3) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
7(4) No Provision/Clause May create or recognize any Trust under Indian Trust 
Act, 1882 or Society registered under Society 
Registration Act in aid of carrying out the functions 
mentioned in this Section. 
 
7A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
8 Term of office of Members of State Bar Council. —The 
term of office of an elected member of a State Bar Council 
(other than an elected member thereof referred to in 
section 54) shall be five years from the date of 
publication of the result of his election: 
 
Term of office of Members of State Bar Council. —The term of 
office of an elected member of a State Bar Council shall be 
six years from the date of publication of the result of his 
election: 
 
8A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

69 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
9(1) A Bar Council shall constitute one or more disciplinary 
committees, each of which shall consist of three persons 
of whom two shall be persons elected by the Council from 
amongst its members and the other shall be a person co -
opted by the Council from amongst adv ocates who 
possess the qualifications specified in the proviso to sub -
section (2) of section 3 and who are not members of the 
Council, and the senior -most advocate amongst the 
members of a disciplinary committee shall be the 
Chairman thereof. 
Constitution of disciplinary committees by the Bar 
Council of India and State Bar Council. 
 
In the case of 
 
(a) Bar Council of India, the Committee shall 
comprise of three members comprising a retired 
High Court Judge who shall be the Chairperson of 
the Committee, one Member nominated by the 
Council from amongst its members and one 
advocate or Senior Advocate to be nominated by 
the Council. 
 
(b) State Bar Council, the Committee shall comprise of 
three members comprising a retired District Judge  
who shall be the Chairpe rson of the Committee, 
one Member nominated by the Council from 
amongst its members and one advocate or Senior 
Advocate to be nominated by the Council. 
 
(c) The Bar Council shall constitute one or more 
disciplinary committees each of which shall 
consist of  3 persons of whom, in the case of Bar 
Council of India would be a retired High Court 
Judge and in the case of State Bar council a retired 
District Judge.  One person shall be nominated by 
the Council from amongst its member and the 
third shall be a person nominated by the respective 
Council from amongst Senior Advocates or an 
Advocate on the roll of the Council for 25 years. 
 

70 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
9(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), 
any disciplinary committee constituted prior to the 
commencement of the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1964, 
(21 of 1964) may dispose of the proceedings pending 
before it as if this section had not been amended by the 
said Act. 
 
Deleted 
9A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
10 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
10A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
10B No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
11 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
12 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
13 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

71 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
14 Election to Bar Councils not to be questioned on certain 
grounds.—No election of a member to a Bar Council shall 
be called in question on the ground merely that due 
notice thereof has not been given to any person entitled 
to vot e threat, if notice of the date has, not less than 
thirty days before that date, been published in the Official 
Gazette. 
Dispute as to election to Bar Councils:- 
 
(1) Any dispute as to the election to the Bar Council 
of India or the State Bar Councils includin g 
election of office bearers shall be referred to the 
committees, specially constituted for this purpose 
by the Bar Council of India prior to election. 
 
 Provided that No election of a member to a Bar 
Council shall be called in question on the ground 
merely that due notice thereof has not been given 
to any person entitled to vote threat, if notice of 
the date has, not less than thirty days before that 
date, been published in the Official Gazette. 
 
(2) The Committee referred to in Sub -Section-1 shall 
comprise (a) in case of Bar Council of India a 
retired Supreme Court Judge as its Chairman and 
Chairmen of two State Bar Councils as its 
Members; and (b) in case of State Bar Councils, a 
retired High Court Judge as its Chairman and two 
Members of the Bar Council of India other than one 
hailing from the concerned State.  The Committee 
shall have such powers as may be prescribed under 
the Rules and shall have powers to pass any 
interim order. 
 
15 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
16 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
17 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

72 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
18(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17, any 
person whose name is entered as an advocate on the roll 
of any State Bar Council may make an application in  the 
prescribed form to the Bar Council of India for the 
transfer of his name from the roll of that State Bar 
Council to the roll of any other State Bar Council and, on 
receipt of any such application the Bar Council of India 
shall direct that the name of such person shall without 
the payment of any fee,  be removed from the roll of the 
first mentioned State Bar Council and entered in the roll 
of the other State Bar Council and the State Bar Councils 
concerned shall comply with such direction: 
 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17, any 
person whose name is entered as an advocate on the roll of 
any State Bar Council may make an application in the 
prescribed form to the Bar Council of India for the transfer of 
his name from the roll of that State Ba r Council to the roll of 
any other State Bar Council and, on receipt of any such 
application the Bar Council of India shall direct that the 
name of such person shall upon payment of such transfer 
fee as may be prescribed by the rules, be removed from the 
roll of the first mentioned State Bar Council and entered in 
the roll of the other State Bar Council and the State Bar 
Councils concerned shall comply with such direction: 
 
Proviso 
to 
Section 
18(1) 
No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
18(2) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
19 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
20 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
21 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
22 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
23 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

73 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
24(1) No Provision/Clause (f) he has paid in respect of the enrolment, stamp 
duty, if any, chargeable under the Indian Stamp 
Act, 1899 and an enrolment fee payable to the 
State Bar Council as may be prescri bed by the 
Rules. 
 
(g) He has paid the professional development fee 
chargeable under the Rules of Bar Council of India 
and the State Bar Council. 
 
(h) he clears the All India Bar Examination or any 
other test prescribed by Bar Council of India and  
fulfils such other conditions as may be specified in the 
rules made by the Bar Council of India under its 
Rules; 
 

74 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
24A Disqualification for enrolment.— 
 
(b) No person shall be admitted as an advocate on a 
State roll—  
 
(a) if he is convicted of an offence involving 
moral turpitude; 
(b)  if he is convicted of an offence under the 
provisions of the Untouchability (Offences) 
Act, 1955 (22 of 1955); 
(c) if he is dismissed or removed from 
employment or office under the State on any 
charge involving moral turpitude. 
 
Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “State” shall 
have the meaning assigned to it under Article 12 of the 
Constitution:] 
 
Provided that the disqualification for enrolment as 
aforesaid shall cease to have effect after a period of two 
years has elapsed since his [release or dismissal or, as 
the case may be, removal]. 
 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to 
a person who havin g been found guilty is dealt 
with under the provisions of the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958).] 
Disqualification for enrolment. — No person shall be 
admitted as an advocate on a State roll— 
  
(a) if he is convicted of an offence involving mora l 
turpitude; 
(b)  if he has been dismissed or removed from 
employment or office by the State or any State 
Undertaking or any State Aided or Statutory Body 
or Corporation on the charge of misconduct; 
 (c)  if he has been convicted of contempt of court 
subject to any order or decision of Court of 
competent jurisdiction otherwise. 
 
Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “State” shall 
have the meaning assigned to it under Article 12 of the 
Constitution:] 
 
 
25 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
26 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
26A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

75 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
27 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
28 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
29 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
30 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
31 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
32 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
33 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
34 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
35(1) Where on receipt of a complaint or otherwise a State Bar 
Council has reason to believe that any advocate on its roll 
has been guilty of professional or other misconduct, it 
shall refer the case for disposal to its disciplinary 
committee. 
 
Where on receipt of a complaint or otherwise a State Bar 
Council has reason to believe that any advocate on its roll 
has been guilty of professional or other misconduct, it shall 
refer the case for disposal to its disciplinary committee.  The 
decision in this regard shall be taken by the concerned 
Bar Council within a period of six months from the date 
of receipt of this complaint. 
 
The complaint to the State Bar Council shall be in proper 
format accompanied with the prescribed fee under the 
Rules of the State Bar Councils. 
 

76 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
35(1A) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
35(2) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
35(3) (a) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (b) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (c) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (d) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
No Provision/Clause (e) impose such fine as it may deem fit, proportionate 
to the gravity of the misconduct proved against the 
advocate, subject to the maximum limit of Rs.3 
lacs and cost of the proceeding; 
 
(f) award a fair and reasonable compensation of such 
amount, subject to the maximum of Rs.5 lacs as it 
may deem fit, payable to the person aggrieved, if 
any, by the misconduct of the concerned advocate. 
 
(g) impose special and exemplary costs subject to the 
maximum of Rs.2 lacs on the complainant in case, 
the complaint is found to be vexatious or frivolous 
or on the respondent -advocate in case he is found 
to have been un -cooperative in the disci plinary 
proceedings under the Act. 
 

77 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
35(4) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
35(5) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
35(6) No Provision/Clause During the pendency of a disciplinary proceeding in the 
complaints of grave misconduct, the Bar Council of India 
and State Bar Council as the case may be, if, it deems fit 
and proper may suspend the advocate from practice, but, 
no such suspension shall be made without the prior 
recommendation of concerned Disciplinary Committee. 
 
35A No Provision/Clause Prohibition on the boycotts or abstention from work –  
 
(1) No association of advocates or any member of the 
association either individually or collectively shall 
boycott or abstain from courts work or cause 
obstruction in any form in court’s functioning during 
court working hours in court premises nor shall 
individually or collectively give a call for such boycott 
or abstinence from work during court hours. 
 
(2) Violation of this clause shall be treated as misconduct 
and shall be liabl e for disciplinary action as 
contemplated under the Act and Rules. 
 
36 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
36A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

78 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
36B(1) The disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council shall 
dispose of the complaint received by it under section 35 
expeditiously and in each case the proceedings shall be 
concluded within a period of one year from the date of the 
receipt of the complaint or the date of initiation of the 
proceedings at the instance of the State Bar Council, as 
the case may be, failing which such proceedings shall 
stand transferred to the Bar Council of India which may 
dispose of the same as if it were a proceeding withdrawn 
for inquiry under sub-section (2) of section 36. 
(a) The State Bar Council sh all dispose of the complaint 
received by it under section 35 expeditiously and in 
each case the proceeding shall be initiated by the 
concerned Bar Council within a period of 6 
months from the date of receipt of the complaint. 
 
(b) The proceeding initiated either on the complaint or 
Suo-Motu shall be completed within a period of one 
year from the date of initiation subject to 
extension for a maximum period of one year by the 
Bar Council of India, for the reason to be recorded 
in writing.   
 
(c) (i) In case t he final decision whether or not to 
initiate the proceeding within a period of six 
months from the date of receipt of the 
complaint is not taken by the State Bar 
Council 
OR 
 (ii) When the proceedings are initiated, but not 
completed by the disciplinary committee 
within a period of one year or extended 
period as the case may be, 
 
  such complaint or the proceeding shall stand 
transferred to the Bar Council of India, which 
may dispose of the same as if it were a 
proceeding withdrawn for inquiry under sub -
section (2) of section 36. 
 

79 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
36B(2) No Provision/Clause 
In case of a transfer of proceedings to Bar Council of 
India, under the provisions of this section, the State Bar 
Council shall be required to pay three -fourth of the 
amount received from the complainant at the time of 
filing the complaint. 
 
37(1) No Provision/Clause 
The memo of appeal shall be in proper format 
accompanied with the prescribed fee under the Rules of 
the Bar Council of India. 
 
38 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
39 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
40 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
41 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
42 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
42A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
43 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
44 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

80 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
45 Penalty for persons illegally practising in courts and 
before other authorities.-Any person who practises in any 
court or before any authorit y or person, in or before 
whom he is not entitled to practise under the provisions 
of this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months. 
Penalty for persons illegally practising in courts and before 
other authorities.-Any person who practises in any court or 
before any authority or person, in or before whom he is not 
entitled to practise under the provisions of this Act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three 
years and with fine, which may extend to one lakh and 
this shall be in addition to penalty imposed under any 
other law for the time being in force. 
 
46. Omitted by Act 70 of 1993 w.e.f. 26.12.1993 
46A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

81 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
46B No Provision/Clause Financial assistance to all the Advocates and/or their 
families in need – 
 
(1) The Central Government shall cause the printing of 
welfare stamps to be affixed on every Vakalatnama, 
Power of Attorney, Agreements for Litigation, 
Affidavits, documents relating to consultation and 
other similar instruments, called by whatever name, 
but, involving service of advocates.  The sale proceeds 
of such stamps shall be utilized for creation of corpus, 
which in turn shall be used for initiation and 
maintenance of various schemes for the assistance, 
aid, welfare and benefit of practicing advocates 
and/or their families in the manner prescribed under 
the relevant Rules.  The said corpus shall be managed 
and maintained by the Central Government and shall 
be exclusively utilized for the purpose indicated. 
 
The instruments referred to above in this sub -Section 
shall be treated as incomplete unless they are affixed 
with the welfare stamps.  
 
(2) The fund and schemes referred to in Sub -Section-(1) 
shall be in addition to the schemes evolved by the 
State Governments for the benefit and welfare of the 
advocates 
 
47 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
48 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
48A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

82 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
48AA No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
48B No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
49(1) (a) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (ab) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (ac) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (ad) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (ae) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (af) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (ag) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (ah) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (b) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(c) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

83 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 (d) the standards of legal education to be observed by 
universities in India and the inspection of 
universities for that purpose; 
(d) the standards of legal education to be observed by 
universities in India and the inspection of Universities  
and Institutions imparting Legal Education  for that 
purpose; 
 
 
(e) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(f) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(g) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(gg) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(h) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 
(i) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

84 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 No Provision/Clause (ia) to provide for, organize and monitor compulsory 
Continuing Legal Education for Advocates or class 
of Advocates either directly or through Bar Council 
of India Trust. 
 
(ib) to make rules to regulate the Indian Law Firms 
operating in more than one State. 
 
(ic) to register and regulate Foreign Law Firms as 
prescribed under this Act. 
 
(id) to register and regulate the Bar Associations, 
Trusts, Societies of Advocates operating in more 
than one State. 
 
 
(j) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
49(2) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
49A(1) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
49A(2) (a) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (b) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (c) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (d) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

85 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
 (e) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (f) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 (g) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
 No Provision/Clause 
 
(h) To carry out Welfare Schemes for practicing 
Advocates. 
 
49A(3) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
49A(4) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
49A(5) No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
50 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
51 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
52 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
53 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
54 No Change Repealed 

86 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
55 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
56 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
57 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
58 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
58A No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
58AA No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
58AB No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
58AC No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
58AD No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
58AE No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
58AF No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
58AG No Change No suggestion received in this regard 

87 
 
Section Present ACT Proposed Amendments 
58B No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
59 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
60 No Change No suggestion received in this regard 
*****

88 
 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
Analysis of Responses Received by Law 
Commission of India 
 
 Based on the facts in the matter of Mahipal Singh Rana,72 
the Apex Court highlighted the dismal state of the regulatory 
mechanism governing lawyers with emphasis on an urgent need 
to review the provisions of the Advocates Act dealing with the 
regulatory mechanism for the legal profession and other 
incidental issues, in consultation with all concerned.73  
 
 Consequently, the C ourt requested the Law Commission 
of India to go into all relevant aspects relating to regulation of 
legal profession and submit a report on the same. In light of the 
above direction, th e 21 st Law Commission of India issued a 
notice on 29th August 2016, inviting comments on “the need for 
reform in regulation of legal profession”. In response to the 
notice, 136 responses have been received, out of which 79 are 
from judges; 10 are from Bar Council(s) and Bar Associations; 
16 are from Lawyers; 6 from Government Lawyers and Officials; 
7 are from academics, research organisations and other 
organisations; and 18 from others.  
 
 At the very inception, the general tenor of the comments 
received point out the lack of defined regulatory objectives and 
principles in the Advocates Act itself. Although the provisions of 
the Act do provide for the basic regulation of legal profession 
throughout its scheme, it has been observed that a set of 
defined objec tives and guiding principles would do better in 
regard to the interpretation of the Act with the regulatory 
                                                        
72 Supra Note 5. 
73 Ibid. at p. 52. 

89 
 
framework in mind. As the regulatory mechanism for legal 
profession in India still abides by the principles of ‘self -
regulation’, overwhelming numbe r of responses point out the 
failure of the existing mechanism and hence have realised the 
need for urgent reform required. In regard to the responses 
regarding specific provisions, a number of responses have 
highlighted the existence of faulty/unsatisfact ory definitions 
such as the definition of advocate (which does not extend to the 
law firms, partnerships, body corporate etc.). Additionally, the 
general tenor of the responses have highlighted that at present, 
there exists no definition of professional or  other misconduct 
which has resulted in the arbitrary usage of Section 35 
(Punishment of advocates for misconduct). It is important to 
point out here that changes to definition will also result in 
changes in the accompanying provisions such as maintenance 
of rolls of advocates (to include rolls of law firms, partnerships, 
corporate entities etc.). 
 
 For the ease of access to the list of State Bar Councils as 
well as to forgo the necessity of making amendments to the 
Advocates Act every time a new State come s into existence, a 
list of the State Bar Councils in the form of a schedule has been 
suggested. Moreover, a number of responses have highlighted 
the need for stricter requirements regarding the eligibility of 
members to be elected in the State Bar Council s as well as the 
Bar Council of India. Additionally, apart from lawyers, to dilute 
the ‘self-regulatory’ mechanism in place, a number of responses 
have suggested the need to change the composition of Bar 
Councils to include individuals outside of the legal  profession. 
In regards to the functions performed by the State Bar Councils 
as well as the Bar Council of India, the general tenor of 
responses highlight the need for reform in relation to Nation 
Entrance Tests, Continuing Education Schemes, Apprenticeship 

90 
 
Programs as well as concerns regarding  inspection and 
approval of law universities across the country. Some responses 
have also highlighted the lack of welfare schemes for advocates 
due to paucity of funds received by the State Bar Councils for 
the same . Some specific responses also point out the 
mushrooming of Bar Associations thereby urging the need to 
regulate the same.  
 
 While dealing with the provisions regarding the 
establishment of disciplinary committees for regulating the 
conduct of lawyers, a large of number of responses have 
highlighted corrupt practices within the lawyer fraternity 
thereby giving rise to issues of vested interests while performing 
the disciplinary functions. The responses have hence urged to 
make amendments in the Act providi ng for composition of 
disciplinary committees which would include retired judges, 
persons from high court registry, civil society members, 
bureaucrats, and legal academicians so as to dilute the majority 
of lawyers in the disciplinary committees. There hav e also been 
calls to make disciplinary committees as permanent standing 
bodies. A number of responses have also pointed out the need 
for uniform qualifying examination and thorough verification of 
documents and character of a person as a pre -requisite for 
enrolment. 
 
 Moreover, to give effect to the observations made in the 
Mahipal Singh Rana  judgment (supra), the responses have 
unanimously agreed with the observation of the Supreme Court 
thereby necessitating amendment in s ection 24A of the 
Advocates Act to provide for post -enrolment disqualification. 
Also, the responses have suggested increasing the duration of 
disqualification (from 2 to 5 years) and have suggested 
necessary amendments in the provision to include certificate of 

91 
 
good character an esse ntial before re -enrolment after the 
disqualification period. Certain responses have also highlighted 
the need for statutory recognition of suspension of right to 
practice until advocate purges himself of contempt. A number of 
responses have also called for stricter penalties such as fine and 
imprisonment for professional or other misconduct and also 
pointed out the need for statutory recognition of the power of 
the courts and disciplinary committees to pass interim orders 
for the same. Additionally, some responses point out the need to 
increase the time granted for disposal of disciplinary committee 
proceedings because it has not been found to sufficient given 
the current capacity of the Bar Councils.  
 
 In regard to the power of the Bar Council of India as well 
as the High Court to make rules regulating the conduct of 
lawyers, responses suggest that there is a need of specific 
mention in section 49 I to exclude the jurisdiction of the Bar 
Council of India to regulate the conduct the lawyers within the 
court thereby giving effect to the Harish Uppal ’s judgement 
establishing the domain of the High Courts’ to regulate conduct 
of lawyers even if has a limited effect on the right to practice. In 
reiteration of the Supreme Court’s observation in Mahipal Singh 
Rana case, certain responses have agreed that appeal  to High 
Courts from the State Disciplinary Committees should be made 
statutory recognising the existing powers of the High Court as 
found under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. 
 
 Other general suggestions include the need for 
establishment client forums and legal ombudsman for 
protection of client interests. Problems regarding the charging of 
exorbitant fees of by advocates have also resulted in responses 
urging the need for struct uring fee payments as well as capping 
and incidence of fee payments. A specific response has also 

92 
 
called for lifting the restriction on advocates for advertising 
while highlighting the need for legal profession to adapt to 
evolving international best practices. 
 
  

93 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
THE ADVOCATES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961   
 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:- 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. Short title and commencement. (1) This Act may be 
called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2017. 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification i n the Official Gazette, 
appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act. 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961  
 
2. Amendment of Section 2.   In the the Advocates Act, 
1961 (25 of 1961) (hereinafter referred to as the Advocates Act), 
in section 2, in sub-section(1),- 
 
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
(a) “advocate” means an advocate entered in any roll 
under the provisions of this Act and includes an 
advocate carrying on practice in law with a law 

94 
 
firm, by whatever name called, and a foreign lawyer 
registered under any law in a country outside India 
and recognised by the Bar Council of India;”; 
 
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
“(bb) ‘Bar Association’ means the association of 
Advocates recognized by the State Bar Council and 
includes a district, taluka and town level associations, 
whether registered or not, under the Societies 
Registration Act (Act No.XXI of 1860);”; 
 
(iii) after clause (g) the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
“(gg) ‘law firm’ means a firm, formed and registered  
under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932); or 
under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 
2009); or a private or public limited company 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 
2013) comprising of an advocate or advocates for  
carrying on practice in law and includes law firms 
formed and registered under any other law outside 
India;”; 
 
(iv) after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
“(ii) ‘legal services’ includes the rendering of any 
assistance or service by an advocate in the 
conduct of any case or other legal proceedings on 
behalf of a person before any court, tribunal or 
any other quasi -judicial body;or giving advice or 
assistance to a person on any legal matter;”; 
 
“(iii) ‘misconduct’ includes -an act of  an advocat e 
whose conduct is found to be in breach of or non-
observance of the standard of professional 
conduct or etiquette required to be observed by 
the advocate; or forbidden act; oran unlawful 
behaviour;or disgraceful and dishonourable 
conduct; or neglect; or not working diligently and 

95 
 
criminal breach of trust; or any of his conduct 
incurring disqualification under section 24A;” 
 
(v) after clause (k), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-  
 
“(kk) ‘register of law firms’ means a register of la w 
firms,- 
(i) maintained by the Bar Council of India in 
respect of a law firm formed under any law 
outside India; and,  
(ii) maintained by a State Bar Council in respect of 
all law firms formed and registered in India; 
 
(kkk) “scheme” means any scheme framed by the  Bar 
Council of India or as the case may be by the State 
Bar Council, for the purpose of giving effect to any of 
the provisions of this Act.”. 
 
3. Amendment of section 3.  In section 3 of the Advocates 
Act,- 
 
(i) in sub-section (2), for clause (b) and the proviso relating 
thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely : - 
 
“(b) in the case of a State Bar Council , with an electorate not 
exceeding five thousand,  eleven members; in the case of a 
State Bar Council with an electorate exceeding five thousand 
but not exceeding fifteen thousand, fifteen members; and in 
the case of a State Bar Council with an electorate exceeding 
fifteen thousand, twenty-one members,- 
  
(i) to be elected in accordance with the system of 
proportional representation by means of the single 
transferable vote from amongst advocates on the 
electoral roll of the State Bar Council, after undertaking 
the process of verification of certificate and place of 
practice of advocates under this Act, and 
  
(ii) from amongst retired judges,  senior advocates or an 
advocate referred to in sub -clause (ii), eminent persons 
from fields other than law and officers of the State 
Government to be nominated by the High Court, 

96 
 
 
and of the total number of members of the State Bar Council of 
a State- 
 
(i) as nearly as may be, one half of such members shall 
be elected subject to any rules that may be made in 
this behalf by the Bar Council of India from amongst 
the advocates carrying on practice in law for at least 
ten years; 
(ii) as nearly as may be the one-third of members shall be 
nominated by the High Court from senior advocates 
having experience of not less than twenty -five years of 
practice and in case of non -availability of senior 
advocate, any advocate with such experience, retired 
Judges of the High Court, retired district judges. 
 
(iii) the remainder shall be nominated by the High Court 
from Select List of eminent persons of the ability, 
integrity and standing having professional experience 
of not less than twenty -five years in accountancy, 
commerce, medical scien ce, management, public 
affairs or social science matters, to be provided by the 
State Bar Council;  
 
Explanation.-  An Advocate shall only be entitled to be a 
member of the State Bar Council if he has been in continuous 
practice for ten years and has appeared in any court, 
Tribunal or any other quasi-judicial body as a lead counsel in 
at least twelve cases a year for a continuous period of three 
years preceding the year of election or nomination.”;   
 
(ii) after sub-section(4), the following sub -sections shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
“(4A) An advocate who has been elected as a member of the 
State Bar Council consecutively  for two terms shall not be 
eligible to contest elections under clause  (b) of sub-section(2), 
for the ensuing next term of the State Bar Council. 
 
(4B) A Member nominated to the State Bar Council shall not 
be eligible for nomination, as such, for more than two terms.”. 
 

97 
 
4. Amendment of section 4. In section 4 of the Advocates 
Act,–  
 
(i) in sub-section (1), for clause (c), the following clauses 
shall be substituted, namely:-  
 
“(c) five members to be nominated by rotation every 
two years, one each in seriatim from the zones as 
specified in the Second Schedule to represent the Bar 
Council of the States and Union Territories;  
 
(d) six eminent persons of the ability, integrity and 
standing having professional experience of not less 
than twenty -five years in accountancy, commerce,  
medical science, management, public affairs or social 
science matters, to be no minated by the Supreme 
Court on the recommendation of a Committee 
comprising of a Judge of the Supreme Court, 
Chairperson of the Appellate Authority constituted 
under section 22A of the Chartered Accountants Act 
1949 (38 of 1949) and the Central Vigilance 
Commissioner appointed under sub -section (1) of 
section 4 of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 
2003 (45 of 2003);”;  
 
(ii) in sub-section (1A),- 
(a)  for the words – “No person”, the words “No person, 
except the persons mentioned in cl ause (d)”, shall 
be substituted; 
(b)  for the words "the proviso", the words "the 
Explanation" shall be substituted.  
 
(iii) for sub-section (3), the following sub -section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“(3) The term of office of a member of the Bar Council 
of India-  
(a) nominated by the  State Bar Counc il or Bar 
Council of the Union t erritories, as the case may 
be, under clause (c) shall be two years from the 
date of his nomination; 
(b) nominated under clause (d) shall be four  
years from the date of assumption of his office: 

98 
 
 
Provided that every such member shall continue to 
hold office as a member of the Bar Council of India 
until his successor is nominated.”. 
 
5. Amendment of section 6.  In section 6 of the Advocates 
Act,- 
 
(i) for clause (gg), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“(gg) to visit and inspect Universities and institutions 
imparting legal education in accordance with the 
directions given under clause (i) of sub -section(1) of 
section 7;”; 
 
(ii) after clause (dd), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
“(ddd) to provide for the recognition, registration and 
regulation of Bar Associations (except the Supreme 
Court Bar Association, Association of law firms, 
foreign lawyers) including election of its office bearers 
from amongst the list of regular practitioners of su ch 
Bar Association situated within its territorial limits 
and to make rules, schemes with concurrence of the 
Bar Council of India to secure their orderly growth;”. 
 
6. Amendment of section 7. In sub-section (1) of section 7 
of the Advocates Act,- 
 
(i) in claus e (i) , for the word “Universities”, wherever it 
occurs, the words “Universities and institutions imparting 
legal education” shall respectively be substituted; 
 
(ii) after clause (k), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely: - 
 
“(l) to provide for legal services to the persons belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, Other 
Backward Classes, women, differently abled persons, 
victims of social unrest , natural calamities, victim of 
diseases impacting the social acceptability, and needy 

99 
 
persons and for spreading legal literacy, legal 
awareness amongst the people;  
 
(m) to frame schemes achieving the objectives mentioned 
in clause (l) and to generate funds for the same by way 
of securing aid from the Government or non -
government organization engaged in social work; 
 
(n) to provide for pre -enrolment training and 
apprenticeship to a person who has obtained from a 
recognised institution degree in law for a period not 
exceeding one year; 
 
(o) to provide for continuing legal education for 
advocates; 
 
(p) to provide for recognition and registration of law firms 
and conditions subject to which they may practice 
law, and other legal services based Bar Associations or 
law firms and foreign lawyers, if any; 
 
(q) to make rules for verification of certificates of 
Advocates and for periodical verification of 
antecedents, conduct, place of practice of Advocates; 
and to make a data based web -portal of all the 
advocates;  
 
(r) to make rules for identifying the non -practicing 
advocates and barring their voting rights in the 
elections to the State Bar Councils, the Bar 
Associations and to impose such other conditions as it 
may deem fit;  
 
(s) to provide for supervision over the election of the 
members of the State Bar Councils; for issuance of 
directions in relation to the conduct of s uch elections 
and for resolution of all elections disputes relating 
thereto; 
 
(t) to make rules to deal with  strikes, boycotts or 
abstentions from courts by the Advocates, provide for 
suitable measures in this regard and to provide for 
punishments including the punishment of 

100 
 
disqualification from contesting any election of Bar 
Councils or of Bar Association for a period of six 
years; 
 
(u) to provide for Entrance Test for admission in the 
Institutions imparting legal education in the country  
and to provide for measures for improvement of legal 
education and to make provision for on -line teachings 
for all the law stude nts of the country either directly 
or through some charitable Institution; 
 
(v) to provide for Lawyers Academies and other similar 
institutions in each State through State Bar Councils, 
or any other organization, Institutions or Agencies for 
imparting continuous legal education for Advocates; 
 
(w) to provide for recognition, registration and regulation 
of law firms, foreign lawyers;”; 
 
(iii) clauses (l) and (m) shall be re -numbered as clauses (x) 
and (y) respectively. 
 
7. Amendment of section 8.  In section 8 of the Advocates 
Act, for the words “five years”, the words “six years” shall be 
substituted. 
 
8. Substitution of new section for section 9. For section 9 
of the Advocates Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
 
“9. Disciplinary Committees .- A Bar Council shall 
constitute one or more disciplinary committees, each of which 
shall consist of five persons of whom— 
 
(i) two persons shall be elected by the Council from amongst 
its members;  
 
(ii) two persons shall be from amongst em inent persons from 
fields other than law to be co-opted by the Council; and  
 
(iii) the fifth member shall be a person nominated by the High 
Court, in the following manner, namely:- 
 

101 
 
 
(a) in case of the Bar Council of India, fifth member of 
such Disciplinary Committees shall be a person, 
who has been the Chief Justice or a Judge of a 
High Court, as i`ts nominated member; 
 
(b) in case of a State Bar Council, fifth member of such 
Disciplinary Committees shall be a person, who has 
been a district judge, as its nominated member; 
 
Provided that the co -opted member shall not be a member of 
the Council, in case of Disciplinary Committee constituted by 
the Bar Council of India, the Judge shall be the Ch airman of 
the Committee, and the the members of a Disciplinary 
Committee of the State Bar Council, in its first meeting decide 
as to who shall preside over as the Chairman of the 
Committee. 
 
9. Substitution of new section for section 9A.  For 
section 9A of the Advocates Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
“9A.Constitution of legal aid committees .-(1) A Bar 
Council may constitute one or more legal aid committees 
each of which shall consist of seven members, of whom 
four shall be persons elected by the Council from amongst 
its members and three persons who are not members, to 
be co-opted by the Council from the following categories, 
namely:- 
 
(i) former Chief Justice or a Judge of a High Court; 
 
(ii) advocates who possess the qualifications specif ied 
in the first proviso to sub-section (2) of section 3;  
 
and the Chief Justice or the Judge of the High Court, co-
opted as member thereof, shall be the Chairman of the 
committee. 
 
(2) The term of office of the members of legal aid 
committee shall be five years.” 
 

102 
 
10. Insertion of new s ection 9B.  After section 9A of the 
Advocates Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
9B. Special Public Grievance Redressal Committee of Bar 
Council of India:- 
(1) The Bar Council of India shall constitute a Special 
Public Grievance Redressal Committee consisting of 
the following members, namely:- 
 
(i) one former Judge of Supreme Court or Chief 
Justice of any High Court as its Chairman; 
(ii) two retired Judges of different High Courts as its 
members;  
(iii) one senior Advocate; 
(iv) one member of the Bar Council of India; 
 
(2) The Special Public Grievance Redressal Committee 
shall inquire into any allegation or complaint of 
corrupt practices or misconduct against any office 
bearer or member of the Bar Council of India in 
discharge of his duti es as a member of the Council, 
which is referred to it by the Council. 
 
(3) The inquiry report of the Committee shall be placed 
before the General Body meeting of the Council and 
the Council after considering the report may- 
 
(i) accept the findings of the report and lodge a First 
Information Report; or 
(ii) accept the report and may refer the matter to 
initiate a disciplinary proceedings against the 
office-bearer or as the case may be a member, or 
(iii) not accept the report, for the reasons to be 
recorded in writing.”. 
 
11. Amendment of section 10.   In sub-section (1) of section 
10 of the Advocates Act, after clause (b), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely: - 
 
“(c) a bar associations affairs committee consisting of five 
members, of whom three shall be persons elected by the 
Council from amongst its members and two persons who 

103 
 
are not members to be co -opted by the Council one each 
from the following categories, namely: - 
 
(i) former Chief Justice or a Judge of a High Court or 
retired district Judge; 
(ii) advocates who possess the qualifications specified 
in the first proviso to sub-section (2) of section 3; 
 
and the Chief Justice or the Judge of the High Court, co -
opted as  member thereof shall be the Chairman of the 
committee.”.  
 
12. Amendment of section 10 A.  In section 10 A of the  
Advocates Act, after sub -section (4) , the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely: - 
 
     "(4A). A nominated member shall have a right to part icipate 
in all proceedings of the Bar Council and shall be entitled to 
vote on any matter except on the issue of removal of any office 
bearer of the Council.". 
 
13. Substitution of new section for section 14.  For section 
14 of the Advocates Act, the following  section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“14. Dispute as to election to Bar Councils:- 
 
(1) Any dispute as to the election to the Bar Council of 
India or the State Bar Council including election of its 
office bearers shall be referred to a committee 
constituted for this purpose by the Bar Council of India 
prior to the conduct of elections: 
 
Provided that an election of a member to a Bar Council 
shall not be called in question merely on the ground 
that due notice thereof has not been given to any person 
entitled to vote thereat, if notice of the date of election 
has been published in the Official Gazette, not less than 
thirty days before the date of election. 
 
(2) The Committee referred to in sub -section(1) shall be 
comprised of (a) in case of Bar Council of India a retired 
Judge of the Supreme Court as its Chairman and 

104 
 
Chairmen of two State bar Councils as its Members; and 
(b) in case of State Bar Councils, a retired Judge of the 
High Court as its Chairman and two Members of the 
Bar Council of India of whom one Membe r shall be a 
person from the other State.   
 
(3) The Committee shall have powers to pass any interim 
order and such other power as may be prescribed.". 
 
14. Amendment of section 15. In sub-section (2) of section 
15 of the Advocates Act, after clause (j), the follo wing clause 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“(ja) the form in which complaint shall be made to the 
State Bar Council and fees payable therewith;”. 
 
15. Substitution of new section for section 19.  For section 
19 of the Advocates Act, the following section shall b e 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“19. State Bar Councils to send copies of rolls of advocates 
to Bar Council of India. 
Every State Bar Council shall send to the Bar Council of 
India a copy of the roll of advocates prepared by it for the 
first time under this Act and shall thereafter communicate 
to the Bar Council of India all alterations in, the additions 
to, any such roll , electronically, as soon as the same has 
been made within a period not later than seven days.  
 
16. Amendment of section 22. After sub -section (2) of 
section 22 of the Advocates Act, the following sub -section shall 
be inserted, namely: - 
 
“(3) The State Bar C ouncil shall maintain an electronic 
data base of all the advocates on its roll containing such 
information as may be prescribed; and it shall keep 
updating it, as and when any change takes place, and such 
Data be made available on the web -site of the State  Bar 
Council.” 
 
 
 
 

105 
 
17. Amendment of section 24.   In sub-section (1) of section 
24 of the Advocates Act,- 
(a) in clause (f),- 
 
(I) (i) for the words “six hundred rupees”, the words “two 
thousand rupees” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “one hundred fifty rupees”, the words 
“five hundred rupees” shall be substituted; 
 
(II) (i) for the words “one hundred rupees”, the words “five 
hundred rupees” shall be substituted; 
(ii)for the words “twenty-five rupees”, the words “one 
hundred rupees” shall be substituted; 
 
(b) after clause (f) the following clauses shall be inserted,  
namely:- 
 
“(g) he has paid professional development fees  of three 
hundred rupees to the State Bar Council and two hundred 
rupees to the Bar Council of India: 
 
Provided that  where such person is a member of the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, the professional 
development fee payable by him to the State Bar Council 
shall be two hundred rupees and to the Bar Council of 
India, one hundred rupees; 
 
(h) he clears the All  India Bar Examination or any other 
test prescribed by Bar Council of India and fulfils such 
other conditions as may be specified in the rules made by 
the Bar Council of India.”. 
 
18. Substitution of new section for section 24A.    For 
section 24 A of the Advoc ates Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely: - 
 
“24A. Disqualification for enrolment._ (1) No person shall 
be admitted as an advocate on a State roll- 
 
(a) if he is convicted of an offence involving moral 
turpitude; or 
 

106 
 
(b) if he is convicted on an offen ce under the 
provisions of the Untouchability (O ffences) 
Act, 1955 (22 of 1955) or the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention 
of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (33 of 1989); or 
 
(c) if he has been convicted of contempt of court 
subject to any order or decision of court.  
 
(d) if he has been dismissed or removed from 
service or employment under the Union or 
the State or its undertakings or any statutory 
body or Corporation.”. 
 
19. Substitution of new section for section 26A .  For 
section 26A of the Advocates Act, the following shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“26A. Power to remove names from rolls .-   A State Bar 
Council may on receipt of information or request, remove 
from the State roll, the name of any advocate,- 
(a) who is dead; or 
(b) from whom a request has been received to that -
effect; or 
(c) who is found guilty of serious misconduct or 
abstaining from courts work or causing 
obstruction in court’s functioning; or 
(d) who has incurred any disqualification under 
section 24A.”. 
 
20. Amendment of section 33. In section 33 of the 
Advocates Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-  
 
“Provided that the practice by law firms and foreign 
lawyers recognized and registered by the Bar Council 
of India shall be subject to the terms and conditions of 
the registration under this Act.”. 
 
21. Insertion of new section 33A. After section 33 of the 
Advocates Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
 
“33A. Registration of an advocate with a Bar Association._  
 

107 
 
(1) An advocate enroll ed with the State Bar Council 
engaged in or intend to practice before a court of law, 
tribunal or before any authority or person shall get 
himself registered as a member of the Bar Association 
where he ordinarily practices or intends to practice 
law.  
 
(2) In case any advocate leaves one Bar Association and 
joins another by reason of change of place of practice 
or by reason of change of field of law, he shall intimate 
such change to the Bar Association of which he is a 
member within a period of thirty days.”.  
 
22. Amendment of section 35.   In section 35 of the 
Advocates Act, -  
 
(i) after sub -section(1A), the following sub -section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“(1AB) The  decision of referring a case under sub -
section(1), to the disciplinary committee shall be taken 
by t he concerned Bar Council within a period of six 
months from the date of receipt of the complaint. 
 
(1AC) The complaint to the State Bar Council shall be 
made in such form and accompanied by such fees, as 
may be prescribed by the State Bar Council.”; 
 
(ii) in su b-section (3), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
“(e)   impose a fine which may extend of rupees three 
lakhs and the cost of proceedings;  
(f) award compensation of such an amount, subject to 
a maximum of rupees five lakhs as it may deem fit, 
payable to the person aggrieved by the misconduct 
of the advocate; 
(g) impose costs, subject to a maximum of rupees two 
lakhs,-  
(i) on the complainant in case the complaint is 
found to be vexatious, false or frivolous;  

108 
 
(ii) on the advocate concerned in case he is fou nd 
to be not cooperating in the disciplinary 
proceedings under the Act.”, 
 
(iii) after sub-section(5), the following sub -section shall 
be inserted, namely:- 
 
“(6) During the pendency of a disciplinary proceeding in 
the complaints of grave misconduct, the State B ar 
Council, if deems fit, it may suspend the advocate 
concerned from practice during the pendency of such 
proceedings, provided no such suspension shall be 
made without the recommendation of a Committee 
consisting of (a) a former Judge of the High Court wh o 
will be the Chairman of the Committee; and (b) two 
Senior Advocates, as may be constituted by the State 
Bar Council.  
 
(iv) after sub -section (6), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
“Provided that if the advocate is convicted under 
section 24A, he shall be deemed to have been guilty of 
professional misconduct unless operation of such 
conviction is stayed by a court of competent 
jurisdiction.”. 
 
23.  Insertion of new section 35A.  After section 35 of the 
Advocates Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
“35A.Prohibition on the boycotts or abstention from 
courts’ work .– No association of advocates or any 
member of the association or any advocate, either 
individually or collectively, shall, give a call for boycott 
or abstinence from courts’ work or boycott or abstain 
from courts’ work or cause obstruction in any form in 
court’s functioning or in court premises.”. 
 
24. Amendment of section 36B.  For sub -section (1) of 
section 36B of the Advocates Act, the following sub-section shall 
be substituted, namely:- 
 

109 
 
“(1)(a) The disciplinary committee of the State Bar Council 
shall dispose of the complaint received by it under section 
35 expeditiously and in each case the proceedings shall 
be concluded by the concerned Bar Council within a 
period of six months from the date of receipt of the 
complaint. 
 
(b) The proceedings initiated by the State Bar Council 
either on the complaint or suo motu  shall be completed 
within a period of six months from the date of initiation 
subject to extension for a maximum period of six months 
by the Bar Council of India, for the reasons to be recorded 
in writing. 
 
(c) In the event of,-  
 
(i) a decision not being taken wh ether to initiate the 
proceeding within a period of six months from the 
date of receipt of the complaint, or  
 
(ii) the proceedings being initiated, but not completed 
within a period of six months or the extended 
period, as the case may be,  
 
then, such complai nt or the proceedings shall stand 
transferred to the Bar Council of India, which may 
dispose of the same as if it were a proceeding withdrawn 
for inquiry under sub-section(2) of section 36.”. 
 
25. Amendment of Section 45.  In section 45 of the 
Advocates Act, fo r the words “with imprisonment for a term 
which may extent to six months”, the words “with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which 
may extend to rupees two lakhs” shall be substituted. 
 
26. Insertion of new section 45A.   After section 45 of the 
Advocates Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
 
45A. Claim for compensation in certain cases.- 
 
(1) If any person suffers loss due to the misconduct of the 
advocate or for his participation in strike or otherwise, 

110 
 
then, such person may make a claim for 
compensation against the advocate in the appropriate 
forum established under any law for the time being in 
force. 
 
(2) The non -payment of fees, either in full or part, by a 
person to his advocate shall not be a defence av ailable 
for the advocate against whom such claim for 
compensation is made. 
 
27. Amendment of section 49. In sub-section (1) of section 49 
of the Advocates Act,- 
 
(i) after the words “State Bar Council ”, wherever they occur, 
the words “and the Supreme Court Bar Association” shall 
be inserted; 
 
(ii) for clause (af), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
“(af) the minimum qualifications and other eligibility 
including age required for admission to a course of 
degree of law in any recognised university;” 
 
(iii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
 
“(d) the standards of legal education to be observed by 
Universities and institutions imparting legal education in 
India; and for that purpose the manner of inspection, 
and the fees relating thereto keeping in view the 
budgetary provisions of universities and institutions 
imparting legal education, and the term and conditions 
for approval of the courses;  
 
(iv) after clause (i),  the following clauses  shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
“(ia) the manner in which the State Bar Council may 
exercise supervision and control over Bar Associations 
except the Supreme Court Bar Association, Association of 
law firms and foreign lawyers, situated within its 
territorial jurisdiction and the manner in wh ich the 

111 
 
directions issued or orders passed by the State Bar 
Council may be enforced; 
 
(ib) to provide for continuing legal education for advocates 
and its monitoring; 
 
(ic) to make rules to register and regulate the law firms 
including such firms operating in more than one State; 
 
(id) to register and regulate Bar Associations; 
 
(ie) for rendering of legal services and spreading legal  
literacy; 
 
(if) regulation of the Supreme Court Bar Association in 
consultation with the President of the Bar Association and 
for regulation of Associations of law firms and foreign 
lawyers; 
 
(ig) to prepare and carry out welfare schemes for 
advocates in practice.”. 
 
28. Amendment of section 50.  In sub-section (5) of section 
50 of the Advocates Act, in clause (b) for the words “the 
Schedule”, the words “the First Schedule” shall be substituted.  
 
29. Insertion of the Second Schedule .-After section 60 of 
the Advocates Act, for the words “THE SCHEDULE”, the words 
“THE FIRST SCHEDULE” shall be substituted and after the 
First Schedule, the following schedule shall be inserted, 
namely:- 
 
 
“THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 4(1)I] 
Zone I 
1. Adhra Pradesh 
2. Goa 
3. Karnataka 
4. Kerala 
5. Maharashtra 
6. Odisha 

112 
 
7. Tamil Nadu 
8. Telangana 
 
Zone II 
1. Haryana 
2. Himachal Pradesh 
3. Jammu and Kashmir 
4. Punjab 
5. Uttarakhand 
6. Uttar Pradesh 
 
Zone III 
1. Bihar 
2. Chhattisgarh 
3. Gujarat 
4. Jharkhand 
5. Madhya Pradesh 
6. Rajasthan 
7. West Bengal 
 
Zone IV 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 
2. Assam 
3. Manipur 
4. Meghalaya 
5. Mizoram 
6. Nagaland 
7. Sikkim 
8. Tripura 
 
Zone V 
1. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
2. Chandigarh 
3. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
4. Daman and Diu 
5. Delhi  
6. Lakshadweep 
7. Puducherry.”. 
 
----- 

113 
 
 