 
 
 
 
 
Law Commission of India 
 
 
Report No.267 
 
 
 
Hate Speech 
 
 
 
March 2017 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 


iii 
 
 

iv 
 
 
Report No.267 
Hate Speech 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter Title Page 
I Background 1-4 
II Hate Speech in India 5-8 
III Examination of the Issue by the Commission 9-14 
IV Impact of Hate Speech on Freedom of Expression 15-31 
V Identifying Criteria of Hate Speech 32-36 
VI Review of Penal Law 37-50 
Annexure   
A The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2017 51-53 
 
 

CHAPTER – I 
 
Background 
 
1.1 Rights are the cornerstone of individual autonomy. They are 
guaranteed as limits on the power of State. 1 In democratic societies they 
have been granted to protect individual from undue State interference. 
Freedom of expression has been enshrined in article 19 of the Universal 
Declaration on Human Rights 2. It is considered to be one of the most 
significant rights as it allows a person to attain self fulfilment and 
strengthen the capacity to fully enjoy freedom.3 
 
1.2 Globally, history witnessed a complete subversion of rights and loss 
of freedoms not just under colonial rule but also the brutal regime of 
Adolph Hitler who had  created a ministry to centralis e Nazi control of all 
aspects of German cultural and intellectual life. 4 In the Reich Ministry of 
Public Enlightenment and Propaganda, Hitler appointed Joseph 
Goebbels as the Reich Propaganda Minister. An unstated goal was to 
present to other nations the impression that the Nazi Party had  the full 
and enthusiastic backing of the entire population. 5 It was responsible for 
controlling the German news media, literature, visual arts, filmmaking, 
theatre, music and broadcasting.  The consequences of such a ministry 
which aimed at spreading the Nazi ideology, 6 are well documented in 
history.  
 
1.3 The Constituent Assembly , c onscious of the burdens of history  
                                                           
1 J.S. Mill, On Liberty and Utilitarianism 4 (Bantam Classic, New York, 2008) . 
2  U.N.G.A. Res. 217 A (III), 1948. 
3 Steffen Schmidt and II Mack C. Shelley, Barbara Bardes et. al., American Government and Politics Today 
(Cengage Learning, USA, 2014). 
4Peter Longerich, Goebbels: A Biography 212-213 (Random House, New York, 2015). 
5 Richard J. Evans , The Third Reich in Power 121 (Penguin, New York, 2005). 
6Roger Manvell and Heinrich Fraenkel,  Doctor Goebbels: His Life and Death 121 (Skyhorse, New York, 
1960). 

2 
 
placed utmost emphasis  on ‘freedom of speech and expression’ as a 
hard-earned right of the new democracy. The discussion on limitations 
on t his freedom  therefore, centred on whether the proviso to the 
fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression should cover 
speech that is ‘likely to promote class hatred’. 7The discussion was 
brought up on multiple occasions, not just limited to debate s on 
fundamental freedoms but also on ‘public order’ or ‘morality’. 
 
1.4 It was initially suggested that the freedom of speech and expression 
would carry the proviso: 
(a) the right of every citizen to freedom of speech and 
expression: 
Provision may be made  by law to make the publication or 
utterance of seditious, obscene, blasphemous, slanderous, 
libellous or defamatory matter actionable or punishable … 
 
Provision may be made by law to impose such reasonable 
restrictions as may be necessary in the public in terest 
including the protection of minority groups and tribes.  
 
This provision faced substantial opposition in the Assembly where 
members argued that it denies ‘absolute’ nature to rights which are 
fundamental. After deep consideration and multiple revisi ons Ambedkar 
pointed out: 
 
it is wrong to say that fundamental rights in America are 
absolute. The difference between the position under the 
American Constitution and the Draft Constitution is one of 
form and not of substance. That the fundamental rights i n 
America are not absolute rights is beyond dispute. In support 
of every exception to the fundamental rights set out in the 
Draft Constitution one can refer to at least one judgment of 
the United States Supreme Court. It would be sufficient to 
quote one such judgment of the Supreme Court in justification 
                                                           
7 Those who spoke during the discussion in the Committee on hate speech were K.M. Panikkar, Alladi 
Krishnaswami Iyer, Syama Prasad Mookherjee, K.M. Munshi, the chairperson J.B. Kriplani, C. 
Rajagopalachari and H.C. Mookherjee and Thakur Das Bhargava. 

3 
 
of the limitation on the right of free speech contained in Article 
13 of the Draft Constitution. In Gitlow Vs. New York in which 
the issue was the constitutionality of a New York "criminal 
anarchy" law which purported to punish utterances calculated 
to bring about violent change, the Supreme Court said: 
"It is a fundamental principle, long established, that 
the freedom of speech and of the press, which is 
secured by the Constitution, does not confer an 
absolute right to speak or publish, without 
responsibility, whatever one may choose, or an 
unrestricted and unbridled license that gives 
immunity for every possible use of language and 
prevents the punishment of those who abuse this 
freedom."  
It is therefore w rong to say that the fundamental rights in 
America are absolute, while those in the Draft Constitution 
are not. 8 
 
 
1.5 The assumption that a rule denying the state power to restrict speech 
on the basis of its content will produce the broadest possible deb ate is 
problematic as this might produce debate that is informed by the 
prejudices of the public. 9 This is especially true in regard to speech that 
acts as a tool to marginalise the vulnerable groups by denying them 
equal place in the society.  
 
1.6 In a p lural democracy, there is always a conflict between different 
narratives and interpretation of what constitutes public interest. 
Democracy thrives on disagreements provided they do not cross the 
boundaries of civil discourse. Critical and dissenting voices are important 
for a vibrant society. However, care must be taken to prevent public 
discourse from becoming a tool to promote  speech inimical to public 
order.  The mode of exercise, the context and the extent of abuse of 
freedom are important in determinin g the contours of permissible 
                                                           
8Constituent Assembly Debates (Nov. 4, 1948) 1459. 
9 Owen M. Fiss, "Why the State?" 100 Harv. L. Rev. 785 (1986-1987). 

4 
 
restrictions.10 The State therefore assumes an important role in ensuring 
that freedoms are not exercised in an unconstitutional manner. 
 
1.7 The Constitution acknowledges that  liberty cannot be absolute or 
uncontrolled and mak es provisions in clauses (2) to (6)  of article 19 
authorising the S tate to restrict the exercise of the freedom guaranteed 
under that article within the limits specified in those clauses.  Thus, 
clause (2) of article 19, as subsequently amended by the Cons titution 
(First Amendment) Act, 1951 and the Constitution (Sixteenth 
Amendment) Act, 1963 , enabled the legislature to impose reasonable 
restrictions on the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and 
expression in the interests of (i) the security of th e State and sovereignty 
and integrity of India, (ii) friendly relations with foreign States, (iii)public 
order, (iv) decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, 
defamation or incitement to an offence. 
 
1.8 Thus it was in this backdrop that th e ‘limits’ to article 19 
contained in 19(2) were arrived at, rather than approaching a definition 
of hate speech itself.  
 
 
                                                           
10 S. Sivakumar, Press Law and Journalists 11 (Universal Law Publishing Co., Gurgaon, 2015) 

5 
 
CHAPTER-II 
Legal Provisions of Hate Speech in India 
 
2.1 Responsible speech is the essence of the liberty granted under 
article 21 of the Constitution. One of the greatest challenges before the 
principle of autonomy and free speech principle is to ensure that this 
liberty is not exercised to the detriment of any individual or the 
disadvantaged section of the society. In a country like  India, with diverse 
castes, creed, religions and languages, this issue poses a greater 
challenge.  
 
2.2 Article 19(2) of the Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and 
expression to all citizens of India. This article is subjected to certain 
restrictions, namely, sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the 
State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or 
morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to 
an offence.  
 
2.3 Hate speech has not been  defined in any law in India. However, 
legal provisions in certain legislations prohibit select forms of speech as 
an exception to freedom of speech. 
 
Legislations Around Hate speech: 
 
2.4 Presently, in our country the following legislations have bearing o n 
hate speech, namely:- 
 
(i) the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter IPC) 
 
 Section 124A IPC penalises sedition 

6 
 
 Section 153A IPC penalises ‘promotion of enmity between different 
groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, 
language, etc. , and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of 
harmony’.  
 Section 153B IPC penalis es ‘imputations, assertions prejudicial to 
national-integration’. 
 Section 295 A IPC penalises ‘deliberate and malicious acts, 
intended to outrage religious feelings of any cla ss by insulting its 
religion or religious beliefs’. 
 Section 298 IPC penalises ‘uttering, words, etc., with deliberate 
intent to wound the religious feelings of any person’. 
 Section 505(1) and (2)  IPC penalises publication or circulation of 
any statement, r umour or report causing public mischief  and 
enmity, hatred or ill-will between classes. 
 
(ii) the Representation of The People Act, 1951 
 
 Section 8 disqualifies a person from contesting election if he is 
convicted for indulging in acts amounting to illegit imate use of 
freedom of speech and expression. 
 Section 123(3A) and section 125 prohibits promotion of enmity on 
grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language in 
connection with election as a corrupt electoral practice and 
prohibits it.  
 
(iii) the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 
 
 Section 7 penalises incitement to , and encouragement of 
untouchability through words, either spoken or written, or by signs 
or by visible representations or otherwise  

7 
 
 
(iv) the Religious Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988 
 
 Section 3(g) prohibits religious institution or its manager to allow 
the use of any premises belonging to, or under the control of, the 
institution for promoting or attempting to promote disharmony, 
feelings of enmity, hatred, ill-will between different religious, racial, 
language or regional groups or castes or communities.  
 
(v) the Cable Television Network Regulation Act, 1995 
 
 Sections 5 and 6 of the Act prohibits transmission or re -
transmission of a programme through cable network in  
contravention to the prescribed programme code or advertisement 
code. These codes have been defined in rule 6 and 7 respectively of 
the Cable Television Network Rules, 1994. 
 
(vi)  the Cinematograph Act, 1952 
 
 Sections 4, 5B and 7 empower  the Board of  Film Certification to 
prohibit and regulate the screening of a film. 
 
(vii) the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
 
 Section 95 empowers the State Government, to forfeit publications 
that are punishable under sections 124A, 153A, 153B, 292, 293 or 
295A IPC. 
 Section 107 empowers the Executive Magistrate to prevent a 
person from committing a breach of the peace or disturb the public 

8 
 
tranquillity or to do any wrongful act that may probably cause 
breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity. 
 Section 144 emp owers the District Magistrate, a Sub -divisional 
Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered 
by the State Government in this behalf to issue order in urgent 
cases of nuisance or apprehended danger.  The above offences are 
cognizable. Thu s, have serious repercussions on liberties of 
citizens and empower a police officer to arrest without orders from 
a magistrate and without a warrant as in section 155 CrPC.  
 
 
 

9 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
Examination of the Issue by the Commission 
 
3.1 Hate speech has always been a live debate in India. The issue has 
been raised time and again before the legislature, court as well as the 
public. In Pravasi Bhalai Sangathan  v. Union of India 11, the Supreme 
Court dealt with a case where the petitioners  prayed that the State 
should take peremptory action against makers of hate speech. The Court 
did not go beyond the purview of existing laws to penalise hate speech as 
that would amount to ‘judicial overreach’. The Court observed that the 
implementation of existing laws would  solve the problem of hate speech 
to a great extent. The matter was referred to the Law Commission to 
examine if it ‘deems proper to define hate speech and make 
recommendations to the Parliament to strengthen the Election 
Commission to curb the menace of “ hate speeches” irrespective of, 
whenever made.’ 
 
3.2 While recognising the adverse and discriminatory impact of hate 
speech on individuals, the Court in Pravasi Bhalai Sangathan 12 also 
expressed the difficulty of ‘confining the prohibition to a manageable 
standard’. The apprehension that laying down a definite standard might 
lead to curtailment of free speech has prevented the judiciary from 
defining hate speech in India and elsewhere.  
 
3.3 The Court again went into the question of hate speech in Jafar Imam 
Naqvi v. Election Commission of India .13 The petitioners filed a writ 
petition challenging the vitriolic speeches made by the candidates in the 
                                                           
11AIR 2014 SC 1591. 
12 Ibid. 
13AIR 2014 SC 2537. 

10 
 
election and prayed for issue of writ of mandamus to the Election 
Commission for taking appropriate steps agains t such speeches. 
However, the Court dismissed the petition on the ground that the 
petition under article 32 of the Constitution regarding speeches delivered 
during election campaign does not qualify as public interest litigation 
and that the Court cannot l egislate on matters where the legislative 
intent is visible.  
 
Analysis of Hate Speech Jurisprudence in India 
 
3.4 Hate speech can be curtailed under article 19(2) on the grounds of 
public order, incitement to offence and security of the State.  The 
Supreme Court in Brij Bhushan v. State of Delhi 14  opined that public 
order was allied to the public safety and considered equivalent to 
security of the State. This interpretation was validated by the First 
Constitution Amendment, when public order was inserted a s a ground of 
restriction under 19(2).15 
 
3.5 However, i n Ram Manohar  Lohiya v. State of Bihar  16, Supreme 
Court distinguished law and order, public order and security of State 
from each other. Observing that: 
 
One has to imagine three concentric circles. La w and order 
represents the largest circle within which is the next circle 
representing public order and the smallest circle represents 
security of State. It is then easy to see that an act may affect 
law and order but not public order just as an act may af fect 
public order but not security of the State. 
 
                                                           
14AIR 1950 SC 129. 
15The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 . 
16AIR 1966 SC 740. 

11 
 
3.6 The standard applied for restricting article 19(1)(a) is the highest 
when imposed in the interest of security of the State. Also, a 
reasonable restriction under article 19(2) implies that the relation 
between restriction and public order has to be proximate and direct as 
opposed to a remote or fanciful connection.17 
 
3.7 In Ramji Lal Modi v. State of U.P .18 the Supreme Court upheld the 
constitutional validity  of this section 295A19 IPC and ruled that this 
section does not penalise every act of insult to or attempt to ‘insult the 
religion or the religious beliefs of a class of citizens but it penalises only 
those acts of insults to or those varieties of attempts to insult the religion 
or the religious beliefs  of a class of citizens, which are perpetrated with 
the deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings 
of that class.’ 20  It was also held by the Court that the expression in the 
‘interest of public order’ mentioned in article 19(2) is much wider that 
‘maintenance of public order ’. Therefore, even if an act does not actually 
cause breach of public order, its restriction ‘in the interest of public 
order’ will be deemed reasonable. 
 
3.8 In Ramesh v. Union of India21, the Supreme Court refused to adjudge 
speech in isolation and held that a movie that intends to impart message 
of peace cannot be considered to violate article 19(1)(a) just because it 
shows fanaticism and violence in order to express the futility of such 
acts. Thus, it is not  the act itself but the potentiality of the act and its 
                                                           
17O. K. Ghosh  v. E. X. Joseph, AIR 1963 SC 812; and Supdt. Central Prison v. Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia, 
AIR 1960 SC 633. 
18AIR 1957 SC 620. 
19 It reads: “Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings of any 
class of [citizens of India], [by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations or 
otherwise], insults or attempts to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to [three years], or with fine, or with 
both.]” 
20Supra note 18. 
21AIR 1988 SC 775. 

12 
 
effect on public tranquility that justifies restriction under article 
19(2).22In this case, the Court refused to treat the freedom of expression 
at par with the societal interests enumerated under arti cle 19(2). It was 
observed that a restriction on speech was justified only if it was 
imminently dangerous to the community as it was held that: 
 
The problem of defining the area of freedom of expression 
when it appears to conflict with the various social i nterests 
enumerated under  Article 19(2)  may briefly be touched upon 
here. There does indeed have to be a compromise between the 
interest of freedom of expression and social interests. But we 
cannot simply balance the two interests as if they are of equal 
weight. Our commitment to freedom of expression demands 
that it cannot be suppressed unless the situations created by 
allowing the freedom are pressing and the community interest 
is endangered. The anticipa ted danger should not be remote, 
conjectural or farfetched. It should have proximate and direct 
nexus with the expression. The expression of thought should 
be intrinsically dangerous to the public interest. In other 
words, the expression should be insepara bly locked up with 
the action contemplated like the equivalent  of a "spark in a 
powder keg".23 
 
3.9 In Shreya Singhal v. Union of India24, the court declared section 66 
A of the Information Technology Act invalid as it did not establish any 
proximate relationship between the restriction and the act. It was opined 
that: 
 
…the nexus between the message and action that may be 
taken based on the message is conspicuously absent – there is 
no ingredient in this offence of inciting anybody to do anything 
which a rea sonable man would then say would have the 
tendency of being an immediate threat to public safety or 
tranquility. 
 
                                                           
22 See Ram Manohar Lohiya supra note 17; and Arun Ghosh v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1970 SC 1228. 
23 Ram Manohar Lohiya supra note 17. 
24AIR 2015 SC 1523. 

13 
 
3.10 The court in this case differentiated between discussion and 
advocacy from incitement and held that the first two were the essence of 
article 19(1). Expression could only be restricted when discussion and 
advocacy amounted to incitement.  The incitement was read as 
incitement to imminent violence in Arup Bhuyan v. State of Assam ,25  
wherein the Supreme Court  declined to impute criminality on  a person 
for being a member of a banned organisation unless that person resorted 
to violence or incited people to violence or created public disorder by 
violence or incitement to violence. 
 
3.11 The context of speech plays an important role in determining  its 
legitimacy under a rticle 19(1)(a) of the Constitution . In State of 
Maharasthra v. Sangharaj Damodar Rupawate26 the Court observed that 
the effect of the words used in the offending material must be judged 
from the standards of reasonable, strong -minded, firm and courageous 
men, and not those of weak and vacillating minds, nor of those who 
scent danger in every hostile point of view.  In Arumugam Seervai v. State 
of Tami Nadu 27, the Supreme Court upheld the prosecution under the 
Scheduled Castes and  Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act , 
1989 for using the words `pallan', ‘pallapayal' `parayan' or `paraparayan' 
with the intent to insult. The historical context of the impugned words 
was examined in this case. 
 
3.12 Interpreting sections 153A and 505(2) of IPC in Bilal Ahmed Kaloo 
v. State of AP,28 the Court held that the common feature in b oth sections 
is that it makes promotion of feeling of enmity, hatred  or ill-will between 
different religious or racial or language or regional groups or castes and 
communities and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony an 
                                                           
25(2011) 3 SCC 377. 
26(2010) 7 SCC 398. 
27 (2011) 6 SCC 405. 
28AIR 1997 SC 3483. 

14 
 
offence.  It is necessary that at least two such groups or communities 
should be involved to attract this provision. Merely hurting the feelings of 
one community or group without any reference to another community or 
group cannot attract either of the two sections. 
 
3.13 In Babu Rao Patel v. State of Delhi  29 the Court held that section 
153A(1) IPC is not confined to the promotion of f eelings of enmity etc. on 
grounds of religion only, but takes in to account  promotion of such 
feelings on other grounds as well , such as race, place of birth, residence, 
language, caste or community.  
 
3.14 The recent decisions show that the India follows a  speech 
protective regime as in practice in the United States and the Courts are 
extremely cautious in restricting article 19  of the Constitution .  The 
reason behind such a stance is the apprehension and fear of misuse of 
restrictive statutes by the State.  
                                                           
29AIR 1980 SC 763. 

15 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
Impact of Hate Speech on Freedom of Expression 
 
4.1 Right to freedom of speech and expression is one of the most 
essential liberties recognized by the democratic States.30 The concept 
of liberty has been primarily influenced by the princip le of individual 
autonomy. The liberal theory of free speech views speech as an intrinsic 
aspect of autonomous individual, hence any restriction  on exer cise of 
this liberty is always subject to judicial scrutiny. The objective of free 
speech in a democracy  is to promote plurality of opinions. The 
importance of allowing expression, howsoever , unpopular has been 
stressed by J.S. Mill in the following words, in his work ‘On Liberty’: 
 
If all mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and only one 
person were of t he contrary opinion, mankind would be no 
more justified in silencing that one person, than he, if he had 
the power, would be justified in silencing mankind. 31 
 
4.2 The importance of allowing diversity of opinion has guided the 
principles of free speech. Thus, even a speech that is ‘vehement, caustic, 
and sometimes unpleasantly sharp’ 32 is protected from State 
intervention.   
 
4.3 Hate speech is an expression which is likely to cause distress or 
offend other individuals on the basis of their association with a particular 
group or incite hostility towards them. There is no general legal definition 
of hate speech, perhaps for t he apprehension that setting a standard for 
determining unwarranted speech may lead to suppression of this liberty. 
                                                           
30 See Handyside v. United Kingdom, Application no. 5493/72(1976). 
31J.S. Mill, supra note 1. 
32New York Times v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964). 

16 
 
 
4.4 The philosopher Jeremy Waldron argues that, while purely 
offensive speech may not justify restrictions, there is a class of injury, 
amounting to more than hurt sentiments but to less than harm, in the 
sense of physical injury, that demands restriction in democratic 
frameworks. Where speech injures dignity , it will do more harm than 
simply offend its target. It would undermine the “implicit assurance” that 
citizens of a democracy, particularly minorities or vulnerable groups are 
placed on the same footing as the majority. 33 While the right to criticis e 
any group should continue to  exist, speech that negates the right of a 
vulnerable group should be regulated. 
 
4.5 Free speech has always been considered to be the quintessence of 
every democracy.  The doctrine of f ree speech has evolved as a bulwark 
against state’ s power to regulate speech. The  liberal doctrine was a 
measure against the undemocratic power of the state.   The freedom of 
expression was one of the core freedoms that were incorporated in the 
Bill of Human R ights.34 The greater value accorded to the expression, in 
the scheme of rights , explains the reluctance of the law makers and 
judiciary in creating exceptions that may curtail the spirit of this 
freedom. Perhaps, t his is the reason behind the reluctance in defining 
hate speech. 
 
An Overview of International Legal Regime on Hate Speech 
 
4.6 The working of the free speech doctrine very often point s to the 
failure of this freedom in addressing the discriminatory , hostile and 
offending attitudes of some individuals and s ome small strata  of the 
society. It was this viewpoint that led to the prohibition of ‘ advocacy of 
                                                           
33Jeremy Waldron, The Harm in Hate Speech 87-88 (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 2012). 
34William A. Schabas, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights : The Travaux Préparatoires (Volume 
I) lxxiii (Cambridge University Press, New York, 2013). 

17 
 
national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to 
discrimination, hostility or violence’ 35 under article 2 0(2) of the 
International Coven ant on Civil and Political Right , 1966 ( hereinafter 
ICCPR)36. Similarly, articles 4 and 6 of the International Convention on 
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination , 1966 ( hereinafter 
ICERD)37 prohibits ‘dissemination of ideas based on racial supe riority or 
hatred, incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence 
or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons of 
another colour or ethnic origin ’ and mandates the signatory states  to 
provide effective remedies and protection against such actions. 
 
4.7 The issue of hate speech has assumed greater significance in the 
era of internet, since the accessibility of internet allo ws offensive 
speeches to affect a larger audience in a short span of time. Recognising 
this issue, the Human Rights Council’s ‘Report of the Special Rapporteur 
on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression’38 on content regulation on internet , expressed that freedom 
of expression can be restricted on the following grounds39, namely: 
 
 child pornography (to protect the rights of children), 
 hate speech (to protect the rights of affected communities) 
 defamation (to protect the rights and reputation of others against 
unwarranted attacks)  
 direct and public incitement to co mmit genocide (to protect the 
rights of others) 
                                                           
35 Roger Kiska, “Hate Speech: A Comparison between the European Court of Human Rights and the 
United States Supreme Court Jurisprudence” 25 Regent University Law Review 119 (2012). 
36 99 U.N.T.S. 171 (1966). 
37 660 UNTS 195 (1966). 
38 Human Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and Protection of the Right 
to Freedom of Opinion and Expression, 17th Session, A/HRC/17/27 (May 16, 2011), available at : 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/17session/A.HRC.17.27_en.pdf  (last visited on Jan. 
23, 2017). 
39Id. at para 25. 

18 
 
 advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes 
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence (to protect the 
rights of others, such as the right to life). 
 
4.8 The analysis of hate sp eech in different countries suggests that 
despite not having a general definition, it has been recognis ed as an 
exception to free speech by international institutio ns and municipal 
courts.  
 
European Union and United Kingdom 
 
4.9 European Court of Human Ri ghts (hereinafter ECtHR) has 
contributed immensely in developing jurisprudence on hate speech. 
Article 1040 of the ‘European Convention of Human Rights’ 41 (hereinafter 
ECHR) guarantees right to freedom of expression, subject to certain 
‘formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties’ stipulated in clause 2 of 
this a rticle.42 Article 17 of the Convention prohibits abuse of rights by 
‘any State, group or person.’43 
 
4.10 ECtHR while determining cases related to hate speech examines it 
on the touchstone of the  Convention values. If the act in question 
negates the rights guaranteed under the Convention, it is decl ared 
                                                           
40 Art. 10(1) reads: “Everyone has th e right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to 
hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and 
regardless of frontiers. This Article shall not prevent States from requiring t he licensing of broadcasting, 
television or cinema enterprises.”  
41European Convention on Human Rights, 213 UNTS 221(1950). 
42 Art. 10(2) reads : “The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may 
be subject to such f ormalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are 
necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, 
for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of health or morals, for the protection of the 
reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for 
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.” 
43 Art. 17 reads: “Nothing in this Conv ention may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person 
any right to engage in any activity or perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and 
freedoms set forth herein or at their limitation to a greater extent than is provi ded for in the Convention.” 

19 
 
impermissible pursuant to article 17 of the Convention.44  The 
Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers to Member States on Hate 
Speech has defined ‘Hate Speech’ as:  
… the term "hate speech" shall be understood as covering all 
forms of expression which spread, incite, promote or justify 
racial hatred, xenophobia, anti -Semitism or other forms of 
hatred based on intolerance, including: intolerance e xpressed 
by aggressive nationalism and ethnocentrism, discrimination 
and hostility against minorities, migrants and people of 
immigrant origin. 45 
 
4.11 According to the Council of Europe’s Manual on Hate Speech , hate 
speech involves multiplicity of situations: 
Firstly, incitement of racial hatred or in other words, hatred 
directed against persons or groups of persons on the grounds 
of belonging to a race; secondly, incitement to hatred on 
religious grounds, to which may be equated incitement to 
hatred on th e basis of a distinction between believers and 
non-believers; and lastly, to use the wording of the 
Recommendation on “hate speech” of the Committee of 
Ministers of the Council of Europe, incitement to other forms 
of hatred based on intolerance “expressed by aggressiv e 
nationalism and ethnocentrism”. 46  
 
4.12 Pluralism, tolerance, peace and non -discrimination have been 
termed non-derogatory values by the ECtHR in ascertaining the extent of 
free speech allowed under the Convention. Speech propagating religio us 
intolerance, negationism, homophobia etc . has b een excluded from the 
ambit of article 10 of ECHR and the importance of responsible speech in 
a multicultural society has been stressed by the court in several cases.  
                                                           
44Ibid. 
45Recommendation No. R (97) 20, available at: 
 http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/standardsetting/hrpolicy/other_committees/dh-lgbt_docs/CM_Rec(97)20_en.pdf, 
(last visited on Dec. 30, 2016); See also Summary report of the Secretary General. 
prepared by the Directorate of Human Rights on the 4th European Ministerial Conference on Mass Media 
Policy (Prague, Dec. 7-8, 1994) , available at : 
https://wcd.coe.int/com.instranet.InstraServlet?command=com.instranet.CmdBlobGet&InstranetImage= 41
1463&SecMode=1&DocId=517420&Usage=2 (last visited on Dec. 25, 2016)., Appendix III para 7.  
46  Anne Weber, Manual on Hate Speech, available at: 
https://www.coe.int/t/dghl/standardsetting/hrpolicy/Publications/Hate_Speech_EN.pdf  (last visited on Dec. 
28, 2016). 

20 
 
 
Tests for determining hate speech: 
 
4.13 Three tests have been adopted by the courts while recognising 
whether a speech amounts to hate speech or not. Once it has been 
established that there has been an interference with freedom of 
expression, the courts resort  to a three -fold analysis to det ermine the 
legitimacy of such interference:47 
 
(a) Is the interference prescribed by law? 
 
The law that allows limitation of a rticle 10 of ECHR must be 
prescribed by the statute and must be precise so that the citizens 
can regulate their conduct in accordance w ith the law and foresee 
the consequences of the impermissible conduct.48 
 
(b) Is the interference proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued? 
 
It has been opined by the court in Handyside v. United Kingdom,49 
that the restricti ons imposed by the State under a rticle 10(2) on 
freedom of expression must be ‘proportionate to the legitimate aim 
pursued.’  
 
(c) Is the interference necessary in a democratic society? 
 
This test requires a careful examination of the fact to determine 
whether the freedom was limited in pursua nce of a legitimate social 
                                                           
47Ibid. 
48Delfi AS v. Estonia, Application no. 64569/09 (2015). 
49Supra note 30 at para 49. 

21 
 
need and in order to protect the principles and values underlying 
ECHR.50 
 
4.14 In Handyside,51 the court remarked that every restriction on article 
10 must be c arefully scrutinised as every offensive speech is not 
illegitimate. This neutrality approach that puts all kinds of speech on the 
same platform is an extension of the liberal view of free speech.  
 
4.15 However, in recent years, ECtHR has moved away from this strictly 
neutral approach. The interference with freedom of expres sion is not 
solely judged on the ‘legitimate aim ’ test but also whether such 
interference was necessary in a democratic society.  One of the criticisms 
of free speech doctrine is that in an unequal society free speech often 
conflicts with the commitmen t to non-discrimination. Affording 
protection to all kinds of speech, even offensive ones, many times vilifies 
the cause of equality.  European Human Rights jurisprudence has been 
making an attempt to harmonise these two principles. 
 
4.16 The ‘European Commission against Racism and Intolerance ’ in its 
Recommendation No. 7 expressly stipulates that exercise of freedom of 
expression ‘ may be restricted with a view to combating racism .’52 Any 
such restrictions should be in conformity with the ECHR. The European 
Commission for Democracy Law constituted to review laws of European 
country remarked that every religious insult cannot be penalized until 
and unless it has an ‘element of incitement to hatred as an essential 
component’.53 In recent years a shift from neutrality principle towards 
                                                           
50Supra note 43. 
51 Supra note 30. 
52 ECRI General Policy Recommendation No. 7 on National Legislation to Combat Racism and Racial 
Discrimination (Dec. 13, 2002), available at: 
http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/ecri/activities/gpr/en/recommendation_n7/ecri03 -
8%20recommendation%20nr%207.pdf (last visited on Dec. 20, 2016). 
53Id. at  para 64. 

22 
 
‘responsible speech’  has been discernible in the EC tHR decisions.  
Though hate speech has not been defined by EC tHR, it has been 
undoubtedly established 54 by the Court that such a  speech is not 
protected under article 10.55 
 
Racial and Religious Hate: 
 
4.17 In a multicultural society discrimination based on race and religion 
is one of the parameters on which extremity of speech is measured. The 
Court in Jersild v. Denmark56 reversed the conviction of a journalist who 
interviewed a group called  ‘Greenjackets’ to expose their racist attitude 
towards a minority section of th e society. The Denmark Supreme C ourt 
held that the defamation and offence caused by the racist content of the 
interview outweighed the right of public to be informed ; and there fore, 
could not be protected under right to freedom of expression. EC tHR 
reversed this decision and held that: 
 
The picture which the applicant's programme presented to the 
public was more that  of drawing attention to racism, 
intolerance and simple minded ness,  exemplified by the 
remarks in question, than an attempt to show  disrespect for 
the reputation or rights of others. In such circumstances the 
Commission finds that the reputation or rights of others, as 
legitimate aims for restricting the freedom of  expression, carry 
little weight. 57 
 
4.18 In the case of Anthony Norwood v. the United Kingdom ,58 the court 
held that the applicant’s act of displaying a poster on his window with the 
words “Islam out of Britain – Protect the British People” and ‘a symbol of a 
                                                           
54 See M. Otheimer, “Protecting Freedom of Expression: The Challenge of Hate Speech in the European 
Court of Human Rights Case Law” 17 Cardozo J. Int'l & Comp. L. 430 (2009). 
55Jersild v. Denmark, Application No. 15890/89 (1994) para 42. 
56 Ibid. 
57Ibid. 
58 Application no. 23131/03 (2004). 

23 
 
crescent and star in a prohibition sign ’59 portrayed racist bias and 
intolerance. Such an attack on a religious group was considered contra ry 
to principles of non- discrimination and tolerance by the court.  
 
Homophobia: 
 
4.19 Discrimination based on sexual orientation has also led to decisions 
that protect sexual minorities. In Vejdeland v. Sweden,60 ECtHR upheld 
the decision of the Sweden Supreme Court wherein the applicants were 
found guilty of spreading homophobic statement. It remarked that even 
though offending remarks are protected under the ambit of hate speech, 
‘the real problem of homophobic and transphobic bullying and 
discrimination in educational settings may justify a restriction of freedom 
of expression’.61 
 
4.20 The Supreme Court  of Sweden acknowledged the applicants’ right 
to express their ideas while at the same time stressing that along with 
freedoms and rights people also have obligations; one such obligation 
being, as far as possible, to avoid statements that are unwarrantably 
offensive to others, constituting an assault on their rights. The Supreme 
Court thereafter found that the statements in the leaflets had been 
unnecessarily offensive. 
 
Negationism: 
 
4.21 Historical consciousness is essential for recognising instances of 
denial of basic rights to certain groups, in the past. Negationism is one of 
the grounds on which ECt HR has in recent years limited a rticle 10. In 
                                                           
59 Ibid 
60Application no. 1813/07 (2012). 
61Id. at para 7. 

24 
 
M’Bala M’Bala v. France,62 the court held that anti Semitism and 
Holocaust denial could not be protected under a rticle 10. Such a speech 
is excluded from the protection of the Convention not only when it is 
sudden and direct but also when it was presented as an artistic 
production. 
 
Threat to Democratic Order: 
 
4.22 Advocating a totalitarian doctrine was considered incompatib le 
with the values of the Convention . In Schimanek v. Austria,63 conviction 
of the applicant on account of such speech was declared a  legitimate 
interference under a rticle 10, necessary for the protection of democratic 
order. 
 
Hate Speech and Internet: 
 
4.23 While internet has made the globe a small and connected place, it 
has also created a space for unregulated forms of expression. In Delfi v. 
Estonia,64 the applicants approached the court against the order of the 
Estonian court, wherein the applicants  (owners of the internet news 
portal) had been made liable for user generated comments posted on 
their website. This was the first case where the court had to examine the 
scope of article 10 in the field of technological innovations.  
 
4.24 The court observed t hat while internet is an important tool for 
disseminating information and opinions, it also serves as  a platform for 
disseminating unlawful speech.  The court emphasized on the need to 
                                                           
62 Application no. 25239/13 (2015). 
63 Application No. 32307/96(2000). 
64Supra note 48. 

25 
 
‘harmonise these two conflicting realities’ 65 as the freedom  of expression 
cannot be exercised at the cost of other rights and values enunciated in 
the Convention. The court upholding the decision of the Estonian Court 
held that: 
 
… in cases such as the present one, where third -party user 
comments are in the form of hate speech  and direct threats to 
the physical integrity of individuals, as understood in the 
Court’s case -law, the Court considers … that the rights and 
interests of others and of society as a whole may entitle 
Contracting States to impose liability on Internet news portals, 
without contravening a rticle 10 of the Convention, if they fail 
to take measures to remove clearly unlawful comments 
without delay, even without notice from the alleged victim or 
from third parties. 66 
 
4.25 The content and context of the expressi on plays an important 
role in analysing the permissibility of the speech. The court takes into 
account various factors before excluding speech from protection under 
the Convention like, nature of remarks, dissemination and potential 
impact of remarks, stat us of targeted person, status of the author of 
the remarks, nature and severity of penalty imposed (to determine the 
proportionality of the interference) etc.67 
 
United States 
 
4.26 The First amendment of the U.S. Constitution forbids the Congress 
from maki ng law prohibiting the exercise of free speech.  The speech 
protection doctrine in United States relies on two important 
assumptions, firstly,68 that there should be equality in the marketplace of 
                                                           
65Id. at para 110. 
66Id. at para 159. 
67See supra note 43. 
68Police Dept. of City of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92 (1972). 

26 
 
ideas and secondly,69 the government cannot be given the power  to 
differentiate between good and bad speech.  The stringent protection 
afforded to speech is one of the hallmarks of the United States 
Constitution.70 
 
4.27 Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire,71 was an important case where the 
United States Supreme Court differentiated between different class es of 
speech and held that there are certain forms of speech like fighting 
words, obscenities, certain profane and slanderous speech , which are 
excluded from the protection under First Amendment. Thus , the court 
held that laws  restricting such ‘ low value speech’  were constitutional 
and upheld the conviction of Chaplinsky under a State law that 
penalised offensive and derisive speech. 
 
4.28 Relying on Chaplinsky,72 the Supreme Court in Beauharnais v. 
Illinois73 upheld the convicti on of Beauharnais  under the S tate law 
prohibiting libel amounting to unrest or breach of peace on grounds of 
race, colour, creed or religion. The court considered such speech outside 
the ambit of the First amendment , observing that ‘such utterances are 
not essential part of any exposition of ideas, and are of such slight social 
value as a step to truth that any benefit that may be derived from them 
is clearly outweighed by the social interest in order and morality’. 
 
4.29 Fighting words were narrowly constr ued in Cohen v. California74 to 
mean ‘t hose personally abusive epithets which, when addressed to the 
ordinary citizen, are, as a matter of common knowledge, inherently likely 
                                                           
69Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15 (1971). 
70 See New York Times supra note 32; and Whitney v. California 274 U.S. 357 (1927). 
71315 U.S. 568 (1942). 
72 Ibid. 
73343 U.S. 250 (1952). 
74403 U.S. 15 (1971). 

27 
 
to provoke violent reaction .’75It was reasoned that the aim of the State 
cannot be to censor every controversial vocabulary so as to make 
conversation ‘palatable to the squeamish.’76 
 
4.30 However, this case was overruled in New York Times  v. Sullivan,77 
where it was held that until and unless a malicious intent to defame with 
utter disreg ard to the truth was proved on part of the author of the 
speech, the speech could not be considered a violation of the First 
Amendment. The court opined that: 
 
…rule compelling the critic of official conduct to guarantee the 
truth of all his fac tual assertions -- and to do so on pain of 
libel judgments virtually unlimited in amount -- leads to a 
comparable "self -censorship."… the rule thus dampens the 
vigour and limits of the variety of public debate. 
 
 
(i) Content Discrimination and Viewpoint Discrimination: 
 
4.31 There have been two landmark cases that overturned legislations 
penalising hate speech. In R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul ,78 the petitioner was 
charged for burning a cross on the family lawn of a black family under 
Minnesota’s Bias Motivated Crime Ordi nance. The court in this case 
narrowly construed the fighting word doctrine laid down in Chaplinsky79. 
It was held by the court that content based prohibition of speech even for 
categories of unprotected speech is prohibited under the First 
Amendment. The o rdinance was deemed invalid because it prohibited 
certain words on selective subject matter , i.e., on the basis of race, 
colour, creed, religion or gender. Such selectivity was considered as 
                                                           
75Id. at 20. 
76Id. at 25. 
77Supra note 32. 
78505 U.S. 377 (1992). 
79 Supra note 71. 

28 
 
content and viewpoint discrimination ; and therefore , invalid unde r the 
First Amendment. 
 
(ii) Distinguishing Conduct and Expression: 
 
4.32 There is a distinction between unlawful conduct and mere free 
expression. In Wisconsin v. Mitchell,80 a statute penalis ing hate crime 
was upheld by the court. 81 The court distinguished  this case from 
R.A.V.82 by differentiating between expression and conduct. It was held: 
 
Nothing in our decision last term in  R. A. V.  compels a 
different result here. That case involved a First Amendment 
challenge to a municipal ordinance prohibiting the use of 
"`fighting words' that insult, or provoke violence, `on the basis 
of race, color, creed, religion or gender.'" … Because the 
ordinance only proscribed a class of "fighting words" deemed 
particularly offensive by the city i.e.., those "that contain . . . 
messages of `bias -motivated' hatred," … we held that it 
violated the rule against content -based discrimination... But 
whereas the ordinance struck down in  R.A.V. was explicitly 
directed at expression (i.e., "speech" or "messages"), the 
statute in this  case is aimed at conduct unprotected by the 
First Amendment. 
 
(iii) Test to qualify speech as hate speech: 
 
4.33 In order to qualify the speech as hate speech, the expression must 
qualify the clear and present danger test expounded in Schenck v. United 
States83. The clear and present danger test was reformulated in 
Brandenburg v. Ohio84 to imminent threat of lawless action test. The 
                                                           
80 508 U.S. 47 (1993). 
81 Under this statute a wrongful conduct pursuant to a discriminatory viewpoint attracted heavier 
punishment than a conduct not motivated by such belief. 
82 Supra note 78. 
83249 U.S. 47 (1919). 
84 395 U.S. 44 (1969). The Appellant was convicted under an Illinois statute making it a crime to 
“Advertise or publish, present or exhibit in any public place ...any lithograph, moving p icture, play, drama 
or sketch, which portrays ... depravity, criminality, unchastity,  lack of virtue of a class of citizens, of any 

29 
 
Court remarked that ‘freedoms of speech and press do not permit a State 
to forbid advocacy of the use of force or of law violat ion except where 
such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless 
action and is likely to incite or produce such action’. 
 
Canada 
 
4.34 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees freedom 
of thought, belief, opinion and expression  subject only to such 
reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in 
a free and democratic society .85  Pursuant to this, section 319 of the 
Criminal Code of Canada, RSC 1985 sanction s public incitement of 
hatred.  
 
4.35 Some important decisions on hate speech in Canada are R. v. 
Keegstra;86 R. v. Andrews;87 and Canada Human Rights Commission  v. 
Taylor.88 In Keegstra, the Canadian Supreme Court held that: 
 
Parliament has recognized the substantial harm that can flow from 
hate propaganda and, in trying to prevent the pain suffered by 
target group members and to reduce racial, ethnic and religious 
tension and perhaps even violence in Canada, has decided to 
suppress the wilful promotion of hatred against identifiable groups.  
Parliament's ob jective is supported not only by the work of 
numerous study groups, but also by our collective historical 
knowledge of the potentially catastrophic effects of the promotion of 
hatred.  Additionally, the international commitment to eradicate 
hate propaganda  and Canada's commitment to the values of 
equality and multiculturalism in  ss. 15  and 27  of 
the Charter  strongly buttress the importance of this objective. 89 
                                                                                                                                                                             
race, color, creed or religion which said publication or exhibition exposes the citizens of any race, color, 
creed or religion to contempt, derision, or obloquy or which is productive of breach of peace or riots. ” 
85 Section 2. 
86(1990)3 SCR 697. 
87(1990)3 SCR 870. 
88(1990) 3 SCR 892. 
89 Supra note 86. 

30 
 
 
 
(iv) Tests to determine limitation on freedom of expression: 
 
4.36 The court in Keegstra90 referred to test laid down in R. v. Oakes,91 
to determine the proportionality of the limitation to the objective sought 
to be achieved. The three s teps to be followed to adjudge the 
proportionality of the restriction in Oakes92 were: 
 Restriction/limitation must have a rational nexus to the object 
sought to be achieved.  
 Even if rationally connected to the objective in this first sense, it 
should impai r "as little as possible" the righ t or freedom in 
question. 
 There must be a proportionality between the  effects of the 
measures which are responsible for limiting the Charter right or 
freedom, and the objective which has been identified as of 
"sufficient importance". 
 
4.37 In Saskatchewan (Human Rights Commission)  v. Whatcott,93 the 
court laid down three tests to determine whether an expression could 
qualify as hate speech or not. Firstly, courts must apply the hate 
speech prohibitions objectively by applyin g the test of a reasonable 
person. Secondly, the legislative term “hatred” or “hatred or contempt” 
must be interpreted to mean the extreme form of the emotions. Thirdly, 
the effect of the expression on the targeted gro up should be 
determined by the Court. 
 
                                                           
90 Ibid. 
91[1986] 1 SCR 103. 
92 Ibid. 
93[2013] 1 SCR 467. 

31 
 
4.38 Canadian laws attempt to restrict false and discriminatory 
statements that expressions that are likely to lead to breach of peace . 
In R. v. Zundel94 the Court observed that publishing and spreading 
false news that was known to be false is likely to cause injury to public 
interest.  This should be prevented as it is potentially harmful to the 
society and multiculturalism in Canada.  In Ross v. New Brunswick 
School District No.15  95, the Court held that anti -semitic writings and 
statements contribute to a n invidiously discriminatory or “poisoned” 
education environment. 
 
South Africa 
 
4.39 Section 16 of the South African Constitution guarantees freedom of 
expression. However, this freedom is subject to limitations under section 
16(2), namely, ‘(a) propagand a for war; (b) incitement of imminent 
violence; or (c) advocacy of hatred that is based on race, ethnicity, gender 
or religion, and that const itutes incitement to cause harm ’. The South 
African Constitution expressly recognizes hate speech as an exception. 
 
4.40 In a recent  case, the Equality C ourt in South Africa in Nomasomi 
Gloria Kente v. Andre van Deventer 96 awarded damages to a domestic 
worker for being subjected to hate speech. Section 10 of the Promotion of 
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000  prohibits a 
person from publishing, propagating, advocating or communicating 
words based on one or more prohibited grounds, against any person that 
could be constru ed demonstration of a  clear intention to be hurtful, 
harmful or incite harm, promote or propagate hatred.  
                                                           
94[1992] 2 SCR 731. 
95[1996] 1 SCR 825. 
9626 [2015] DEREBUS 45. 

32 
 
CHAPTER - V 
Identifying Criteria of Hate Speech 
 
5.1 Freedom of speech is a n essence to a democratic society, and 
limitations are subject to scrutiny. The Supreme Court of India in Shreya 
Singhal v. Union of India 97 had differ entiated between three forms of 
speech, discussion, advocacy and incitement.  It was held by the C ourt 
that a speech can only be limited on grounds of exceptions mentioned in 
article 19(2) when it reaches the threshold of  incitement. All other forms 
of spe ech, even if offensive or unpopu lar have to b e protected under 
article 19(1)(a). Incitement is the key to determining the constitutionality 
of restriction on free speech.  
 
5.2 The courts in some countries  have refrained from identifying 
criteria of hate s peech. However, through an analysis of the decisions of 
the different State jurisdictions, certain parameters may be summarised: 
 
(i) The extremity of the speech 
 
5.3 In order to qualify as hate speech, the speech must be offensive 
and project the extreme form  of emotion.98 Every offensive statement , 
however, does not amount to hate speech.  The expressions advocacy 
and discussion of sensitive and unpopular issue have been termed ‘low 
value speech’ unqualified for constitutional protection.99 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
97 See supra note 24. 
98Saskatchewan supra note 93. 
99Chaplinsky  supra note 71. 

33 
 
(ii) Incitement  
 
5.4 In Shreya Singhal,100 the speech must amount to incitement  in 
order to be restricted. This is an accepted norm to limit speech. The 
imminent threat to lawless action test laid down by United States 
Supreme Court also echoes the same reasoning. 101 Moreover, incitement 
to discrimination lies at the heart of hate speech principles. The 
principles of hate speech have  always come into conflict with two 
concepts, liberty and equality.   The free speech proponents believe that 
equality is integral to this doctrine as i t promotes ‘equality in the 
marketplace of ideas’ 102 However, critics of free speech suggest that this 
concept of neutrality, where all speeches are accorded similar status, 
often leads to creation of discriminatory environment especially for t he 
minorities and the marginalised, since they are generally not well placed 
to make their voices heard. They argue that in light of the ‘great 
disparities of wealth and power, free speech’s formal equality results in 
massive substantive discrimination in the marketplace of ideas’103. 
 
5.5 Liberty and equality are complementary and  not antithetical to 
each other. The intent of freedom of speech is not to disregard the 
weaker sections of the society but to give them equal voice. Similarly, the 
intent of equality is not to suppress this liberty but to balance it with the 
necessities of a multicultural and plural world, provided such constraint 
does not unduly infringe on the freedom of expression.  Thus, incitement 
to not only violence but also to discrimination has been recog nized as a 
ground for interfering with freedom of expression. 
 
                                                           
100 Supra note 24. 
101Supra note 84. 
102Supra note 68. 
103 J. Weinstein, Hate Speech, Pornography and Radical Attack on Free Speech Doctrine  93 (Westview 
Press, Colorado, 1999). 

34 
 
 
(iii) Status of the author of the speech 
 
5.6 ECtHR has recognized that position of the author of the speech is 
important in determining the legality of limitation imposed by the State. 
Thus ‘interferences with the freedom of expression of a politician … calls 
for the closest scrutiny on the Court’s part’ 104. The Supreme Court in 
Pravasi Bhalai Sangathan105 was approached to sanction hate speech on 
a similar ground. The petitioners sought  court’s intervention to declare 
"hate speeches" delivered by elected representatives, political and 
religious leaders as unconstitutional. The petition was specifically 
addressed to the people who held power to influence society on a large 
scale. The Court recognizing the negative impact of hate speech referred 
the matter to Law Commission for in depth examination. 
 
(iv) Status of victims of the speech 
 
5.7 The status of the targeted audience is also important in 
determining whether a speech can be limited. EC tHR in  Lingens v. 
Austria 106distinguished between the status of public and private 
individuals in this regard and remarked that: 
 
…the limits of acceptable criticism are accordingly wider as 
regards a politician as such than as regards a private 
individual. Unlik e the latter, the former inevitably and 
knowingly lays himself open to close scrutiny of his every word 
and deed by both journalists and the public at large, and he 
must consequently display a greater degree of tolerance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
104Incal v. Turkey, Application no. 41/1997/825/1031 (1998). 
105 Supra note 11. 
106(1986) 8 EHRR 407. 

35 
 
 
 
(v) Potentiality of the speech 
 
5.8 The potential impact of the speech has to be viewed to  determine 
the speaker’s state of mind at the time speech was rendered. In Ramesh 
v. Union of India ,107 Supreme Court examined the validity of the 
restriction on the basis of the potential of th e movie to impact the 
audience.  
 
(vi) Context of the Speech 
 
5.9 Every seemingly hateful speech may not be termed as a hate 
speech. The context in which the speech was made is essential in 
determining its permissibility. The context of expression has alwa ys been 
looked into while adjudging the restriction.108 
 
Manner of Regulation  - Respecting dissent and non -majoritarian 
speech 
 
5.10 Any attempt to regulate hate speech need not shrink the space for 
criticism and dissent, which are covered by the human right  of a person 
to free speech and expression. As a consequence, not all hate speech can 
legitimately be made the subject of legal prohibition. 109At the least, the 
elements of intent and incitement to violence must be included in any 
formulation of hate speech legislation. Incitement of violence and 
immediacy of the threat is also considered a relevant factor in 
determining whether such speech should be prohibited.110 
                                                           
107 Supra note 21. 
108 See e.g. Bobby Art International v. Om Pal Singh Hoon, AIR 1996 SC 1846. 
109 UNGA, Sixty sixth session “ Report by Sp ecial Rapporteur Frank La Rue on the Promotion and 
Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression”(Sept. 7, 2012) UN Doc A/67/357, paras 32, 
33. 
110See for e.g. Chaplinsky supra note 71 (laying down the fighting words doctrine). 

36 
 
 
5.11 Broadly, international human rights law requires that measures 
which limit or restrain the freedom of speech and expression may do so 
only where the ‘three-part test’111 is satisfied. This standard requires that 
the measure by which a human right is being curtailed , must satisfy the 
following requirements: 
 
▪ The measure must by prescribed by law. T his requirement is 
satisfied where the right is curtailed by means of a law passed 
through the appropriate procedures and through provisions 
worded in explicit and unambiguous language. [ Prescription by 
law] 
▪ The measure must directly satisfy a legitimate a im. [ Legitimate 
aims] 
▪ The measure must be necessary to achieve its stated aim and must 
be proportionate to the harm that it attempts to prevent or redress. 
The standard of proportionality in this context has also been 
understood to include a requirement fo r minimum impairment of 
the right being restricted, i.e., the restriction must not do any more 
damage to the right than is absolutely necessary to meet its aim. 
[Necessity and proportionality] 
 
                                                           
111 UN HRC, “General Comment 34” One Hundred and Second Session July 11 -29, 2011 ( July 21, 2011) 
UN Doc CCPR/C/GC/34, para 22; United Nations Economic and Social Council, UN Sub -Commission on 
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities ”, Forty First Session (1984) “Siracusa Principles 
on the Limitation and Derogation of Provisions in the International Covenant  on Civil and Political Rights” 
(Sept. 28, 1984) Annex UN Doc E/CN.4/1984/4 para 17 (hereinafter Siracusa Principles) ; The Sunday 
Times v. United Kingdom  (1979) EHRR 245; Compulsory Membership in an Association Prescribed by 
Law for the Practice of Journalism , Advisory Opinion OC -5/85, Inter -American Court of Human Rights 
Series A No 5 (Nov. 13, 1985); Media Rights Agenda v. Nigeria (2000) AHRLR 262. 

37 
 
 
Chapter – VI 
 
Review of Penal Law 
 
 “…[T]hat the law shall be certain, and that it shall be just and shall 
move with the times.”  
      -Lord Reid, Judge as Law Maker 112 
 
 6.1  It is difficult to define hate speech as any ambiguity in a definition 
may allow intrusion into freedom of speech and expression. The erstwhile 
section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2002 which was struck 
down in Shreya Singhal113 is an example wherein the vagueness of the 
legal provision led to misuse of the law. The precision of law is one of the 
grounds adopted by EC tHR in adjudging t he legality of restriction 
imposed by the State.  Hence, any attempt to define hate speec h must 
meet the aforementioned parameters. 
 
6.2 Incitement to violence cannot be the sole test for determining 
whether a speech amounts to hate speech or not. Even spee ch that does 
not incite violence has the potential of marginalis ing a certain section of 
the society  or individual . In the age of technology, the anonymity of 
internet allows a miscreant to easily spread false and offensive ideas. 
These ideas need not alwa ys incite violence but they might perpetuate 
the discriminatory attitudes prevalent in the society. Thus, incitement to 
discrimination is also a significant factor that contributes to the 
identification of hate speech. 
 
 
                                                           
112 Lord Reid, “The Judge as Lawmaker” 12 Journal of the Society of Public Teachers of Law (1972) cited 
in Abhiram Singh v. C.D Commachen (Dead) by Lrs. &Ors. (2017) 2 SCC 629. 
113 Supra note 24. 

38 
 
6.3 The term “hate speech” has been  used invariably to mean 
expression which is abusive, insulting, intimidati ng, harassing or which 
incites violence, hatred or discrimination against groups identified by 
characteristics such as one’s race, religion, place of birth, residence, 
region, langu age, caste  or community , sexual orientation  or personal 
convictions. However, in international human rights law, it is defined by 
article 20 of the ICCPR.  The inherent dignity and equality of every 
individual is the foundational axiom of international hum an rights.  It is, 
therefore, perhaps not surprising that international law condemns 
statements which negate the equality of all human beings.  Article 20(2) 
of the ICCPR requires  states to prohibit hate speech.  Advocacy of 
national, racial or religious ha tred that constitutes i ncitement to 
discrimination or hostility is prohibited by law. Under the common law 
system, such speech had been treated as ‘sui generis’ that is, ‘outside the 
realm of protected discourse’.  
 
6.4 One of the recent examples of such r umour mongering is the case of 
the Northeast exodus in the year  2012. Up to 50,000 c itizens belonging 
to the Northe ast moved from their residences  across India, back to the 
North-eastern states. 114 This was triggered b ecause of the circulation of 
false images of violent incidents that took place in Myanmar several 
years ago. These were projected to be images from the Assam riots of 
2012.115 This resulted in creat ion of panic across the country as other 
groups started targeting people from Northeast living in ot her parts of 
India. The police authorities responded with a complete internet 
shutdown.  
 
                                                           
114 Stephanie Nolen, “ India’s ethnic clashes intensify within social-media maelstrom” Aug. 23 2012, 
available at: http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/indias-ethnic-clashes-intensify-within-social-
media-maelstrom/article4496392/ (last visited on Feb. 5, 2017). 
115 Asian Centre For Human Rights, “Assam Riots: Preventable but not Prevented” Sept. 2012, available at 
:  http://www.achrweb.org/reports/india/AssamRiots2012.pdf  1 (last visited on Feb. 5, 2017). 

39 
 
6.5 Hate speech has the potential of provoking individuals or society to 
commit acts of terrorism, genocides, ethnic cleansing etc . Such speech is 
considered outside the realm of protective discourse.  Indisputably, 
offensive speech has real and devastating effects on people’s lives and 
risks their health and safety. It is  harmful and divisive for communities 
and hampers social progress. If left unchecked h ate speech can severely 
affect right to life of every individual.   
 Examining  Restrictions on Freedom of Speech and Expression 
 
6.6 Analysis of  the Constituent  Assembly debates and the debate 
around the First and Sixteenth Amendments, restrictions to speech 
based on hate speech are located primarily under the terms ‘public order’ 
and to a lesser extent ‘sovereignty and integrity’ under article 19(2). Both 
sections 153A and 295A have been justified as restrictions under public 
order.116 The Supreme Court, in Ramji Lal Modi,117 has held that after the 
First Amendment in 1951, the language of 19(2) read – “in the interests 
of public order”. This has to be read very widely, so a law like section 
295A might not directly deal with public order but can be read to be “in 
the interests of public order”.118 
 
6.7 However, if hate speech is also about insulting persons or 
wounding religious feelings (without involving public order), then one 
could justify this under the ‘decency and morality’ clause of article 19(2). 
The Supreme Court he ld that s ection 123(3) was a constitutional 
restriction on speech, in the interests of  decency.119 Similarly, the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 
1989 proscribes “ intentionally insult [ing] or intimidat [ing] with intent t o 
                                                           
116 See supra note 9. 
117 Supra note 13. 
118Ibid 
119Id. at paras 27-9. 

40 
 
humiliate a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe in any 
place within public view .”120 In Swaran Singh v. State 121 the Supreme 
Court held that calling a member of a Scheduled caste “chamar” in public 
view would attract Section 3(1)(x).  
 
6.8 The f orm of hate speech that the Supreme Court  here is dealing 
with is insult. It is related to a history of humiliation faced by S cheduled 
Caste persons, and is not directed against  public order. Using the word 
chamar to insult someone could constitute hate sp eech irrespective of 
whether it leads to a public order disturbance. The restriction on speech 
here is more directly linked to ‘decency or morality’ in article 19 (2) than 
‘public order’. 122 Similarly, the restrictions  under section 153B  
(Imputations, assertions related to national integration) could be justified 
under the ‘sovereignty and integrity’ restriction in article 19(2). 
 
6.9 Hate speech provisions are found in three different chapters of the 
IPC, “Of Offences Relating to Religion”, “Of Offences Again st the Public 
Tranquillity” and “Of Criminal Intimidation, Insult and Annoyance”. 
Section 295A, IPC was enacted to specifically target speech that intended 
to outrage religious feelings by insulting religion or religious beliefs.123 
 
Politics and Hate Speech 
 
6.10   Political speeches often assume a divisive tone in order to exploit 
social prejudices for electoral gains. However, this discourse must take 
                                                           
120Section 3(1)(x). 
121(2008) 8 SCC 435. 
122 Restrictions based on public morality have  been struck down on the basis that these restrictions were 
discriminatory. See Irina Fedotovav. Russian Federation , UN Doc. No.  CCPR/C/106/D/1932/2010.(Held 
that a Ryazan Regional Law in Russia, prohibiting dissemination of information related to homosexu ality 
to minors, violated the non-discrimination provisions of the ICCPR). 
123 For a recent account of the legislative debates leading to the enactment of section 295A; See Neeti Nair, 
Beyond the ‘Communal’ 1920s: The Problem of Intention, Communal Pragmatis m, and the Making of 
Section 295A of the Indian Penal Code, 50 Indian Economic Social History Review 317 (2013) available 
at; http://ier.sagepub.com/content/50/3/317, DOI: 10.1177/0019464613494622 (last visited on Feb. 14, 
2017). 

41 
 
place in an environment that does not foster abusive or hateful 
sentiments. Though, political rivalry migh t encourage the use of 
unwarranted language, it is unwise to restrict speech that merely 
showcases the tendency to evoke unwanted circumstances  without 
intention.124 In order to promote  robust and healthy debate, it is 
important that a fine balance is struck between freedom and restrictions.    
 
6.11   In Dr. Ramesh Yeshwant Prabhoo v. Shri Prabhakar Kashinath 
Kunte & Ors. 125, the Court analysed the meaning of sub -section (3A) of 
section 123 of The Representation of People’s Act, 1951 ( hereinafter RPA, 
1951) observing that the said provision is similar to section 153A, IPC as  
"the promotion of, or attempt to promote, feelings of enmity or hatred"  as 
against the expression "Whoever .... promotes or attempts to 
promote.....disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred  or ill -will ...." in 
section 153A, IPC. The expression ‘feelings of enmity or hatred’ is 
common in both the provisions but the additional words in Section 153A, 
IPC are ‘disharmony ....or ill -will’. The difference in the plain language of 
the two provisio ns indicates that even mere promotion of disharmony or 
ill-will between different groups of people is an off ence under section 
153A, I.P.C, while u nder sub - section (3A) of section 123 of the 
RPA,1951, only the promotion of or attempt to promote feelings of enmity 
or hatred, which are stronger words, are forbidden in the election 
campaign. 
 
6.12 In Prof. Ramachandra G. Kapse v. Haribansh Ramakbal Singh126, it 
was held that the accused could not held responsible for the content of 
the election manifesto as he did not participate in making it. Also, in 
                                                           
124 For difference between ‘tendency and intention’ see Law Commission of India, “42nd Report on Indian 
Penal Code”.  
125AIR 1996 SC 1113. 
126 AIR 1996 SC 817. 

42 
 
Manohar Joshi  v. Nitin Bhaurao Patil & Anr .127, the Supreme Court 
observed that a statement by a candidate during election that first Hindu 
State will be established in Maharashtra cannot be considered a corrupt 
practice under section 123(3) of the RPA, 1951 as:  
 
[the statement] by itself [was] not an appeal for votes on the 
ground of his religion but the expression, at best, of such a 
hope. However, despicable be such a statement, it cannot be 
said to amount to an appeal for votes on the ground of his 
religion. 
 
6.13 The recent judgment of the Apex Court, Abhiram Singh v. C.D 
Commachen (Dead) by Lrs. &Ors .128 analysed the law on corrupt 
practices under the Act, 1951 taking into account series of case laws and 
observed that Sub -section 3A was simultaneously introduced so as to 
provide that the promotion of or an attempt to promote feelings of enmity 
or hatred between different classes of the citizens of India on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, community or language wo uld constitute a corrupt 
practice where it was indulged in by a candidate, his agent or by any 
other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent for 
furthering the election prospects of the candidate or for prejudicially 
affecting the el ection of any candidate. While widening the ambit of the 
corrupt practice as provided in sub -section (3), a significant change was 
brought about by the inclusion of the words “for any person on the 
ground of his”. 
6.14 The Constitutional validity of sectio n 123(5) of the Act,  1951 was 
upheld by the Constitution Bench in which the sweep of the corrupt 
practice on the ground of religion was rather broad. The Court also made 
an observation that section 123(3A) has a different ambit. It does not 
mean vilifying another language or creating enmity between 
                                                           
127 1996 SCC (1) 169. 
128 Abhiram supra note 104. 

43 
 
communities. It refers to the promotion of or attempt to promote hatred 
between different classes of citizens on the proscribed grounds but 
section 123(3A) does not refer to the religion, race, caste, community o r 
language of a candidate or of a rival candidate (unlike section 123(3) 
which uses the expression “his”). Section 123(3A) refers to the promotion 
of or attempts to promote feelings of enmity or hatred between different 
classes of the citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, 
community or language.129  
Judicial Doctrine 
 
6.15 Courts have consistently upheld the constitutional validity of hate 
speech provisions, including sections 153A and 295A  IPC on the basis of 
the ‘public order’, an exception carved out in article 19(2). 130In State of 
U.P. v. Lalai Singh  Yadav 131, the Supreme Court upheld the “the 
constitutional value of ordered security.” 132 In this judgment, ordered 
security was identified as a constitutional value that is to be safe guarded 
and courts should give preference to the State if their intent is to protect 
safety and peace. Here the principle of ordered security is enunciated as 
a positive principle, without which creativity and freedom are 
meaningless.   
 
6.16 The Model Code of Conduct g iven by the Election Commission of 
India for the guidance of political parties and candidates should be 
amended to the extent that effect is given to the sub section (3A) of 
section 123 of the  RPA, 1951. The first part of the Code i.e. General 
Conduct should expressly provide a provision that prohibits any kind of 
speech that promotes, or attempt s to promote, feelings of enmity or 
                                                           
129 See also, Jamuna Prasad Mukhariya v. Lachhi Ram, AIR 1954 SC 686. 
130See supra note 14. 
131 AIR 1977 SC 202. 
132 See Siddharth Narrain, “Hate Speech, Hurt Sentiment, and the (Im)Possibility of Free Speech”  51(17) 
Economic and Political Weekly 122 (Apr. 23, 2016). 

44 
 
hatred between different classes of the citizens of India on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, community, or language, by a candidate or his agent 
or any other person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent 
for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or 
for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate. 
6.17 In the current scenario the threat of large fines is a deterring factor 
for publishers, artists, bloggers and those who do not have the financial 
muscle to contest hate speech litigation.  
 
6.18 Other jurisdictions 133 have developed extensive jurisp rudence on 
hate speech law. J udges have tried to strike a balance between harm  
caused by  hate speech and the threat to freedom of speech and 
expression. Any legal regulation of hate speech must take into account 
the principles that have evolved in these jurisdictions. For instance, in 
the Canadian case Sasketchwan v. Whatcott134, the Canadian Supreme 
Court limited the meaning of the term ‘hatred’ to extreme manifestations 
of “detestation” and “vilification”. In this case, the  Court identified two 
categories of hate speech  (i) marginalising individuals based on their 
membership of a targeted group, thus affecting inclusiveness and dignity 
(ii) impairing their ability to respond to substantive ideas under debate, 
thus creating a serious barrier to their full participation in democracy.135  
 
Distinguishing Sedition from Hate Speech  
 
6.19 Care must also be taken to differentiate hate speech from sedition. 
The difference between offences under Chapter VIII (that cover aspects of 
hate speech) and sedition is that the offence of hate speech affects the  
                                                           
133 See section on Chapter IV of this report for a detailed account on international laws.  
134 Supra note 93. 
135Ibid. 

45 
 
State indirectly by disturbing public tranquility, while sedition is an 
offence directly against the State. 
 
6.20 In 1897 when amendments to section 124A  IPC were being 
proposed, a Select Committee reviewing the Bill recommended that 
sedition must be distinguished from stirring up class hatred. It reasoned 
that: 
It appears, to us that the offence of stirring up class -hatred 
differs in many important respects from the offence of sedition 
against the State. It comes more appropriately in the chapter 
relating to offences against the public tranquility. The offence 
only affects the Government or the State indirectly, and the 
essence of the offence is that it predisposes classes of the 
people to action which may disturb the public tranquility. The 
fact that this  offence is punishable in England as seditious 
libel is probably due to historical causes, and has nothing to 
do with logical arrangement.136 
 
6.21 To qualify as sedition, the impugned expression must threaten the 
sovereignty and integrity of India and secur ity of the State. Since it has 
been made a distinct offence under section 124A, it would not be 
advisable to place expressions exciting disaffection against the State 
under the proposed section on hate speech. Also, imputations or 
assertions prejudicial to  national integration are punishable under 
section 153B IPC.   
 
Non-Legal Measures to Address Hate Speech 
 
6.22 It is also worth considering whether there are ways to combat 
the harm created by hate speech that are less harmful than banning 
or blocking the speech. Currently strategies such as prior restraint or 
punishment for hate speech are being contemplated in Indian law.  
6.23 Other strategies have also been explored in other countries and 
these include:  
                                                           
136 W.R. Donogh, A Treatise on the Law of Sedition and Cognate Offences in British India 164 (Thacker, 
Spink and Co., Calcutta, 1911). 

46 
 
 Popular television dramas which subtly and effec tively promote 
harmony between warring communities,  
  the involvement of religious heads to build empathy across 
religious lines to reduce communal tension, and  
 strategic interventions (especially in the context of social med ia) 
to monitor the di ssemination of hate speech  and mob 
mobilisation. 
 Persuading people who are the weakest links, to stop spreading 
a harmful rumour. 
 
An Effort to find Solution 
 
6.24 The definition of hate speech is still subject to wider intellectual 
and academic debate. What is at issue is  the criminalisation of hate 
speech and how the existing laws look at it. Since it is entrenched in the 
constitutional right of freedom of speech and expression, “hate speech” 
has been manipulated by many in different ways to achieve their ulterior  
motive under the garb of such right and the law courts in absence of 
clear provisions in IPC, are not able to prosecute hate speech charges 
brought before them with success.  
 
6.25 As per the Jakarta Recommendations which was a regional 
consultation on “ Expression, Opinion and Religious Freedoms in Asia ”, 
held in Jakarta, Indonesia on 3 -5 June, 2015 and which included expert 
participants such as UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and 
protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression observed  the 
following: 
 There is a need to r evise and strengthen the existing anti -
discrimination legislation so as to meet universal standards on 
equality across all groups, communities, men and women; 

47 
 
 Laws should be adopted to pu nish incitement to hatred that ma y 
result in violence, hostility and discrimination.  They should be 
implemented in a non -selective, non -arbitrary and transparent 
manner, which should not be used to stifle dissent or the 
legitimate exercise of freedom of expression; 
 The religious minorities’ parliamentarians should be enabled to 
raise issues relating to freedoms of expression and religion, and 
the intersection of these rights, in the parliament and other 
platforms. 
 All instances of violations of freedom of expression in the context of 
religion and incitement of hatred resulting in violence should be 
condemned and prevented. 
 Fight against hate speech cannot be isolated.  It should be 
discussed on a wider platform such as  the United Nations.  Every 
responsible government, regional bodies and other international 
and regional actors should respond to this threat.137 
 
6.26 These recommendations can serve as guidelines  for developing 
hate speech jurisprudence. 
Prohibiting Advocacy of Hatred138  
6.27 Freedom of speech and expression has been establishe d as a key 
freedom required for sustaining democracy. However, with every right 
comes responsibility; and therein, is the need for a limitation on the right 
                                                           
137Jakarta Recommendations on Freedom of Expression in the Context of Religion (June 17, 2015)  
available at: https://globalfreedomofexpression.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Jakarta-
Recommendations-FINAL.pdf (last visited on Jan. 16, 2017). 
138  The term advocacy of hatred has been used in Article 20 of the ICCPR , Constitution of South Africa, 
Art. 16(2)(c) and also Human Rights Council, “Report of the Special Rapporteur on Minority Issues”, 28th 
session, Agenda item 3, A/HRC/28/64 (Jan. 5, 2015) available at: 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session28/Documents/A_HRC_28_64_ENG.d
oc. (last visited on Jan. 16, 2017). 
 
 
 
  

48 
 
to freedom of speech and expression so as to prevent the destructive and 
regressive effect it could  have. The founding fathers of our Constitution 
were cognisant of the history and the need to highlight the responsibility 
attached to freedom of speech and expression. Thus, there is a need to 
convince and educate the public on responsible exercise of fre edom of 
speech and expression.   
6.28 The Constitution in its working , however, required amendments to 
article 19 so as to add several new grounds of restrictions upon the 
freedom of speech and expression; initially, under the Constitution (First 
Amendment) Act, 1951 followed by the  Constitution (Sixte enth 
Amendment) Act, 1963.  The new grounds of restriction s added were (i) 
friendly relations with foreign states (ii) defamation or incitement to an 
offence (iii) the sovereignty and integrity of India (iv) s ecurity of State (v)  
decency and (vi) contempt of court. 
6.29 In pursuance of the aforesaid constitutional provisions, certain 
provisions such as section 153A, section 153B and section 295A, were 
added in IPC to deal with particular category of offences wh ich fall in 
general expression of hate speech.  In IPC those provisions of hate 
speech fall under the categories of Offences Relating to Religion, Offences 
Against Public Tranquillity  and Criminal Intimidation, Insult and 
Annoyance.  Section 124A penalises sedition, 153A penalises promoting 
enmity among groups on various grounds and doing acts prejudicial to 
maintenance of harmony, section 153B penalises imputation assertions 
prejudicial to national integration, and section 295A penalises malicious 
acts intended to outrage religious feelings  which supplement section 298 
which relates to uttering words with intent  to wound the religious 
feelings. Section 505 deals with statements conducing to public mischief.   
 
6.30 The reading of above provisions make it cl ear that there is no 
water tight compartment to deal with the various acts relating to hate 

49 
 
speech which generally overlap.  In a particular situation hate speech 
may become sedition.  In the case of Kedar Nath Singh v. State o f 
Bihar139, the Supreme Court upheld section 124A IPC as constitutionally 
valid, following the view of the Federal Court in Niharendu Dutt Majumdar 
v.  Emperor140  and did not accept  the interpretation given to it by the 
Privy Council in Emperor v. Sadasiv Narain Bhalerao141.  In Niharendu142 
the Federal Court held that “public order or the reasonable anticipation 
or likelihood of public disorder” was the gist of the offence of sedition and 
that in order to be punishable under section 124A, - “the acts or words 
complained of must either incite to disorder or must be such as to satisfy 
reasonable men that that was their intention or tendency”.  The Supreme 
Court in Kedar Nath Singh143 interpreted section 124A to mean that an 
utterance would be punishable under this section only when it is 
intended or has a reasonable tendency to create disorder or disturbance 
of the public peace by resort to violence. 
 
6.31 Hate speech generally is an incitement to hatred primarily against 
a group of persons defined in terms of race, ethnicity, gender, sexual 
orientation, religious belief  and the like  (sections 153A, 295A read with 
section 298 IPC). Thus, hate speech is any word written or spoken, signs, 
visible representations within the hearing or sight of a person with the 
intention to cause fear or alarm, or incitement to violence.  
 
6.32 Hate speech poses complex challenges to freedom of speech and 
expression. The constitutional approach to these challenges has been far 
from uniform as the boundaries between impermissible propagation of 
hatred and protected spee ch vary across jurisdictions . A dif ference of 
                                                           
139 AIR 1962 SC 955. 
140 AIR 1942 FC 22. 
141 AIR 1947 PC 84. 
142 Supra note 140. 
143 Supra note 139. 

50 
 
approach is discernible  between the United States and other 
democracies. In the United States, hate speech is given wide 
constitutional protection; whereas under international human rights 
covenants and in other western democracies, such as Canada, Germany, 
and the United Kingdom, it is regulated and subject to sanctions. 
 
6.33 In view of the above, the Law Commission of India is of considered 
opinion that new provisions in IPC are required to be incorporated to  
address the issues elaborately dealt with in the preceding paragraphs.  
Keeping the necessity of amending the penal law, a draft amendment bill, 
namely, The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2017 suggesting insertion 
of new section 153C (Prohibiting  incitement to hatred) and section 505A 
(Causing fear, alarm, or provocation of violence in certain cases) is 
annexed as Annexure-A for consideration of the Government.   
 
 
 

51 
 
Annexure A 
 
 
THE CRIMINAL LAW (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to  amend the  Indian  Penal  Code,  and  the Code  of  Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -eighth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:- 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. Short title. This Act may be called the Criminal Law (Amendment) 
Act, 2017. 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 
 
2. Insertion of new section after section153B.- In the Indian Penal 
Code, (45 of 1860) (hereinafter referred to as the Penal Code), after 
section 153B , the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
Prohibiting incitement to hatred- 
 
"153 C. Whoever on grounds of religion, race, c aste or community, sex, 
gender identity, sexual orientation, place of birth, r esidence, language, 
disability or tribe - 
 
(a) uses gravely threatening words either spoken or written, signs, 
visible representations within the hearing or sight of a person with 
the intention to cause, fear or alarm; or  
(b) advocates hatred by words either spoken or written, signs, visible 
representations, that causes incitement to violence 

52 
 
 
shall be punishable with imprisonmen t of either description for a term 
which may extend to  two years, and fine up to Rs 5000, or with both.".  
 
3. Insertion of new section after section 505.- In the Penal Code, after 
section 505, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 
Causing fear, alarm, or provocation of violence in certain cases. 
 
"505 A . Whoever in public intentionally on grounds of religion, race, 
caste or community, sex, gender, sexual orientation, place of birth, 
residence, language, disability or tribe- 
 
uses words, or dis plays any writing, sign , or other visible 
representation which is gravely threatening, or derogatory; 
 
(i)   within the hearing or sight of a person, causing fear or alarm, 
or; 
 
(ii)  with the intent to provoke the use of unlawful violence,  
 
against that person or another,  shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and/or fine 
up to Rs 5000, or both". 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
 
 
5. Amendment of First Schedule . In the First Schedule to the Code of 
Criminal Procedure under the heading “ I. – OFFENCES UNDER THE 
INDIAN PENAL CODE (45 of 1860)”,  
 
 
(i) after the entries relating to section153B and section 505,  the 
following entries shall respectively be substituted, namely :- 
 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
153C Prohibiting 
incitement to 
hatred 
Imprisonment 
for two years, 
and fine up to 
Rs 5000 
Cognizable Non-
Bailable 
Magistrate 
of the first 
class 
 

53 
 
(ii) after the entries relating to section 505, the following entries shall 
be inserted, namely:- 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
505A Causing 
fear, alarm, 
or 
provocation 
of violence 
in certain 
cases 
Imprisonment 
for one year 
and/ or with 
fine up to Rs 
5000, or both 
Non-
cognizable 
Bailable Any 
Magistrate 
 