  
  
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
    
Report No.269 
 
 
 
 
Transportation and House-keeping of Egg-laying 
hens (layers) and Broiler Chickens. 
 
 
 
 
 
July, 2017 
  


ii 
 
 
 
 
lR;eso t;rs 
 
 
D.O. No.6(3)310/2017-LC(LS)           3 July 2017 
 
 
 
The Law  Commission of India received a reference  dated 2 nd March 
2017, from the Ministry of Law and Justice asking the Commission to look into 
the existing laws and international practices on the transport and 
housekeeping of poultry birds.   On 12 April 20 17, the Commission put up an 
Appeal on its website, requesting all stakeholders to present their views before 
the Commission, on rearing, maintenance , sale or any other relevant issues in 
this regard .  The Commission received several responses, which have been 
summarised and annexed to the report.  Further, the international practices 
were also gone into in detail.  After detailed discussions , the Commission has 
finalized its Report No.2 69 titled ― Transportation and House -keeping of 
Egg-laying hens (layers)  and Broiler Chickens ‖, and is sent herewith for 
consideration by the Government. 
 
The Commission would like to place on record its gratitude to  
Dr. Saumya Saxena, Ms. Anumeha Mishra and Ms. Sakshi Vijay,  Consultants 
for their commendable assistance rendered in preparing the Report. 
 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
 
 
[Dr. Justice B S Chauhan] 
 
 
Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
Hon‘ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi – 110 115 
  
Dr. Justice B. S. Chauhan 
Former Judge, Supreme Court of India 
Chairman 
Law Commission of India 
Government of India 
Hindustan Times House 
Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi – 110 001 
Tel: 23736758, Fax: 23355741 
Mk0 U;k;ewfrZ cychj flag pkSgku 
iwoZ U;k;k/kh’k] lokZsPp U;k;ky; 
v/;{k 
Hkkjr dk fof/k vk;ksx 
Hkkjr ljdkj 
fgUnqLrku VkbZEl gkÅl 
dLrwjck xk¡/kh ekxZ] ubZ fnYyh & 110001 
nwjHkk"k% 23736758] QSDl% 23355741 

iii 
 
Report No.269 
 
Transportation and House-keeping of Egg-laying 
hens (layers) and Broiler Chickens. 
 
Table of Contents 
Chapter Title Page 
I Introduction 1-3 
II Constitutional and Legal Framework 4-13 
A Constitution 4-5 
B Statutes 5-7 
C Legal Provisions regulating transport of 
animals 
7-9 
D International Obligations and globally 
recognised poultry rights 
9-10 
E Supreme Court judgments dealing with 
Animal Welfare  
10-12 
F High Court Judgements dealing with Animal 
Welfare 
12-13 
III Housekeeping of layers and broilers 14-21 
A Layers 14-19 
 a. Practices in European Union and other 
countries 
18 
 b. Regulations on Layer Hens 18-19 
B Broilers 19-21 
 a. Legal Framework Governing Broiler 
Chickens 
19-20 
 b. Recommendations on Broiler Chickens 20-21 
IV Review of Punishments in PCA Act 22-23 
V Summary of Recommendations 24-25 
Annexure    
I The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Egg 
Laying Hens) Rules, 2017 
26-31 
II The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Broiler 
Chicken) Rules, 2017 
32-36 
III Summary of the Representations/Responses 37-38 
 
 

 1 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Introduction 
 
1.1 The modern legal system differentiates between humans and 
animals on the basis of cognition, social capacities such as culture and 
moral capacities.1 Animal welfare jurisprudence urges for re-examination of 
this imaginary boundary. Jeremy Bentham, argued that ability to suffer 
rather than the ability to reason should inform the way law treats 
animal. He remarked: 
 
 ―The day may come when the rest of the animal 
creation may acquire those rights which never could 
have been withheld from them but by the hand of 
tyranny. … The question is not, can they reason? Nor 
can they talk? But, can they suffer?‖2 
 
Animal welfare debate emphasis es on taking in to account the suffering of 
animals and for framing laws that are more sensitive towards this end.  In 
recent years anima l welfare jurisprudence has been insisting for adopting 
more compassionate methods of meat production and improving animal 
conditions in factory farms. It has persistently been suggested  that 
improved animal welfare result in better and safer food through ‗reduced 
incidence of infectious disease on farms, reduced shedding of human 
pathogens by farm animals and reduced antibiotic use and antibiotic 
resistance‘.3 It has been found that experienced and sensitive handling of 
livestock, prevents quality deficiencies in meat and by-products.4 
 
1.2 On March 2, 2017, the Law Commission of India received a 
reference from the Ministry of Law and Justice asking the Commission to 
                                                        
1 Anne Peters, ― Liberté, Égalité, Animalité: Human –Animal Comparisons in Law‖ 
available at : http://www.mpil.de/files/pdf4/Peters_Human-Animal_Comparisons2.pdf 
(last accessed on June 24, 20117. 
2 See P. Singer, Animal liberation( Thorsons Publishers Ltd, 1975). 
3 See A.M. de Passillé & J. Rushen, ―Food Safety and Environmental Issues in Animal 
Welfare‖24(2) Rev. sci. tech. Off. int. Epiz. 757 (2005). 
4Philip G. Chambers and Temple Grandin  ―Guidelines for Humane Handling, Transport  
and Slaughter of Livestock‖ ( RAP Publication 2001/4, Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations). 

 2 
conduct a detailed study on the existing laws and international practices 
on the transport and housekeeping of poultry birds.  
1.3 Animals find mention in religion, folk tales and mythology, in direct 
and indirect ways. They define ways of existence and life events . I t is 
believed that animals can communicate and have sentiments  as well5. It is 
also sig nificant that humans always had a symbiotic relation with the 
animals.  
Indian ethos has always considered animals quintessential 
aspect of human living.  Kautilya‘s Arthshastra talks 
extensively of animal welfare. For example, it prohibited 
killing or inj uring protected species and animals in reserved 
parks and sanctuaries. Village headman was responsible for 
preventing cruelty to animals and a person found treating an 
animal cruelly could be restrained in any manner.6 
 
1.4 Worldwide, the chickens have been commercially trait selected for 
two reasons, that of egg production (layers) and meat production (broilers).  
The Law Commission in t his report has examined the issues pertaining to 
both, the layers and broilers.   Specifically in layer birds, the issues relate 
to disposal of male chicks and housing of egg laying hens.  In case of 
broilers, the issue of trait selection, housing, transport and slaughter of the 
birds, have been examined.  
1.5 The recommendations are for both, the egg-laying hens (layers) and 
the me at producing hens (broilers). It is noted that the Animal Welfare 
Board of India (‗AWBI‘) had prepared the draft 'Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (Egg Laying Hens) Rules' in 2012 recommending to the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests to notify the draft Rules as on 27th December, 
2012. However the draft Rules have not been notified yet.   
1.6 The present Report concludes with two sets of draft rules, the 
'Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Egg Laying Hens) Rules' wh ich is a 
                                                        
5 Krishna, Nanditha, ―Sacred Animals of India‖ (2010), Penguin Books India; and Allen, 
Barbara, ―Animals in Religion: Devotion, Symbol and Ritual‖ (2016), Reaktion Books. 
6 Kautilya, ―The Arthshashtra‖, edited and translated by L.N.Rangrajan 61 ( Penguin 
Books India , 1992). 

 3 
modified version of  2012 draft rules  of the AWBI. The modifications made 
are in lines with the objects of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 
1960 (‗PCA‘), the constitutional provisions and the best practices in other 
countries. The second dr aft rules propose to deal with  the 'Preventi on of 
Cruelty to Animals (Broiler Chickens) Rules' with respect to meat 
producing chickens.  

 4 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Constitutional and Legal Framework governing housekeeping 
and Transport of poultry in India 
 
 
A. Constitution: 
 
2.1 Under article 21 of the Constitution no person shall be deprived of his 
life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. The 
Supreme Court has in Animal Welfare Board of India  v. A. Nagaraja & Ors 7 
(Jallikattu Case), extended the rights guaranteed under article 21 of the 
Constitution to all living beings.  
 
2.2 The Supreme Court, in the said Jalikattu case, emphasized on each 
animal‘s right to live with intrinsic worth, honour and dignity under 
article 21 of the Constitution.  The extended protection of right to life,  was 
to allow all species a set of rights according to international standards. It 
was observed in the case that ― animal has also honour  and dignity which 
cannot be arbitrarily deprived of and its rights and privacy have to be 
respected and protected from unlawful attacks.” 
 
2.3 The State under the Directive Principles of State Policy is mandated 
to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific 
lines.8Additionally, the Constitution mandates the State to endeavour to 
protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forest and 
wildlife of the country.9 
 
2.4 It is the Fundamental Duty of each citizen, under article 51A(g) of the 
Constitution, to ―protect and improve the natural environment including 
                                                        
7 (2014) 7 SCC 547 
8 Article 48, Constitution of India, 1950. 
9 Article 48A, Constitution of India, 1950. 

 5 
forests, lakes, rivers and wildlif e and to have compassion for living 
creatures‖. 
 
B. Statutes: 
 
2.5 Parliament has sought to harmonise the statutory framework to 
include the prevention of animal cruelty as well as the maintenance of food 
standards and safety through the following statutes:  
 
2.6 The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to 
as the 'PCA Act') has been enacted with  the object ive of prevention of 
unnecessary pain or suffering on animals and lays down responsibilities of 
the persons in charge of the anim als to take all reasonable measures to 
ensure their well-being.10It provides for setting up of the AWBI to make rules 
under the PCA Act to ensure that the welfare standards are met and that 
the animals are not exploited.11  
 
2.7 Section 11(1) of the PCA Act defines what ‗treating animals cruelly‘ 
entails and clause (e) thereof states that if a person “…keeps or confines any 
animal in any cage or other receptacle which does not measure sufficiently in 
height, length and breadth to permit the animal a reasonabl e opportunity for 
movement”; or under ―(h) being the owner of (any animal ) fails to provide 
such animal with sufficient food, drink or shelter; or ….(k) offers for sale or 
without reasonable cause, has in his possession any animal which is 
suffering pain b y reason of mutilation, starvation, thirst, overcrowding or 
other ill-treatment…‖, it would amount to cruelty and would be punishable 
under this section. 
 
2.8 State Laws: Since the protection, improvement of stock and 
prevention of animal diseases is a State subject under the Seventh Schedule 
                                                        
10 Section 3, PCA Act.  
11 Section 4, PCA Act.  

 6 
to the Constitution12, there are several State specific statutes and rules with 
respect to housekeeping and transport of chicken s. Following are the 
examples of State Laws - 
 
2.9 The Bombay Diseases of Animals Act, 1948  provides for prevention 
and control of disease affecting animals including poultry.  
 
2.10 The Gujarat State Poultry Farm Registration and Regulatory 
Authority Act, 2007 makes provision  for registration and regulation of 
activities connected with poultry farming. The State Government is 
empowered to issue guidelines to ensure that poultry related activity does 
not cause any detrimental effect to environment and human health. The Act 
also provide s for bio -security measures to curb the spread of various 
diseases in poultry.  
 
2.11 The Orissa Animal Contagious Diseases Act 1949  was enacted with 
a view to provide for the prevention and control of contagiou s diseases 
among animals. The word ‗ animal‘ has been given a bro ad definition under 
the Act to include birds. Various penalties and offences are laid down under 
the provisions of this Act for dep riving animals of fodder or spreading 
infectious diseases among animals or causing to spread infections. It also 
provides inter alia for the power to  the executive to i nvestigate in such 
matters and arrest any person without warrant if found indulging in certain 
offences. 
 
2.12 The Punjab Livestock and Bird Diseases Act, 1948  was enacted 
with a view to provide for the prevention and control of diseases affecting 
live stock and birds and enables the State to take measures for prevention 
of outbreak or spread of any scheduled disease in poultry along with 
penalties for the offenders. The  Punjab Livestock Development Board 
Rules, 2001 provide for the constitution of a Board for promoting all round 
                                                        
12 Entry 15, List II, Schedule VII, Constitution of India, 1950. 

 7 
development of the poultry sector in Punjab on modern scientific and 
commercial lines.   
 
2.13 The Punjab Poultry Production Act, 2016  deals with registration of 
poultry premises, improvement of quality of poultry products, ensuring  bio-
security measures in poultry operation.   
 
2.14 The Rajasthan Animal Diseases Act, 1959  was enacted with a view 
to provide for prevention and control of disease affecting animals including 
poultry.   
  
C. Legal provisions regulating the transport of animals: 
 
2.15 The Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food 
Businesses) Regulations, 2011 (hereinafter referred to as ―the FSSR‖) 
[Notification – F.No. 2-15015/30/2010 dated 01.02.2011]  has been framed 
under section 92(2)(o) read with s ection 31 of the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 200 6 (hereinafter referred to as ― the FSSA‖). The FSSR lays 
down certain guidelines for the Pre-Slaughter Handling of Animals especially 
with respect to the transport of animals. The g uidelines contained in Part IV  
Rule 6.4 (a)(1) provide, inter alia, - 
 
Only healthy animals in good condition after verification and 
certification by a qualified veterinary inspector would be 
transported; transportation of Animals from endemic areas of a 
disease to non -endemic a reas with a provision for protective 
vaccination and quarantine for 30 days, before further 
transportation, would be necessary; female animals in advanced 
stages of pregnancy would not be transported; all animals must 
be treated humanely and sufficient spa ce to stand or lie must 
be provided while being transported;  light feeding, watering 
facilities must be provided at regular intervals along with an 
attendant handling first aid and loading during extreme 
temperatures must be avoided; Inspection for safety , such as, 
checking for undamaged floors, walls, ensuring suitability such 
as covering to avoid weather conditions etc, before loading the 
animals is mandatory.  
 

 8 
2.16 Transport of Animal Rules, 1978  (‗Rules of 1978‘): Chapter VII of the 
Rules of 1978 (included  through the amendment of 2001) specifically  deals 
with transport of poultry.  The Rules of 1978 provide the following-  
 
(i) Rule 79(a) lays down o nly birds in healthy and good 
conditions, examined and certified for fitness by a veterinary 
doctor, shall be transported. 
(ii) Rule 79(c)  and (d)  lays down  that t he birds  being 
transported  shall be fed and watered before being placed in 
containers for transportion , and arrangements shall be 
made to feed and water them during transp ortation, with 
watering  ensured every 6 hours. 
(iii)  Rule 80 lays down that  in case of road travel, 
containers shall not be placed one a -top another and shall 
be covered properly in order to provide light, ventilation and 
to protect from rain, heat and cold air. 
(iv)  Rule 81 lays down that  in case of rail travel, 
consignment on journey for over 12 hours to be 
accompanied by an attendant. Adequate facilities for 
ventilation and protection for exposure to weather shall be 
made, and no other merchandise (which may result in 
mortality of the birds) shall b e transported in the same 
wagon. 
(v)  Rule 82 lays down i n case of air travel, the containers 
carrying poultry shall be kept near the doors and unloaded 
immediately upon arrival. 
(vi)   Rule 83 lays down specifications for containers – 
dimensions of containers for m onth old chicks, 3 month old 
chicks and adult stock, Gees e and Turkeys, Chicks and 
Poultry and birds per container . It also  lays down special 
requirement for containers for chicks and pou lts, such as 
prohibition on use of wire mesh or net as bottom for 
container, properly secured to vehicle, properly labelled, 
continually transported for no more than 6 hours, 
transportation cannot be stationary for longer than 30 
minutes and provision of fire extinguishers in transport 
vehicles. 
 
2.17 The Ministry of Road T ransport and Highways vide Notification No. 
G.S.R. 546 (E) Dated 8 th July, 2015 amended  the Central Motor Vehicles 
Rules, 1989 , by Central Motor Vehicles (Eleventh Amendment) Rules, 
2015 and added Rule 125E,  which provide s that the motor vehicles for 
carrying animals shall have permanent partitions in the body of the 
vehicle so that the animals are carried  individually in each partition 
where the size of the pa rtition in case of poultry  shall not be less than 40 

 9 
cm sq. The space provided however does not co nform to the international 
standards for the same. 
 
D. International Obligations and globally recognized 
poultry rights: 
 
2.18 World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) defines Animal welfare as: 
 
 ―Animal welfare means how an animal is coping with the 
conditions in which it lives. An animal is in a good state of 
welfare if (as indicated by scientific evidence) it is healthy, 
comfortable, well nourished, safe, able to express innate 
behaviour and is not suffering from unpleasant states 
such as pain, fear, and distress. Good animal welfare 
requires disease prevention and veterinary treatment, 
appropriate shelter, management, nutrition, humane 
handling and humane slaughter or killing. Animal welfare 
refers to the state of the animal; the treatment that an 
animal received is covered by other terms such as animal 
care, animal husbandry, and humane treatment.‖ 
 
2.19 India is a member of World Organization for Animal Health (OIE). The 
OIE guiding principles on animal welfare which include the universally 
recognised ―Fi ve Freedoms‖ 13, published in 1965 to promote the right to 
welfare of animals under human control. According to this concept, an 
animal‘s primary welfare needs can be met by providing: 
• Freedom from hunger, malnutrition and thirst; 
• Freedom from fear and distress;  
• Freedom from physical and thermal discomfort;  
• Freedom from pain, injury and disease; and 
• Freedom to express normal patterns of behaviour. 
 
 
2.20 These five fundamental rights have been affirmed by the Supreme 
Court of India in A. Nagaraj c ase14.  They describe animal welfare as a 
                                                        
13 World Organization for Animal Health, Animal Welfare. http://www.oie.int/en/animal -
welfare/animal-welfare-at-a-glance/ Accessed on April 13, 2017 
14 Supra note 7 

 10 
condition where the animal is in good state of welfare if (as indicated by 
scientific evidence) it is healthy, comfortable, well nourished, safe, able to 
express innate behaviour and if it is not suffering from unpl easant health 
conditions such as pain, fear and distress. 
 
2.21 The Supreme Court cognizance of the above mentioned principles and 
reiterated them in T. N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India 15; T. N. 
Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India 16 and Centre for Environmental 
Law World Wide Fund India v. Union of India.17 
 
2.22 The Welfare Quality Project, funded by the European Commission has 
suggested twelve criteria to assess the welfare of poultry. The criteria 
suggested by them are absence of prolonged h unger, absence of prolonged 
thirst, comfort around resting, thermal comfort, ease of movement, absence 
of injuries, absence of diseases, absence of pain induced by management 
procedures, expression of social behavior, expression of other behavior, good 
human-animal relationship and positive emotional state. 18 These criteria 
incorporate physical and mental well being of the poultry by linking animal 
welfare with food quality concept.  
E. Supreme Court judgments dealing with Animal Welfare:  
2.23 The Supreme C ourt in Animal Welfare Board of India v. A. 
Nagaraja19 held that animals ha ve a right to live with dignity, intrinsic 
worth and without unnecessary pain and suffering.  The Court while 
dealing with the matter directed the AWBI and Governments "to take steps 
to prevent the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on the 
animals, since their rights have been statutorily protected under sections 
3 and 11 of PCA Act.‖. 
                                                        
15(2012) 3 SCC 277. 
16(2012) 4 SCC 362. 
17(2013) 8 SCC 234. 
18 Welfare Quality assessment Protocol for Poultry, available at : 
http://www.welfarequalitynetwork.net/downloadattachment/45627/21652/Poultry%20
Protocol.pdf (last visited on June 26, 2017). 
19 Supra note 7. 

 11 
 
2.24 The Court in this case has elaborately dealt with the issues with 
reference to the Constitution and the PCA Act and observed as under: 
 
―34. ….Section 3 of the Act deals with duties of persons having 
charge of the animals, which is mandatory in nature and 
hence confer corresponding rights on animals. Rights so 
conferred on animals are thus the antithesis of a duty and if 
those rights are violated, law will enforce those rights with 
legal sanction… 
 
...Primary duty on the persons in charge or care of the animal 
is to ensure the well-being of the animal. ―Well-being‖ means a 
state of being comfortable, healthy or happy... 
 
42. Sections 3 and 11, as already indicated, therefore confer 
no right on the organisers of jallikattu or bullock cart race, but 
only duties, responsibilities and obligations, but confer 
corresponding rights on animals. Secti ons 3, 11(1)(a) and (o) 
and other related provisions have to be understood and read 
along with Article 51A(g) of the Constitution which cast 
fundamental duties on every citizen to have ‗compassion for 
living creatures‘. Parliament, by incorporating Article  51A(g), 
has again reiterated and re -emphasised the fundamental 
duties on human beings towards every living creature, which 
evidently takes in bulls as well.  All living creatures have 
inherent dignity and a right to live peacefully and a right to 
protect their well -being which encompasses protection from 
beating, kicking, overdriving, overloading, tortures, pain and 
suffering, etc. Human life, we often say, is not like animal 
existence, a view having anthropocentric bias, forgetting the 
fact that animals h ave also got intrinsic worth and value. 
Section 3 of the PCA Act has acknowledged those rights and 
the said section along with Section 11 cast a duty on persons 
having charge or care of animals to take reasonable measures 
to ensure well-being of the animal s and to prevent infliction of 
unnecessary pain and suffering.‖ 
 
 
2.25 The Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Mirzapur Moti Kureshi 
Kassab Jamat & Ors 20, held that by enacting article 51A(g) and giving it the 
status of a fundamental duty, one of the objec ts sought to be achieved by 
                                                        
20 (2005) 8 SCC 534 

 12 
Parliament is to ensure that the spirit and message of articles 48 and 48 A 
are honoured as a fundamental duty by every citizen. Article 51A(g) , 
therefore, enjoins that it is  a fundamental duty of every citizen ―to have 
compassion for living creatures‖, which means concern for suffering, 
sympathy, kindliness etc., which has to be read along with sections 3 
(Duties of persons having charge of animals), section 11(1)(a) and (m) 
(Treating animals cruelly), and section 22 (Restrictio n on exhibition and 
training of performing animals) etc. of the PCA Act21. 
 
2.26 The Supreme Court, while hearing a Transfer Petition filed by the 
Animal Welfare Board of India praying for transfer of four writ petitions from 
different High Courts, seeking the phasing out of battery cages for egg laying 
hens and switching to a cage free humane option, to one Court, held that 
―we expect the Government of India to convene the proposed meeting and 
expedite the process of framing of the rules and report further developments 
on the subject to the High Court of Delhi upon transfer of the cases to it.‖ 22 
The writ petitions are currently pending before the Delhi High Court. 23 
2.27 The Supreme Court disposed of WP No. 330 of 2001, Common Cause, 
A Registered Society v. Union of India vide order dated 17.02.2017, wherein  
while dealing with the issue of illegal treatment of animals during transport 
and slaughter, directed  the State governments and Union territories  to 
comply with the compendium of Indian standards prepared  by the 
Government of India. 
F. High Court judgments dealing with Animal Welfare 
 
2.28 The Madras High Court in S. Kanna n v. Commissioner of Police 24, 
held that protection shall be granted to all kind of birds including poultry 
against cruelty in any manner , observing ―the birds and animals are 
entitled to co -exist along with human beings‖ . Th e Court also issued 
                                                        
21 Compassion Unlimited Plus Action v. Union of India (2016)3SCC 85 (paragraph  67)  
22 Transfer Petition (Civil) No(s).1095-1098  OF 2016 
23 WP 9056/2016, WP 9622/2016, WP 9630/2016&WP 10990/2016 
24 WP (MD) No. 8040 of 2014 

 13 
orders prohibiting Cock fight and any other bird or animal fight for the 
sake of enjoyment of spectators. 
 
2.29 The Gujarat High Court in Muhammadbhai Ja lalbhai Serasiya v. 
State of Gujarat 25, held that to keep birds in cages would tantamount to 
illegal confinement of the birds which is in violation of right of the birds to 
live in free air / sky. Thereby the High Court directed to release such 
illegally confined birds in the open sky/air. A similar view is taken by the 
Gujarat High Court in Abdulkadar Mohamad Azam Sheikh v. State of 
Gujarat26, observing that ―it is the duty of every citizen to see that there is 
no unnecessary pain or suffering to any animal or bird.‖  
 
2.30 In Tetragon Chemie v. CCE & Ors .,27  the Customs Excise & Gold 
Tribunal held that poultry feed must not only include that food which is 
necessary for their survival but also that food which is necessary for their 
growth and development. 
 
2.31 The High Court of Himachal Pradesh has prohibited animal sacrifice 
on 26.09.2007 in CWP No. 9257 of 2011 along with CWP No.4499/2012 
and CWP No.5076/2012 and quoted the words of Mahatma Gandhi: 
 
―The moral progress and strength of a nation can be 
judged by the care and compassion it shows towards 
its animals.‖   
 
2.32 The Delhi High Court i n the case of  People for Animals v. M D 
Mohazzim & Anr 28, held that: 
 
―…birds have fundamental rights including the right to live with 
dignity and they cannot be subje cted to cruelty by anyone (…) 
human beings have no right to keep them in small cages for the 
purposes of their business or otherwise.‖ 
  
                                                        
25 2015 JX (Guj)378:2014 
26 (CR.A/1635/2010) 
27 1999 (63) ECC 709 
28Decided on 15 th May 2015, Delhi High Court, CRL.M.C. 2051/2015  
(MANU/DE/2074/2015) 

 14 
CHAPTER-III 
  House-keeping of Layers and Broilers 
  
A. Layers: 
 
3.1 According to the Food and Agriculture Organization o f the United 
Nations, India is the third largest producer of eggs in the world prod ucing 
more than 65 billion eggs .29 The industry in India has evolved from 
Backyard Poultry farming in 1950 -60‘s, high platform cages in 1995 to high 
capacity farms with low c ompartmentalization, automated feeding 
techniques and environmentally controlled housing by 2011.30 
 
3.2 This evolution in layer farming tec hniques has led to varied layers  of 
farming across the country. The poultry industry has turned lucrative and 
highly competitive. The economic factors of the industry demand higher 
production at lower costs without compromising the consumer quality 
standards. The scale and intensity of production is substantially higher in 
the commercial and industri al sectors than in ba ckyard farming . 
Advantages are derived by the poultry industry from economies of large 
scale production which provides for specialisation and division of labour at 
different stages in the production process, leading to automation of 
operations and labour-cost savings.31  
 
3.3 In contrast, backyard poultry farming in rural areas still follow the 
traditional way of farming methods. This makes the production ineffec tive 
as it exposes the birds to predators and  renders them prone to  diseases.32 
                                                        
29 Government of India; State/UT-wise estimates of Egg Produ ction by Fowls during the 
years 2008-09 to 2012 -13https://data.gov.in/resources/details-estimates-egg-
production-fowls-during-2008-09-2012-13/download 
30Indian J. Anim. Hlth. (2 015), 54(2) : 89 -108 Review Article An Overview Of Poultry 
Production In India R.N. Chatterjee* And U. Rajkumar 
31http://www.thepoultrysite.com/poultrynews/31498/animal-rights-campaigners-
highlight-welfare-issues-in-indian-egg-industry/ 
32Problems related to  farm operations in poultry farming as perceived by farm women , 
http://www.veterinaryworld.org/Vol.2/May/Problems%20related%20to%20farm%20oper
ations%20in%20poultry%20farming%20as%20pe.pdf 

 15 
Further, lack of c onstant optimal environment leads to low hatchability 
among the birds. Thus , the housing conditions in poultry farming have a 
significant impact over the production. In order to achieve the maximum  
production, low cost caging techniques even at the cost of  consumer quality 
standards are rampantly in use . The present trend in the market indicates 
that small houses are being discarded for larger and more mechanised 
houses for egg production. 33 The birds are maintained in hen houses 
without any contact with oth er flocks and other wildlife. Consequently , it 
reduces the immunity of the birds making bio -security a critical factor in 
egg production.  
 
3.4 The hens used for the production of eggs in the egg industry are 
reared in small, barren wire cages called ―batt ery cages‖, a name given due 
to the arrangement of cages placed side by side. T he battery cages are  so 
small that the animals are unable to stand up straight or spread their wings 
without touching the sides of the cage or other hens  or turning in a 
complete circle without any impediment . The floor space available to each 
hen is approximately 623.7 cm 2 which is almost the area of a  sheet of A4 
size paper. The most common cages hold 5 -10 birds. A typical egg farm in 
our country contains thousands of cages wit h tens of thousands of birds, 
stacked multiple tiers high, lined in multiple rows. 
 
3.5 This method of stocking the hens, leads to sore feet, minor and major 
abrasions, broken bones and other bodily injuries to the birds. It also 
increases the risk of dise ases in the flock. 34 The People for Ethical 
Treatment of Animals (PETA) has forwarded information on the conditions of 
poultry in India and has  addressed various issues relating thereto. The 
Commission has taken into consideration  the same  while formulating  the 
‗Draft Rules ‘. In addition, climatic conditions such as temperature and 
                                                                                                                                                                       
 
33https://www.forbes.com/sites/jamesmcwilliams/2013/10/23/small-free-range-egg-
producers-cant-escape-problems-of-factory-farms/#504cbea021f2 
34http://www.hindustantimes.com/mumbai-news/wired-cages-in-poultry-farms-killing-
hens-in-india-shows-survey/story-KM7Nd0UZDnxsBc8TDpKvpM.html 

 16 
humidity play an important role in attaining maximum production. Higher 
temperatures would lead to low productivity therefore the birds are usually 
kept at constant temperatures i n poultry farms in India. The downside to 
this is that the birds would be more susceptible  to diseases even with small 
changes in climatic conditions, affecting the chances of  their survival. 
Consequently, they are fed antibiotics to boost immunity.  
 
3.6 With a view to curtail the cruel practices of confining birds in battery 
cages, it is necessary to have a distinction between  the produce obtained 
from healthy farming of hens in cage free environment  and the produce 
obtained from battery cage farming .  To wards this end , certification by the 
Animal Husbandry Departments of the States, recognising that the poultry 
farms follow the practice of cage  free egg farming , is desirable.  This would 
enable the consumer to select the produce obtained from healthy farm ing 
and will result in discouraging battery cage farming. 
 
3.7 It is also important that the feed used must be nutrient rich and 
devoid of antibiotics as it affects the consumer food quality standard which 
is required to be maintained across countries. There are no statutory 
regulations, at present to prescribe the standard, quality and quantity of 
food for poultry in India which leads to rampant use of antibiotics in the 
poultry feed.  
 
3.8 In response to the notice inviting  suggestions on the issue, the L aw 
Commission has received a large number of responses. As per the response 
received from the Tata Memorial Centre , Bombay, many Indians suffer 
from antibiotic resistance. The Centre claims  that it is  proven that non -
therapeutic antibiotics given to poultry cause such resistance and that such 
antibiotics are given to poultry because their living conditions are cramped 
and unhygienic. It further says that with more open, cleaner and ventilated 
living space the animals are less likely to need t hese constant a ntibiotics 
making their eggs and meat safer for human consumption.  The view s 

 17 
expressed hereinabove stand fully supported by various writings by experts  
such as Tollefson, Altekruse and Potter.35 
 
3.9 In this regard, the Central Government in the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has also issued advisory/instructions 
to the Department of Animal Husbandry of all the States and Union 
Territories on 3rd June, 2014 observing that: 
 
―2. …antibiotics are also used as feed premix for regular fee ding in 
poultry and animals used for meat, milk and egg production.  This 
kind of regular feeding of antibiotics has serious consequences on 
human being since residues of antibiotics may accumulate in meat, 
milk and eggs.  Consumption of antibiotic contami nated meat, milk 
and eggs may develop antibiotic resistance in both human being 
and animals.  This type of use of antibiotics should be discouraged 
and in this regard, the farmers/ industries and feed manufacturers 
should be advised/educated on not to use antibiotics for animal 
feeding. 
 
3. Further, the use of hormones as growth promoters used in food 
producing animals should also be stopped since it has also adverse 
effect on human and animal life‖. 
 
The Central Government has asked all the State Governmen ts and Union 
Territories to advis e all the State Veterinarians, feed manufacturers and 
also the persons involved in treatment of animal for judicious use of 
antibiotics and hormones for the treatment of ailing food producing 
animals.  
 
 
                                                        
35 L. Tollefson, S.F. Altekruse and M.E. Po tter, ―Therapeutic Antibiotics in Animal Feeds 
and Antibiotic Resistance‖, Res. Sci. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz. 1997 16 (2), 7090715  

 18 
3.10 The Animal Wel fare Board of India, vide letter dated 16.02.2012, 
explained/clarified that confining hens in batte ry cages violates  provisions 
of section 11(1)(e) of PCA Act. The relevant part of the letter reads: 
 
“Considering the issue of well -being of egg laying birds  as well 
as food safety, you may be aware that the EU has decided to 
phase out battery cages for egg laying hens with effect from 1 
January, 2012. These directives apply to all 27 EU member 
states; however, some European countries have preferred to 
adopt e ven stricter guidelines for farm animal protection. For 
instance in Switzerland, battery cages have been prohibited 
since 1992. 
The AWBI advises the Government of India and the State 
Governments to issue suitable directions to poultry farmers to 
prohibit t he use of battery cages in egg production, so that 
poultry farms keeping egg laying hens adhere to the provisions 
of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (PCA) Act, 1960 and not 
confine birds in cages. The existing cage facilities be phased out 
within the next 5 years i.e.2017. 
Central and State Governments must encourage animal welfare 
and environment sustainability within the Indian food sector by 
promoting production systems that adhere to modern standards 
for animal welfare (as enshrined by the Five Fre edoms) and the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals  (PCA) Act 1960‖  
 
a. Practices in European Union and other 
countries: 
 
i. Europe: All member countries  of the European Union (EU) 
have phased out the use of battery cages.  
ii. United States of America: States of Cali fornia, Michigan, Ohio, 
Oregan and Washington have adopted the policy of prohibiting 
or phasing out battery cages for egg laying hens. 
iii. Bhutan: In 2013, Bhutan declared itself a cage – free country. 
 
b. Regulations on Layer Hens: 
 
i. While perusing the draft Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Egg 
Laying Hens) Rules, 2012, the Law Commission found that the 
same can be improved upon by few modifications . Such 
modifications are to be carried out by detailing environmental 

 19 
provisions that meet the basic needs of these animals. T he 
revised draft rules delineate space requirements for feeders, 
drinking spaces and floor are a and other key resources to 
ensure good management of the system. Other important 
animal welfare provisions including  when and how to carry 
out euthanasia of sick or injured animals  are incorporated in 
the revised draft rules. 
 
ii. The modified rules  are recommended  keeping in view  the 
constitutional provisions and the object of  PCA Act .  The 
revised draft rules are annexed as Annexure- I.  
 
 B. Broilers: 
 
3.11 Since the last four decades the poultry business has been a backyard 
affair, but today, it has expanded into a massive industry. Broiler chickens 
are bred and raised to gain maximum body weight in the shortest period of 
time. Birds are bred through tra it selection in order to achieve maximum 
weight with maximum feed conversion ratio 36, with little  regard for the 
welfare of the bird. Rapid growth of muscle on an infantile skeletal structure 
makes the broilers prone to joint, bone and ligament disorders. A s a result, 
these birds suffer from leg deformities and lameness . The welfare 
implications for caging broilers raise several welfare concerns as observed in 
battery cages for layers. Therefore, the usage of broiler battery cage s should 
be discontinued and the system of cage -free rearing ought to be preferred 
with improvements in stocking density, feed, and hygiene.  The entire 
process from hou sekeeping to transport to slaughter  must be made 
humane.   
 
a. Legal Framework Governing Broiler Chickens  
 
3.12 Rule 3 of t he PCA (Slaughter House) Rules, 2001, prohibits the 
slaughter of any animal except in recognis ed or licensed houses. Whereas 
                                                        
36 Robert Pym.  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. ―Poultry 
Genetics and breeding in developing countries‖ http://www.fao.org/3/a-al726e.pdf 

 20 
rule 6 provides for several conditions pre and post slaughter, including ―rule 
6(1) No animal shall be slaughtered in a slaught er house in sight of other 
animals‖ and ―rule 6(2) No animal shall be administered any chemical, drug 
or hormone before slaughter except drug for its treatment for any specific 
disease or ailment.‖  Further, it prescribes required infrastructure of 
slaughter houses. All of which have also been included in the F SS 
Regulations, 2011, which is a comprehensive set of regulations.  The 
regulations prescribe standards for slaughter house infrastructure, location 
of premises, sanitary practices, equipment and machin ery to be utilised, 
personal hygiene, pre -slaughter handling, transport and space requirement 
during transport, humane slaughter methods, and sanitary requirem ents 
for meat processing units. 
 
b. Recommendations on Broiler Chickens: 
 
3.13 It has been noted tha t the incidence of disease s is markedly reduced 
in slower g rowing broiler chicken strains.  France has produced ―Label 
Rouge‖ chickens. These chickens reach slaughter weight at 12 weeks, and 
suffer substantially lower incidences of leg disease, low mortalit y rates 
despite having a grow -out period that is twice as long as conventional 
broiler chickens. The trend for using slow -growing chickens may also be 
seen in United Kingdom as well as the United States of America. Therefore, 
slower growing chicken strains may be promoted for broiler production. It is 
desirable that early steps are taken to notify regulations to ensure that trait 
selection is not only for production of healthy broiler chickens but also 
welfare centric. 
3.14 It is a matter of concern that th ere is no regulation with respect to 
stocking density and other housing condition s. The minimum floor space  
available per bird should be an important factor  in calculation of maximum 
stocking density. It is expected that t he AWBI acting pro–actively will look 
into all the issue s of welfare of animals including the broilers, o n similar 
lines as in egg – laying hens rules. The regulations for housing and stocking 

 21 
density of broiler birds along with relevant provisions of the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals ( Broiler Chicken s) Rules, 2017 are recommended, 
annexed as Annexure II. 
 
3.15 On perusal of the 1978 Rules, as well as the FSS Regulations, 2011, it 
is found  that the procedures and standards prescribed in these laws are  
satisfactory. Once the appropriate authority ensures the strict compliance of 
these rules and  regulations the object will stand achieved.  To ensure the 
same failure on the part of the official concerned shall render him personally 
responsible, as if it was a dereliction of duty. 
 
3.16 On perusal of the Slaughter House Rules, 2001, as well as the FSS 
Regulations, 2011, it is found that the procedures and standards prescribed 
in these rules/regulations are satisfactory. However, these rules/regulations 
are violated blatantly in roadside meat sh ops and outlets.  The appropriate 
authorities shall ensure strict compliance of these laws  by providing for 
personal responsibility of the concerned officer for a failure which may be 
treated as dereliction of duty, if so found . Additionally, a mechanism be 
developed for imparting training to butchers/slaughter men so that sanitary 
practices are followed during slaughter.  
 

 22 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Review of Punishments in PCA Act 
 
4.1 Animal welfare and food safety are intricately link ed. The consumers 
across the globe are gradually becoming aware of the  fact that how  poultry 
and livestock are treated. Animal welfare can be assessed by examining two 
criteria, namely, design criteria and animal -based criteria. The d esign 
criteria describes the quality of the environment  or the way  in which 
animals kept. This includes battery cages, floor space, housing and stocking 
density etc. Animal -based criteria evaluate the behaviour and physiology of 
the animals, including health levels.37 
 
4.2 These standards have been globally reco gnised and India too needs to 
adhere to these standards in the interest of animal welfare.  Absence of 
regulations on housing and stocking density of poultry, ineffective 
implementation of the existing rules, and ignorance on the part of those 
involved in this profession towards recognised standards of housekeeping 
indicate that appropriate changes need to made in the law as well as 
implementation system. 
 
4.3 Penalties for animal cruelty offences vary in each jurisdiction, but in 
most of the countries p rovisions provide for imprisonment  and fines. 
Further, the penalties apply to both deliberate and negligent acts of animal 
cruelty.    
 
4.4 In the  United Kingdom , cruelty to anim als is a criminal off ence for 
which one may be imprisoned  for up to 6 months. In France, cruelty to 
animals is punishable by imprisonment of  two years and a financial penalty 
(30,000 €).  In Bangladesh, the Animal Welfare Law, 2016 provides that 
anyone invo lved in the offences like killing an animal or injuring it 
                                                        
37 Supra note 28. 
 

 23 
intentionally will s erve a sentence of imprisonment up to a period of two 
years or will be fined Taka 50,000 or both. 
 
4.5 In Japan, Welfare and Management of Animals Act 1973 (amended in 
1999 and 2005) stipulates that "no person shall kill, injure, or inflict cruelty 
to animals ...", and in particular, criminalises cruelty to all mammals, birds, 
and reptiles possessed by persons; as well as cattle, horses, goats, sheep, 
pigs, dogs, cats, pigeons, d omestic rabbits, chickens, and domestic ducks  
regardless of whether they are in captivity. 
 Killing or injuring without due reason: up to one year's imprisonment 
with labour or a fine of up to one million yen; 
 Cruelty such as causing debilitation by discont inuing feeding or 
watering without due reason: a fine of up to five hundred thousand 
yen; 
 Abandonment: a fine of up to five hundred thousand yen; 
 
4.6 The rules under the PCA Act 1960, largely suffers from weak penal 
provisions. While the penal provisions  pertaining to fine  in the Act may 
have been a sufficient deter rent in 1960,  those provisions have lost their 
significance due to inflation . As monetary penalties under legislations of 
various jurisdictions chan ge regularly, it is averred that the penal 
provisions in the said Act are required to be revised suitably.  While 
keeping in view both the health and welfare of the people and the 
avoidance o f pain and suffering of animals, punishment for all offences 
under the Act need to be appropriately revised. 
 
 

 24 
CHAPTER-V 
 
Summary of Recommendations 
 
5.1 The Commission made an Appeal on its website requesting all 
stakeholders to forward their views to the Commission, on rearing, 
transport, maintenance and sale of poultry or any other relevant issues in 
this regard .  The Commission received a number of responses, which are 
summarised at Annexure – III to this Report. 
 
5.2 All the recommendations made in this report are summarised 
hereunder. The existing legal framework governing the transport of animals 
is adequate and shall be implemented to ensure that unnecessary pain and 
suffering is not inflict ed on poultry during transi t. The responsibility of 
compliance shall lie on the consignor and consignee, and any person in 
charge of care of such consignment as provided u nder section 3 of the PCA 
Act. 
 
5.3 The very idea of having this report is to put an end to the cruel 
practices of confining birds in battery cages.  With this object in mind, the 
Commission recommends certification of poultry farms by the Animal 
Husbandry Departments of the States, where a distinction of produce 
obtained from cage free egg farming from that obtained from battery cage 
farming, is drawn. 
 
5.4  Given the gravity of the issue of battery cages and the fact that the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Anim als (E gg Laying Hens) Rules Bill has been 
pending since 2012 , the proposed modifoed rules should be considered for 
being notified.  The se rules are modified keeping in view the constitutional 
provisions and the object of the PCA Act.  
 
5.5 Weight of birds should be an important factor in calculation of 
maximum stocking density. It is also noticed that there is no regulation with 
respect to stocking density and other housing condition s, therefore 

 25 
necessary amendment s in regulations for housing and stocking d ensity of 
broiler birds and other relevant provisions in the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (Broiler Chicken) Rules, 2017 are expressed.  
 
5.6 On perusal of  the Slaughter House Rules, 2001, as well as the FSS 
Regulations, 2011 , the Commission is of the opinion that the procedures 
and standards prescribed in these rules/regulations are satisfactory. Their 
compliance in letter and spirit will meet the aims and objects of the 
regulations.  
 
5.7 In view of the analysis in c hapter IV above, it is also recommen ded 
that the provisions of the PCA Act prescribing punishment for inflicting 
cruelty on animals be amended to provide for stringent punishments.  
 
 
  


 26 
Annexure-I  
 
 
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Egg Laying Hens) 
Rules, 2017 
 
S.O ______________(E) : - Whereas a draft of the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (Egg Laying Hens) Rules, 2017 is hereby published, as required 
under sub-section (1) of section 38 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
Act, 1960 (59 of 1960), for inviting objections and suggest ions on the said 
draft rules from all persons likely to be affected thereby, before the expiry of 
the period of thirty days from the date of publication of this notification in 
the Official Gazette; 
 
The objections and suggestions, if any, may be sent to t he Under Secretary 
to the Government of India, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change at Room No……………………. ; 
 
All objections / suggestions received from the public within the specified 
period shall be duly considered by the Central Government; 
 
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub -sections (1) and 
(2) of section 38 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (59 of 
1960), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:- 
 
DRAFT RULES 
1. Short title and com mencement.- (1) These rules may be called the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Egg Laying Hens) Rules, 2017. 
(2) They shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government …………………………………………  
 
2. Definitions.-  In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, -  
(a) "Act" means the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (59 
of 1960); 
(b) ―Board‖ means the Board established under section 4, and as 
reconstituted from time to time under section 5A of the Act; 
(c) ―farm‖ means the land, building, support facilitie s, and other 
equipment that are wholly or partially used in poultry farming 
for the  production of eggs; 
(d) ―farm owner‖ means a person having right and control over a 
farm, where hens are reared and kept for production of eggs for 
commercial purposes; 
(e) ―farm operator‖ means a person who owns, operates or manages 
the business of a farm; 
 

 27 
(f) ―hen‖ means any female domesticated chicken kept for the 
purpose of egg production and includes pullets; 
 
(g) ―local authority‖ means a municipal committee, district board, 
cantonment board, panchayat or any other authority entrusted 
under any law with the administration and control of any 
matters within the specified local area; 
(h) ―prescribed authority" means the Board or any officer 
authorised by it; 
(i) ―State Board‖ means a State Anim al Welfare Board constituted 
in a State by the State Government;  
(j) ―Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals‖ means the Society 
as defined in clause (e) of rule 2 of the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (Establishment and Regulation of Societies for 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) Rules, 2001 (notified vide 
S.O.271(E) dated 26th March, 2001);   
(k) ―veterinary practitioner‖ means a registered veterinary 
practitioner as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Indian 
Veterinary Council Act 1984 (52 of 1984). 
 
3. Application of rules.- These rules shall apply to the farms where egg 
laying hens are housed.  
 
4. Registration.- (1) No person shall engage in poultry farming without 
being registered with the animal husbandry department of the 
concerned State Government under these rules. 
(2) The registration certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous 
place at the farm. 
(3) Every farm operating prior to the commencement of these rules 
shall, within a period of three months from the date of its 
commencement, register  itself with the animal husbandry 
department of the concerned State.  
(4) The animal husbandry department of the State may, while 
granting registration, impose such conditions as it may deem fit. 
(5)  The animal husbandry department of the State may, after  
satisfying itself with the fulfilment of operating procedure laid down 
in these rules, certify any farm as a cage -free or free range farm and 
on certification, such farm shall be permitted to use the term 
‗organic produce‘. 
 
5. Powers of Board to issue guide lines.- (1) The Board or a State 
Board may, from time to time, issue such guidelines to animal 
husbandry department of the State and the local authorities, as it 
may deem necessary to facilitate compliance of these rules. 
(2) The farm owner or operator sha ll make available all records and 
provide information relating to functioning of the farm to the Board 
or the State Board, as and when required. 
 

 28 
6. Responsibility of company engaged in poultry farming.- (1) Where 
the farm is owned by a company, its Chief Exe cutive Officer, 
President or highest ranking employee of such company shall be 
responsible for ensuring the compliance of these rules. 
(2) In case of contract farming between companies and farmers, 
where inputs for poultry farming are provided to the farm owne r by a 
company, in return for providing eggs at a pre -determined price, 
both the farm owner and the company shall be responsible for 
ensuring compliance of these rules. 
(3) Where a farm is owned by a government entity the responsibility 
of compliance of these rules shall be on the Head of the entity. 
 
7. Power to authorise inspection. - For the purposes of ensuring 
compliance, the animal husbandry department of the State or the Board or 
a State Board or a local authority, may authorise any of its officers in 
writing to inspect any farm, and submit a report containing the findings of 
such inspection, to the department, Board, State Board or as the case may 
be the local authority, and any officer or person so authorised may – 
(a)  enter at any reasonable time and inspect the farm; and 
(b)  require any person to produce any record kept by him in respect 
of the farm. 
(c)     seize any animal, if there is reason to believe that the provisions 
of the Act, are not being complied with or that the animals are 
being treated with cruelty and the seized animal shall be kept in 
the custody of the local SPCA or an animal welfare organisation. 
 
8. Requirement of Space Allowance. - (1) Hens shall not be confined in 
a manner that prevents them from lying down, standing up, fully 
spreading both wings without touching the side of an enclosure or 
other egg -laying hens, or turning in a complete circle without any 
impediment and without touching the side of an enclosure. 
(2)  There shall be sufficient space for all hens to perch and must have 
a nest box, litter to allow pecking and scratching and access to feed 
freely. 
 
9. Stocking Density in Poultry Farm.-(1) For the purpose of calculation 
of the floor space, the area of nests, nest boxes and elevated perches 
shall not be included, but the non -elevated perches that are 
integrated into slatted floors shall be calculated as a part of the floor 
space.   
(2) In a single level house, a minimum of 0.14 sq. meters per hen 
shall be provided to allow normal behaviour. 
(3)  In a house with litter and a raised slatte d area, with a perching 
or roosting area over a droppings pit or belt, the minimum space 
allowance shall be 0.11 sq. meters per hen. 

 29 
(4) In multi -tier systems with feeders and drinkers on overhead 
perches or platforms, and in which the overhead perches or plat forms 
provide sufficient space for at least fifty -five per cent of the hens to 
perch then, a minimum of 0.09 sq. meters (900cm²)  space per hen 
shall be provided. 
(5) The pullets shall be housed with a space allowance of not less 
than the following, namely:- 
 
(a) 0-6 weeks 72 in² (464 cm²); 
(b) 6-18 weeks (or placement in layer house) 144in² (929 cm²) 
; and 
(c) pullets shall have access to perches before six weeks of 
age so that they are prepared for introduction to the 
laying environment. 
 
10. Maintenance records of space all owance - (1) The farm owner or 
the operator shall ensure that the maximum housing density is not 
exceeded and maintain records of the total floor area available to the 
hens; the space allowances; and maximum number of birds kept 
within the house.  
(2) The farm  owner or the operator shall maintain the record of 
available number of birds, the daily mortality and number culled.  
(3) These records shall be made available for inspection by the 
prescribed authority.  
 
11. Number of nest boxes - Individual nest boxes shall be  provided at 
not less than one per 5 hens or community nest systems shall provide an 
overall minimum nesting area of 0.8 sq. meters per one hundred birds. 
 
12. Floor substrate in nest boxes - Nest boxes shall have a floor 
substrate that encourages nesting behaviour. 
 
13. Perches - (1) Perches shall be provided in all houses, and they shall 
provide for an area of at least 15.24 cm per hen. At least twenty per 
cent of perches shall be elevated but perches shall not be located too 
high as hens can fracture bones jumpi ng down fro m high perches , 
and for the pur pose of calculating perching space, only perches 
located more than 40.64 cm and less than 1 meter above the adjacent 
floor shall be taken into account . 
(2)  The perforated floors may be considered as perching space 
when they have perches incorporated within the floor structure or 
attached on top of the floor.  
(3)  The minimum space between incorporated perches shall be 
twelve inches to allow birds to easily roost simultaneously. 
 
14. Design of perches - (1) Perches shall be designed to have a gap of not 
less than 1.27 cm in on either side of any perch to allow hens to grip 
the perches without risk of trapping their claws.  

 30 
(2) The perches shall be at least 3.18 cm wide at the top (round 
perches shall have a diameter of not less t han 3.18 cm), have no 
sharp edges, and be of a non-slip material. 
(3) The perches shall be positioned to minimise dirtying of any 
hens below and, when possible, shall be over a droppings pit. 
 
15. Litter -  (1) The area of litter provided shall be sufficient to al low the 
birds to dust bathe and forage freely. 
(2) For housing systems which include a completely slatted or grid 
floor, the opportunity to dust bathe shall be provided by suitable 
substrate (litter) throughout the house of a size that allows multiple 
hens to dust bathe simultaneously.  
(3) In converted high -rise buildings, a minimum of fifteen percent 
available floor space shall be a suitable substrate. 
(4) The pullets shall have continuous access to litter. 
 
16. Euthanasia of Male Chicks - (1) The hatcheries shall us e animal 
euthanasia to euthanise male chicks using a combinations of inert 
gases by the method of controlled atmospheric killing.  
(2) The Board shall issue guidelines specifying the manner for 
euthanasia.  
 
17. Prohibition with regard to feed  - (1) The feeding of  hens with 
remains of dead chicks shall be prohibited. 
(2) The use of growth promoters shall be prohibited.  
(3) Antibiotics may be administered for therapeutic purposes 
(disease treatment) and only under supervision of a veterinarian.  
(4) Withdrawal of feed to induce a molt shall be prohibited.  
 
18. Disposal of Spent Hens - (1) The farm shall sell spent hens only to a 
licensed slaughter house.  
(2) The transport and slaughter of spent hens shall be in 
accordance with the applicable rules.  
 
19. Veterinary Care.- (1) Every farm owner shall—  
(a) employ only, persons trained in handling and taking care 
of animals, and who do not have  aggressive or abnormal 
behaviour, rather have compassionate temperament towards 
animals also; and 
 
(b) deploy sufficient number of employees at the farm to t ake 
care of, and attend hens properly, and ensure that at least two 
employees per ten thousand animals are available at all times to 
take care of the hens.  
 
(2) Every farm shall make provision for veterinary care, including 
emergency medical care, and dis play at a conspicuous place in the 
farm the emergency contact details of the veterinary practitioner so as 

 31 
to facilitate the employees and inspectors to approach the veterinary 
practitioner, as and when required.  
(3) The farm operator shall immediately report  the outbreak or 
suspected outbreak of any zoonotic or contagious disease or infection 
to the local authority, the State Board and the State Government. 
(4) Every farm shall have at least one room or enclosure for 
quarantining sick hens, or hens suspected to be sick. 
 
 
 
  

 32 
Annexure-II 
 
The Prevention of Crue lty to Animals (Broiler Chicken ) 
Rules, 2017 
 
S.O ______________(E) : - Whereas a draft of the Prevention of Crue lty to 
Animals (Broiler Chicken ) Rules, 2017 is hereby published, as required 
under sub-section (1) of section 38 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
Act, 1960 (59 of 1960), for inviting objections and suggestions on the said 
draft rules from all persons likely to be affected thereby, before the expiry of 
the period of thirty days from the date o f publication of this notification in 
the Official Gazette; 
 
The objections and suggestions, if any, may be sent to the Under Secretary 
to the Government of India, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change at Room No……………………. ; 
 
All objections / s uggestions received from the public within the specified 
period shall be duly considered by the Central Government; 
 
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub -sections (1) and 
(2) of section 38 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (59 of 
1960), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:- 
 
DRAFT RULES 
 
1. Short title and commencement - (1) These rules may be called the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Broiler Chicken) Rules, 2017. 
(2) They shall come into for ce on such date 
…………………………………………. 
 
2. Definitions - (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires- 
  
(a) "Act" means the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (59 
of 1960); 
(b) ―Board‖ means the Board established under section 4, and as 
reconstituted from time to time under section 5A of the Act; 
(c) ―chicken‖ means any domesticated chicken, turkey, duck, 
goose, or guinea fowl kept for the purpose of meat production 
and includes pullets; 
(d) ―farm‖ means the land, building, support facilities, and other 
equipment that are wholly or partially used for the  production 
of broiler chickens for meat;  
(e) ―farm owner‖ means a person having right and control over a 
farm, where chickens are reared for fattening and production of 
meat for commercial purposes; 
(f) ―farm operator‖ means a person who owns, operates or manages 
the business of a farm; 

 33 
 
(g) ―local authority‖ means a municipal committee, district board, 
cantonment board, panchayat or any other authority entrusted 
under any law with the administration and control of any 
matters within the specified local area; 
(h) ―prescribed authority" means the Board or any officer 
authorized by it; 
(i) ―State Board‖ means a State Animal Welfare Board constituted 
in a State by the State Government;  
(j) ―Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA)‖ means a 
statutory SPCA established under the Act; 
(k) ―veterinary practitioner‖ means a veterinary practitioner 
registered as per the Indian Veterinary Council Act 1984 and 
whose name for the time being is included in the Indian 
Veterinary Practitioner s‘ Register established under the Indian 
Veterinary Council Act, 1984 (52 of 1984). 
 
3. Application of the rules - These rules shall apply to the farms where 
chickens are housed.  
 
4. Registration - (1) No person shall engage in chicken farming without 
being reg istered with the animal husbandry department of the 
concerned State Government under these rules. 
(2)  The registration certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous 
place at the farm. 
(3)  Every farm operating prior to the commencement of these rules 
shall within a period of three months from the date of its 
commencement, register itself with the state animal husbandry 
department of the concerned State.  
(4)  The animal husbandry department of the State may, while 
granting registration, impose such conditions as it may deem fit. 
 
5. Powers of Board or State Board to issue guidelines - (1) The Board 
or State Board may, from time to time, issue such guidelines to 
animal husbandry department of the State and the local authorities, 
as it may deem necessary to facilitate compliance of these rules. 
(2) The farm owner or operator shall make available all records and 
provide information relating to functioning of the farm to the Board or 
the State Board, as and when required. 
 
6. Responsibility of company engaged in chicken farming - (1) Where 
the farm is owned by a company, its Chief Executive Officer, President 
or highest ranking employee of such company shall be responsible for 
ensuring the compliance of these rules 
(2) In case of contract farming between companies and fa rmers, 
where inputs for chicken farming are provided to the farm owner by a 
company, in return for providing the chicken at a pre -determined 
price, both the farm owner and the company shall be responsible for 
ensuring compliance of these rules. 

 34 
(3) Where a farm is owned by a government entity the responsibility 
of compliance of these rules shall be on the Head of the entity. 
 
7. Power to authorise inspection. - For the purposes of  ensuring 
compliance, the Animal H usbandry department of the State or the 
Board or a S tate Board or a local authority may authorise any of its 
officers in writing to inspect any farm, and submit a report containing 
the findings of such inspection to the department, Board, State Board 
or as the case may be, the local authority, and any officer or person so 
authorised may – 
 
(a) enter at any reasonable time and inspect the farm; and 
(b) require any person to produce any record kept by him in respect 
of the farm. 
(c) seize any animal, if there is reason to believe that the provisions 
of the Act, are not be ing complied with or that the animals are 
being treated with cruelty and the seized animal shall be kept in 
the custody of the local SPCA or an animal welfare organisation. 
 
8. Requirement of Space Allowance- 
 (1) Chickens shall not be housed in cages, or  kept on wire or slatted   
floors  
(2) Chickens shall be provided sufficient space for movement without 
any difficulty, to stand normally, turn around and stretch their 
wings.  
 
9. Stocking Density in Chicken Farm –  
(1) The maximum stocking density shall be calculated on the weight of 
chickens per available floor space. 
(2) This density allowance shall not exceed 30 kg/m2.  
 
10. Maintenance Records of space allowance  - (1)  The farm owner or 
the operator shall ensure that the maximum housing density is not 
exceeded and m aintain records of the total floor area available to the 
chickens; the space allowances; and maximum number of birds kept 
within the house.  
(2) The farm owner or the operator shall maintain the record of 
available number of birds, the daily mortality and number culled.  
(3) These records shall be made available for inspection by the 
prescribed authority. 
 
11. Feed - (1) Chickens shall be provided nutritious feed every day and 
fed a wholesome diet, in sufficient quantity which is appropriate to 
their age and species. 
(2) The nutrient content and feeding regimes shall be controlled to 
prevent leg abnormalities and other problems associated with rapid 
rate of growth. 
(3) Chickens shall not be given feed containing remains of dead 
chicks.  

 35 
(4) Chickens shall not be given growth promoters.   
(5) Antibiotics, including coccidiostats, shall not be administered 
except under the supervision of a veterinarian. 
(6) The farm owner or operator shall provide sufficient feeder which 
shall be distributed throughout the house or enclosure to allow all 
chickens to eat without undue competition and the feed distribution 
shall ensure uniform feed availability throughout the entire feeder 
system. 
 
12. Preventing contact with toxic substances in buildings  - The farm 
owner or operator shall ensure that chickens do no t come into contact with 
fumes, paints, wood preservatives, disinfectants, or any other substances 
that are toxic to them. 
 
13. Design of floors - (1) Chicken house flooring shall allow for effective 
cleansing and disinfection to prevent build ing-up of parasit es and 
other pathogens.  
(2) The concrete floors shall be preferable to earthen floors because 
they can be more effectively cleaned and disinfected. 
 
14. Litter- (1) The floor of all houses shall be completely covered by litter 
and the chickens shall have access to the litter area at all times.  
(2) The litter shall: 
(a) be of suitable material, particle size and easy to maintain; 
(b) be of good quality (clean, dry, dust-free, and absorbent); 
(c) be of a sufficient depth for dilution of feces; 
(d) birds‘ feet should be free from excessive fecal 
contamination; 
(e) allow birds to dust bathe; and 
(f) be skimmed and topped up as necessary with fresh litter. 
(3) The litter that is wet, infested with mites, or otherwise 
contaminated shall not be introduced into chicken housing. 
(4) The wet or otherwise contaminated litter, or caked litter shall be 
replaced from time to time. 
(5) The wet litter from accidental flooding shall be replaced. 
 
15. Period of lighting  - The lighting system in the chicken house shall 
provide a twenty-four hour cycle: 
(a) A minimum period of eight hours of light, by the provision of 
either artificial light or access to daylight; and 
(b) A minimum period of six continuous ho urs of darkness in every 
twenty-four hour cycle, except when the natural period of 
darkness is shorter.  
(c) The requirement of clause (b) need not apply during the first few 
days of rearing and the last three days prior to slaughter. 
 
16. Stimulating environment  - (1) Provisions shall be made to keep 
indoor chickens active. 
(2) The environmental enrichment such as ramps, low perches, 

 36 
pecking blocks, straw bales shall be used to stimulate exploratory, 
foraging and locomotive behaviour and to minimize injurious pecking.  
 
 
17. Disposal of Chickens  - (1) The farm shall sell chickens only to a 
licensed slaughter house.  
(2) The transport and slaughter o f chickens shall be in accordance 
with the applicable rules. 
 
18. Veterinary Care - (1) Every farm owner shall  
(a) employ only, persons trained in handling and taking care of 
animals, and who do not have aggressive or abnormal 
behaviour, rather have compassionate  temperament towards 
animals also; and 
(b) deploy sufficient number of employees at the farm to take care 
of, and attend to chickens properly, and ensure that a minimum 
of two employees per five thousand animals are available at all 
times to take care of the chickens.  
 
(2) Every farm shall make provision for veterinary care, including 
emergency medical care, and display at a conspicuous place in the 
farm the emergency contact details of the veterinary practitioner so as 
to facilitate the employees and inspecto rs to approach the veterinary 
practitioner as and when required.  
(3)  The farm operator shall immediately report the outbreak or 
suspected outbreak of any zoonotic or contagious disease or infection 
to the local authority, the Board and the State Governme nt 
Department responsible for Animal Husbandry. 
(4)  Every farm shall have at least one room or enclosure for 
quarantining sick or diseased hens, or hens suspected to be sick or 
diseased. 
 
 

 37 
Annexure-III 
 
 
Summary of the Representations/Responses  
  
 
The Law Commission of India upon the request of the Government of India, 
examined the status of the laws and trends relating to the housekeeping 
and transport of poultry birds.   The Commission 
invited views/comments from the various stakeholders through an appe al 
dated 12th April 2017.  
 
On 2 nd May, 2017, Letters have been written to all Chief Secretaries of the 
States and UT's asking the various stakeholders by giving wide publicity to 
take part in the endeavour of the law commission and assist us in getting 
their opinion Comments have been received from organisations, 
restaurants, prominent individuals, retired members of the judiciary, 
medical practitioners, journalists and a poultry farm.  
 
The representations have stated the following:  
 
 The representation b rought to the commission notice is the 
unhygienic conditions of the poultry industry and the effect of battery - cage 
confinement on the well -being of the birds. The need for better facilities of 
housing to ensure more free and natural movement of the birds . The 
increase of fatal diseases like cancer, etc. due to the unhygienic conditions 
the birds are kept in. The impact of these unhygienic conditions is on people 
who consume meat or eggs of such birds. 
 The cruel practices of the breaking of beaks and the k illing of young 
male chicks in the industry .The practice of unnecessary feeding non -
therapeutic antibiotics given to the birds (which eventually leads to 
antibiotic resistance) is only to counter the effects of cruel confinement in 
battery cages. The impac t of slaughter and the unhygienic condition in 
industry is on human. The need for a humane system of rearing and 

 38 
breeding lacks the necessary facilities in the poultry industry, and the 
necessity to end the battery cage facilities. Consumers ask for cruelt y- free 
meat/ organically-produced eggs and the lack of such an existing trend in 
the larger market makes it difficult for seller‘s and hotel industries to cater 
to the business; advocacy of more humane treatment of the hens in this 
regard. 
 Requested for m ore compassionate handling of the birds in the 
poultry industry and appeals for ending of battery cage facilities. More 
natural environment of housing that allows the hens to perch and move 
about freely is a better alternative to the existing practice of b attery 
cages.  The practices to be used by the farming industry must be more 
human. The need for better farming techniques and an immediate change in 
the manner in which they are kept. The tremendous health impact of 
increasing antibiotic resistance in pou ltry-farm birds and the need to notify 
the Draft Rules. The reasons for ending battery cage confinement of the 
poultry-farm birds as it lead to the cruelty towards them and need a n 
immediate intervention of Government with respect to Rules regulating the 
same to curb the inhuman practices. 
 
 the provisions of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, and the 
Food Safety and Standards Act that speak of ensuring the dignity and 
humane treatment of animals; appeal to end battery cage confinement of the 
birds an d notification of draft rules for the purpose. Early notification of 
Draft Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Egg - Laying Hens) Rules, 2012, 
emphasizes the inhumane treatment of male chicks in the poultry industry.  
Related personal experiences when studyin g the poultry industry for 
journalistic purposes and detailed the cruelty and need for this cruelty to be 
curbed.  
 
  
                                                                                                                   
 
 