LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORE

(THE CODE OF CIVH. PROCEDURE, 1908)

December, 1964

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW


CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION,
5, Jorbagh, New Delhi,

December 13, 1964.

Shri Asuke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My Dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Twenty.
seventh Repori of the Law Commission which relates to the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

2. The question of taking up revision of this Code was
considered at the meeting of the Law Commission held on the
gth March, 1959. As the Fourteenth Report of the Law Com-
mission (Reform of Judicial Administration) had suggested
amendments in the Code on certain matters, it was decided at
that meeting that clarification be sought from the Ministry of
Law as to whether revision of the Code should comprise all
questions, including matters covered by and suggested in
the Fourteenth Report, or it should be confined to matters
not covered by it. The Government decided that the revision
should include those matters also. In accordance with that
direction a draft Report was prepared which after discussion
and reconsideration by the Commission at its 25th and zgth
meetings held on December 2, 1959 and August 29, 1960, Tes-
pectively, was circulated to the State Governments, High
Courts, Bar Associations and other interested persons and
bodies.

3. After the constitution of this Commission, the subject
was studied in detail taking into consideration, as set out in
the Report, the amendments in the RS.C. after the Evershed
Report, several amendments made by the various High
Courts in India, the decisions of the Supreme Court and the
conflict of judicial opinion in the High Courts and the criti-
cisms of and suggestions on the previously circulated draft

Report received by the Commission. The Cominission consi-


dered all these matters ac neetings held on the following
dates: —
5ist meeting—4th, 5th and 6th November, 1963.
52nd meeting—2nd to 7th December, 1963.
55th meeting—17th to 21st February, 1964.
56th meeting seth and 33st M-sch and tst to 4th April,
1964.

57th meeting—4th to 8th May, 1964.

58th meeting—7th to 12th September, 1964.

59th meeting—2Ist to 26th September, 1964.

6oth meeting—3rd, 5th and 6th October, 1964.

61st meeting—23rd, 24th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 30th and 31st
October, 1964.

62nd meeting—sth to 7th November, 1964.

63rd meeting—r6th to 18th November, 1964.

* 4. A revised draft Report, draft of the Bill and notes on
clauses were prepared after the discussions at the meetings
above mentioned and all these were again considered and
finalised at the 64th meeting of the Commission held from
December 7 to December 12, 1964.

5. I wish to acknowledge the assistance rendered to us by
Mr. P. M. Bakshi, our Joint Secretary and Draftsman, in
the preparation of the Report and the draft Bill and notes.
His industry and research have been prodigious. He placed
before us very valuable material for our consideration. He
analysed the mass of case law on the subject, and drew our
attention to the conflict of judicial os inion on the interpreta-
tion of various provisions of the Code. He also brought to
our notice many knotty and intriguing points, which have
arisen in Courts during more than half a century that the
Code has been in force.

Yours sincerely,
j. L. KAPUR.


REPORT ON THE CODE OF CIVIL

PROCEDURE, 1908

CONTENTS
PARAGRAPH SU BJECT-MATTER Pace
I Importance of the subject . . . . 1
2 Historical background—the 1&s9 Code. . न हम
3 The 1877 Code. . + . - : 2
4 Thers88zCode . . . . + . 2
5 The 1908 Code. . . . . - 2
6 Present Code weil-thought out . . 4
7 Scheme of revision . . . . . . . 4
g Twin problem of costs of litigation . . - - . $
9 Problem of delay . . . . . - - 6
10 Reports of previous Committees and Commissions . - 7
11 System of administration of justice and procedure . . 7
12 Indigenous system . . है . . . . . : 7
13 Continental system . . . . . . . . 8
14 English system preferred 2 2. . . 9
15 Some delay inherent in English system . -. 9
16 Causes of delay—personat factors and defects in procedure 9
7 Delaying tactics. . . . . - - 10
18 Defects in procedure. ww foe 1
19 Problem examined under three stages. . . u
“26 Delay in trialof suits 2... ur
25 Delay before trial . - . . . . - - ir
22. Service of summons—process fee and forms Lo. i
23 Service of summons—procedure for . . 12
24 Service by the police =, wk. eee 12
25 Filing of weitten statement. . . . न . 12
26 Documents to be filed by defendant . . . 13
27 «Framing ofissues. 7 ww kk वि 13
28 Summons for directions and “ pre-trial conferences ?? considered 12
4

29

Examination under Order K . +,


m (7)

PARAGRAPH SUBJECT-MATTER PaGE
30 Delay during trial . . पु . . . . . - 15,
डा. Adjournments www ww, 1s
३३. Noneattendance of witnesses ©, wwe 15
33 Adjournments for want of time | ५. .,. . 16
34 Adjournments on account of convenience of counsel . . 16
35 Delay atthe appellate siage 2 ww 9. . + 16
36 Appealsin England .  . - wk ww 16
37 Curtailment of right of appeal . . . . + 7
38 Letters Patent Appeals ©. swe 17
39 Delay in disposal of appeals by High Courts. 5. 18
42 Appellate procedure. www 18
41 Delay in execution—Order XXI, rule 58 and rule 97 18
42 Court-fees on appeals from orders under Order XXT, cule 58, etc. 19
43. Affidavit of assets by judgment-debtor . . 19
44 Delay caused by pleas of payment or adjustment . 5, 19
45 Other changes suggested in Order XXI‘ to avoid delay . 20
46 Human factor re-emphasised . . . . . . . 20
47 Other main changes . . . . न . . . 20
48 Section 47 and constructive res judicata . . . . . 20
49 = Section 60. . . . . . . पु . . 20

$0—$2 Section 80. . . . . . न पु . . 2
53 Section 87B. . . . . . . न . . 23
54 Section 115 . . . . . . . . 23
55 Quessions to be considered as to revision. Retention of section 4
56 Revision against interlocutory orders . . . . . 25
57. Restriction on revision against interlocutory orders . . . 25
$8 Stay in revision—security =. . . पु . 26
$9 Calling for records in revision =. sw ७. - ko
60 Stay by the High Court in revision—real remedy | . . 26
61 Sections 121—128 . . . . . . . . . 27
62 Order है, rule 8 . . . . . . . . . 28
63 Order VI, rule 17. . . . . . . . . 23


(पी)

PARAGRAPH SUBJECT-MATTER Pace
64 Order VIII, and counterclaim www 29
63 Order XVI, rutes2end3 0.0. we 29
66 Order XXI and “garnishee” proceedings toe. 29
67 Order XXIII, rule 1 and minor plaintiff : : पु 29
68 Order XLI, rule पर and apjvals against orders in execution of
money decrees eee हि : 30
69 Order XL rule 23 and remand 2 wwe; 3
70० Order XLI, rule 27 . . . . . डा
7 Order XLVI, rule 9. - + +. . |. - 32
72 Otherchangess 2. 2. wl, 32
73 Other points considered» 9 ५७ 4. . -. - 32
74. Appendices © ewww 32
APPENDICES
Appenpix —I.—Proposals as shown in the form of draft amendments to the
existing Code . . . . - . 34
Appenpix If.—Notes on clauses . . . . . . न : 87
Appenpix IfE—Comparative Table . . . : - . . 248

APPENDIX 1V.—Summary of recommendations in respect of other Acts . 256


REPORT ON CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE

1, In every civilized society there are two sets of laws
(i) substantive laws and (ii) procedural laws. Substantive
laws determine the rights and obligations of citizens.
Procedural laws prescribe the procedure for the enforce-
ment of such rights and obligations. Of the two, subs-
tantive laws are no doubt the more important. But the
efficacy of substantive laws, to a large extent, depends
upon the quality of the procedural laws. Unless the
procedure is simple, expeditious and inexpensive, the
substantive laws, however good, are bound to fail in their
purpose and object. Substantive law, according to Sir
Henry Maine’, has at first the look of being gradually
secreted in the interstices of procedure. In this view, the
revision of the Code of Civil Procedure assumes consider-
able importance.

2. The history of civil procedure in this country really

begins with the year 1859, when the first uniform Code ६

of Civil Procedure was enacted. Before 1959, the law of
Civil Procedure was in a chaotic condition. Not only was
there no uniform law of Civil Procedure applicable to the
whole of the country, but in the same area different systems
of procedure prevailed. For example, in Bengal alone,
there were as many as nine*® systems of procedure simul-
taneously in force. The first effort in the direction of
evolving a uniform procedure was made when Sir Charles
Wood, then President of the Board for the Affairs of India,
directed* the Second Law Commission to address them-
selves to the preparation of “a Code of simple and uniform
procedure” applicable to all the courts. The Commission
prepared four draft Codes of procedure, which were
intended to apply to ordinary civil courts of the lower
provinces of Bengal, the Presidencies of Madras and
Bombay and the North-Western Provinces. Four Bills
based on these drafts were ultimately amalgamated and
enacted as the Code of Civil Procedure, 1859. The Code
of 1859 was, however, not applicable to the Supreme Courts
in the Presidency Towns and to the Presidency Small
Cause Courts. Soon after it was passed, it was subjected
to a series of amendments. In the meantime, it was
extended, subject to some modifications, to the whole of
British India and to the High Courts in the exercise of
their civil, intestate, testamentary and matrimonial juris-
diction”! The new Letters Patent of 1865, however, modi-

*Sir Henry Maine, Dissertations on Early Law and Custom (१883),
page 389.

*Whitley Stokes + The Anglo-Indian Codes (1888) Vol. II, page 381,

°Whitley Stokes : The Anglo-Indian Codes (1888) Vol. II, page 384.

‘See the revoked Letters Patent of 1862, ¢.g., section 37 of the C: ‘J
Letters Patent, 1862. & aa 3८०४

Import-
ance of

subject.

Historical
ack=
ground—
the 1859
Code.


The 1877
Code.

The 1882
Code,

The 1908
Code.

2

fied this position, and empowered the High Courts to make
their own rules and orders for regulating civil proceedings.
At the same time, it imposed a duty on them to be guided
by the provisions of the Code of 1859, as amended from
time to time. पु

3. The 1859 Code was soon fcund to be “ill-drawn, ill-
arranged _and incomplete!.”. In 1863-64, a fairly campre-
hensive Bill was prepared by Mr. Harrington (afterwards
Sir Heway Harrington) to replace it. But, for some
teason, the enactment of the Bill into law was deferred.
In the meantime Acts dealing with particular branches of
law were enacted, and these necessitated corresponding
changes in the Code. The work of revision was taken up
seriously when Dr. Whitley Stokes, at that time Secretary
to the Government of India in the Legislative Department,
was permitted by the Law Member to recast the draft Bill
prepared by Mr. Harrington. He re-arranged’ in a sys-
tematic manner the provisions of the Code of 1859. He
introduced a number of new provisions hased on orders
and rules made in England under the Judicature Acts.
He also borrowed some provisions of the Naw York Civil
Code. Sir Arthar Hobhouse (later Lord Hobhouse), who
was the then Law Member, made substantial contribution
to the draft Bill. With certain modifications, the Bill was
enacted as the Code of Civil Procedure, 1877.

4. Soon after the enactment of the Code of 1877, it was
realised that the new Code required several amendments.
As many as 130 sections of the Code were amended’ in
1879. ther amendments were proposed in 1882. It was
then decided, that the Code should be completely re-cast.
It was in these circumstances that the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1882, was enacted.

5. Experience of a quarter of a century of the working
of the Code of 1882 showed that the general lines on which
it proceeded were sound‘. It was, however, discovered,
that in respect of some matters the provisions of the Code
were too rigid to meet sufficiently the varying needs of
the different areas of the country. Moreover, there was
some conflict of judicial opinion on the interpretation of
certain provisions of the Code. To remedy these and other
defects, a comprehensive revision of the Code was under-
taken in the first decade of this century. The revision
was undertaken by a Select Committee, which collected
valuable material on the subject and prepared a draft
Bill. A Special Committee presided over by Sir Earle

1Whitley Stokes: Op. cit. page 385.

*Whitley Stokes : Op. cit. page 386.

*Whitley Stokes : Op. cit., page 388.

‘Report of the Special Committee appointed to consider the amendment
of the Civil Procedure Code, Gazette of india, 1907, Part V, page 179.



3

Richards, which included Dr. Rashbeharv Ghose, examin-
ed the Bill carefully. This Committee, while giving due
regard to the provisions of the Bill, relied upon the Code
of 1882 as the basis of revision. It re-arranged all the
provisions of the Code into two varts—

L “the body of the Code” and
Il. “the Schedule”.

The Committee explained the principle underlying the
re-arrangement thus:

“The general principle on which we have pro-
ceeded has been to keep in the body of the Bill these
provisions which appear to us to be fundamental and
those provisions which confer powers operating out-
side the province in which the court is situated. In
some cases we have adopted the plan of inserting
leading provisions in the Bill, stating in general terms
the powers of the court and of leaving the details to
the rules!.”

In the proposed revised Code the provisions pertaining
to details of procedure and other matters of minor charac-
ter were relegated to rules contained in a Schedule. The
object of the re-arrangement was to separate the funda-
mental and basic provisions, which could not be amended
except by the legislative process, from the comparatively
miner and detailed provisions in respect of which it was
desirable to provide a more elastic and speedy machinery
for modification than the tardy process of legislation.
Sir Earle Richards, Law Member, while moving for leave
to introduce the Bill which ultimately became the Code
of Civil Procedure 1908, observed as follows!:~-

“They (the Special Committee} do not desire to de
away with uniformity in main principles... But
they think that, with due regard to those consi-
derations, it is possible to confer a power to change
the less important provisions of the Code in cider that
defects in them can be remedied at once as they are
discovered and in order that in special circumstances
the courts may have power to simplify our legal
machinery and to make it more adapted to the wants
of less advanced communities?”

It was accordingly proposed. that the new Code should
empower the High Courts to make rules for regulating
their own procedure and the procedure of subordinate
courts and to modify the rules contained in the first
Schedule to the Code. Provision was also made for a
Rules Committee to report to the High Court on ell pro-
posals for making new rules or modifying the existing
rules.

+Report of the Special Committee, Gazette of India, 1907, Part ५, page
179 (at p. 185), para. 12.
Gazette of India, 1907, Part VI, pages 136-137.


Present
Code well-
thought
out.

Scheme of
revision,

4

Apart from the re-arrangement of the provisions of the
Code into sections and rules, the Committee did not make
many changes of a radical character. Its approach was
justifiably conservative. The Bill, as settled by the Special
Committee, was enacted as the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, wihout any substantial modifications.

6. The foregoing survey reveals that the Code of 1908"
is a product of well-thought out efforts and experimenta-
tion extending over more than half a century. The Code
has stood the test of time. It has on the whole worked
satisfactorily and smoothly and has evoked the admira-
tion of many distinguished authorities. An eminent Chief
Justice of a High Court observed recently thus!:

“The more you study the Civil Procedure Code
the more you realise what an admirable piece of legis-
lation it is.”

Similar views were expressed in the course of the evidence
given before the Law Commission in connection with the
preparation of its Report on the Reform of Judicial Ad-
ministration’?, We have, therefore, been very cautious in
proposing any radical changes in the Code of 1908.

7. The Law Commission has, in its Fourteenth Report,
indicated the broad lines on which the Code should be
revised. Before making its Report, the Commission
toured the whole country and elicited public opinion on
some of the important problems relating to the Reform of
Judicial Administration. In making our recommenda-
tions for the revision of the Code, we have taken the fol-
lowing materials into consideration—

(i) The recommendations made in the Fourteenth
Report, in so far as those recommendations contem-
plated changes in the law of civil procedure;

{ii) The amendments made by State Legislatures
in the body of the Code;

(iii) The amendments made by the various High
Courts in the rules contained in the First Schedule to
the Code; .

(iv) The new Rules of the Supreme Court in
England which are based largely on the recommenda-
tions contained in the Evershed Report’ and which
came into force on the 1st January, 1964;

(v) The County Court Rules, 1936, as amended
up-to-date;

IChagla 0. J. (as he then was) in his foreword to Soonavala’s Treatise
on the Law of Execution Proceedings (1958).

414th Report, Vol. I, page 263, para. 10.
*Binal Report of the Committee on Supreme Court Practice and Pro-
cedure (1953), Cmd. 8878.


5

(vi) The conflict of judicial opinion on the inter-
pretation of various provisions of the Code;

(vii) The suggestions received by us for amend-
ment of the Code.

8. Justice should be cheap and expeditious. That is
what the common man wants. Lord Evershed has ob-
served—

“Expedition and cost to the community and the
litigant alike are factors of ever present import” (in
maintaining the respect of the citizen tor the 189).

Two important problems which, therefore, arise for consi-
deration are—(i)} costs, and (it) delay. Costs of litigation
mainly consist of (1) court-fees, (2) lawyer's fees, and
(3) expenses incurred in calling witnesses. The question
oi court-fees has been exhaustively dealt with by the Law
Commission in the Fourteenth Report?. The main recom-
mendations in that Report are the following: —

(1) It is one of the primary duties of the State
to provide the machinery for the administration of
justice, and on principle it is not proper for the State
to charge fees from suitors in courts.

(2) Even if court-fees are charged, the revenue
derived from them should not exceed the cost of the
administration of civil justice.

(3) The making of a profit by the State from the
administration of justice is not justified.

(4) Steps should be taken to reduce  court-fees,
so that the revenue from them is sufficient to cover
the cost of the civil judicial establishment. Principles
analogous to those applied in England should bi:
applied to measure the cost of such establishment
The salaries of judicial officers should be a charge
on the general tax-payer.

(5) There should be a broad measure of equality
in the scales of court-fees all over the country. There
should also be a fixed maximum to the fee chargeable

(6) The rates of court-fees on petitions under
articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution should be very
Jow, if not nominal. हु

(7) The fees which are now levied हां. भ्रवापतपर
stages, such as the stamp to be affixed on certified
copies and exhibits and the like, should be abolished.

(8) When a case is disposed of ex parte or is com-
promised before the actual hearing, half the court-
fee should be refunded to the plaintiff.

_ "Lord Bvershed, .
in the United States and England”,
*rgth Report, Vol. I, pages 487 to 509, and summary at page 509.
para. 42.
3566 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 505, para. 30.

ry “Appellate Courts

Twin
problem
of costs
and delay.


Problem
of delay.

(9) The court-fee payable in an appeal should be
half the amount levied in the trial court’.

A brief reference is also made in the Fourteenth Re-
port? to lawyers’ fee in the following terms: —

“The fees paid to a lawyer so long as they do not
exceed the amounts prescribed by the rules framed
by the several High Courts under the Legal Practi-
tioners Act, 1879 are also recoverable from the oppo-
site party, if a certificate is filed to the effect that the
lawyer has actually received the fee claimed. No
doubt the successful litigant does often pay higher
fees to his lawyer than he gets from his opponent on
taxation, These are however luxury expenses in-
curred by him for his convenience in respect of which
he is not entitled to an indemnity. It may be that if
the scales of lawyer's fees have for legitimate reasons
risen in particular States, alterations may have to be
made in the percentages prescribed by the High
Courts under the rules.”

In order to indemnify the successful party for all
necessary expenses incurred by him, we propose’ that
certain items of lawful expenditure, such as (i) expendi-
ture incurred in giving notice before a suit is filed;
(ii) expenditure incurred on the ty; pins of pleadings;
{iii) charges paid for inspection of t records of the
Court; (iv) expenditure incurred for bringing witnesses to
Court though not summoned through the Court, which are
not at present allowed as costs may, if the Court so directs
form part of the taxed costs.

The best method, however, of reducing costs is to im-
prove the rules of procedure so that the length of trial is
reduced, because costs increase in direct proportion to
the length of a trial. If cases are adjourned from time
to time and witnesses have to come to court a number of
times before they are examined, the costs incurred in
calling them will necessarily increase. So far as the Code
is concerned, the problem of costs is, therefore, intimately
connected with the problem of delay, to which we now
address ourselves.

9. Although the provisions of the Code of Civil Proce-
dure, 1908 are basically sound, it cannot be gainsaid that
in view of the appalling back-log of cases which has
unfortunately become a normal feature of nearly all the
courts of the country, the problem of delay in the law

1See 1401 Report, Vol. I, page $09, para. 41.
sz4th Report, Vol. 1, page 481, para. 13.
*Appendix 1, Order 20A.


7

courts has assumed great importance. Lord Evershed’s
observation quoted earlier is worth repetition:
“Expedition and cost io the community and the
litigant alike are factors of ever present import” (in
maintaining the respect of the citizens for the law).

We have, therefore, while making our recommenda-
tions, paid special attention to this problem.”

10. The problem of delay is rot a new problem. It is Reports of
as old as the law courts. Nor is the problem peculiar to previous
our country. Lord Devlin in his speech before the Thir- nmi
teenth Legal Convention of the Law Council of Australia Gommis-
admitted that even in England cases are taking longer sions.
to be decided’. In India, Committee after Committee? has
been appointed to tackle this problem. The Rankin Com-
mittee appointed in 1923 devoted a large part of its Repoi
to this problem’. The problem has been examined in
some detajl in the Fourteenth Report of the Law Com-
mission on the Reform of administration of justice. Some
States appointed their own Committees to deal with this
problem. Various suggestions have beer made by ail
these Committees. Many of them have been implement-
ed. But the problem’ still remains. The problem is
complex, and does not admit of a simple solution. The
Fourtcenth Report contains several recommendations for
eliminating delay. We have further examined these recom=-
mendations in some detail. We have carried out many
of them. We have ventured to make a few more sugges-
tions, which we think, will help in the solution of the
problem. We have also taken into consideration the
Suggestions for eliminating delay made at the recent
seminar on Civil Procedure Code held in New Delhi
under the auspices of the Bar Association of India.

वा, There is a school of thought which believes that System
our procedural laws, which are based on the English sys- of admi-
tem, are not suited to the genius of our people. The alter- nistration
natives to the English system are (i) the indigenous of ustice
system, and (ii) the continental system. cedute.

12. The indigenous system has been rejected by the Indigen-
Law Ccmmission in the Fourteenth Report. The reasons 0७७ sys-
for rejecting that system are well brought out in the '%™
following passages from that Report:

“The answers we have received state with almost
complete unanimity that the system which has pre-
vailed in our country for nearly two RO माल for nearly two centuries, though though

Lord Evershed, in the Foreward to Delmar Karlen, “A
in the United States and England”. arleny © Appeliate Courts

#36 Australian Law Journal, pages 277, 279.

“For details, see 141 Report, Vol. 1, Pages 14-15, paras. 11 to 13.
‘Civil Justice Committee (1924-25), Report, pages 1446.

*tgth Report, Vol. I, page 24, para. 3.


Conti-~
nental
system.

British in its origin, has grown and developed in
Indian conditions and is now firmly rooted in the
Indian soil. It would be disastrous and entirely des-
tructive of our future growth to think of a radical
change at this stage of the development of our
economy. It has been pointed out that those who
have supported a reversion to the indigenous system
of judicia} administration have not really applied
their minds to the question. It would be ridiculous,
it is said, for the social welfare State envisaged by
our Constitution which itself is based largely on the
Anglo-Saxon model to think of remodelling its system
of judicial administration on ancient practices,
adherence to which is totally unsuitable to modern
conditions and ways of life. We may as well, it is
said, think of rejecting modern medicine and surgery
and content ourselves with what the ancient knew
and practised.”

It is to be noticed that the conclusion reached by the Law
Commission not to depart from the Anglo-Saxon system
of procedure is based on “almost complete unanimity” of
public opinion.

13. A brief resume of the continental system is given
in the Report of the Evershed Committee in the following
words'-*:

‘(o) In both France and Germany ail (oral)
witnesses are the Court’s witnesses, though generally
speaking they are tendered by the parties. In bot
countries the system is (as has been said), unlike the
English system, “inquisitorial”. There is substantial+
ly no cross-examination and for practical purposes
none at all by the parties or their legal representa-
tives. The witness in effect makes a deposition before
the examining judge who decides what witnesses shall
be summoned, The process of taking evidence is
almost invariably at an early stage of the proceedings,
long before the “trial” proper.

{c) The witness makes his statement in his own
words—there being no “hearsay” rule. It is for
the Court to decide the value of what has been said.
It is, however, to be noted that the parties themselves
are, generally, not competent witnesses in Germany;
and in France parents, relatives and servants of the
parties and certain other categories of persons are
not competent.

(d) In both France and Germany oral testimony
is regarded as of far less significance than in England
{as will be apparent from the preceding paragraph).

‘Final Report of the Committee on Supreme Court Proctice and Pro-
cedure (1953) Cmd. 8878, pages 85-86, paras. 250 and 252.
3866 alse 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 341, para. 73.


9

The main emphasis is on written evidence includiny
notarially attested records of every sort of transac-
tion,

* * *

The ora} evidence, as we have said, is taken
more or less in the form of depositions by an examin-
ing magistrate before the “trial”. The examining
magistrate decides what he shall receive and what he
shall not receive and makes his report thereon. So
far as regards oral evidence that is the end of the
matter, and it follows that there is no room for the
characteristic English rule about hearsay.”

The system in Eastern European countries is also not.
very different.

14. We think that on merits the English system is to pygtish
be preferred, because it ensures fair trial. system
preferred.
If the rule of law is to be maintained, if a democratic
social order is our political objective and “if justice must
be done in a way which will satisfy the minds of the
public that it is not only being done but is obviously and
clearly being done”, we cannot think of any legal system
other than the English without imperilling the very
foundations of our legal structure and the great principles
which are enshrined in our Constitution. Most of our
laws, both procedural and substantive, are based upon
English jurisprudence. It is too late in the day to shift
to the Continental system, unless we are prepared to
revise our entire body of laws.

15. If the English system is to be adopted, some delay Some
is inherent in that system itself, The essence of the felay ine
English system is a “fair trial’. A “fair trial” means that English
each party must know the case of the other party (plead- system.
ings) that each party must disclose to the other party all
documents which are relevant to the subject-matter of the
dispute between them (discovery and inspection), that the
Court should determine the points of difference between
the parties (issues), that each party should be permitted
to lead evidence in support of its case (examination of
witnesses) and, finally, that each party should be heard
before judgment is delivered. An ideal Code is one which
strikes a just balance between a fair trial and expedition.
Subject to the necessary safeguards to ensure a “fair trial”,
the procedure should be so simple that “it is easier to
decide a case than to invent reasons for not deciding it”.

16. The causes of delay may be divided under four Causes
heads (1) insufficient number of judges, (2) inadequate of delay—

ministerial staff, (3) personal factors, and (4) defects in personal
procedure: and de-
fects in

procedure,


Delaying
tactics.

10

(1) Phere is congestion of work in several courts.
The only way of removing such congestion is to appoint
additional judges. Unless the arrears in any court are
wiped out by the appointment of additional Judges, any
improvements in procedure will not result im the expedi-
tious disposal of cases in that Court.

(2) The remuneration at present payable to Judges is
grossly inadequate. The Law Commission, has in its
Fourteenth Report’, made certain recommendations on
this subject. If Judges are expected to work efficiently
ustly, they should be properly paid, having regard
status and the nature of work done by them.

(3) A great deal of preliminary work for getting cases
ready for disposal is done by the ministerial staff. The
ministerial staff should be of sufficient strength to handle
such work properly and expeditiously. The emoluments
paid to the ministerial staff in subordinate courts are near
the starvation level. A great deal of corruption among
the ministerial staff in subordinate courts is due to this
factor, It is, therefore, imperative that the conditions of
service of such ministerial staff should be improved?.

(4) Under the head “personal factors” fall such causes
of delay as (1) inexperienced Judges, (2) inefficient minis~
terial staff, and (3) delaying tactics adopted by litigants.
The first cause of delay is outside the scope of our inquiry.
As regards the second cause, a great deal of delay caused
by this factor could be avoided if in every court there is
a well-organised office which is equipped with trained staff
and is properly supervised. We shall, therefore, proceed
to deal with cause (3), which is sometimes erroneously
attributed toe defects in procedure.

17. A leader of the New York Bar is said to have begun
his practice with the following motto on his wall:

“If I am plaintiff, nothing can stop me. If I am
defendant, nothing can move me.”

There is a popular belief that the technicalities of legal
procedure can be exploited and a case continued almost
indefinitely if so desired. In a weak case, apart from
numerous applications for adjournment, frivolous inter-
locutory applications are made, eg, applications for
amendment of the pleadings or for amendment of issues,
examination of witnesses on commission, summoning un-
necessary witnesses, etc. These tactics do not succeed
before an experienced and astute Judge. They succeed

गत Report, Vol. 1, pages 163-164 and pages 193—-201. हर
चदषका Report, Vol. I, page 224, para. 126.


ii

only before Judges who have no adequate experience.
And such tactics succeed not because of the observance,
but because of the non-observance, of the rules of proce-
dure. Delay under this item is, therefore, not due to any
defects in procedure. Rules of procedure are intended
te subserve, and not to delay or defeat justice.

18. The Law Commission, after eliciting public opinion, Defects
came to the following conclusion in the Fourteenth in pro.
Reporti: — हु

“It was generally agreed that the Code of Civil
Procedure is an exhaustive and carefully devised
enactment. the provisions of which if properly and
rigidly followed are designed to expedite rather than

delay the disposal of cases. Delay results not from

the procedure laid down by it but by reason of the
non-observance of many of its important provisions,
particularly those intended to expedite the disposal

of proceedings.”

While we generally agree with the above conclusion, we
think that for better subserving the ends of justice and
for eliminating delay, some of the provisions of the Code
are capable of improvement.

19. The problem of delay due to defects in procedure Problem

may be examined with reference to three stages — examined
(1) delay in the trial of suits; under
(2) delay at the appellate stage; and stages.

(3) delay in execution proceedings.

20. Statisties collected by the Law Commission for the Delay in
purposes of the Fourteenth Report? revealed. that 65 to 70 trial of
per cent, of sitits are disposed of within one or two years.*-4 suits.
It is. however, possible to improve the procedure so that
suits can be disposed of in a shorter period. Delay in
the trial of suits may be divided under twa heads—(i)
delay before trial and (ii) delay during trial.

21. “Delay before trial” may be considered with refer- pelay
ence to the following items~-(i) service of summonses before
and other processes, (17) filing of written statements, (iii) trial.
filing of documents, and (iv) issues. Each of these items
may be dealt with separately.

22. Delay under the first item can be further sub-divid- Service
ed urder two heads—(i) delay in payment of process fee of sum-
and preparation of process, and (ii) delay in the actual Ones
service of summonses. Process fee must be paid when the fee and

oe a -+ a — forms.

114th Report, Vol. I, page 253, para. 10,
214th Report, Vol. 1, page 263, para. 10,
आफ Report, Vol. I, page 258, para. 7.

‘We tried to secure up-to-date figures on the subject, but replies in res-
pect of several States have not yet been received.


Service
of sum-
mons—
procedure
for.

Service
by the
police.

Filing of
written
state-
ment.

2

plaint is filed. As recommended in‘ the Fourteenth Re-
port!, a rule should be made by the High Courts requiring
the parties or their pleaders to file with the plaint printed
forms of process legibly filled in, leaving only the date
of appearance of the defendant and the date of issue of
process blank. Such a rule has been made in several
States. The printed forms of summonses should be avail-
able free of cost or on a small payment in the Nazir’s
office.

23. Order V, rule 20A provides for the service of sum-
mons by registered post either in lieu of or in addition to
the normal manner of service where for any reason what-
soever the summons is unserved. We have, after taking
into account the recommendation in the Fourteenth
Report®, proposed a rule* whereunder a summons by post
may be issued simultaneously with the summons in the
ordinary manner. The Court can then act on whichever
return shows effective service.

24. We have considered the suggestion made in a
leading law journal* that summonses be served through
the agency of the Police. But, in our view, this is not
a practicable suggestion. The police force in this country
js not adequate even to discharge its ordinary duty of
maintaining law and order. It will not be possible to so
enlarge the police force as to. enable it to discharge the
additional burden that is proposed to be imposed on it.
Apart from the inadequacy of the police force, since the
police will not be under the control of civil courts it will
not be a suitable agency for the service of summons in
civil cases. It is also not proper or desirable to associate
the police with the execution of civil processes. We are
not aware of any Commonwealth country utilizing the
services of the police for the purpose.

25. We have not carried out the suggestion made in
the Fourteenth Report’, that instead of a separate order
requiring the defendant to file a written statement the
summons by which the plaint is served on the defendant
should itself require him to file a written statement within
a specified time. We think, that no useful purpose wiil be
served by making this provision. Written statements are
rarely filed at the first hearing, and in practice, not much.
time will be saved if this proposal is accepted. Moreover,
under the Code the filing of a written statement is not
compulsory. {We are, however, recommending a clarifica-
tion in the law as to the effect of failure to file a written
statement®.

गत Report, Vol. 1, page 304, para. 15.

arth Report, Vol. 1, page 310, para. 24.

3866 Appendix I, Order 5, rule 19A.

468 Calcutta Weekly Notes, Editorial Notes xxxii (13-4-1964).
$r4th Report, Vol. I, page 302, Para. 71.

‘Appendix I, Order 8, rule 10,


B

26, Order VII, rule 14 provides that where a plaintiff Decu-
sues upon a document in his possession or power, he shall ments f°
produce it in Court when the plaint is presented. Where by defen-
the plaintiff relies on any other documents | (whether in dant.
his possession or power or nct}, as evidence in support of
his claim, he has to enter such documents in a list to be
addcd or annexed to the plaint. The Fourteenth Report?
recommended, that a similar provision should be made in
the case of a defendant. We feel, that the distinction bet-
ween a document upon which the plaintiff relies cannot
properly be made in the case of a written statement. The
only manner in which such a distinction can be made is
between documents on which a defendant pases his defence
and other documents on which he relies as evidence in
support of his defence. In our opinion such a distinction
woald be unrealistic and impractical. A written state-
ment merely answers the claim made in the plaint. In
practice, it would be difficult to distinguish between docu-
inents on which the defence “is based” from other docu:
ments of purely evidentiary value. We, however, think’
that a defendant should enter in a list to be added or
annexed to the written statement all documents on which
he relies in support of his defence.

27, The framing of issues is an important step in the Framing
trial of a suit. Sufficient attention is often not paid to ofissues.
this matter. The result is, that in most cases some un-
necessary issues are raised which delay the completion
of the trial. The framing of issues should be done care-
fully after a detailed consideration of the pleadings and
the examination of the parties, and the other materials
referred to in Order XIV, rule 1(5) and rules 3 and 4.

Even where what are known as “consent issues” are put
in hy the Advocates of the parties, the presiding officer
should satisfy himself that they—

G) bring out all the points in controversy; and

(ii) raise no unnecessary issues which would
delay the trial.

This could be achieved by a strict observance of the provi-
sions of Order XIV.

_ 28. Before the issues are framed, some kind of a weed- Summons
ing out process seems to be necessary, This is done both for direc-
in’ England and in America. In England the object is tions and
achieved by what is known as summons for directions*. cbrectrial
The original side rules of High Courts also contain such ences” con
a provision’. The object of a summons for directions is a sidered.
general stock-taking of the case with a view to arriving

at the essentials of the dispute. In America the same

Izath Report, Vol. I, page 316, para. 32.

*Appendix I, Order 8, rule 1.

*Order 25, rules 1 to 4, R.S.C. (Rivisions), 1962,

+See, e.g. Bombay High Court Original Side Rules (1957), rule 147.


Exami-
nation
under
Order X.

14

object is achieved by what are known as “pre-trial con-
ferences”. The relevant rule relating to pre-trial con-
ferences is in the following terms!:

“In any action, the court may in its discretion direct
the attorneys for the parties to appear before it for
a conference to consider—

(1) the simplification of the issues;

(2) the necessity or desirability of amendments
to the pleadings;

(3) the possibility of obtaining admission of
fact and of documents which will avoid unneces-.
sary proof;

(4) the limitation of the number of expert
witnesses;

(5) the advisability of a preliminary reference.
of issues to a master for findings to be used in
evidence when the trial is to be by jury;

(6) such other matters as may aid in the dis-
position of the action.”

in America, pre-trial conferences have resulted in a large
number of arrears being wiped out”. The Law Commission
has, in the Fourteenth Report,* rejected the proposal for
pre-trial conferences. It was of the opinion, that Order
X which provides for the examination of parties by the
court, can serve the same purpose. We generally agree
with this view.

29. The object of the examination under Order X
is to ascertain precisely the matters which are in dispute
petween the parties. If a proper use is made of the pro-
visions contained in this Order, the Judge will, at an early
stage of the suit, be in a position to sift the chaff from
the grain, and to pinpoint his attention on the matters on
which the parties are at variance. A complete grasp of
the case at an early stage of the suit will enable the Judge,
when the suit comes up for hearing, to dispose it of ex-
peditiously. It will enable him to narrow down the issues

etween the parties, and eliminate the need for recording
formal or irrelevant evidence. The parties to the suit can
also benefit by the examination under Order X. After
such examination, they will know exactly which of their
contentions have survived the examination and what they

Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States District Courts, Rule 16
(140 Report, Vol. I, pages 321-322).

*See articles in the Annual Magazine of the American Judicature Society,
October—December 1956, particularly the one under the caption “‘ Calendar
Decongestion in the Southern Districts of New York” by Irwing R. Kaufman,

14th Report, Vol. I, pages 311—313.


15

have to prove in support of their case. The Law Commis-
sion in its Fourteenth Report!, therefore, rightly stressed
the importance of the provisions of Order X.

Under Order X, however. it_is discretionary for the
Court to examine the parties. In practice the salutary
provisions of this Order are rarely used. The Courts often
get over these provisions by observing, that since the plead-
ings are clear it is not necessary to exariine the parties.
We think, that in order that the provisions of Order X
may be effective and achieve the object in view, the exami-
nation of parties by the Court should be made mandatory.
The Law should also briefly indicate the purpose for which
the parties should be examined. We recornmend that Order
X should be amended on these lines’.

30. Delay during trial is often caused by unnecessary
adjournments.

31. Order XVII, rule 1(2), proviso, enacts that when the
hearing of evidence has once begun, hearing of the suit
shall be continued from day to day. In practice, this pro-
vision is rarely observed’. The practice which prevails in
England should be followed, i.e. the evidence should be
recorded continuously without any break, except in very
exceptional circumstances such as the illness of a party,
his witnesses or the advocate appearing in the case.

There are far too many adjournments on the ground of
(a) non-attendance of witnesses, (0) want of time, and (c)
convenience of counsel.

$2. Order XVI, rules 1 and 2 should be amended? so as
to provide that the list of witnesses to be summoned by any
arty should be filed within a Spe cified time. The date of
earing should be fixed only after such a list is filed and
having regard to the time that may be reasonably required
for summoning the witnesses. The date of hearing should
be fixed in consultation with the advocates of both sides.
Where a party has applied late for summoning his witnes-
ses, the summons should be issued at his risk’. A provision
should be made in the Code enabling the parties to serve
their own witnesses’. Penal action should be taken a gainst
witnesses who fail to attend though duly served (Order
XVI, rules 10 to 13). :

8.

‘x4th Report, Vol. I, page 313, para.
2966 Appendix I, Order 10, rule 2.
‘rqth Report, Vol. 1, page 335, para. 63.

4See Appendix I, Order 16, rule 1.

Gf. t4th Report, Vol. I, page 325, para. 45, middle.
See Appendix I, Order 16, rule 7A,

Delay
during
trial.

Adjourn-
ments.

Non-at-
tendance
of wit-
nesses,


Adjourn-
ments for
want of
time.

Adjourn-
ments on
account

of conven-
ience of
counsel,

Delay at
the appel-
Tate stage.

Appeals
in Eng-
land.

16

33. The remedy for adjournment for want of time is a
proper and careful preparation of the cause list’, The
cause list should be prepared after making an estimate of
the time that each case will take. Such estimate may be
made in consultation with the advocates of both the sides.
Only such number of cases should be fixed for day as are
likely to be finished on that day. The Judge himself should
supervise the preparation of the cause list and not leave
it entirely to a ministerial officer. The cause list should
be scrutinized and, if necessary, revised before the date of
hearing.

34. Grant of adjournments for convenience of counsel is
a practical and not a legal problem. Civil work is generally
concentrated among a few leading lawyers. ‘There is
always the desire of the members of the Bar to accommodate
each-other. Although, under the law. a Judge can refuse an
adjournment on the ground of convenience of counsel, in
practice he rarely does so. A Judge becomes unpopular
if he refuses adjournments on such grounds. The remedy
for this evil lies in the hands of the Bar and a strong
judiciary’.

35. One obvious remedy for eliminating delays at the
appellate stage is to restrict the number of appeals avail-
able to a litigant under the existing law. It is often com-
plained that in this country there are far too many appeals.
There is some justification in this complaint. Where the
value of a suit tried by a subordinate judge is less than
Rs. 5,000 or Rs. 10,000 in some States, a litigant has a right
of first appeal to the district court on facts and law and
of a second appeal to the High Court on a point of law
only. If the second appeal in the High Court is heard
by a single Judge, the party can file a further appeal known
as the Letters Patent appeal to a Divisional Bench of the
High Court except where such appeals have been abolished’.
Where the value of a suit tried by a subordinate judge
exceeds Rs. 5,000, or in some States Rs. 10,000, the first
appeal lies direct to the High Court both on facts and on
jaw. In both cases, there is a further right of appeal,
subject to certain conditions, to the Supreme Court under
article 133 of the Constitution and section 109 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908.

36. Compared with the multiplicity of appeals in this
country, the right of appeal in England is very much res-
tricted. In that country, in cases which originate in the
High Court, there is a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal

1568 14th Report, Vol. I, page 330, paras. 54 and $7.
Cf. 14th Report, Vol. I, pages 337-338, pata. 66.
*14th Report, Vol. 1, pages 378—381, paras. 28 and 31.


17

both on facts and on law from a final judgment of the
High Court. From the Court of Appeal a litigant may
appeal to the House of Lords, subject to leave being | granted
by the Court of Appeal or the House of Lords. This leave
ig very sparingly granted and, accordingly very few cases
go to the House of Lords’. For all practical purposes,
there is, therefore, only one appeal from a judgment of
the High Court. In cases decided by a county court, an
appeal lies to the Court of Appeal on a question of law
only.

37. The proposal to curtail the right of appeal in this Curtail-

country was fully examined in some detail by the Law ment of
Commission in the Fourteenth Report? We agree with right of
their conclusion that, considering the conditions in this appeal.
country there is not much scope for curtailing the right
of appeal. The only change proposed by the Law: Com-
mission in the Fourteenth Report was in section 102 of
the Code (apart from enlargement of appellate jurisdiction
of District Courts and abolition of certain Letters Patent
Appeals). Section 102 provides, that no second appeal
shall lie in any suit of the nature cognizable by Courts
of Small Causes when the amount or value of the subject-
matter of the original suit does not exceed one thousand
rupees. The Law Commission recommended in the Four-
teenth Report’, that the limit of Rs, 1,000 may be raised
to Rs. 2,000. We think that in view of the further fall in
the value of money since the making of the Fourteenth
Report, the limit should be raised to Rs. 3,000. The
Law Commission further recommended, that there should
be no second appeal even in the case of suits of a
value exceeding that prescribed by section 102 which
are not of a small cause nature and in which no right to
immovable property is involved. A second appeal lies on
a question of law only. We do not think that a litigant
should be deprived of this limited right of appeal in the
case of suits other than those of the nature cognizable by
a Court of Small Causes. For the purpose of an appeal,
no distinction can, in principle, be made between suits
involving a right to immovable property and other suits.
If a question of law arises in either case there should be a
right of second appeal. We are, therefore. of the opinion
that apart from raising the limit of Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 3,000,
no further amendment should be made in section 102 of
the Code.

38. The Law Commission in the Fourteenth Report Letiers
recommended! the abolition of Letters Patent Appeals from Patent
the judgment of a single Judge of a High Court exercising APPeals-
appellate jurisdiction. We express no opinion on this

\For details, see ? Right of appeai etc. ? in 1958 Current Legal Problems*
a a Report, Vol. 1, pages 364—384, particclarly paras. 10, 16, 20
and 35.
%r4th Report, Vol. I page 377, para. 23-24.
‘rath Report, Vol. I, pages 378-381, paras. 28 and 31.


Delay in
disposal Lot
2p peals by
igh

Courts.

Appellate
procedure.

Delay in
execu-
tion—
Order 21,
rule 58 and
rule 97.

18

question, because we think that amendment of the Letters
Patents of High Courts should be dealt with separately
and should not be mixed up with the revision of the Code
of Civil Procedure.

39. Relying on the statistics collected by it, the Law
Commission expressed the conclusion in the Fourteenth
Report! that dejays in the disposal of appeals are far
greater in the High Courts than in the District Courts.
On an average an appeal in the District Court is disposed
of within a period of one or two years. The problem of
delay in appeals arises in High Courts only. In the High
Courts appeals take a much longer time. The duration
of a first appeal in a High Court ranges from 289 days to
2503 days and that of a second appeal from 113 days to
2038 8995, {We understand that, the average duration of
an appeal in the Court of Appeal in England is about
three months only. It seems to us, that the delay in the
disposal of appeals in the High Courts is not due to any
defects in procedure. The delay is also not due to the
time taken in the preparation of paper books’.

40. Order XLI lays down the procedure for hearing ap-
peals. The provisions of this Order are basic and funda-
mental, and are not capable of improvement except in
some minor details. The Law Commission in the Four-
teenth Report recommended some smal] amendments in
this Order We have incorporated some of these amend-
ments with which we agree in the draft Bill prepared by
us. In our opinion the delay in the disposal of appeals in
High Courts is mainly due to congestion of work, which is
not in any way connected with the procedure prescribed
by Order XLI.

The congestion of work is mainly due to increase in
the number of appeals and the big addition of petitions
under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution. The latter
class of petitions naturally and rightly take precedence
over other work, and often involve complicated questions
which consume a great deal of judicial time. We think
that the remedy for reducing the arrears of appeals in High
Courts lies elsewhere than in the amendment of the Code,
eg. by increase in the number of Judges. \

41, Delay in execution proceedings is mainly due to
certain dilatory tactics adopted by judgment-debtors. When
in execution proceedings any property is attached, there
is generally a claim filed under Order XXI, rule 58. If this
claim is rejected, a suit is filled under rule 63 of that Order.
Tf the attachment of the property is finally upheld, there

14th Report, Vol. I, page 261, para. 8.

sBased on statistics collected for 1954-55, 14th Report, Vol. I, pages
260, 261 and pages 366-369, 374s 3792 380.

334th Report, Vol. 1, page 394, Para. 25.

34५ Report, Vol. I, pages 385~412.



‘19

are obstruction proceedings under rule 97, followed by a
suit under rule 103. The Fourteenth Report’, contains a
recommendation that claim proceedings or obstruction
proceedings should be finally determined by the execution
court, and that where they are so determined, there should
be no right of suit. This recommendation has been made
with a view te eliminating delay in execution proceedings.
Unfortunately, we have no statistics to indicate in what
percentage of cases a suit is filed under rule 63 or rule 103.
‘We are, however, in agreement with the recommendation
in the Fourteenth Report, which is based upon certain
evidence recorded by the Commission.

42, We further recommend’, that when _an appeal is Court-
filed against any order made under Order XXI, rule 58 or fees on
Order XXI, rule 97, the court-fee payable should be the appeals
same as is at present payable in the case of an appeal irom orders
an order under section 47. The State Governments have, under
by notifications issued under the Court-fees Act, reduced Order XX,
the court-fee payable in respect of appeals against orders we 58, ete.
under section 47. We recommend that the State Govern-
ments should issue a similar notification in respect of ap-
peals against orders under Order XXI, rule 58 et seq or
Order XXI, rule 97 et seq, as proposed to be revised.

43. We also recommend’, that where a judgment-debt Affidavit
remains unpaid for a certain period, the decree-holder 9 aseis
should be entitled to call upon the judgment-debtor to make oot डः
an affidavit of his assets. The filing of such an affidavit debtor.
will expediate execution proceedings. In many cases, the
judgment debtor would, for obvious reasons, be unwilling
to file such an affidavit, and would be prepared to pay the
decretal amount. He cannot also file a false affidavit re-
garding his assets, because, if he omits any of his assets
from his affidavit, he may have to face the risk of other
people claiming as their own the assets which he has omit-
ted. Another advantage accruing from such an affidavit
would be, that a judgment-debtor who has disclosed any
assets in his affidavit will not be in a position to instigate
2 claim by third persons in respect of such assets under
Order XXI, rule 58.

44. The provisions of Order XXI, rule 2 are at vresert Delay
responsible for considerable delay in execution proceedings. caused
A judgment-debtor against whom an execution application by pleas
is filed generally sets up a plea of oral adjustment. In or’ae *
most cases such a plea is wholly without substance, and is ment.
deliberately set up to delay the execution proceedings.
‘When such a plea is set up, the court has no option but to
record oral evidence. which is generally false and worthless,

4r4qth Report, Vol. I, pages 453-454, para. 49.
For action by State Governments,
Appendix J, Order 21, rule 41.


‘Other
changes
suggested
in Order
21 to avoid
delay.
Human
factor re-
empha-
sised.

Other
Thain
changes.

Section
47 and
eonstruc-
tive res
judicata.

Section
69,

20

A plea of oral adjustment thus enables a dishonest and
unscrupulous judgment-debtor to drag on execution pro-
ceedings indefinitely. The Law Commission in its Four-
teenth Report recommended), that in order that a payment
or an adjustment may be recognised by the executing
court, it must be in writing. We have proposed the neces-
sary amendment in pursuance thereof.

45. Apart from these principal amendment, we have
suggested some other amendments in Order XXI, which in
our opinion, will expedite execution proceedings®.

46. Before parting with the topie of delay, we would
again emphasise the part which the human factor plays
in the efficient and impartial administration of justice. It
need hardly be stated, that the success or failure of any
procedural law depends upon the men who administer it.
A law of procedure, however perfect, will fail in its purpose
uniess the men who administer it are men of ability and
are imbued with a missionary zeal for doing justice, and
unless they receive in this task the co-operation of members
of the Bar. If the Judges are high-minded, able and fear-
less, and if the members of the Bar also share their zeal,
we have no doubt that the problem of delay, which now
threatens to bring the entire administration of justice into
disrepute, will be solved to the satisfaction of the litigating
public and the community at large.

47. Having dealt with the question of delay, we now
proceed to explain the other main changes proposed by
us in the Cede of Civil Procedure, 1908.

48. It has been held in several decisions, including one
of the Supreme Court*, that the principle of constructive
res judicata applies to execution proceedings. The Law
Commission in its Fourteenth Report®, has recommended
that statutory effect should be given to these decisions.
We have, in pursuance of this recommendation’, proposed
the necessary amendment.

49. Explanation I to section 60 provides that in the case
of salary other than salary of a servant of the Government
or a servant of a railway company or local authority, the
attachable portion thereof is exempt from attachment
until it is actually payable. The result is that while the
salary of a Government servant, etc., is attachable before it

‘rath Report, Vol. 1, pages 443-444, para. 25.
*See Appendix I, Order 21, rules 1 and 2.
35९४ Appendix I, Order 21, various rules.

‘Mohan Lal v. Benoy Krishna, 1953 S.C.R, 377 } ALR,
Court 65. 953 377 1953, Supreme

14th Report, Vol. 1, page 440, para. 18.
6Appendix I, section 47.



21

is actually payable, the salary of other employees in not
attachable until it is actually payable. Whatever may
have been the reasons for this distinction in the past
between the salary of a Government servant and other
employees, those reasons no longer exist. In actual prac-
tice, it is wellnigh impossible to attach a salary when it is
actually payable. In the case of employees other than
Gevernment servants, the condition that the salary cannot
be attached until it is actually payable renders the pro-
visions regarding attachment illusory and nugatory. We,
therefore, recommend’ that the distinction between the
attachability of the salary of a Government servant, etc.,
and other employees in this respect should be abolished.

50. Section 80 of the Code enacts that no suit shail be
instituted against the Government or against a_ public
officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by such
public officer in his oficial capacity until the expiration of
two months after a notice in writing has been given. We
have tried to trace the history of this section. The Code
of 1859 or its later amendments did not contain this section.
The section was for the first time introduced in the Code
of 1877 by the Select Committee. The Select Committee,
while recommending the insertion of such a pr :
made the following observations :—

“We have provided (section 424) that no suit shall
ve brought against Government or against a public
officer as such until two months next after delivery
of a notice in writing, stating the cause of action and
the name and residence of the intending plaintiff. We
have also provided that every suit against a public
eficer must be commenced within six months next
after the acerual of the cause of action. Similar pro-
visions are contained in the Police Act (V of 1861),
section 42 and in the various Municipal Acts.”

The period of limitation of six months proposed by the
Select Committee seems to have been_omitted when the
Code of 1877 was finally enacted. The provisions of
section 424 of the Code of 1877 were re-enacted in the Code
90 and now find a place in section 80 of the Code of
1908.

51. The object of section 80 is to give to the Govern-
ment or the public officer en opportunity to examine the
legal position and to settle the claim, if so advised, without
litigation. The Law Commission in the Fourteenth Report
stated as follows® :—

“The evidence disclosed that in a large majority
of cases the Government or the public officer made ro

tAppendix I, section 60.
*z4th Report, Vol. 1, pages 475-476.

Section.
80.


22

‘use of the opportunity afforded by the section. In most
vases the notice given under section 80 remained un-
answered till the expiry of the period of two months
provided by the section. It was also clear that in a
Jarge number of cases, Governments and public offices
utilised the section merely to raise technical defences
contending either that no notice had been given or
that the notice actually given did not comply with
the requirements of the section. These technical de-
fences appeared to have succeeded in a number of
cases defeating the just claims of the citizens.”

52, The Fourteenth Report accordingly contains a
recommendation that section 80 should be omitted. We
have been unable to find.a parallel provision in any other
country in which the Anglo-Saxon system of law prevails.
We think, that in a democratic country like ours there
shouid. ordinarily, be no distinction of the kind envisaged
in section 80 between the citizen and the State.

When section 80 was originally enacted, India was a
dependency under foreign rule and the main function of
the Government was the maintenance of law and order.
India is now a free country and a welfare State. It engages
in trade and business like any other individual. A welfare
State should have no such privileges in the matter of liti-
gation as against a citizen, and should have no higher status
than an ordinary litigant in this respect. Experience has
also shown that the provision of this section has worked
great hardship, particularly in suits relating to injunctions.
For these reasons, we have recommended omission of the
section. While recommending the omission of the section,
the Fourteenth Report suggested the insertion of a provi-
sion in the Code to the effect that if a suit against the
Government or a public officer ig filed without reasonable
notice, the plaintiff should be deprived of his costs in the
event of a settlement of the claim by the Government or
publie officer before the date fixed for the settlement of
issue. We do not think that such a statutory provision is
necessary. In another place the Fourteenth Report con-
tains the following passage! :-—

“Generally the filing of suit is preceded by an
advocate’s or a solicitor’s notice demanding redress, and
these notices form the foundation of the suit which is
filed subsequently.

__ _To rush to court without sending a lawyer’s notice
in advance is to invite a disallowance by the court
of the costs incurred in the suit.”

Costs are always in the discretion of the court, and where
a suit is instituted against the Government without ade-
quate notice, the courts will no doubt deal with the question

t1gth Report, Vol. I, Page 480, para. 11, first sub-para.


23

of costs in a proper and just manner. If any provision
regarding costs is to be made, it should not only deprive
the plaintiff of his costs, but also provide for costs being
paid to the Government irrespective of the result of the
it. In this connection we may invite attention to section
$ the Public Authorities Protection Act, 1893 (56 and
+t. ९, 61) which was in the following words :--

“(d) Tf, in the opinion of the court, the plaintiff
has not given the defendant a sufficient opportunity
of tendering amends before the commencement of the
proceeding, the court may award to the defendant costs
to be taxed as between solicitor and client;”

The Act has, however, been repealed by section 1(a),
Law Reform (Limitation ete.) Act, 1954 (2 and 3 Eliz. ८.
36).

53. Section 87B extends to Rulers of former Indian
States, in respect of institution of suits against them, the
8 protection that has been conferred by certain other
ns of the Code on Rulers of foreign States. The
constitutional validity of this section came up for considera-
tion in a recent decision of the Supreme Court’, In that
decision the Supreme Court, while upholding the validity
of the section with reference to article 14 of the Constitution
in the light of the historical considerations that led to its
enactment, expressed the opinion, that with the passage of
time those historical considerations may lose their validity,
and the continuance of this section may then become cpen
to serious challenge. The Supreme Court has suggested,
that the Central Government may examine the question
whether, in respect of transactions subsequent to the 26th
January, 1950, this protection need or should be continued.
Since the constitutionality of the section, in the circum-
stances existing at present, has been upheld, we are not
suggesting any change in the section*.

54. Section 115 of the Code has been very narrowly
interpreted by the Privy Council. In one case‘, the Privy
Council pointed out, that where a court has jurisdiction to
decide a question before it and it decides the question, it
cannot be regarded as acting in the exercise of its jurisdic-
tion “illegally or with material irregularity” within tne
meaning of clause (c) of section 115. In another case‘, the
Privy Council laid down, that the section applies to juris-
diction alone, to the irregular exercise or non-exercise of it
— eee

1 Narottam Kishore Deb v. Union of India, A.LR. 1964 S.C. 159°
(October, 1964).

2Bor a detailed discussion, see Appendix IH, notes on clauses, section
878.

340४6 Hassan Khan v. Sheo Baksh Singh (1885) tr LA. 237 3 LLR.
11 Cal. 6 (9.८).

‘Balakrishna Udavyar vy. Vasudeva Aiyar, 4g LA. 261 3 LLR. 4०
Mad. 793 3 ALR. 197 P.C. 71 (P.C.).

Section

Section
15.


Questions
to be con-
sidered as
to revision,

Retention
of section

24

or the illegal assumption of it, and is not directed against
erroneous ¢cncl: of law or fact in which the question
of jurisdiction is no: involved. These principles have been
re-iterated in subsequent decisions of the Privy Council!
and the Supreme Court?5. In spite of these rulings, the
High Couris have continued to exercise a very wide and
extensive sdiction under this section. The result is,
that the High Courts are flooded with revision applications,
mos: of which are frivolous, and are filed with a view to
delaying the conclusion of litigation. We may, in this
connection, quote a passage from the Fourteenth Report.
which reveals a telling picture‘: —

“The statement shows that over fifty per cent. of
these applications are dismissed summarily by the High
Courts and that the percentage of ultimate success is.
very low even out of those in which a rule nisi is issued.
For instance, in Bihar, out of 1,020 applications under
section 115 of the Code disposed of in 1954, 546 were
dismissed summarily and out of the rest the rule was
made absolute only in 152 applications. In Bombay,
out of a total of 1.711 applications disvosed of in the
same year, as Many as 1,245 applications were sum-
marily dismissed and orders were reversed only in 145
applications. In Madhya Pradesh, the total number of
applications disposed of was 631, out of which 351 were
summarily dismissed and the orders were reversed only
in 79 applications. In Madras, excluding 1,447 applica-
tions transferred in that year to Andhra, 1,826 applica-
tions were dispased of, out of which 605 were summa-
चीज dismissed and the orders were reversed only in 219
applications.”

The provisions of section 115 are particularly misused
in the case of revision applications against interlocutory
orders.

55. Two questions arise for consideration: (1) whether
it is at all necessary to retain section 115, (2) whether the
right of revision applications against interlocutory orders
should be curtailed and if so, in what manner.

As regards the first question, it may be argued, that in
view of articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, section 115
of the Code of Civil Procedure is no longer necessary.
Article 226 empowers the High Court to issue a writ of
certiorari. Article 227 vests in the High Courts the power
of superintendence over all such courts. We, however,

1Venkatagiri v. Hindu Retigious Endowments Board, Madras 76 1.8
67 5 ALR. 1949 P.C. 156, 158 ; 1.1..8. (1950) Mad. 1 (P.C.).

*Keshardeo v. Radha Krishan, (1953) S.C.R. 136 3 A.LR. 1953 S.C. 23>
28.

3866 also Manindra Land, etc., Corporation v. Bhuinath, A.1.R. 1964.
S.C. 1226.

4r4th Repost, Vol. I, page 416, para. 4.


25

think that in addition to articles 226 and 227, the jurisdic-
tion conferred upon the High Courts by section 115 serves
a useful purpose.

56. As regards the second question, the Law Commission,
after carefully considering the views expressed before it,
came to the conclusion that the right of revision against
an interlocutory order is a valuable right which should not
be abolished. The case for retaining the right of revision
against an interlocutory order was fairly put by an ex-

erienced Chief Justice who made the following statement
Before the Law Commission? :—

“It ig not unoften that a very wrong order is made.
If it be made impossible to challenge the order imme-
diately and have it set aside and if the error is left to
be corrected in the appeal from the final order if and
when such an appeal is taken, the intermediate pro-
ceedings will necessarily all be on an erroneous hasis
and it can hardly be just to compel the parties to submit
to the order without any chance of instant redress.”

The Law Commission in the Fourteenth Report accordingly
recommer.ded that the expression “case decided” in section
115 should be so defined as to include an interlocutory
order’. Necessary amendment is proposed in section 115°.

57. Wa think that some restriction should be placed on
revision applications against interlocutory orders. We have
given anxious thought to this matter, but we have come to
the conclusion that it is not possible to impose any greater
restrictions than those proposed by the Law Commission
in the Fourteenth Report‘. These restrictions are, that no
revision application shall lie against an interlocutory order
unless either of the following conditions is satisfied :—

(i) that if the order were-made in favour of the
applicant, it would finally dispose of the suit or other
proceeding, or

(ii) that the order, if allowed to stand, is likely to
occasion a failure of Justice or cause an irreparable
injury’.

We may make it clear, that these restrictions are in
addition to those imposed by the terms of section 115 itself,
that is to say, 4 revision application against an interlocutory
order must first fall within clause (a), (b) or clause (c) of
that section, and then it should further satisfy either of
the two conditions set out above.

1zqgth Report, Vol. 1, page 419.
4See now Major S. 3. Khanna v. Brigadier Dhillon. A.I.R. 1964 S.C.
497.
‘Appendix I, section 115.
4rgth Report, Vol. I, page 422, para. 19.
‘See Appendix I, section 115.

Revision
against
interlocu-
tory
orders.

Restric-
tion on
revision
against
interlocu-
tor

or ders,


Stay in re-
vision—
security.

Calling
for
records
in

revision.

Stay by
the High
Court
revision—

real
remedy.

26

58. The Law Commission proposed in the Fourteenth
Report!, that a provision regarding stay of proceedings
similar to Order XLI, rule 5 should be made in the case of
revision applications. We do not think that any such pro-
vision is necessary. Unlike an appeal, the exercise of
jurisdiction in a revision application under section 115 is a
matter of discretion. Since the main jurisdiction rests
upon the discretion of the Court, it is not necessary to
expressly provide for any incidental matters like stay, etc.
Powers of the High Court under the existing Code are
wide enough to impose such terms as it considers just when
granting stay.

59. Connected with the question of revision application
against an interlocutory order is the question of calling for
the original record and proceedings from the lower court.
If the original record and proceedings are called for from
the lower court either before or immediately after the
revision application is admitted, the further progress of the
suit or other proceeding from which the revision applica-
tion arises is automatically delayed and therefore unneces-
sarily held up. We, however, do not think that any statu-
tory provision is necessary to regulate the circumstances
in which the High Courts should call for the records and
proceedings in a revision application against an interlocu-
tory order. This matter may be best left to the discretion
of the High Courts. We may, however, in this connection,
invite attention to the practice prevailing in the Bombay
High Court which is as follows?: —

“In revision applications from decrees and orders
in cases which have been finally disposed of in the lower
court, this Court (Bombay High Court) invariably calls
for the original records and proceedings for disposal of
the said application. In regard to revision applications
against interlocutory orders, the records and proceed-
ings are nct called for unless the Court of its own motion
or on an application of a party, orders them to be sent
for; otherwise ordinarily certified copies of the relevant
papers are considered sufficient for the disposal] of the
revision application.”

60. The Law Commission has, in the Fourteenth Re-
port’.", made certain suggestions as to how delay resulting
from stay granted by the High Court in exercise of its
revisional jurisdiction could be reduced. The real remedy,
as observed in that Report, lies in the superior courts

itgth Report, Vol. I, page 420, para. 14. ~ 7

*Extracted from the reply of the Additional Registrar, Bombay High
Court, to our letter asking for information on the subject.

*r4th Report, Vol. I, page 419, para. 11 and Page 420, para. 14.

“See also Civil Justice Committee (1924-25), Report, pages 372-373,
paras, 17-18,



27

keeping in view the following essential rules in dealing
with these revisions :--

(1) That the rule nisi should not be issued except
upon a very careful and strict scrutiny.

(2) That where a stay is not granted, the records
of the subcrdinate courts should not be called for and
when the records are necessary, only copies of the
records should be required to be produced.

(3) That whenever a rule nisi is granted and a stay
order issued, every effort should be made to dispose of
the revision application within two or three months,

61. Sections 121 to 128 empower the High Courts to
annul, alter er add to all or any of the rules in the First
Schedule to the Code. In the draft Report circulated for
comments, it was proposed, that this power, which at
present vests in the High Courts, should vest jn an all-India
committee. The object of this proposal was to achieve
uniformity. On further consideration, we think that while
uniformity is desirable, there are other weighty reasons
why the rule-making power should continue to vest in the
High Courts. We will briefly set out these reasons. First,
local conditions vary from State to State, and it is not
possible to achieve complete uniformity. Secondly, after
the Code is revised in the manner proposed by us, there is
no serious danger of divergent rules being made by the
variou, High Courts on any important matter. We have
examined the various amendments made by the High
Courts sy far. We have adopted many of these amendments
of a general character, which should in our view apply to
the whole of India. There will, therefore, be little scope
for further amendments of the rules by the High Courts.
Thirdly, article 227 of the Constitution empowers the High
Courts f9 make and issue general rules and prescribe forms
for regulating the practice and proceedings of all courts
subordinate tw) them. In conformity with the spirit of this
article, it is desirable that the rule-making power under
the Code of Civil Procedure should also vest in the High
Courts. Fourthly, the revision of the Code was considered
in some detail by the Law Commission in the Fourteenth
Report. That Report did not suggest the constitution of an
all-India committee for the purpose of making rules. Fifthly,
there are practical difficulties in the constitution of an
a'l-India committee. The committee proposed in the draft
Report consisted of twenty-seven members. The committee
included only six advocates from the whole of India. It
has been represented to us, that the committee should in-
clude one advocate from each State. If this proposal is
accepted, the committee would become still more unwieldly.
Tn our opinion, an all-India committee which is fully repre-
sentative of all interests will consist of not less than thirty-
five members. Such a committee will not be a suitable
agency for annulling, altering or adding to the rules in the

Sections
121 to 128.


Order L
rule 8.

Order VI,
vale 17.

‘28

Fifth Schedule to the Code. The committee must neces-
sarily consist of busy judges and advocates, who will
hardly have any time to meet together, much less to initiate
and consider amendments to the rules. Moreover, the all-
India committee, by the very nature of its constitution,
will not be in a position to initiate amendments. The pro-
posals for amendments must necessarily come from the
High Courts which in their experience come across any
difficulties in the working of the rules. It follows, that
though the power to make rules would not formally vest
in the High Courts, the moving spirit behind the com-
mittee would be the High Courts.

We may point out that in Canada’ it is the “provincial
diversity rather than federal uniformity that prevails” in
the law of procedure and administration. The problem is
not in any way different in the several federating States
in US.A.

For these reasons, we recommend that the existing pro-
visions conferring the rule-making power on the High
Courts should not be disturbed.

62. Order I, rule 8 deals with what are known as “repre-
sentative suits” filed by or against numerous persons having
the same interests. We have proposed some changes in this
rule?. The main change to which we would like to draw
attention is the proposed provision to the effect, that while
a judgment tnder this rule should be binding on all persons
on whose behalf the suit is brought or is defended, it shall
not, except with the leave of the court. be executed against
anv such person who is not actually a party to the suit. In
suggesting thig amendment, we have followed the vrovi-
sions of Order XV, rule 12(2) of the Revised Supreme Court
Rutes of England.

पर

63. Order VI, rule 17 deals with amendment of pleadings.
A question has arisen whether the court can allow amend-
ment of a plaint where the effect of the amendment would
be to render that court incompetent to try the suit. One
view is, that the court cannot grant such an amendment.
Another view is that the court can grant such amendment,
but the plaint should after the amendment, be returned
for presentation to the proper court?. We propose that
statutory effect should be given to the latter view, by a
suitable amendment of Order VI, rule 17.

1Canadian Jurisprudence. The Civil Law and Common Law in Canada,
by Edward Mc Whinney (1958), page 301.

4Appendix I, Order 1, rule 3
‘For details see Appendix II, notes on clauses, Order VI, rule 17

‘Appendix I, Order VI, rule 17.


29

64. There is at present no express provision for the filing Order vill
of a counter-claim except the rule-making power in section nd coun-
128(2}(c}. The present position has been summed up by reclaim.
Mulla' thus:

“Though the Code does not provide for eounter~
claims, there is nothing to prevent a Court from treat-
ing the counter-claim as a plaint in a cross-suit and
hearing the twa suits together, provided the requisite
court-fee on the counter-claim has been paid.”

High Courts which exercise original jurisdiction have made
rules which provide for counter-claims (९.9. Bombay High
Court Original Side Rules, 1957, Rules 137 et seq.). We are
of the opinion that in order to avoid multiplicity of pro-
ceedings and tc dispel doubts that counter-claims cannot

be entertained, an express provision’ should be inserted in
the Code for this purpose.

65, The provisions of rules 2 and 3 of Order XVII have Order
given rise to considerable difficulty. It is not clear in which XVI,
cases tule 2 applies and in which cases rule 3 applies®. and’3.
There is considerable conflict of judicial opinion on. this
matter. We recommend‘, that the law on the subject
should be clarified. Stated broadly, the effect of our propo
sal is, that where the parties are present, rule 3 should
apply, and where the parties are absent, rule 2 should
apply notwithstanding that there has been a “default” in
terms of rule 3.

66. Under the existing law, if a “garnishee” denies the Order XXI
debt, the executing court has no power to determine and
whether the debt exists or not. This position is not satis- garnishee
factory. Certain High Courts have framed rules under ings,
section 128 (2) (d), whereunder if a “garnishee” denies the
debt, an issue about the existence of the debt can be framed
and decided by the executing court itself. A right of appeal
is however provided in such a case, In pursuance of the
recommendation made in the Fourteenth Report’, we have
proposed a provision® on the lines of Order XXI, rules 468.
to eH inserted by the Caleutta High Court on the subject.

67. Under Order XXIU, rule 1, the next friend of a minor Order
can, in collusion with the defendant, withdraw a suit filed XXII,
on behalf of a minor although such withdrawal is not in Tule 1 and
the interests of the minor. No suit to which a minor is a motif
party can be compromised except with the leave of the *
Court. (Order XXXII, rule 7). A fortiori such leave should
be necessary when a suit is withdrawn on behalf of a minor.

1Mulla, Code of Civil Procedure (1953), page 634
*Appendix I, Order 8, rules 6A ¢¢ seq.

*See Appendix IT, notes on clauses, Order 17, rules 2 and 3
4Appendix I, Order 17, tule 3.

Ss4th Report, Vol. 1, page 4515 para. 45.

“Appendix I, Order 21, rules 46A 6६ seq.


execution
of money
decrees.

30

We, therefore, recommend!, that the necessary amendment
may be made in Order XXIII, rule 1.

68. The Law Commission in its Fourteenth Report?-*
recommended that certain conditions should be imposed
before an appeal arising from an order made under section
47 in execution of a money decree is admitted at the stage
of preliminary hearing under Order XLI, rule 11. The Law
Commissicn gave the following reasons in support of its
recommendation: —

“The Civil Justice Committee proposed that in the
case of orders of execution of money decrees restrictions
should be placed on the right of appeal by requiring
the appellant judgment-debtor to deposit or at least
give security for the decretal amount as a condition
precedent to the admission of an appeal. We recom-
mend the acceptance of this proposal by an amendment
of the Code.”

This recommendation was made with a view to discourag-
ing the filing of frivolous execution appeals and the delay-
ing tactics often resorted to by judgment-debtors. The
Civil Justice Committee also took the view, that it seemed
only just that after trial this protection should be given to
the successful decree-holder. On further consideration, it
seemed to us that such a provision might prove, at !cast
in some cases, to be so onerous that it may render the right
of appeal wholly illusory. The mere filing of an appeal,
or even its admission, does not automatically operate as a
stay of execution proceedings (See Order XLI, rule 4). It
is the order of stay and not the filing of an a Bpeal which
may defeat the ends of justice. Under Order XLI, rule 5,
the Appellate Court is required before granting stay ‘to
exercise its discretion in accordance with principles which
are well recognised. Order XLI, rule 5(3) provides that
no order for stay of execution shall be made unless the
court making it is satisfied—

(a) that substantial loss may result to the party
applying for stay of execution unless the order is
made;

(b) . ve

(c) that security had been given by the applicant
for the due performance of such decree or order as may
ultimately be binding upon him.

In our opinion, the provisions of Order XLI, rule 5, parti-
eularly sub-rule (3), read with Order XLI, rule 8, are
sufficient to safeguard the interests of the decree-holder
when an appeal is filed from an order made in execution
proceedings in respect of a money-decree.

Appendix I, Order XXII, rule 1.
*rqth Report, Vol. I, page 442, para. 21.
See also Civil Justice Committee (1924-25), Report page gor.


31

69. The power of the Appellate Court to remand a case Order XLL
is at present confined to the circumstances mentioned in rule 23

Order XLI, rule 23. The Law Commission in its Fourteenth camand.
Report observed?

“In practice, cases often arise in which a remand
is necessitated for some other reason (than the reversal
of the finding on a preliminary pointy. In such cases
in order to make a remand the Courts have resorted to
their inherent power under section 151 of the Code.
This is not a satisfactory position. Further, an order
of remand under the inherent power of the Court is
not appealable like an order under rule 23.”

We recommend, that a provision may be added? to Order
XLI under which the Appellate Court can remand a case in
circumstances other than those mentioned in rule 23.

70. Order XLI, rule 27 prescribes the circumstances in Order
which an Appellate Court may take additional evidence, XL1. rule
The provisions of this rule are stringent and have been 2.
strictly construed*--*-°, The Law Commission in its Four-
teenth Report stated as follows: —

“Thus the right to adduce additional evidence

(under rule 27) is strictly limited. A party who has
discovered new evidence of high probative value which
he could not, with due diligence, have produced in the
lower cour!, will be unable to produce it in the Appel”
late Court as a matter of right. It is true that Order
XLVI, rule 1 gives a right of review in such cases, but
that right cannot be availed of in an appeal. The High
Courts of Madras, Allahabad, Patna, Orissa and Andhra
Pradesh have amended Order XLI, rule 27 so as to per-
mit a party to an appeal to adduce additional evidence
if he satisfies the Appellate Court that he could not,
in spite of due diligence, produce such evidence at the
time of original hearing or that it was not within his
knowledge at that time. We are not aware of this
amendment having resulted in an increase in the num-
ber of applications to receive additional evidence. In
our view, it makes a very necessary improvement in
the appellate procedure and we. recommend its general
adoption by a suitable amendment to the Code.”

4rgth Report, Vol. I, page 405, para. 46.

*Appendix I, Order 41, rule 23A.

*Mulla, C.P.C. (1953), page 122.

“Barsotint v. Lal Mohan, 58 TA. 254 tren To fet 654 3 ALR.
1931 F Cop fiiticising Indrayit’s case, $0 LA. 183 5 LLR. 2 Pat. 6745

‘Bombay Sizing Co. v. Kusumgar I.L.R. 47 Bom. 674 3 A.LR. 1923

. 227.

338 to mis-construction of a document, see Bhusawal Borough Munici-
pality v. Amalgamated Electricity Co. Ltd. (1964) 1 M.L.J., Notes of
recent cases, 60 (Supreme Court).

7140) Report, Vol. 1, page 405, para. 45.



Order
XLVI,
rule 7.

Other

changes,

Other
points
consid~
ered.

Appen-
dices.

32

We recommend! that Order XLIL, rule 27 should be so
amended as to give effect to the recommendation inade in
the Fourteenth Report. Such an amendment would avoid
multiplicity of proceedings. We may add, that in England
the corresponding rule? is couched in very wide terms.

71. Under Order XLII, rule 1(w), an appeal lies from
an order under Order XLVII, rule 4 granting an application
for review, but the scope of such appeal is limited_to the
grounds specified in clauses (b) and (c) of Order XLVII,
Tule 7, It follows, that where a review is granted on the
ground of a mistake or error apparent on the face of the
record, or “for any other sufficient reason”, no appeal would
lie against the order granting review. This is not a satis-
factory position. There does not seem to be any valid
reason why an appeal should lie when a review is granted
on certain grounds, and not where it is granted on other
grounds. We recommend’, that the restriction at present
imposed by Order XLVI, rule 7 on the right of appeal
against an order granting review should be removed.

72. We have explained above the principal amendments
that we have proposed. The other changes proposed by
us can be seen from Appendix I, and the reasons therefor

in the Notes on Clauses in Appendix Il.

73. There are certain other points which we have con-
sidered, though we have not recommended any amendment
of the law on those points. These have been discussed in

the Notes*.

74, In order to give a concrete shape to our recommenda-
tions, we have, in Appendix I, put fhem in the form of
draft amendments 10 the existing Code.

Appendix II contains Notes on Clauses, explaining, with
reference to the amendments in Appendix J, any points
that might need elucidation.

Appendix III gives a comparative table, showing the
recommendations made in the Fourteenth Report and the

amendments, if any, proposed by us in pursuance thereof.

Appendix 1, Order 41, tule 27.

40rder 58, rule 9 (2), R.S.C. which continues after the 1962 Revision.
*Appendix I, Order 47: rule 7.

“Appendix 11, notes on clauses,


33

Appendix IV summarises our recommendations in

tespect of other Acts.

P.

Th

1. J. L. KAPUR.—Chairman,
2. K. 5. DATAR. 7
S. K. HIRANANDANIL
4. S. P. SEN-VARMA. Members.
6.

M. BAKSHI,
Joint Secretary and Draftsman.

New DELHr,
@ 13th December, 1964.

*Member Shri Hiranandani has signed the Report subject to a separate

note,

was

**Member Shri De could not attend the meeting at which the Report
finalised. He has, therefore, been unable to sign the Report


5 of 1908.

Bar of
suit to
set aside
decree on
objection

place of
suing.

APPENDIX I

PROPOSALS AS SHOWN IN THE FORM OF DRAFT AMENDMENTS TO
THE EXISTING CODE

(This is a tentative draft only)

Section 1
In section 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (here-
inafter referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section (3),
the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: —

“(3} It extends to the whole of India except—

(a) the State of Jammu and Kashmir;

(b) the tribal areas in the State of Assam:

(०) save as hereinafter provided; the Union
territory of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi
Islands, and the Scheduled areas comprising the
East Godavari, West Godavari and Visakhapatnam
Agencies in the State of Andhra Pradesh:

Provided that sections 36 to 43 and Order XXXIV
in the First Schedule shall extend also to the Union
territory of Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands
and the Scheduled areas cpmprising the East Godavari,
West Godavari, and Visakhapatnam Agencies.”,

Section 2(17)
In section 2 of the principal Act in clause (17) in

paragraph (09), for the words “the Indian Civil Service”,
the words “an All-India Service” shall be substituted.

Section 8 पु
In section 8 of the principal Act, for the words and
figures “and 155 to 158”, the word and figures “157 and
158” shall be substituted.

Section 21A

After section 21 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely: —

21A, No party to a suit shall be allowed to attack
the validity of a decree passed in a former suit between
the same parties, or between parties under whom they
or any of them claim, litigating under the same title,
on any ground based on an objection as to the place of
suing.

Explanation—The expression “former suit” shall
denote a suit which has been decided prior to the suit
in question, whether or not it was instituted prior
thereto.

3


35

Section 24

In section 24, for sub-section (2), the following sub
section shall be substituted, namely:—

(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been trans-
ferred or withdrawn under ‘sub-section (1), the Court
which thereafter tries or disposes of such suit or pro-
ceeding may, subject to any special directions in the
case of an order of transfer, either re-try it or proceed
from the point at which it was transferred 05
withdrawn.”.

Section 25
For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely: —

“25. (1) On the application of the Attorney-General Power of
of India or of a party, ‘and after notice to the parties and Supreme
after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, the cotter
Supreme Court may, at any stage, if satisfied that an suits.
order under this section is expedient for the ends of
justice, direct that any particular suit, appeal or other
proceeding be transferred from a High Court or other
Civil Court in one State to a High Court or other Civil
Court in any other State.

(2) Every application under this section shall be
made by motion which shall, except when the appli-
cant is the Attorney-General of India or the Adnocaie-
General, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.

(3) The Court to which such suit, appeal or other Cf. Section
proceeding is transferred shall, subject to any special Ben

directions in the order of transfer. either re-try it_ or
proceed from the point at which it was transferred.
(4) Where any application for the exercise of the

powers conferred by this section ts dismissed, the
Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the applica-
tion was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to
pay by way of compensation to any person who has
opposed the application such sum not exceeding two
thousand rupees as it may consider appropriate in the
circumstances of the case.

(5) The law applicable to any suit, appeal or other Cf. exis-
proceeding transferred under this section shall be the ting.
jaw which the Court in which the suit, appeal or other Section
proceeding was originally instituted ought to have 252).
applied to such suit, appeat or proceeding.”.

Section 354
In section 35A of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “excluding an
appeal”, the words “excluding an appeal or a revision”


36

spall be substituted;

(9) in sub-section (2), for the words “one thousand
rupees”, the words “two thousand rupees” shall be
substituted.

Section 36

For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely: —

Applica- “36. The provisions of this Code relating to the
ER, to execution of decrees (including provisions relating to
Ts. payment under a decree) shall, so far as they are appli-

cable, be deemed to apply to execution of orders
{including payment under an order).”.

Section 37

To section 37 of the principal Act, the following Explana-
tion shall be added, namely: —

“grplanation—The Court of first instance does not
cease to have jurisdiction to execute a decree on the
ground merely that after the institution of the suit
wherein the decree was passed or after the passing of
the decree, any area has been transferred from the
jurisdiction of that Court to the jurisdiction of any
other Court; but, in every such case, such other Court
shall also have jurisdiction to execute the decree, if at
the time of making the application for execution of the
decree it would have jurisdiction to try the said suit.”

Section 39

In section 39 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), after the words “to another
court”, the words “of competent jurisdiction” shall be
inserted;

(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted at
the end, nameiy: —

“Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,

a Court shall be deemed to be a “court of compe-

tent jurisdiction”, if the amount or value of the

subject-matter of the suit wherein the decree was
passed does not exceed the pecuniary limits (if
any) of its ordinary jurisdiction.’

Section 42

Section 42 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as
sub-section (i) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so
re-numbered the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely: —

“(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions of sub-section (1), the powers of the court


37

under that sub-section shall include the following
powers of the court which passed the decree, namely :—
(a) power to send the decree for execution to

another court under section 39;

(bs power to execute the decree against the
legal representative of the deceased under section
56:

(९) power to order attachment of a decree in
accordance with the prescribed procedure.

(3) A court passing an order in exercise of the pow-
ers specified in sub-section (2) shall send a copy thereof
to the court which passed the decree,

(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer
on the court to which a decree is sent for execution any
of the foltawing powers, namely; —

(a) power to order execution at the instance of
the transferee ot a decree;

(89) power to grant leave to execute a decree
against a firm, m relation to a person who, though

a partner in the firm, has not appeared in his own

nime or admitted on the pleadings that he is 6

partner and has not been adjudged to be a partner

and has not been served individually as a partner.”

Section 47

(a section 47 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely: —
“(4) The provisions of section 11 shall, so far as
may be, apply in relation to proceedings under this
section, as they apply to suits.”;

{b) for the Explanation, the following Explanations
shall be substituted, namely :—

“Explanation 1—For the purposes of this sec-
tion, a plaintiff whose suit has been dismissed and

a defendant against whom a suit has been dismiss- pale,
e

...are parties to the suit.

Explanation IL.—........ For the purposes of this
section, a purchaser of property ata sale in execu-
tion of a decree shall be deemed to be a party to the
suit in which the decree is passed, and all questions
relating to delivery of possession of such property
to such purchaser or his representative shall be
deemed to be questions relating to the execution,
discharge or satisfaction of the decree within the
meaning of this section.”,

Cf. section
47 Expl.
earlier

alg,

xp
latter half.


38

Section 58

In section 58 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in
clause (a), for the words “fifty rupees”, the words “two
hundred rupees” shall be substituted.

Section 60
In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1},—
(a) in the proviso,—

(i) in clause (9), after the words “pensioners
of the Government’, the words “or of a local
authority or of any other employer” shall be
inserted;

(8) in clause (i), for the proviso, the follow-
in proviso shall be substituted, namely:—

“Provided that where.......the whole or
any part of the portion of such salary liable
to attachment has been under attachment,
whether continuously or intermittently, for a
total period of twenty-four months, such por-
tion shall be exempt from attachment until
the expiry of a further period of twelve
months and, where such attachment has been
made in execution of one and the same
decree, shall be finally exempt from attach-
ment in execution of that decree.”;

(iii) in clause (j), for the words and figures
“the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934”, the
words and figures “the Navy Act, 1957” shall be 62 of
substituted; 1957.

(0) for Explanation 1, the following Explanation
shall be substituted, namely :--

“Explanation 1-—-The particulars mentioned
in clauses (9), (0, (0, 6०), (9), (0) and (0) are
exempt from attachment or sale whether before
or after they are payable, andin the case of all
salaries the attachable portion thereof is liable to
attachment whether before or after itis actually
payable.”:

(०) In Explanation 2, for the words, brackets and

letters “clauses (h) and (i)”, the words, brackets and
letters “clauses (i) and (ia)” shall be substituted.

Section 80
Section 80 of the principal Act shall be omitted.


39

Section 82

For section 82 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—

“39, (1) Where in a suit by or against the Govern- Execution
ment, or by or against a public officer in respect of of fectee
any act purporting to be done by him in his official Govern
capacity, a decree is passed against the Union of India ment or
or a State or, as the case may be, the public officer,.... public
जज execution shall not be issued on the decree unless °cer.
it remains unsatisfied for a period of three months, or CJ. section
such other period as the Court may fix in a particular ong 829).
case, computed from the date of the decree.

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply
in relation to an order or award as they apply in
relation to a decree, if the order or award—

(a) is passed or made against the Union of
India or a State or a public officer in respect of
any such act as aforesaid, whether by a Court or
by any other authority, and

(b) is capable of being executed under the
provisions of this Code or of any other law for
the time being in force as if it were a decree.

(3) The Court may, in its discretion, from time to
time, enlarge the period specified in sub-section (1) or
fixed by the Court under that sub-section, even though Cf. section
the period so specified or fixed may have expired.”. लिन C

Section 95

In section 95 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1),
the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end.
namely: —

“Explanation.—Compensation may be awarded
under this section for injury to reputation.”.

Section 97

In section 97 of the principal Act, the words “passed
after the commencement of this Code” shall be omitted.

Section 98

In section 98 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),
in the proviso,—

(8) for the words “composed of two Judges be-
longing to a Court consisting of more than two Judges”,
the words “composed of two or other even number of
Judges belonging to a Court consisting of more Judges
than those constituting the Bench” shall be substituted;


Revision

48

(b) for the words “differ in opinion on a point of
law, they may state the point of law”, the words “differ

in opinion on 2 point........ , they may state the point”
shall be substituted.
Section 102

In section 102 of the principal Act, for the words “one
thousand rupees”, the words “three thousand rupees” shall
be substituted.

Section 105

In section 105 of the Pincipal Act, in sub-section (2),
the words “made after the commencement of this Code’
shall be omitted.

Section 115

For section 115 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely: —

“115. (7) The High Court may call for
the record of any case which has been decided by any
court subordinate to such High Court. ee) an
if such subordinate court appears—

(a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested
in it by law, or

(9) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so
vested, or

(c) to have acted in the exercise of its juris-
diction illegally or with material irregularity,

the High Court may make such order in the case as it
thinks fit:

Provided that the High Court shall not, under this
section, vary or reverse any order made, or any order
deciding an issue, in the course of a suit or other pro-
ceeding, except where—

(a) the order, if it had been made in favour of
the party applying for revision, would have finally
disposed of the suit or other proceeding, or

(b) the order, if allowed to stand, would oc-
casion a failure of justice or cause irreparable in-
jury to the party against whom it was made.

(2) The High Court shall not, under this section,
vary or reverse any decree or order against which an
appeal lies either to the High Court or to any court
subordinate thereto.

Explanation.—-In this section, the expression “any
case which has been decided” includes any order made,
or any order deciding an issue, in the course of a suit
or other proceeding.”.,



4

Section 135A

In section 135A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),
for the word “fourteen”, the word “forty” shall -be substi-
tuted.

Section 144

In section 144 of the principal Act,—

(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely: —

“<1) Where and in so far as a decree or an
order is varied or reversed, or is set aside or modi-
fied in any suit or proceeding instituted for the
purpose, the Court of first instance. or, as the case
may be, the Court whose decree or order is set
aside or modified, shall, on the application of any
party entitled to any benefit by way of restitution
or otherwise, cause such restitution to be made
as will, so far as may be, place the parties in the
position which they would have occupied but for
such decree or order or such part thereof as has
been varied, reversed, set aside or modified; and,
for this purpose, the Court may make any orders,
including orders for the refund of costs and for
the payment of interest, damages, compensation
and mesne profits, which are consequential on the
variation, reversal, setting aside or modification of
the decree or order.”.

Section 145

Yor section 145 of the principal Act, the following
section shall be substituted, namely: —

“145. Where any person has furnished security— Enforce:
(a) for the performance of any decree or any 17761

part thereof, or habiiity of
(8) for the restitution of any property taken

in execution of a decree, or

(c) for the payment of any money, or for the
fulfilment of any condition imposed on any person,
under an order of the Court in any suit or in any
proceeding consequent thereon.

the decree or order may be executed in the manner
herein provided for the execution of decrees,—

(i) if he has rendered himself personally
liable, against him to that extent; and

(ii) tf he has furnished any property as security,
by sale of such property to the extent of the secu-
rity;


Who may
be joined
as plain-
tiffs.

(Revision),
1962.

Who may
be joined
as defen-

dants.

Power
toorder
separate
trials
where
joinder of
defendants
may em-
barrass or
delay trial.
f. Order

XV, rule
5601) RSC.
evision)
1962.

42

(iti) _if the case falls both under clause (i) and
under clause (ii), then to the extent specified
in those clauses;

and such person shail, for the purposes of appeal, be
deemed fo be a party within the meaning of section 74:

Provided that such notice as the Court in each case
thinks sufficient has been given to the surety.”.

Order I, rule 1
For rule 1 of Order I of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shali me substituted,
naniely:—
“LAN persons may be joined in one suit as plain-
tiffs where—

{a) any right to relief in respect of or arising
out of the same act or transaction or series of acts
or transactions is alleged to exist in such persons,
whether jointly, severally or in the alternative, and

(0) if such persons brought separate suits, any
common question of Jaw or fact would arise.”.

Order I, rule 3
For rule 3 of Order I of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act, the following rule shal! be substituted, namely:—
“3, All persons may be joined in one suit as defend-
dants where—

(a) any right to relief in respect of or arising
out of the same act or transaction or series of acts
or transactions is alleged to exist against such per-
sons whether jointly, severally or in the alter-
native, and

(6) if separate suits were brought against such
Persons, any common question of law or fact would
arise.”.

Order I, rule 3A

In Order I of the First Schedule to the principal Act,
after rule 3, the following rule shall be inserted, namely: —
“8A. Where it appears to the Court that any
joinder of defendants may embarrass or delay the
trial of the suit, the Court may order separate trials

or make such other order as may be expedient.”.


43

Order I, rule 8
For rule 8 of Order 1 of the First Schedule to the prin-
-eipal Act, the following rule shall be ‘substituted, namely: —
iz One person

“g. (1) Where there are numerous persons havin: Ons cue or

the same interest in one suit,— defend on
behalf of

(a) one or more of such persons may, with ohin same
the permission of the Court, sue or be sued, OF jnterest.
may defend, in such suit, on behalf of or for the Cf. Orderl, |
benefit of all persons so interested; rule, BU a

half, C-P.C.

(b) the Court may direct that one or more of Cf. Bom-
such persons may sue or be sued, or may defend, bay ang
in such suit, on behalf of or for the benefit of all amend-
persons so interested. ments.

(2) The Court shall, in every case where a per- Cf. Order I,
mission or direction is given under sub-rule (1), give, rule BC)
at the plaintiff’s expense, notice of the institution of eee.

the suit to all persons so interested, either by personal ~
service, or, where from the number of persons or any

other cause such service is not reasonably practicable,

by public advertisement, as the Court in each case may

direct.
(3) Any person on whose behalf or for whose Cf. Order T,
rule 8(2),

benefit a suit is instituted or defended under sub-rule (09.2.
(2) may, apply to the Court to be made a party to ~~
such suit.

(4) No such suit shall be withdrawn and no part es . Order
of the claim in any such suit abandoned under sub- Won
tule (1) or sub-rule (2) of rule 1 of Order XXIII, and ६8९, ld)
no agreement, compromise or satisfaction shall be re- and Revis-
corded in any such suit under rule 3 of that Order, ed RSC.
unless the Court has given, at the plaintiff's expense, श्र
notice to all persons so interested, in the manner Order, AG
specified in sub-rule (2). .

(5) Where any person suing or defending in any Cf. sec-
such suit does not proceed with due diligence in the tion 92,
suit or defence. the Court may substitute in his place Presidency
-any other person having the same interest in the suit. Ten ney

है हु Act, 1909.

(6) A decree passed in द suit under this rule shall cy, order
be binding on all persons on whose behalf or for whose हुए,
Benefit the suit is instituted or defended, as the case Tule 12(3)
may be; but such decree shall not be executed by or and.
against any person not a party to the suit except with Revised
the leave of the Court. (1962).


44

Cf. Order {7) Notice of an application for the grant of leave
XV, rule ander sub-rule (6) shall be served on the person
BO, against whom the decree is sought to be executed in
— the manner provided in this Code for the service of a
summons.
Cf. B.S.C. (8) Notwithstanding that a decree to which any
(Revision) application for the grant of leave under sub-rule (6)
Bee, relates is binding on the person against whom_ the
CRAG application is made, that person may dispute liability
. to have the decree executed against him on the ground
that by reason of facts and matters particular to his
case he is entitled to be exempted from such liability.”.
Order I, rule 10
In rule 10 of Order I of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act,—

(i) for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall

be substituted, namely: —
EL RSC “(2) The Court may, at any stage of the pro-
(1962), ceedings, either upon or without the application

Order XV, of either party, and on such terms as may appear
rule to the Court to be just,— हि
6(2) (a).

(a) order that the name of any 90800
who has been improperly or unnecessarily
joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or
who has for any reason ceased to be a proper
or necessary party, be struck out;

(b) order that the name of any person
who ought to have been joined, whether as
laintiff. or defendant, or whose presence
efore the Court may be necessary in order to:
enable the Court effectually and completely
to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions.
involved in the suit, be added.”;

(ii) in sub-ruie (5), for the words and figures
“Indian Limitation Act, 1877, section 22”, the words
and figures “section 21 of the Limitation Act, 1963”
shall be substituted.

Order I, rule 11
Cf, Order In rule 11 of Order I, of the First Schedule to the

Ry gue 18 principal Act, for the words “the suit”, the words “a suit”:

Revision Shall be substituted.
(1962).

36 of 1963.


48

Order Il, rule 6

For rule 6 of Order IJ of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act, the following rule shall be substituted, namely: — Power of
“6, Where it appears to the Court that the joinder Court to
of eauses of action in one suit may embarrass or delay Separate
the trial or is otherwise inconvenient, the Court may trials,
order separate trials or make such other order as may Cf. Order
be expedient.”. mie 52
Revision
(1962).
Order पा, rule 4

In rule 4 of Order III of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act, for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be
substituted, namely:— .

*(3) For the purposes of sub-rule (2.—

{a) an application for review of judgment,

(b} an application under section 144 or sec-
tion 152 of this Code,

(2) anv appeal or application for revision
from any decree or order in the suit and any
application relating to such appeal or revision,
ane

(8) any application or act for the purpose of
obtaining copies of documents or return of docu-
ments produced or filed in the suit or of obtaining
refund of monies paid into the Court in connec-
tion with the suit.

shall be deemed to be proceedings in the suit.”.

Order गा, rule 5

In rule 5 of Order IH of the First Schedule to the prin-
-eipal Act, for the words “any process served on the pleader
of any party”, the words “any process served on the pleader cj order
who has been duly appointed to act for any party” shall Til, rule
be substituted. 4(5) |
proviso.

Order TH, rule 6

_in rule 6 of Order ITI of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act, the following sub-rule shall be inserted at the
-end, namely: —

“(3) The Court may, at any stage of a suit, order cy.
any party to the suit not having a recognised agent Bombay
residing within the jurisdiction of the Court, to Amend-
appoint within a specified time an agent within the et
jurisdiction of the Court, to accept service of pre
on his behalf.”. id -©f Process


Service
on male
member.

Simul-
taneous
issue of
summons
for service
by post in
ad (वी 0०५ to
personal
service.

Cf. Order
Vi rule
20462),
CPC.

46
Order V, rule 15

For rule 15-of Order V of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,.
namely: —

“15, Where in any suit the defendant is absent
from his residence at the time when service is sought
to be effected on him at his residence and there is no-
likelihood of his being found at the residence within
a reasonable time, and the defendant has no agent
empowered to accept ‘service of the summons on his
behalf, service may be made on any adult male
member of the family of the defendant who is resid-
ing with him.

Explanation—A servant is not a member of the
family within the meaning of this rule.”.

Order V, rule 17

In rule 17 of Order V of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act, for the words “or where the serving officer, after
using all due and reasonable diligence, cannot find the de-
fendant”, the words “or where the defendant is absent

rom his residence at the time when service is sought to
be effected on him at his residence and there is no likeli-
hood of his being found at the residence within a reason-

able time” shall be substituted.

Order V, rule 198.

After rule 19 of Order V of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely: —

“92. (1) The Court shall, in addition to and simul-
taneously with the issue of summons for service in the
manner provided in rules 9 to 19, also direct the sum~
mons to be served by registered post addressed to the
defendant or his agent empowered to accept the
service at the place where the defendant or his agent
ordinarily resi des or carries on business or personally
works for gain:

Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall require

the Court to issue a summons for service by registered

ost, where, in the circumstances of the case, the Court
regards it as unnecessary.

(2) When an acknowledgment purporting to be
signed by the defendant or the agent or an endorse-
ment purporting to be made by a postal employee that
the defendant or the agent refused to take delivery has
been received, the Court issuing the summons may
declare that there has been valid service.”.


a7

Order V, rule 20

In rule 20 of Order V of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipai Act, after sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be
inserted, namely:—

“(1A) Where under sub-rule (1) the Court orders GES 5),
service by advertisement in a newspaper, the news- Companies
paper shall be a daily newspaper circulating in the Act, 1956.
neighbourhood of the place in which the defendant is
last known to heve resided, carried on business or
personally worked for gain.”.

Order V, rule 205.

Rule 20A of Order V of the First Schedule te the prin-
cipal Act shall be omitted.

Order V, rule 26

For rule 26 of Order V of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely: —

“26. Where—

(a) in the exercise of any foreign jurisdiction Service in
vested in the Central Government, a Political foreign
Agent has heen appointed, or a Court has been through
established or continued, with power to serve a Political
summons issued by a Court under this Code in any Agent or
foreign territory in which the defendant resides, or Court.

(8) the Central Government has, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, declared, in respect
of any Court situate in any such territory and not
established or continued in the exercise of any
such jurisdiction as aforesaid, that service by such
Court of any summons issued by a Court under
this Code shall be deemed to be valid service,

the summons may be sent to such Political Agent or
Court, by post or otherwise, or if so directed by the
Central Government, through the Ministry of that Gov-
ernment dealing with foreign affairs or in such other
manner as may oe specified by the Central Government,
for the purpose of being served ubon the defendant;
and, if the Political Agent or Court. returns the sum-
mons with an endorsement signed by such Political
Agent or by the Judge or other officer of the Court that


* 48
Order V, rule 26A (New)

After rule 26 of Order V of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:—

Summon_ “26A. Where the Central Government has, by
169 to be notification in the Official’ Gazette, deciared in respect
officers of of any foreign territory that summonses to be served
foreign on defendants residing in that foreign territory may
countries. be sent to an officer of the foreign territory specified by

the Central Government, the summonses may be sent to
the officer of the foreign territory so specified, through
the Ministry of the Government of India dealing with
foreign affairs or in such other manner as may be
specified by the Central Government; and if such officer
returns the summons with an endorsement signed by
him that the summons has been served on the defendant,
such endorsement shall be deemed to be evidence of
service.”

Order VI, rule 2

For rule 2 af Order VI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule. shall be substituted,

namely: —

Pleading “2. (1) Every pleading shall contain. and contain
to state only, a statement in a concise form of the material
material हि ding reli © .
facts and facts on which the party plea telies for his claim or
not evi- defence, as fhe case may be, but not the evidence by
dence. which they are to be proved.

Cf. Order {2) Every pleading shall, when necessary, be
pide 2) divided into paragraphs numbered consecutively, each
Bsc allegation being, so far as is convement, contained in

Revision 2 separate paragraph.
(1962).
(3) Dates, sums and numbers shall be expressed
in a pleading in figures.”.
Order-VI, rule 14A
Order Vi, After rule 14 of Order VI of the First Schedule to the

rule 14a principal Act, the foliowing rule shall be inserted, namely: —

Address “14A. (1) Every pleading when filed by a
for ser- party shall be accompanied by a statement in the
notice, prescribed form, signed as provided in rule 14, and

the party’s address for service.

(2) Such address may, from time to time, be
changed by lodging in court a form duly filled up
ond stating the new address of the party and ac-
companied by a verified. petition.


49

(3) The address so given shall be called the of Order
“registered address” of the party, and shall, until Sy. 144
duly changed as aforesaid, be deemed to be the (Calcutta).
address of the party for the purpose of service of
all processes in the suit or in any appeal from any
decree or order therein made and for the purpose
of execution, and shall hold good, subject as afore-
said, for a period of two years after the final deter-
mination of the cause or matter.

(4) Service of any process may be effected
upon a party at his registered address in all res-
pects as though such party resided thereat.

(5) Where a party files an address for service
under this rule, which is to be discovered false, fic-
titious or illusory, he shall, if he is a plaintiff, be
liable to have his suit stayed, or if a defendant, to
have his defence, if any, struck out and to be
placed in the same position as if he had not
defended: and an order saying his suit or striking
out his defence may be passed by the Court of
it: own motion, or on the application of any party.

(6) Where a suit is stayed or a defence struck Cf.
out under sub-rule (5), the plaintiff or defendant, Madhyo
as the case may be, may apply for an order to set Hradesh
aside the stay or striking out; and if files the true ment,
address and satisfies the Court that he was pre- Order VII,
vented by any sufficient cause from filing the true ile 2109).
address at the proper time, the Court shall set
aside the stay or striking out on such terms as to
costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint
a day for proceeding with the suit or defence as
the case may require.

(7) The provisions of this rule for service at Sh Order
the registered address shall be without prejudice vit, 26,
vice.” r ५
to any other modk of service. Bombay,
Allahabad,
Patna, ete.,
amend-

Order VI, rule 16 ment.

For rule 16 of Order VI of the First Schedule to the

principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
-namely:—

“16. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings opie,
order to be struck out or amended any matter in any oul ples
Pleuding— i

ings.

_ (a) which may be unnecessary or scandalous,
frivolous or vexatious, or


Cf. Order
xvi,

tule 19,
RSC.
(Revised)
1962.

€ Order
, tule 2.

50

(b) which may tend to prejudice, embarrass.
or delay the fair trial of the suit, or

(०) which is otherwise an abuse of the process
of the Court.”.

Order VI, rule 17
Rule 17 of Order VI of the First Schedule to the principal

Act shall be re-numbered as sub-rule (7) thereof, and after
sub-rule (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-rule
shall be inserted, namely: —-

“(2) The Court may allow an alteration or amend-
ment of the plaint under this rule notwithstanding that
after such alteration or amendment the Court would
not be competent to try the suit; and where the Court
allows such alteration or amendment, it shall, after
allowing the alteration or amendment, return the
plaint for presentation to the proper Court, and the
provisions of rule 10 of Order VII shall apply to an
order so returning the plaint.”.

Order VII, rule 9
In rule 9 of Order VIE of the First Schedule to the

principal Act, for sub-rule (1), the following sub-rules
shail be substituted, namely:—

+* (1) The plaintiff shall endorse on the plaint, or
annex thereto, a list of the documents (if any), which
he has produced along with it, and skall within such
tame as.may be fixed by the Court or extended by it
from time to time, present as many copies on plain
paper of the plaint as there are defendants, unless the
Court, by reason of the length of the plaint or the
number of the defendants or for any other sufficient
reason, permits him to present a like number of con-
cise statements of the nature of the claim made or of
the relief claimed in the suit, in which case he shall
present such statements.

(14) The plaintiff shall also pay the court-fees
and postal charges chargeable for the service of sum-
mons on the defendants before or at the time when he
presents copies of the plaint or concise statements under
sub-rule (1}.”.

Order VIIL, written statement and set-off
For.the heading to.Order VIII of the First Schedule to

the principal Act, the following heading shall be substituted,
namely: —
“WRITTEN STATEMENT, .

.-SET-CFF AND

COUNTER-CLAIM”,


51
Order VIII, rule 1

Rule 1 of Order VIII of the First Schedule to the princi-
pal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-rule (1) thereof, and
after sub-rule (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
rules shall be inserted, namely: —

“(2) Where the defendant relies on any document Cf. Order
(whether in his possession or power or not) in support vu. 14.
of his defence or claim for set off, he shall enter such ™ 7
documents in a list, and shall—

(a) if a written statement is presented, add or
annex the list to the written statement;

(8) if a written statement is not presented,
present it to Court at the first hearing of the suit.

(3) Where any such document is not in the pos- Cf. Order
session or power of the defendant, he shall, if possible, vit 15.
state in whose possession or power it is. w .

(4) If no such list is so added or annexed or pre- Cf. Punjab-
sented, the defendant shall be allowed such further Amend-
period as the Court may allow to file his list of docu- ment.

Order
ments. VIIL,

rule 1(2).

(5) A document which ought to be entered in the latter half.
list referred to in sub-rule (2), and which is not entered Cf. Punjab.
accordingly, shall not, without the leave of the Court, Amend
be received in evidence on behalf of the defendant at Ment.
the hearing of the suit. VIII,

(6) Nothing in sub-rule (5) applies to documents tule 103).
produced for cross-evamination of the plaintiff's witnes- CI. Punjab
ses or handed to a witness merely to refresh his me- Amend-
Order

(7) Where a Court grants leave under sub-rule (5), 1a).
it snall record its reasons for so doing, and no such
leave shall be granted unless good cause 1s shown to
the satisfaction of the Court for the non-entry of the
document.”

mory.

Order VIII, rules 6A to 6G (New)

After rule 6 of Order VIII of the First Schedule to the (New)
principal Act, the following rules shall be inserted,
namely: —

“6A. (1) A defendant in a suit, in addition to his Counter-
right of pleading a set-off under rule 6, may set wp, by claim by
way of counter-claim against the claim of the plaintiff, defendant. .
any right or claim in respect of a cause of action ac-
cruing to the defendant either before or after the filing
of the suit but before the defendant has delivered his
defence and before the time limited for delivering his
defence has expired, whether such counter-claim sounds
in damages or not.


CH.
Order VIII
rule 6(2).

Cf.
Order VII,
rule 6(1).

Cf.
Order VII,
rule 6(1).

Counter.
claim to.
be stated.

Exclusion
of counter-
claim.

‘Disconti-
nuance

of suit.

Cf. RS.
(Revision)
1962.
Order XV,
rule 2(3).
Default by
defendant

to counter-
claim.

Cf.
Order VII,

rule 10.

cf.

Order XX,
rule 19
also. ~

Rules
relating
to written
statement
to apply.

cf.
Order VIII,

52

(2) Such counter-claim shall have the same effect
as a cross-suit, so as to enable the Court to pronounce
a final judgment in the same suit, both on the original
claim and on the counter-claim.

(3) The plaintiff (if so advised) shall be at liberty
to file a written statement in answer to the counter-
claim of the defendant within such period as may be
fixed by the Court.

(4) The claim made in the counter-claim shall not
exceed the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the
Court

(5) The counter-claim shall be treated as a plaint
and governed by the rules applicable to plaints.

6B. Where any defendant seeks to reply upor any
ground as supporting a right of counter-claim, he shall,
in his written statement. state specifically that he does
so by way of counter-claim.

60, Where a defendant sets up a counter-claim, if
Mintif® contends thr: the claim thereby ‘aised

ht net to be disposed of by way of counter-claim but
in an independent suit, he may, at any time before trial,
apply to the Court for an order that such counter~ i
may be excluded, and the Court may, on the hearing
such application, make such order as shall be just.

GD. If in any case in which the defendant sets up
a counter-claim, judgment is given for the plaintiff or
the suit of the plaintiff is stayed, discontinued or dis-
missed, the counter-claim may nevertheless be proceeded
with.

69, lf the defendant to the counter-claim makes
default in putting in a reply to the counter-claim, the
Court may pronounce judgment against him or make
such order in relation to the counter-claim as it thinks

fit.

GF. Where in any suit a set-off or counter-claim is
established as a defence against the plaintiff's claim,
the Court may, if the batance is in favour pf the defen-
dant, yive judgment for the defendant for such balance,
or may Otherwise adjudge to the defendant such relief
as h2 may be entitled to upon the merits of the case.

6G. The rules relating to a written statement by a
defendant apply to a written statement in answer to a
counter-claim.”.

Order VIII, rule 7
In rule 7 of Order VIII of the First Schedule to the

tule 6(3). principal Act, after the word “set-off”, the words “or

counter-claim” shall be inserted.


53

Order VIL, rule 8
in rule 8 of Order VIII of the First Schedule to the
principe] Act, after the word “set-off", the words “or
counter-claim” shall be inserted.
Order VIIE, rule 9
In rule 9 of Order VIII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act. after the word “set-off, the words “or
cownter-claim”™ shall be inserted.
Order VIE, ruie 10
In rule 10 of Order VIII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act. for the words “is so required fails to present
the same within the time fixed by the Court”, the words and
figures “is required under rule 1 or rule 9 fails to present
the same within the time permitted or fixed by the Court,
as the case may Ve”, shall be substituted.
Order IX, rule 2
For rule 2 of Order IX of the First Schedule to the
rincipal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,

Where on the day so fixed it is found that the Dismissat
summons has not been served upon the defendant in of suit
consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the summons
court-fee or postal charges (if any) chargeable for such not served
service. or to present copies of the plaint or concise in conse-
+ as required by rule 9 of Order VII, the quence of
make an order that the suit be dismissed: Palure to
Provided that no such order shall be made.. . pay costs.
if, notwithstanding such failure, the defendant.
attends in person (or by agent when he is allowed to
appear by agent) on the day fixed for him to appear and

aensiper
Order IX, rule 4
Ty rule 4 of Order IX of the First Schedule to the princi-
pai Act, for the words “his not paying the court-fee and
postal charges (if any) required within the time fixed before
the issue of the summons”, the words “such failure as is
referred to in rule 2” shall be substituted.
Order IX, rule 5
In rule 5 of Order IX of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act ia sub-rule (5), for the words “three months”, the
words “two raonths” shall be substituted.
+ Order IX, rule 13
To rule 13 of Order IX of the First Schedule to the
princinal Act, the following proviso shalt be added,
hame!l

‘Provided further that no Court shall set aside a GJ. the,
decrze passed ex parte merely on the ground that there Amend
has been an irregularity in the service of summons, if it Madras.

is satisfied that the defendant had notice of the date Orissa.
ing in sufficient time to appear and answer the Allahabad.

of hearing in

plainsiffs claim.”. Eee
and.
Andhra

Pradesh..


“Oral
examina-
tion of
party or
compa-
nion of
party.
Order X,
rule 2
earlier

half,
modified.

Cf.

Order X,
rule 2,
latter half.

also Order
XI,
rule 19(2).

Cf. sec~
tion 162
Evidence
Act.

हक

Order X, rule 2

For rule 2 of Order X of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act, the following rule shal! be substituted, namely :—

“2. (1) At the first hearing of the suit, the Court—

(a) shall, with a view to elucidating the mat-
ters in controversy in the suit, examine orally such
of the parties to the suit appearing in person or
present in Court, as it deems fit, and

(b) may orally pxamine any person able to
answer any material questions relating to the suit
by whom any party appearing in person or present
in Court or his pleader 1s accompanied.

(2) At any subsequent hearing, the Court may
orally examine any party appearing in person or pre~
sen‘ in Court, or any person able to answer any material
questions relating to the suit by whom such party or
his pleader is accompanied.

(3) The Court may, if it thinks fit, put in the course
of an examination under this rule questions suggested
by either party.”.

Order XI, rule 6

In rule 6 of Order XI of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act, after the words “at that, stage”, the words “or on
the ground of privilege” shall be inserted.

Order XI, rule 15

In rule 15 of Order XI of the First Schedule ‘othe
principal Act, after the words “in whose pleadings or affida-
vits reference is made to any document”, the words “or
30100 has entered any document in any lists added or annexed
to his pleadings” shall be inserted.

Order XI, rule 19

In rule 19 of Order XI of the First Schedule to the
orincipal Act, in sub-rule (2), the words “unless the docu-
ment relates to matters of State” shall be inserted at the
end.

Order XIII, rule 2

Rule 2 of Order XIII of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act shall be renumbered as sub-rule (1) thereof, and
after sub-rule (1) as so re-numberea, the following sub-rule
shall be inserted, namely: —

(2) Nothing in sub-rule (1) applies, in relation to
any party, to documents produced for cross-cxramina-+
tion of the witnesses of the other party or handed to a
witness merely to refresh his memory.


55

Order XIII, rule 9
in rule 9 of Order XIII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in sub-rule (1), for the first proviso, the fol-
‘towing proviso shall be substituted, namely:—

“Provided that a document may be returned at any
time earlier than that prescribed by this rule if the
person applying therefor—

(a) delivers to the proper officer for being sub-
stituted for the originai,
(i) in the case of a party to the suit,a
certified copy, and
(ii) in the case of any other person, an
erdinary copy which has been examined, com-
pared and certified in the manner mentioned in
Rule 17 of Order VI. and
(0) undertakes to produce the original if re-
quired to do so.”.
Order XIV, rule 1
In rule 1 of Order XIV of the First Schedule to the
princinal Act. in sub-rule (5), for the words “after such
examination of the parties as may appear necessary”, the
words and figures “after examination under rule 2 of Order,
X and after nearing the parties or their pleaders” shall be

substituted.
Order XVI. rule 1

For rule k of Order XVI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely :—

“3, (11 On or before such date as the Court may List of wit-
appoint and not later than ten days after the date on nesses and
which the issues are settled, the parties shall present in fw
Court a list of witnesses whom they propose to call posses
either to give evidence or to produce documents.

(2) A party desirous of calling, whether by sum-
moning through Court or otherwise, any witness other
than those whose names appear in the said list, may be
permitted te do so by the Court, if he shows good
cause for the omission of the said witness from the list.

(3) Where the Court grants any such permission,
it shall record its reasons for so doing.

(4) On application to the Court or to such officer Cf. exist-
as it appoints in this behalf, and subject to the provi- PE, Order
sions of sub-rule (2), parties may obtain summonses to rule")
persons whose att ce is required either to give
evidence or to produce documents.”.

Order XVI, rule 1A
For rule 1A of Order XVI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely : —
“1A. Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2) of Production

rule 1, any party to the suit may, without applying for of nee

summons under rule 1, bring any witness to give evi- yithout
dence or to produce documents.”. summons
through

court.


56

Order XVI, rule 2

In rule 2 of Order XVI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following sub-rule shall be inserted at
Cf. the the end, namely :—

Madras “(4) Where the summons is served on the witness
Amené- by the party directly, the expenses mentioned in sub-

Order XVI, rule (1) shall be paid to the witness by the party or his
rule 2. agent.”.
Order XVI, rule 15
After tule 7 of Order XVI of the First Schedule to the:
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,

namely :—
Summons ¥

given to “TAL (1 e Court may, on the application of any
party for party for the issue of a summons for the attendance of
service. any person, permit such party to effect service of such
summons by such party, and shall in such a case deliver

ch the summons to such party for service.
Bombay (2) The service of such summons shall be effected
Amend- by or on behalf of such party by delivering or tendering
ment, XVI ६0 the witness personally a copy thereof signed by the
tule {B. Judge or such officer as he क्र in this behalf and

sealed with the seal of the rt,
a as (3) The provisions of rules 16 and 18 of Order V
Amend shall apply to a summons personally served under this
ment to rule, as if the person effecting service were 6 serving
Order officer.
RYU, (4) Tf such summons, when tendered, is refused or
Cj ee if the person served refuses to sign an acknowledgment
€ eutta of service or for any reason such summons cannot be
Amend- served personally, the Court shall, on the application of
ment to the party, re-issue such summons to be served by the
Order XVL Court in the same manner as a summons to a defendant.
स्पाह है. (5) Where a summons is served dy a party under
this rule, the party shall not be required to pay the fees.
otherwise chargeable for the service of summons.”,
Order XVI, rule 8
For rule 8 of Order XVI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely: —

Summons “8. Every summons under this Order, ४०: being a
served. summons delivered to a party for service under rule

7A, shall be served as nearly as may be in the same

manner as a summons to a defendant, and the vules in

Order V as to proof of service shall apply in the case

of all summonses served under this rule.”
Order XVI, rule 10
In rule 10 of Order XVI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act,—

(a) in sub-rule (1)--

(i) after the words “if the certificate of the

serving officer has not been verified by affidavit”,


57

the words “or if service of the summons has been
effected by a party or his agen 1” shall be inserted;

Gi) after the words “examine the serving
officer”, the words “or the party or his agent who
has effected service, as the case may be,” shall be

inserted;

(b) the following sub-rule shall be inserted at the
‘end, nanely :—

“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
rule 1 of Order XLVIII, no court-fee shall be
charged for the issue of any process under this rule
unless the Court otherwise directs.”.

Order XVI, rule 12

Rule 12 of Order XVI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-rule (7) thereof,
and after sub-rule (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
rule shall be inserted, namely :—-

“(2) Where the Court has not issued a proclamation
under sub-rule (2) of rule 10 nor issued a warrant nor
ordered attachment under sub-rule (3) of that rule, the
Court shall not impose fine under this rule unless the
person upon whom the fine is to be imposed has been
given notice to show cause why the fine should not be
imposed.”.

Order XVII, rule 2

To rule 2 of Order XVII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following Explanation shall be added,
namely : —

“Explanation—Where the evidence or a substantial
portion of the evidence of any party has already been
recorded, and such party fails to appear on any day to
which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the Court
may, in its discretion, proceed with the case as if such
party were present.”. .

Order XVII, rule 3

For rule 3 of Order XVI of the First Schedule to
‘the principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely: —

“3, Where any party to a suit to whom time has Power ot
been granted fails to produce his evidence, or to cause Court to
the attendance of his witnesses, or to perform any other th.
act necessary to the further progress of the suit, for poe
which time has been allowed, the Court may, not- the party’s

withstanding such default,— failure to
produce
(a) if the parties are present, proceed to decide evidence,

the suit forthwith;

(b) if the parties or any of them is absent,
proceed under ruie 2.”.


Provistons
Telating to
certain
iterns.

Order XVIII, rule 2
To rule 2 cf Order XVIII of the First Schedule 10 the
principal Act, the following sub-rule shall be added,
namely :—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
rule, the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, direct.
or permit any party to examine any witness at any

staae.”,
Order XX, rule 1
Rule 1 of Order XX in the First Schedule to the principal
Act shall be re-numbered as sub-rule (1) thereof, and after
sub-rule (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-rule shall
be inserted, namely: —

- “(2) Where a written judgment is to be pronounced,
it shall be sufficient if the findings of the Court on each
issue and the final order passed in the case are read out,
and it shall not be necessary for the Court to read out
the whole judgment; but a copy of the whole judgment
shall be made available for the perusal of the parties or
their pleaders immediate; after the ju doment is
pronounced,”

Order XX, rule 123
Aiter rule 12 of Order XX of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely :—

“12A. Where a decree for specific performance of
a contract for the sale or lease of immovable property
orders that the Purchase-money है or other sum be paid
by the purchaser or lessee, it shall specify the period

within which the payment shall be made.”.

Order XX, rule 19
In rule 19 of Order XX of the First Schedule to the
paincipal Act, in sub-rules (1) and (2), after the word “set-
aff” wherever it occurs, the words “or counter-claim” shalt’
he meerted.
Order XXA (New)
After Order XX of the First Schedule to the principal
Act, the following Order shall be inserted, namely: —
“ORDER XXA
Costs
1. (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions of this Code relating to costs, the Court may
award costs in respect of—

(a) expenditure incurred for the giving of any
notice required to be given by law before the in-
stitution of the suit;

(b) expenditure incurred on any notice which,
though not required to de given by law, has been


59

given by any party to the suit to any other party
before the institution of the suit;

(c) expenditure incurred on the typing of
pleadings filed by any party;

(d) charges paid by a party for inspection of
the records of the Court for the purposes of the
suit;

(९) expenditure incurred by a party for pro-
ducing witnesses, even though not summoned
ihrevgh Court; and

(f) in the cases of appeals. charges incurred by
4 party for obtaining any copies of judgments and
deerees which are required to be filed aiong with
the memorandum of appeal.

(2) The award of costs under the rule shall be in
accordance with such ruies as the High Court may
make in that behalf.

2. In calculating costs, no amount shall be included Pleader’s
as pleader’s fees unless a receipt signed by the pleader, विष:
or a certificate in writing signed by him and stating
the amount received, has been filed in court “

Order XXI, rule 1

For rule 1 of Order XXI in the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely: -—

“1. (7) All money payable under a decree shail be

paid as follows, namely :— prodes of

(a) by deposit into or by postal money-order money

sent to the Court whose duty it is to execute the ynder a

decree, or through bank to that Court; jecree.
(0) out of Court to the decree-holder through

@ bank or by postal money-order or by any other

mode wherein the payment is evidenced in writing:

er

(९) otherwise as the Court which made the
decree directs.

(2) Where any payment is made under clause @
er clause (c) of sub-rule (1), the judgment-debtor shall
give notice thereof to the decree-holder either through
the Court, or by registered post direct.

(3) Where money is paid by postal money-order
under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-rule (1), the
money-order shall accurately state the following parti-
eulars, namely: —

(0) the number of the original suit;

(ii) the names of the parties;

(iit) how the money remitted is to be adjust-
ed, that is to say; whether it includes the princi-
pal, interest or costs;


60

(iv) the number of the execution case of the

Court, where such a case is pending;

(०) the name and address of the payer.

(4) On any amount paid under clause (a) or
clause (c) of sub-rule (1), interest (if any) shall
cease to run from the date of service of the notice
under sub-rule (2).”.

Order XXI, rule 2

In rule 2 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act,—

(a) in sub-rule (1), for the words “or the decree
is otherwise adjusted”, the words “or a decree of any
kind is otherwise adjusted” shall be substituted;

(0) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule
shall be inserted, namely: —

“(2A) No payment or adjustment shall be
recorded at the instance of the judgment-debtor
unless—

(a) the payment is made in the manner
provided in rule 1, or

(b) the adjustment is proved by docu-
mentary evidence, or

(९०) the payment or adjustment is ad-
mitted by or on behalf of the decree-holder in
his reply to the notice or before the Court.”.

Order XXI, rule 11A (New)

After rule 11 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted, namely :—

Appli- “118, Where an application is made for the arrest
cal Ron for and detention in prison of the judgment-debtor, it shall
arrest to state, or be accompanied by an affidavit stating, the
state ds. “grounds on which arrest is applied for.”.

Order XXI, rule 17

For sub-rule (1) of rule 17 of Order XXI of the First
Schedule to the principal Act, the following sub-rules shall
be substituted, namely: —

“(1) On receiving an application for the execu-
tion of a decree as provided by sub-rule (2) of rule
11, the Court shall ascertain whether such of the re-
quirements of rules 11 to 14 as may be applicable to
the case have been complied with; and, if they have
not been complied with, the Court....shall allow the
defect to be remedied then and there or within a
time to be fixed by it.


61

(1A) If the defect is not so remedipd, the Court
may reject the application. ...:

Provided that where the Court is of the opinion
that the amount stated in the application as the
amount due under the decree is not correct, the Court
shall either— .

(a) decide what the correct amount is and
allow the defect to be remedied as aforesaid,
before rejecting the application, or

(b) an order that the execution of the
decree should, subject to the other provisions of
this Code, issue for the amount provisionally
decided by the Court as the correct amount, sub-
ject to the right of the applicant to get the ques-
tion of the amount determined in the course of
the proceedings.”.

Order XXI, rule 22

In rule 22 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in sub-rule (1),—
(a) in clause (a) and in the proviso, for the
words “one year”, wherever they occur, the words
“two years” shall be substituted,

(b) the word “or” shall be inserted at the end of
clause (b);

(९०) after clause (9), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely: —

“(c) Where the party to the decree has been
adjudged to be an insolvent against the assignee
or receiver in insolvency.”.

Order XXI, rule 29

In rule 29 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, after the words “a decree of such Court”,
the words “or a decree which is being executed by such
Court” shall be inserted.

Order XXI, rule 31

In rule 31 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in sub-rules (2) and (3), for the words
SBE months”, the words “three months” shall be  substi-
uted.

Order XXI, rule 32
In rule 32 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the

principal Act, in sub-rules (3) and (4), for the words “one
year”, the words “six months” shall be substituted.


Custody of
movable
property.

62
Order XXI, rule 41

Rule 41 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the prin-
cipal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-rule (1) thereof, and
after sub-rule (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
rule shall be inserted, namely:— पु

“(2) Where a decree for the payment of money
has remained unsatisfied for a period of thirty days,
the Court may, on the application of the decree-holder,
order that the judgment-debtor, or in the case of a@
corporation, any officer thereof, shall make an affi-
davit stating particulars of his assets; and the power
of the Court to make any such order shall be without

* prejudice to its power under sub-rule (1).”.

Order XXI, rule BA

After rule 43 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following. rule shall be inserted,
namely: — .

“483A. (1) When the property attached consists of
live-stock, agricultural implements or other articles
which cannot conveniently be removed and the at-
taching officer does not act under the proviso to rule
43, he may, at the instance of the judgment-debtor or
of the decree-holder or of any person claiming to be
interested in such property, leave it in the village or
place where it has been attached in the custody of
any respectable person.

(2) If the custedian fails, after due notice, to pro-
duce such property at the place named by the Court
to the officer deputed for the purpose or to restore it
to the owner if so ordered by the Court, or if the pro-
perty, though so produced or restored, is not in the
game condition as it was when it was entrusted to

im—
(a) the custodian shall be liable to pay com-
pensation to the decree-holder, judgment-debtor

or any other person who is found to be the owner
thereof, for any loss caused by his fault; and

{b) such liability may be enforced—

_ (i) at the instance of the decree-holder,
as y ue custodian were “a surety under sec-
ton >

{i) at the instance of the judgment-
debtor or such other person, on an applica-
tion in execution; and
{c) any order determining such liabili

shall be appealabdle as a decree™® iabitity


68
Order XXI, rule 46A to 46 (New)

» After rule 46 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to
the principal Act, the following rules shall be inserted,
mamely:— . .

“46A. (1) The Court may in the case of a debt Notice to
(other than a debt secured by a mortgage or a charge) garnishee.
which has been attached under rule 46, upon the ap-
plication of the attaching creditor, issue notice to the
garnishee liable to pay such debt, calling upon him Cf. RS.C.
either to pay into Court the debt due from him to the 1863, Order
judgment-debtor or so much thereof as may be suffi- County
cient, to satisfy the decree and costs of execution, or Courts

ules.
to appear and show cause why he should not do so. Bales.

(2) An application under sub-rule (1) shalt be
made on affidavit verifying the facts alleged and stating
that in the belief of the deponent the garnishee is in-
debted to the judgment-debtor.

(3) Where the garnishee pays in the Court the
amount due from him to the judgment-debtor or so
much thereof as is sufficient to satisfy the decree and
the costs of the execution, the Court may direct that
the amount may be paid to the decree-holder towards
satisfaction of the decree and the costs of the execution.

46B. Where the garnishee does not forthwith Pay Order
‘into Court the amount due from him to t judgment- against
debtor or so much thereof as is sufficient to satisfy the garnishee.
decree and the costs of execution, and does not appear

and show cause in answer to the notice, the Court may

order the garnishee to comply with the terms of such

notice, and on such order execution may issue as

though such order were a decree against him,

462, Where the garnishee disputes liability, the pq) of
Court may order that any issue or question necessary disputed
for the determination of liability shall be tried as if it questions.
were an issue in a suit, and upon the determination of
such issue shall make such order or orders upon the
“parties as may seem just:

Provided that, if the debt in respect of which the
sapplication under rule 46A is made is in respect of a
sum of money beyond the pecuniary gurisdiction of the
Court, the Court shall send the execution case to the
Court of the District Judge to which the said Court
is subordinate, and thereupon the Court of the District
Judge or any other competent Court to which it may
be transjerred by the District Judge shall deal with
it in the same manner as if the case had been originally
instituted in that Court.


Procedure
where debt
belongs to
third
person.

Order, as
regards
third

person.

Payment
by garni-
shee to be
valid dis-
charge.

Costs.

Appeal.

Applica-
tion to
negotiable
instra-
ments,

64

460. Where it is suggested or appears to be pro~
bable that the debt belongs to some third person, or
that any third person has a lier or charge on, or oth
interest in, such debt, the Court may order such third
person to appear and state the nature and particulars
of his claim (if any) to such debt and prove the same.

468. After hearing such third person and any per~
son or persons who may subsequently be ordered to
appear, or where such third or other person or persons
do not appear when so ordered, the Court may make
such order as is hereinbefore provided, or such other
order or orders upon such terms, if any, with respect to
the lien, charge or interest, if any, of such third or other
person or persons as may seem fit and proper.

46F. Payment made by the gurnishee on notice
under rule 464. or under any such order as aforesaid
chail be a valid discharge to him as against the judg-
ment-debtor and any other person ordered to appear
as aforesaid for the amount paid or lenied, although
the decree in execution of which the apolication under
rule 46A was made, or the order passed in the pro-
ceedings on such application, may be set aside or re-
versed,

46G. The costs of any application made under rule
464 and of any proceeding arising therefrom or inci-
dental thereto shall be in the discretion oj the Court.

46H. An order made under rule 46B, 46C or rule
46E shall be appealable as a decree.

461. The provisions of rules 46A to 46H shall, so
far as may be. apply in relation to negotiable instru-
ments attached under rule 51 as they apply in relation

0 debts.”

Order XXI, rule 48
In rule 48 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the

| principal Act,—

(को in sub-rule (1), after the words “local autho-
rity”, the words and figures “or of ४ servant of a cor-
poration engaged in any trade or industry which is
established ba a Central, Provincial or State Act or a
Government company as defined in section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956 shall be inserted;

49) for sub-rule (3), the followi:
be substituted. namely oHowing sub-rule shall

ae “3) Every order made under this rule, unless
it is returned in accordance with the provisions of

lof 1956.


sub-rule (2), shall, without further notice or other
process, bind the appropriate Government or the
railway company or local authority or corporation
or Government company, as the case may be. while .
the judgment-debtor is within the local limits to
which this Code for the time being extends and
while he is beyond those limits if he is in receipt
of any salary or allowances payable out of the
revenues of the Central Government or a State
Government or the funds of a railway company
carrying on business in any part of India or local
authority or corporation or Government company
in India; and the appropriate Government or the
railway company or local authority or corporation
or Government company, as the case may be, shall
be liable for any sum paid in contravention of this
Tule.”;

(c) for the Explanation, the following Explanation
shall be substituted, namely:—

‘Explanation.—In this rule, “appropriate Gov-

ernment” means—

(६) as respects any person in the service of

the Central Government, or any servant of a
railway administration or of a cantonment
authority or of the port authority of a major
port, or any servant of a corporation engaged
in any trade or industry which is established
by a Central Act, or any servant of a Govern-
ment company in which any part of the share Cf. sec-
capital is held by the Central Government or tion 617
by more than one State Governments or partly Companies
by the Central Government and partly by one Cts 1956.
or more State Governments, the Central Gov-
ernment;

G i) as respects any other servant of the
rovernment, or a servant of any other local
authority, or any servant of a corporation en-
gaged in any trade or industry which is estab-
lished by a Provincial or State Act, or a servant
of any other Government company, the State
Government.”.

Order XXI, rule 48A (New)

_After rule 48 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely: —

“48A. (1) Where the property to be attached is Attach-
the salary or allowances of a servant other than q ser- ment of
vant to whom rule 48 applies. the Court, where the salary or
disbursing officer of the employed is within the loca] allowances
limits of the Court’s jurisdiction, may order that the of private.
ainount shall, subject to the provisions of section 60, be “री


66
withheld from such salary or allowances either in one
payment or by monthly instalments as the Court may
direct; and upon notice of the order to such disbursing
officer, such disbursing officer shall remit to the Court
the amount due under the order, or the monthly
instalments, as the case may be.

(2) Where the attachable proportion of such salary
or allowances is already being withheld or remitted
to the Court in pursuance of a previous and unsatisfied
order of attachment, the disbursing officer shall fortk-
with return the subsequent order to the Court issuing
it with a full statement of all the particulars of the
existing attachment.

(3) Every order made under this rule, unless it is
returned in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule
(2) shall, without further notice or other process, bind
the employer while the judgment-debtor is within the
local limits to which this Code for the time being ex-
tends and while he is beyond those limits, if he is in
receipt of salary or allowances payable out of the funds
of an employer in any part of India; and the employer
shall be Hable for any sum paid in contravention of this
rule.”.

Order XXI, rule 50

In rule 50 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
‘principal Act,—

(a) in the proviso to sub-rule (1), for the words

and figures “section 247 of the Indian Contract Act,
1872”, the words and figures “section 30 of the Indien 9 of 1873,
Partnership Act, 1932” shall be substituted; 9 of 1932.

(6) the following sub-rule shall be inserted at the

end, namely:—
“(5) Nothing in this rule applies to a decree

passed against a Hindy undivided famil by virtue
of the provisions of rule 10 of Order XXX.”,

Order XXI, rule 53

In rule 53 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
sprincipal Act,—
(a) in sub-rule (1),—
(३) for clause (b), the followi ta
be substituted, se ing clause shall
“(b) if the decree sought to be attached
‘was passed by another Court, then by the issue
to such other Court of a notice by the Court
which passed the decree sought to be executed,


67

requesting such other Court to stay the execu-
tion of its decree unless and until—
{i) the Court which passed the decree
sought to be executed cancels the notice;
or

(ii) the holder of the decree sought to
be executed, or his judgment-debtor if he
has obtained the consent in writing of the
decree-holder or the permission of the
attaching Court, applies to the Court
receiving such notice to execute the
attached decree;”;

{b) in sub-rule (6), after the words “in contra-
vention of such order”, the words “with knowledge
thereof or” shall be inserted.

Order XXI, rule 54

In ruie 54 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act,—
(a) after sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall
be inserted namely: —

“(1A) The order shall also require the judg-
ment-debtor to attend Court on a date to be fixed
by the Court. to take notice of the date fixed for
settling the terms of the proclamation of sale.”;

(b) in sub-rule (2), after the words “in the office
of the Collector of the district in which the land is
situate”, the following words shail be inserted,
namely: —

“and, where the property is land situate in a village,
also in the office of the Gram Panchayat, if any,
having jurisdiction over that village.”

Order XXI, rules 58 to 63

In Order XXI of the First Schedule to the principal Act,
for rules 58 to 63 (both inclusive), the following rules
shall be substituted, namely: —

“58. (1) Where any claim is preferned to, or an; judica-
objection is made to the attachment of, any property acer)
attached in execution of a decree on the ground that claims to,
such property is not liable to such attachment, the oF objec-
Court shail proceed to adjudicate upon the claim or pttachment
objection in accordance with the provisions herein of, attached
contained: property.

Provided that no such claim or objection shall be
entertained—

(a) where, before the claim is preferred or

objection is made, the property attached has already
been sold; or


Sheer XXI,
tule $0(3).

Steer झड़,
rule 63.

Stay of
sale.

Cf.

Order XXI,
rule 58(1),
proviso.

(09) where the Court considers that the claim
or objection was designedly or unnecessarily
delayed.

sre
(2) All questions (including questions relating to
right, title or interest in the property attached) arising
between the parties to a proceeding under this rule
or their representatives and relevant to the adjudication
of the claim or objection shall be determined by the
‘ourt dealing with the claim or objection and not by
6 separate suit.

(3) Upon the determination. of the questions refer-
red to in sub-rule (2) the Court shall in accordance
with such determination—

(a) allow the claim or objection and release
the property from attachment either wholly or to
such extent as it thinks fit; or

(b) disallow the claim or objection; or

(c) continue the attachment subject to any
mortgage, charge or other interest in favour of
any person; or

(7) pass such order as in the circumstances
of the case it deems fit.

(4) Where any claim or objection has been adjudi-
cated upon under this rule, the order made thereon
shall have the same force and be subject to the same
conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it were a

lecree.

(5) Where a claim or an objection is preferred and
the Court, under the proviso to sub-rule (1), refuses
to entertain it, the party against whom such order is
made may institute a suit to establish the right which
he claims to the property in dispute; but, subject to
the result of such suit, if any, an order so refusing
to entertain the claim or objection shall be conclusive.

59, Where before the claim was preferred or the
objection was made, the property attached had already
been advertised for sale, the Court may—

(a) if the property is movable, make an order
postponing the sale pending the adjudication of
the claim or objection; or

(b) if the property is immovable, make an
order that pending the adjudication of the claim.


70

Order XXI, rule 90

For rule 90 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,

namely: —
Applica- “90. (1) Where any immovabie property has been
tion to set sold in execution of a decree, the decree-holder, or the
aside sale purchaser, or any person entitled to share in a rateable
of regu distribution of assets, or whose interests are affected
larity or by the sale, may apply to the Court to set aside the
fraud. sale on the ground of a material irregularity or fraud

in publishing or conducting it.

(2) ...... No sale shall be set aside on the ground of
irregularity or fraud unless upon the facts proved the
Court is satisfied that the applicant has sustained subs-
tantial injury by reason of such irregularity or fraud.

(3) No application to set aside a sale under this
rule shall be entertained upon any ground which could
have been taken by the applicant on or before the date
on which the proclamation of sale was drawn up.”.

Order XXI, rule $2

In rule 92 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act,—

(a) in sub-rule (1), after the words “the Court
shall”, the words and figures “subject to the provisions
of rule 59” shall be inserted;

(0) for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be
substituted, namely: —

“(2) Where such application i9 made and
allowed, and where, in the case of an application
under rule 89, the deposit required by that rule is
made within thirty days from the date of sale,
or in cases where the amount deposited under rule
89 is found to be deficient owing to any clerical or
arithmetical mistake on the part of the depositor,
such deficiency has been made good within such
time as may be fixed by the Court, the Court shall
make an order setting aside the sale:

Provided that no order shall be made unless
notice Of the application has been given to all
persons affected thereby.”.


TE
Order XXI, rule 97

of Order XXT of the First Schedule to the
« for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shail
ted, namely: —

“(2) Where any such application is made, the Order XXI,
Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the application rules,
m accordance with the provisions herein contained”, ™

Order ऊँ; प, rules 98 to 103
For rules 98 to 108 of Order XXI of the First Schedule Order to

to the principal Act, the following rules shall be substituted, तक कमान
namely: — cation com-
Plaining of

resistance,

“98.(1) Upon the determination of the questions Order XXI,
referred to in rule 101. the Court shall, in accordance rule 26. 4
with such determination. and subject ta the provisions 7
Of sub-rule (2),—

(a) allow the application and direct that the
applicant be put into possession of the property; or

(bh dismiss the application; or

(९) pass such order as in the circumstances of
the case it deems fit.

(2) Where upon such determination the Court is Cf.

satisfied that the resistance or obstruction was occasion- Order XXf,
ed without any just cause by the judgment-debtor or ™#e 93.
by some other person at his instigation or on his behalf,
# shall direct that the applicant be put into posses-
sion of the property, and where the applicant is still
resisted or obstructed in obtaining Possession, the Court
may also, at the instance of the applicant order the
Judgment-debtor, or any person acting at his instigation
@r on his behalf, to be detained in the civil prison for
a term which may extend to thirty days,

99. (7) Where any person other than the judgment- Dispesses-
debtor is dispossessed of immovable property by the sion by
holder of a decree for the possession of such property fecree.
or, where such property has been sold in execution of purchaser,
a decree, by the purchaser thereof, he may make an Order XX,
application to the Court complaining of such dis- rule 100,
Possession. modified.

(2) Where any such application is made, the Court
shall proceed to adjudicate upon the application in
accordance with the provisions herein contained,


72

100. Upon tre determination of the
1 ferred to in rule 101, the Court shall, in

pacation with such determination,—
lain-
Sng of dis {a) aliow the application and direct
possession. anplicant be put back into possession of
{New} perty; or
(b) dismiss the application; or
{c) pass such order as in the circumstances of
the ease it deems fit.
‘Questions 101. All questions (including questions relating to
to be . right, title or interest in the property) arising between
Getermin- the parties to a proceeding on an application under
[New] rule 97 or rule 99 or their representatives and relevant
te the adjudication of the application, shall be deter-
mined by the Court dealing with the application and
not by a separate suit.
‘Rules not 102. Nothing in rules 98 and 100 shall apply to
gpplicable resistance or obstruction in execution of a decree for
Yeree lite the possession of immovable property by a person to
pendente. whom the judgment-debtor has transferred the property

after the institution of the suit in which the decree was

Shaer XXI, passed or to the dispossession of any such person.
rule 102.

Orders to 103. Where any application has been adjudicated
be treated. upon under rule 98 or rule 100, the order made thereon
Sa. shall have the same force and be subject to the same
rule 103,” conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it were a
modified. deeree.”.

Cf.

Order XXI,

rule 50(3).

Order XXI, rules 104 and 105 (New)

In order जुड़ा of the First Schedule to the principal Act,
after rule 103, the following rules shall be inserted,
namely: —

Hearing of “04. (1) The Court before which an application
applica under any of the foregoing rules of this Order is pend-
jon. ing may fix a day for the hearing of the application.

(2) Where on the day fixed or on any other day to
which the hearing may be adjourned the applicant does
not appear when the case is called on for hearing, the
Court may make an order that the «pplication be
dismissed.

(3) Where the applicant appears and the opposite
party to whom the notice has been issued by. the Court
does not appear, the Court may hear the application ex
parte and pass such order as it thinks fit.


73

Explanation—An application referred to in sub-
rule (1) includes a claim or objection made under rule

58.

+ .. Setting

105. (1) The applicant against whom an order is aside

made under sub-rule (2) of rule 104 or the opposite orders
party against whom an order is passed ex parte under passed
sub-rule (3) of that rule or under sub-rule (1) of rule to. *
23, may apply to the Court to set aside the order, and i
he satisfies the Court that there was sufficient cause
for his non-appearance when the application was called
on for hearing, the Court shall set aside the order on
such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and
shall appoint a day for the further hearing of the appli-
cation.

(2) No order shall be made on an application
under sub-rule (1) unless notice of the application has
been served on the other party.

(3) An application under sub-rule (1) shall be
made within thirty days of the date of the order, or
where in the case of an ex parte order the notice was
not dily served. the date when the applicant had know-
ledge of the order.

(4) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation
36 of 1963. rie 1963, shall apply to applications under sub-rule

Order XXH, rule 5

In rule 5 of Order XXII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted at the
end, namely: —

“Provided that, where such question arises before
an Appellate Court, that Court may, before determi-
ning it, direct any subordinate court to try the ques-
tion and to return the evidence, if any, taken on the
question together with its finding and reasons therefor
and may take the same into consideration in determi-
ing the question.”.

Order XXUI, rule 1

In rule 1 of Order XXIII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rules
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(3A) Where the plaintiff is a minor or other
person to whom the provisions contained in rules
1 to 14 of Order XXXII extend, the suit shall not be
withdrawn under this rule, nor shall any part of the
claim be abandoned, without the leave of the Court.

(3B) An application for teave under sub-rule
(3A) shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the next


Questions
objected
to before
the Com-
missioner.

Siter 18,
rule 11,

Applica-
tion of
order to
execution
proceed-
ings.

74

friend and also, if the minor or such other person is
represented by a pleader, by a certificate of the pleader,
to the effect that the withdrawal proposed is, in his
opinion, for the benefit of the minor or such other
person.”,

Order XXII, rule 3

In rule 3 of Order XXII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act,—
(a) after the words “lawful agreement or com-
promise”, the words “in writing and signed by the
parties” shall be inserted;

(b) the following Explenation shal! be inserted at
the end, namely:—

“Explanation.—An agreement or compromise
which is void or voidable under the Indian Con-
tract Act, 1872, shall not be deemed to be lawful
within the meaning of this rule.”.

Order XXVI, rule 7

In rule 7 of Order XXVI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, for the words “subject to the provisions of
the next following rule”, the words and figure “subject to
the provisions of rule 8” shall be substituted.

Order XXVI, rule 164 (New)

After rule 16 of Order XXVI of the First Schedule to
the Principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely: —

“16A. (1) Where any question put to 4 witness is
objected to by a party or his pleader in proceedings
before a Commissioner appointed under this Order, the
Commissioner shall take down the question, the answer,
the objection and the name of the person making it.

(2) No answer taken down under sub-rule (1)
shall be read as evidence in the suit except by the order
of the Court.”,

Order XXVI, rule 18A
After rule 18 of Order XXVI of the First Schedule to
the principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely: —
“18A. The provisions of this Order shall apply, so
far as may be, to proceedings in execution of a decree
or order.”.

9 of 1872,


75
Order XXVI, rule 22

In rule 22 of Order XXVI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, after the figures “16”, the words and figures
“sub-rule (1) of rule 1637 shail be inserted.

Order XXX, rule 3

For rule 8 of Order XXX of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely: —

“8. (1) Any person served with summons as a Appear-
partner under rule 3 may enter an appearance under ened under
protest, denying that he was a partner at any material Protest.
time.

(2) On such appearance being filed, either the
plaintiff or the person entering the appearance may, at
any time before the date fixed for hearing and final
disposal of the suit, apply to the Court for determining
the question whether the person so served was a part-
ner of the firm and liable as such.

(3) If cn such application the Court holds that he
was a partner at the material time, that shall not pre-
clude that person from filing a defence denying the
liability of the firm in respect of the claim of the defen-
dant.

(4) If, however, the Court holds that such person
was not 4 partner of the firm and was not liable as
such, that shall not preclude the plaintiff from other-
wise serving a summons on the firm and proceeding
with the suit: but in that event the plaintiff shall be
precluded from alleging the liability of that person as
4 partner of the firm in execution of any Cecree that
may be passed against the firm.”.

Order XXX, rule 10

For rule 10 of Order XXX of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely: --

“10. Any person carrying on business in a name Suit
or style other than his own name or a Hindu undivided against
family carrying on business under any name, may be Hindu ded
sued in such name or style as if it were a firm name YPdivide:

: : family or
and, in so far as such nature of the case will permit, all person
rules under this Order shall apply.”. carrying

on business
in name

other than
his own.


6
Order XXXH, rule 1

To rule 1 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following Explanation shall be added,
namely :—

‘Explanation——-In_ this Order, the expression
“minor? means a person who has not attained his
majority within the meaning of sections 3 and 4 of the
Indian Majority Act, 1875, whether the suit relates to 9 of 1875.
any of the matters mentioned in clauses (०) and (0)
of section 2 of that Act, or to any other matter,

Order XXXU, rule 2A (New)

After rule 2 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to
the principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,

namely : —
Security “2A. (1) Where 6 suit has been instituted on behalf
ove a of the minor by his next friend, the Court may, at any

by the stage of the suit, either of its own motion or on the

next friend application of any defendant, and for reasons to be re-

when so corded, order the next friend to give security for the

ordered. payment of all costs incurred or likely to be incurred
by the defendant,

(2) Where such 6. suit is instituted in forma
pauperis, the security shall include the court-fees pay-
able to the Government.

(3) The provisions of rule 2 of Order XXV shall,
so far as may be, apply to a suit qwhere the Court makes
an order under this rule directing security to be fur-
nished.”.

Order XXXH, rule 3

In rule 3 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, for sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules shall
be substituted, namely: —

“(4) No order shall be made on any application
under this rule except upon notice to .........- any
guardian of the minor appointed or declared by an
authority competent in that behalf, or, where there is
no such guardian, ................... the father or other
natural guardian of the minor, or, where there is no
father or other natural guardian .......... the person
in whose care the minor is, and after hearing any
objection which may be urged on behalf of any person
served with notice under this sub-rule.

(4A) The Court may, in any case, if it thinks fit,
issue notice under sub-rule (4) to the minor also.”.


77

Order XXXII, rule 4(3)
In rule 4 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in sub-rule (3), after the word “consent”, the
words “expressed in writing” shall be inserted.

Order XXXH, rule 4(4)

Ia rule 4 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in sub-rule (4), after the words “any fund
in Court in which the minor is interested”, the words “or
from the minor's property” shall be inserted.

Order XXXUH, rule 6

In rule 6 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, to sub-rule (2), the following proviso shall
be added. namely

“Provided

may, in its Giscretion, for
Nse with such security
u g next friend or guardian for
the swt to receive money or other movable property
under a decree or order, where such next friend or
guardian—

(a) is the manager of a Hindu undivided
family. and the decree or order relates to the
property or business of the family: or

(9) is the parent of the minor.”.

Order XXXII, rule 7

In rule 7 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following sub-rule shall be inserted at
the end, namely: —

“(3) An application for leave under sub-rule (1)
shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the next friend
or the guardian for the suit, as the case may be, and
also, if the minor is represented by a pleader, by the
certificate of the pleader, to the effect that the agree-
ment or compromise proposed is, in his opinion, for the
benefit of the minor.”.

Order XXXII, rule 16

For rule 16 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to
the principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely :—

“16 (1) Nothing in this Order shall apply— Savings
regarding
(a) to the Ruler of a foreign State suing or Rulers.
being sued in the name of his State, or being sued section 87.
by the direction of the Central Government in the .
name of an agent or in any other name; or


ch.
section
87B.

Suits in
forma _
pauperis,

Ch.
Bombay
and Kerala
Amend-
ments.

78

(0) to the Ruler of any former Indian State
suing or being sued in his name.

(2) Nothing in this Order shall be construed as
affecting or in any way derogating from the provisions
ot any local law for the time being in force relating to
suits by or against minors or by or against lunatics or
other persons of unsound mind.”.

Order XXXII, rule 1

For rule 1 of Order XXXIII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely: —

“1, Subject to the following provisions, any suit
may be instituted by a pauper.

Explanation 1—A person is a “pauper”—

(a@} when he is not possessed of sufficient
Means other than his necessary wearing-apparel
and the subject-matter of the suit to enab f him to
pay the fee prescribed by law for the plaint in
such suit, or

(b) where no such fee is prescribed, when he
is not entitled to property worth one thousand
rupees other than his necessary wearing-apparel
and the subject-matter of the suit.

Explanation 2.—Any property which is acquired
by a person after the presentation of his application
for permission to sue as a pauper and before the deci-
sion of the application, shall be taken into account in
considering the question whether he is a pauper.”.

Order XXXIII, rule 11

In rule 11 of Order XXXIII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in clause (a), after the words “such service”,
the words “or to present copies of the plaint or concise
statement” shall be inserted.

Order XXXUI, rule 15

Rule 15 of Order XXXIII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-rule (1) thereof,
and—

(a) in sub-rule (J) as so re-numbered, the word
“first” shall be omitted;

(b) after sub-rule (1) as so re-numbered, the follow-
ing sub-rule shall be inserted, namely: —

“(2) Where the applicant has not, before the
institution of the suit, paid the costs referred to in
sub-rule (1), the Court may, if it thinks fit, allow
him such time as it thinks fit to pay such costs.”.


79
Order XXXII, rule 158 (New)

ce 13 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule to
Act, the following rule shall be inserted,

After ru

“15A. Nothing in rules 5.7 or 15 shall prevent a Grant of
Court while rejecting an application under rule 067 payment of
refusing an application under rule 7 from granting time court-fees,
to the cpplicant to pay the requisite court-fee within

such time as May he fixed by the Court or extended by

it from time to time: and upon such payment and on

payment of the costs referred to in sub-rule (1) within

that time, the suit shall be deemed to have been ins-

tituted on the date on which the application was
presented.”,

Order XXXIL, rule 17 (New)

After rule 16 of Order XXXIII of the First Schedule to
the principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely: —

“17. Any defendant who desires to plead a set-off Defence by
or counter-claim may be allowed to defend as a pauper, Pauper.
and the rules in this Order shall. so far as may be.
apply to him as if he were a plaintiff and his written
statement were a plaint.”,

Order XXXIV, rule 3

In rule 3 of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule 40 the
principal Act, in sub-rule (2), after the words “on applica-
tion made by the plaintiff in this behalf’, the words “and
after notice to all parties” shall be inserted,

Order XXXIV, rule 5

In rule 5 of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in sub-rule (3), after the words “on applica-
tion made by the plaintiff in this behalf”, the words “and
after notice to all parties” shall be inserted.

Order XXXIV, rule 8

In rule 8 of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in sub-rule (3), after the words “on applica-
tion made by the defendant in this behalf”, the words “and
after notice to all parties” shall be inserted.

Order XXXIV, rule 15

Rule 15 of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the
principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-rule () thereof,
and after sub-rule (1) as so Te-numbered, the following
sub-rule shall be inserted, namely :—

“() Where a decree orders payment of money and
charges it on immovable property on default of pay-


Adjudica-
tion of
claim to
roperty
Btigched
before
judgment.

Provisions
applicable
to attach-
ment.

Conse-
quences
of dis-
obedience
or breach
of injune-
tion.

Cf.

Order
XXRIX
tule 2(3)
and 2(4),

80

ment, the amount may be realised by sale of that
property in execution of that decree.”.

Order XXXVIII, rule 8

In Order XXXVIII of the First Schedule to the principal
Act, for rule 8, the following rule shall be substituted,
namely : —

“8. Where any claim is preferred to property at-
tached before judgment, such claim shall be adjudi-
cated upon in the manner hereinbefore provided for
the adjudication of claims to property attached in
execution of a decree for the payment of money.”.

Order XXXVUHI, rule 12 (New)

In Order XXXVIII of the First Schedule to the princi-
pal Act, after rule 11, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely :—

“11A. The provisions of this C applicable to an
attachment made in execution of a decree shall, as far
as may be, apply to aa attachment made bejore judg-
ment which continues after judgment by virtue of the
provisions of rule 11.”.

Order XXXIX, rule 2

1m rule 2 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, sub-rules (3) and (4) shall be omitted.

Order XXXIX, rule 2A (New)

After rule 2 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to
the principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely: —

“24. (1) In case of disobedience to any injunction
granted or other order made under rule 1 or rule 2 or
breach of any of the terms on which the injunction was
granted or the order made, the Court granting the
injunction or making the order, or any Court to which
the suit or proceeding is transferred, may order the
property of the person guilty of such disobedience or
breach to be attached, and may also order such person
to be detained in the civil prison for a term not_ ex-
ceeding six months, unless in the meantime the Court
directs his release.

(2) No attachment under this rule shall remain in
force for more than one year, at the end of which
time, if the disobedience or breach continues, the
property attached may be sold, and out of the proceeds
the Court may award such compensation as it thinks
fit to the injured party, and shall pay the balance, if
any, to the party entitled thereto.”.


हा
Order XXXIX, rule 8

In rule 8 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the
principal Act,—

(a) in sub-rule (1), the words “after notice to the
defendant” shall be omitted;

(b) in sub-rule (2), the words “after notice to the
plaintiff’ shall be omitted;

(८) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall
be inserted, namely: —

“(3) The Court shall in all cases, except where
it appears that the object of making the order oy
would be defeated by the delay before making the Order
rder, direct notice of the application for the same XXXIX
ven to the opposite purty.’. rule 4.

Order XLI, rule 1

raie 1 of Order XLF of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, to sub-rule (2), the following proviso shall
be added, aamely;—

“Provided that where two or more cases have been
tried together and decided by the same judgment and
two or more appeals are filed together against the
decree, whether by the same appellant or by different
uppellants, the Appellate Court may dispense with the
filing of more than one copy Of the judgment,”.

Order XLI, rule 3A

After rule 3 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely: —

“BA, (1) When an appeal is presented after the Applica-
period of limitation prescribed therefor, it shall be tion. for
accompanied by an application supported by affidavit condona-
setting forth the facts on which the appellant relies to delay.
satisfy the Court that he had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within such period,

_ (2) If the Court sees no reason to reject the applica-

tion without the issue of a notice to the respondent,
notice thereof shall be issued to the respondent and
the matter shall be finally decided before the Court
Proceeds to deal with the appeal under rule 11 or rule
13, as the case may be.”.

Order XLI, rule 5

In rule 5 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act,—

(a) in sub-rule (1), after the words “order stay of
execution of such decree”, the words “or, if such


Remand in
ether
cases.

Order of
Temand to
mention
date of
next
hearing.

82

decree is a preliminary decree, direct that proceedings
for passing a final decree shall be stayed, or that sucit
proceedings mey continue but the making of the final
decree shall be stayed” shall be inserted;

(9) in sub-rule (3), in the opening line and in clause
(a), the words “of execution” shail be omitted;

(c) in sub-rule (4), the words “of execution” shali
be omitted.

Order XLI, rule 11

To rule 11 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following sub-rule shali be added,
namely :—

“(4) Where an Appellate Court subordinate to the

High Court dismisses an appeal under sub-rule (1), it

shall deliver a judgment recording in brief its grounds

for doing so, and a formal decree shall be drawn up in
accordance with the judgment.”.

Order XLI, rule 23A (New)

After rule 23 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely :—

“238A. Where the Court from whose decree an
appeal is preferred has disposed of the case otherwise
than on a preliminary point, and the decree is reversed
in appeal and a re-trial is considered necessary, the
Appellate Court shall have the same powers as it has
under rule 23.7,

Order XLI, rule 25

In rule 25 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, after the words “and the reasons therefor”,
the words “within such time as may be fizd by the Appel-
late Court or extended by it from time to time” shall be
inserted.

Order XLI, rule 26

After rule 26 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted, ,
namely: —

“964, Wherever the Appellate Court remands a
case under rule 23 or rule 23A, or frames issues and
refers them for trial under rule 25, it shall fix a date
for the appearance of the parties before the Court from
whose decree the appeal was preferred for the purpose
of receiving the directions of that Court as to further
proceedings in the suit.”


83

Order XLI, rule 27

in rule 27 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in sub-rule (1), after clause (a), the foliow-
ing clause shall be inserted, namely: —

“(aa) the party seeking additional evidence satisfies
the Appellate Court that such evidence, notwithstand-
ing the exercise of due diligence, was not within his
knowledge or could not be produced by hin. at the
time when the decree appealed against was passed,
or”,

Order XLI, rule 30

Rule 30 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the
principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-rule (1) thereof,
and after sub-rule (1) as so re-numbered, the following
sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2) Where a written judgment is to be pro-
nounced, it shall be sufficient if the points for deter-
mination, the decision thereon and the final order
passed in the appeal are read out. and it shall not be
necessary for the Court to read out the whole juda-
ment; but a copy of the whole judgment shall be made
available for the perusal of the parties or their pleaders
immediately after the judgment is pronounced.,”.

Order XLIU, rule 1

In rule 1 of Order XLIII of the First Schedule to the
principal Act,—

(a) after clause (j), the following clause shali be
inserted, namely :—

“(j) an order rejecting an application made
under sub-rule (1) of rule 105 of Order XXI, provided
an order on the original application, that is to
say, the application referred to in sub-rule (1) of
rule 104 of that Order is appealable;”;

(b) in clause (7), after the word and figure “rule

2”, the word, figure and letter “rule 2A” shall be

inserted;

(c) in clause (u), after the figures “23”, the words.
figures and letter “or rule 23A” shall be inserted.

Order XLIV, rule 1A (New)

After rule 1 of Order XLIV of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, the following rule shall be inserted,
namely : —

“1A. Where an application is rejected under rule Grant of
1. the Court may, while rejecting | the application. time for
allow the applicant to pay the requisite court-fee with- payment of
im such time as may be fixed by the Court or extended °urt-fees,


84

by it from time to time; and upon such payment the
memorandum of appeal in respect of which such fee is
payable shall have the same force and effect as if such
jee had been paid in the first instance.”.
Order XLIV, rule 2
In rule 2 of Order XLIV of the First Schedule to the
principal Act, in the proviso, after the words “sue oF
appeal”, the words “or defend the suit or appeal” shall
be inserted.
Order XLVI, rule 7
In rule 7 of Order XLVII of the First Schedule to the
princival Act, for sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shali
be substituted, namely: —

“(2) An order of the Court rejecting the applica-

shall not pe appeaiable; but an order granting an
application may be objected to. >> >>; Once by
an appeal from that order or in any appeal from the
final decree or order passed or made in the suit.”.

First Schedule, Appendix E, Form No. 156A (New)

In Appendix E to the First Schedule to the principal
Act. after Form No. 16, the following Form shall be
inserted, namely: —

“No. 16A
AFFIDAVIT OF ASSETS TO BE MADE BY 4 JUDGMENT-DEBTOR
[O, XXI, r. 41(2)]
In the Court of
AB., decree-holder

vs.
C.D., judgment-debtor
I of
oath
-state on as follows: —
solemn affirmation
1, My full name is
(Block capitals)
2. I live at
3. I am married 7
single
widower (widow) (delete as necessary).
divoreed

4, The following persons are dependent upon me.
5. My employment, trade or profession is that of
carried on by me at


execution—prohibitory order where the property consi

85
I am a director of the following companies :--

6. My present annual/monthly/weekly income,
after paying income-iax, 15 as follows: —

(a) From my employment,
trade or profession Rs.

(b) From other sources Rs.

7. (a) L own the house in which I)
live; its value is Rs, I pay |
as outgoings by way of |
rates, mortgage interest, etc., f (delete as
the annual sum of Rs. necessary)

(9) 1 pay as rent the annual |
sum of Rs. J

8. I possess the following :--

(9) Banking accou है।
(by Stocks and shares. |
(९) Life and endowment pclicies eae
(९) House property. particulars
(९) Other property. |
(£) Other securities. J

9. The following debts are owing to me :—
(give particulars)

(a) From of
Rs.
(9) From of
Rs, (ete.).
Sworn, ete.”.

First Schedule, Appendix E, Form No. 24

In Form No. 24 (being the Form of attachment

of immovable property) in Appendix E to the First Sche-
dule to the principal Act, after the first paragraph, the
following paragraph shall be inserted. namely: —

“Tt is also ordered that you should attend Court on
the day of 19 , to tuke

notice of the date fixed for settling the terms of the
proclamation of sale.”,


86
First Schedule. Appendix E, Form No. 29

In Form No. 29 (being the Form of proclamation cf
sale) in Appendix E to the First Schedule to the principal
Act, to the Schedule of Property appearing at the end of
the Form, the following columns shall be added,
namely : ++

The value of the property as stated | The value of the property as stated
by the decree-holder. by the judgment-debtor,

Fivst Schedule, Appendix H, Form No. 2A (New)

In Appendix H to tne First Schedule te the principal
Act. after Form No. 2, the following Form shall be
inserted, namely: —

“No. 2A

List OF WITNESSES PROPOSED TO BE CALLED BY PLamntify/
Derennant (0, 16, r. 1).

Name of the party which Name and address Remarks
proposes to call the of the witness,
witness.

First Schedule, Appendix H, Forms Nos. 11 and TIA.

For Form No. 11 (being the Form of notice to minor de-
fendant and guardian) in Appendix H to the First Schedule
to the principal Act, the following Forms shall be substi-
tuted, namely: —

“Wo. 11
NOTICE TO CERTIFICATED, NATURAL OR de facto GUARDIAN,
(0. 32, r. 3).
(Title)
To (Certificated/Natural/ de facto guardian),

WHerreas an application has been presented on the
part of the plaintiff'/on behalf of the minor defendant? in
the above suit for the appointment of a guardian for the
suit for the minor defendant » you (insert the
name of the guardian appointed or declared by Court, or
natural guardian, or the person in whose care the minor
ts) are hereby required to take notice that unless you

La Strike off what is inapplicable.


87

appear before this Court on or before the day appointed
for the hearing of the case and stated in the appended
summons, and express your consent to act as guardian for
the suit for the minor, the Court will proceed to appoint
some other person to act as a guardian for the minor, for
the purposes of the said suit.

GIvEN undsr my hand and the seal of the Court, this

day of 19 .
Judge.
No. 113.
Notice 70 Minor Derenpant. (C. XXXII, r. 3}
(Title)
To Minor defendani.

WHEREAS an application has been presented on the
part of the plaintiff in the above suit for the appointment
of ‘as guardian for the suit for you,
the minor defendant, you are hereby required to
take notice to appear in this Court im person on the
day of 19 , at O'clock in the
forenoon to show cause agains< the application, failing
wherein the said application will be heard and determined
ex parte.

Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this
day of ig.

Judge.”.

APPENDIX II
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Section 1 (Extent)

(i) It is understood that before enacting Act 2 of 1951,
which amended the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, it was
specifically suggested to the State Governments that the
Code may be made applicable to the whole of India except
Jammu Kashmir and Manipur, the former because of
legislative incapacity and the latter because of the Part C
States (Laws) Act, 1950, (now the Union Territories Laws
Act, 1950). As a result of the replies received, it was found
that the only areas to which the Code need not extend
were the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Union terri-
tory of Manipur, the tribal Areas in the State of Assam
and the Scheduled Areas in the State of Madras. In
answer to a further query as to whether there were any
“former Scheduled Districts” or “present Scheduled Areas”

1 Here insert name and description of proposed gua rdian.


88

in the State of which the Code should not extend, th.
reply of the Government of Madras was: —

“Tne Laccadive Islands (including Minicoy), the
Amindivi Islan: nd the East Godavari, West Godavari
and Visakhapatnam agencies are the Scheduled areas
ithin ine Madras State and the Code of Civil Proce-
dure is not in force in the Laccadive Islands (including
Minicoy) while sections 36 to 43 (including Order
XXXIV of the First Schedule and sections 56 te 43 and
48 (including Order XXXIV) are in force in the East
Godavari, West Godavari and Visakhapatnam agencies,
The intention is that the present position may con-
tinue.”,

(ii) Whatever the earlier history with regard to Sche-
duled Districts may be, it is clear that after Act 2 of 1951
the question whether the Code did or did not extend to
Scheduled Districts is hardly relevant. Apart from the
Tribal Areas in Assam and the State of Jammu &
Kashmir and the Union territory of Manipur, the only
areas to which the Code was not intended to extend were
the Scheduled Areas in Madras. which by the Scheduled
Areas (Part A States) Order, 1956, (Gazette of India, Extra-
ordinary, 1950, page 670) comorised the Laccadive Islands
(including Minicoy) and Amindivi Islands, East Godavari,
West Godavari and Visakhapatnam agencies.

(ili) Section 1(3) of the Code as amended by Act 2 uf
1951 therefore continued the existing position with regard
10 these Islands. It may be recalled in this connection,
that section 3 of the Laccadive and Minicoy Islands
Regulation, 1912, provided that notwithstanding anything
in any enactment now in force (that is on 22nd January,
1912) that Regulation and the enactments mentioned in
section 3 (which did not include the Code of Civil Proce-
dure) were be the only enactments in force in the islands.
Amindivi Islands were not included within the scope of
the Regulation.

(iv) After the formation of Andhra State, the proviso
to section 1(3) underwent a modification, so that the
Amindivi Islands were shown as being in the State of
Madras and the Agencies were shown as being in the
State of Andhra Pradesh.

(५) After the passing of the States Reorganisation Act,
1956, the proviso underwent a further modification, as
Amindivi Islands had ceased to be a part of the Madras
State. But necessary amendments were not carried out
in section 1(3) (b). As there are no Scheduled Areas in
the State of Madras at present, sub-clause (b) appears to
be meaningless and the proviso therefore does not fit
in. Hence this opportunity has been taken of recasting
sub-section (3).


89

(vi) Incidentally, it may be added that t the Administra-
tor of the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands _ has,
in his suggestion relating to the Civil Procedure Code
sent to the Cammission, suggested that sections 36 to 43
should, for uniformity, extend also to Laccadive and Mini-
coy Islands. (At present, they extend only to Amirdivi
Islands). This has been accepted. and Order XXXIV also
proposed to be extended to those Islands.

(vi) It_may also be added, that
1957. the Code extends to Manipur also.
(viii) Reference to section 48 has been omitted from the

proviso, as section 48 is now omitted from the Code; see
section 28, Limitation Act, 1963.

m the ist January,

Section 2(2) “decree”

Regarding the definition of “decree” a recommendation
has been made in an earlier Report of the Law Commission!
for regarding awards in Land Acquisition proceedings as
decrees. It suggested an amendment of the Land Acquisi-
tion Act for this purpose. This is a ४91९७ io be considered
when Anal action for revising the Land Acquisition Act is
taken.

2. The question whether an order rejecting a memoran-
dun of appeal on the grounds of deficit in court-fees should
be treated as a decree, has been considered. 1t would not.
however, be conyeniont to insert a provision on the subject
in the definition of “ ", as there is no specific provision
in the body of the Code ur ‘n the rules relating to rejection
of a memorandum of appeal (except O XLI, rule 3 deal-
ing with rejection on the ground of ze jormal defects),

Section 2(17)(b)
The words “All-India Service” have been substituted, in
conformity with the Constitution and present usage.

Section 7

Tt has been 5: 31९6 that the absence of a power to attach
immovable property under section 94(b), read with Order
XXXVIII, leads to injustice, because the creditor who sues
in a Court of Small Causes does not have the benefit of
attachment before judgment, with the result that when the
decree is passed, the defendant would, jn the meantime, have
alienated all his immovable property. The question of
making an amendment in the law so as to give the power
to attach immovable property (before judgment) to Courts
of Small Causes has therefore been considered.

One preiiminary point may be considered, After the
decree a Small Causes Court has no jurisdiction to execute
the decree against immovable property, and it has to be
transferred for that purpose to the regular side of the Court,

* 3rd Report (Limitation Act) Page 59 para, 151.


90

But there may be no illogicality (as was suggested in some
quarters) in making the suggested amendment, because,
even after the suggested amendment, if a Small Causes
Court attaches immovable property before judgment. the
attachment will continue for the benefit of the decree-
holder. and he can have the decree transferred to the
regular side for execution against the immovable property.

The real point is, that the absence of such a power has
not led to any difficulty. Hence no amendment is proposed.

Section 8

Rerence to sections 155-156 has been deleted, as these
have been already repealed.

Section 9

1. The question whether, regarding suits for offices, any
clarification is necessary has been considered. The present
position is stated below: —

{i} Suits relating to religious offices to which fees
«re attached.—Such Suits raise no difficulty.'?-8,

Gi) Suits relating to religious offices to which fees
are not attached.—These can be classified into: —

{a) offices which are attached to a sacred spot;
(b) offices which are not so attached.

2. The Bombay High Court seems to have recognised a
distinction between (a) and (9) above, and the majority
of the decisions of the High Court allow a suit for an office
under (a) above but not for an office under (9) abovet-3,

3. The other High Courts do not seem to recognise this
distinction.°7*°

*Muhammad v. Syad Ahmed (1861) 1 BHC. A’ pendix p. xviii, cited
in Mulla, C.P.C. (1953), page 26. PI P

°Ghela Bhai v. Hargoyan, 1.L.R. 36 Bom. 94.

*Girja Shankar v. Murlidhar, 1.L.R. 45 Bom. 234 ; A.LR. 1921 Bom.
209.
‘Kasam Khan v.Kaji Isub, L.R. 50 Bom. 148 ; ALR. 1926 Bom.
161, which recognises this distinction.

‘For earlier cases, see—Lima ४. Rama, LL.R. 13 Bom. 548; Gursangaya
v. Tamana, L.L.R. 16 Bom. 281 ; Shankar v. Hewia, UR. 2 Bom. 470 3
Murari ४, Suba, LLL.R. 6 Bom. 725 ; The decision in Syad Hashim v.
Hussein Sha, L.L.R. 13 Bom. 429, 433, however, allowed a suit even for a
personal office to which no fees were attached.

*Mainat Ram v. Babu Ram, 1.L.R. 15 Cal. 159.

*Tholapalia v. Venkata, 1.L.R. 19 Mad. 62.

*Ramalingachi v. Ellayaperuma, A.1.R. 1937 Mad. 403.

*Chunnu Dat v. Babu Nandan, LL.R. 30 All. 527.


91

een cases (a) and (b)

हि istinction made betw ae
4. Since the distincticn made he High Courts, it is

is not recognised by the majority of tl
unnecessary to amend the section.

It may be added, that the decision of the Privy Council!
to the effect that a suit for pecuniary benefits is a civil
suit, even if it becomes necessary to determine a right to
perform religious services, does not imply that other suits
relating to religious offices cannot be entertained. (In that
case. the right claimed was that of-—Adhyapaka Mirass—
reciting certain reli न a a temple—and the
claim was for recovery of certain benefits in kind earned by
the defendants by illegally exercising that right).

As to suits for religious rites, ete., (apart from office),
see the recent decision of the Supreme Court’.

Section 11

1. A suggestion has been made, that an express i
sion should be inserted extending the principle of res judi-

inde]
cata not only to execution proceedings but to all indepen- nt 8 Le

dent proceedings. It is considered unnecessary to make ¢
any specific provision of this nature, and that the matter
should be left to be dealt with by the Courts.

‘ovi- Applica-
provi- 11 8

lings.

2. The question whether an express provision should Cross-

be made to lay down the rule applicable in cases where
cross-suits have bee filed between the same parties and
have been disposed of by two judgments, has been examin-
ed. The point is, whether, if an appeal is filed from one
judgment and is not filed from the other judgment, the
matters decided in the other judgment becomes res judicata.
It has been considered unnecessary to make a specific pro-
vision on this point, as the matter should be dealt with by
the courts according to the facts of each case".

Section 15

It has been suggested that jurisdiction to entertain suits
where the subject-matter is incapable of pecuniary valua-
tion should not be left to the caprice of the plaintiff as at
present. and that the rule-making power under section 9
of the Suits Valuation Act. 1887 (7 of 1887) should be uti-
lized by the High Courts to lay down precise rules on the
subject. (So far. only a few of the High Courts have made
rules on the subject). The making of such rules would put
the matter on a satisfactory basis. The suggestion is worth

1Krishnama v. Krishnasaini (1879) LL.R. 2 Mad. 62 (P.C.).
2Siaha Rananija v. Ranca Ramansja A.LR. 1961 S.C. 1720.

°Cf. amendment proposed to s. 47.

wt Narkari v. Shankar, (1950) 1 S.C.R. 754 3 AIR. 1953 S.C.



92

accepting. Necessary action should be initiated by the
States, as the matter falls within entry No. 3 in the State
List.

As an example of such rules, reference may be made to
the rules made by the High Court of Lahore.’ These rules
cover, (besides other cases), suits asking for a decree estab-
lishing an adoption or declaring it to be void, suits for
restitution of conjugal rights, suits for a decree establish-
ing. annulling or dissolving a marriage or for a declaration
that a marriage is void, etc.. and suits by a reversioner 10
set aside an alienation of immovable property made by 3
limited owner, ete.

Section 20

Certzin changes have been suggested in the Explana-
tions ]and H. These have not been accepted. The matter
is discussed below.

Explana- Eyplanation J.—This deals with the case of a person hav-
tion of the ing a permanent dwelling place and a temporary residence.
present It provides that, {if the cause of action arises at the tem-
* porary residence), the person should be deemed to reside
at Poth the places. This fiction of law created by the word
Sdeamed” has the effect of treating his permanent dwelling
place as his residence. It has also the effect of elevating
his temporary residence, but that is not material, because
the cause of action test would suffice to give jurisdiction
in relation to the temporary residence. The emphasis in
the Explanation is on the permanent dwelling place. Even
though that dweiling is not his residence, it is deemed to
be his residence within the meaning of section 20, clause
(2). It was so heid by 8. R. Ghosh J. in one case.” There,
the defendant had a permanent dwelling place in Gopalganj
and carried on business and lived at Calcutta. He executed
a promissory note at Caicutta in favour of the plaintiff. The
plaintiff filed a suit on the pronote at Gopalganj (perma-
nent dwelling place) and the suit was held to be properly
instituted. The argument of the defendant's counsel was:
“Phe mere fact that the defendant had his ancestral home
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of a court, though
he actually resided outside such local limits, would not give
the court jurisdiction”. This argument was rejected by
the court. relying on Evplanation I to section 20.

This view was followed in a Lahore case*. There the
defendant had his original family residence in Tehsil Naro-
wal, but was actually residing and carrying on business at
Chapra. The plaintiff sold some goods to him at Chapra,
and got him to execute some documents. On the basis of

‘Gollecisd ia Row, Courtfees and Suits Valuation Acts, pages 839-
840.

*Sitanand v. Jatindranath L.L.R. 57 Cal. 65 5 ALR. 1930 Cal. 3.
'Nuruddin v. Shairuddin, A.1.R. 1933 Lahore, 130, (Jai Lal J.).


93

these documents he instituted a suit at Narowal. The court
expressly agreed with the Calcutta decision cited above,
and held that the Narowal court had jurisdiction since he
had his ancestral or permanent dwelling at that place.

The Calcutta case was followed again in a laiter -ase
of the Lahore High Court.' There the defendants had
joint family property at Lahore, but were residing and
carrying on business at Karachi. The grandsons of the de-
fendant filed a suit for recovery of maintenance and for
expenses of certain religious ceremonies. The suit was
filed at Lahore, and the objection that the suit was not
maintainable in Lahore was repelled. Besides holding that
a part of the cause of action arose at Lahore, the court
also took the view, that under the Explanation to section 20
the defendant must be deemed to be residing voluntaiily
and actually at Lahore. (Even though defendant had not
for 13 years visited Lahore, Lahore was held to be his per-
manent dweliing because at one time defendant did reside
in Lahore and had no intention to abandon that place).

Explanation I]—The second Explanation can be split up
into two parts, (i) a corporation is deemed to carry on
business at its sole or principal office in India; (ii) it is
deemed to carry on business at the place of subordinate
office. The first half is obviously necessary, because it
equates the sole or principal office with the place of carry-
ing on business. This part of the legal fiction has nothing
to do with the arising of the cause of action.

As regards the latter half of Eaplanation II, what it pro-
vides is that the corporation is deemed to carry on busi-
ness at its subordinate office if the cause of action arises
there. It is true that here the cause of action test and the
business test coincide, so that the latter half does not pri-
marily confer jurisdiction on a court which would not have
jurisdiction in its absence. It has, however, got a second-
ary importance, in the sense that it fixes the place of busi-
ness by legal fiction. Ag has been pointed out by 8. K.
Mukherjea J.,* onee it is established that the corporation
has got a branch office at a place, it should be deemed by
iaw to carry on business at that place irrespective of the
nature of the work thet is actually carried on there. In
that case, one Bidhu Bushan residing in the district of
Dacca was insured by the insurance company having its
insured office at Lahore and a branch office at Dacca. The
insured died in Dacca district, and his heirs filed a suit in
Dacca for the money due on the policy. The insurance
company resisted the suit on the ground that the Dacca
court had no jurisdiction. It was held, that death was part
of the cause of action and as the assured died within the
jurisdiction of the Dacca court, a part of the cause of action

‘Ramdas v. Lachmandas, AIR. 1936 Lah. 53.
*People's Insurance Co., v. Benoy Bushan, A.L.R. 1943 Cal. 199,

203


94

arose in Dacca. It was further held, that as the company
had a branch office at Dacea, the suit could be instituted
in Dacea under Explanation II to section 20. (Even though
the Dacca office merely performed the function of collect-
ing the premium and remitting them to the head office, it
was held to be a subordinate office). The only point that
arises is whether the Explanation is intended to expand
the meaning or restrict it. The Nagpur High Court has
observed? that the Explanation restricts the meaning of
“carries on business” in relation to corporations. The court
also observed, that the second part of the Explanation is
obscure in view of the cause of action test contained in
section 20(c). Further, the court said: “It is much to be
regretted that an insurance company should not be amen-
able to the jurisdiction of the court at the place where it
maintains a Subordinate office irrespective of any question
about the accrual of cause of action. But few policy
holders realise the implications of the forms of the con-
tract prepared by the insurance companies which, though
operating all over the country by receiving proposals and
premiums through their various subordinate offices care-
fully undertake to pay only at the head office situated in
many cases far away from the policy holder or his assignee

or nominee.”

It has been suggested, that—

(1) in Explanation I the requirement that the
cause of action should have arisen at the place of tem-
porary residence is irrelevant and therefore is unneces-
sary and should be omitted, and

(2) in Explanation H, the requirement that the
cause of action must have arisen at the place of sub-
ordinate office is not necessary and should be omitted.

The sug, gestion has not been accepted, as it has been
considered that the omission of the requirement would un-
duly widen the scope of the section in both cases.

Section 20 and suits against Government

A suggestion for defining the place where the Govern-
ment can be sued has been made. it is considered that
such a definition is not practicable. How far the test of
“carrying on business” would apply io Government under-
takings must depend on the facts of each case. As regards
Railways, the matter is now settled by a recent decision

of the Supreme Court?-*,

IA.LR. 5956 Nag. 200, 204.
*See Union of India v. Ladu Lal Fain, A.I.R. 1963, S.C. 1687,
*For previous conflict of decisions, see—
(i) Anisuddin v. Union of India, ALR. 1945 Madras 345.
(i) P, 6. 88७०४ ९ Union of India, A.LR. 1956 Assam 85,


95

In any case, the “cause of action” test would always be
there to fail back upon, and the absence of a specific pro-
vision need not cause any serious hardship, in practice.

Section 21 and execution

1. The question has been considered whether to avoid
delay in execution, objections as to the territorial compe-
tence of a court executing @ Cecre2 should not be allowed
and that to achieve this purpose, a provision on the sub-
ject should be inserted.

2. At present, section 21 of the Civil Procedure Code
deals only with objections as to place of suing.

3. The section does not apply in terms to execution pro-
ceedings, that is to say, where an attack is sought to be
taade on the validity of the execution proceedings them-
selves on the ground that they have been held in the wrong
court.

4. The principle on which section 21 is based-—_-namely,
that no objection as to local jurisdiction of a court can be
made'—has, however, been held to apply in relation to
execution proceedings in a number of decisions. Thus,
it has been held,’ that the defect of jurisdiction arising
by reason of the transfer of an area pending execution
proceedings does not vitiate those proceedings. It has also
been held,’ that after sale an application to set aside the
sale on the ground that the court had lost territorial juris-
diction, could not be made, and that such objection, if not
taken at the earliest opportunity, cannot be raised subse-
quently.

5. Generally as to object of section 21, see the observa-
tions of the Supreme Court.‘- “The policy underlying sec-
tions 21 and 99, C.P.C. and section 11 of the Suits Valua-
tion Act is the same, namely, that when a case had been
tried by a Court on the merits and judgment rendered, it
should not be liable to be reversed purely on technical
grounds, unless it has resulted in failure of justice, and
the policy of the legislature has been to treat objection to
jurisdiction, both territorial and pecuniary, as technical and
not open to consideration by an appellate court, unless
there has been a prejudice on the merits.”.

6. In a Madras case“ relating to a mortgage decree, the
absence of a formal transfer order under section 39 was

‘Cf. Hira Lal v.Kalinath, A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 199, 201.

2Rajrzgopsla v. Tirupathia Pillai, A.LR. 1926 Mad. ight-
hand Wi f id. 421, 422, right

"Ayzsa ए. Nagaratna, ALR. 1934 Mad. 573, $75 (0.8.).

‘Kiran Singh v. Chaman Paswan, (1955) 1 $.C.R, 117; ALR. 1954
S.C. 340, 342, para. 7 (section 11, Suits’ Valuation Act).

*A.LR. 1956 Mad. 593, 594.

“Balakrishnayya v. Linga Rao, 1.L.R. 1943 Mad. 804 ; ALR. 1943
Mad. 449, 4514



regarded as an irregularity in the assumption of jurisdic-
tion, which could be waived. In that case, the order passed.
in execution proceedings after notice under Order 21, rule
22, was also held to operate as res judicata.

7, A few decisions apparently to the contrary may be
noted. there are observations to the
effect that section 21, which refers to objection as to the
place of suing, will not apply to execution petition. (Many
of the previous cases were not, however, considered). In
that case, while an execution petition was pending for
attachment and sale of immovable property in Court A,
and after the order of attachment, the property was re~
moved to the jurisdiction of Court B. An order for the
sale of the praperty by Court A was held not to bind another
execution creditor. This case can, however, be distin-
guished. as the person <ttacking the execution was not the
judgment-debtor. To the same effect is an earlier Madras
decision*, which was also a case of & rival auction purchaser.
Gceater difficuity is, however, caused by a Calcuita case,"
where the sale by a court of property outside its jurisdic-
tion was held to be void, and section 21 was held not to
apply in execution proceedings. It was stated, that sec-
tion 21 is an exception to the well-established rule that
where the court has no inherent jurisdiction over the sub-
ject-matter of the suit, its decree is a nullity, even
though the parties may have consented to the juris-
diction of the court. This exception cannot, it was observ-
ed, obviously be interpreted as to have a wider application
than what is justified by its terms. It was pointed out,
that the only case in which a court can in execution sell
immovable property beyond the local limits of its jurisdic-
tion was under Order XXI, rule 3, and in any other case
such a sale would be a nullity, because if a court has no
jurisdiction, its judgment is void.

8. The principle of section 21 has been applied to first
appeals! and to applications under Order IX, rule 13°.

9. We are not here concerned with another aspect of the
matter, namely, whether the territorial jurisdiction of the

‘Srimanthu v. Venkatappayya, A.LR. (1948), Mad. 18 3 ALR. व:
Mad. 347, 349, 352, Paras. 12 and 24 (FB). श्र

*Veerappa v. Ramaswami, A.I.R. 1920 Mad. $05, 508, right-hand.

*Kunjc Mohan v. Makindra Chandra, AR. 1923 Cal. 610, 621. 622
left (Asutosh Mukerjee and Chotnner JJ... (Sale of tenancy rigkts in exe-
cution of a decree for rent, held to be ४0 व, in 2 suit brought by decree-holder
auction purchaser to evict the ten nt).

‘Makhanlal v. Pancham, A.LR. 1933 Nag. 318.

*Dwarka Das v. Pyare Lal, ¥.L.R. 52 All. 0473; AJR. 1930 All, 873,
874. (Sulaiman J.).


97

trial Court can be challenged in execution. The answer to-
this would, ordinarily, be “no”. '-*-°-,

10, It may be noted that under section 21, before the
proceedings can be set aside, both the conditions must be
fulfilled, namely. objection at the earliest stage and
failure of justice*-*

11. It is considered ihat no express provision is neces-
sary, and that in mest cases, courts will apply the prin-
ciple of section 21 to execution also.

Section 21A (New)

This is intended to put at rest ihe conflict of decisions
as to whether defect of jurisdiction can be made a ground
of attack by a new suit. One view is, that if the defen-

af ject to ‘urisdiction and a decree is passed
he cannot, in a subsequent suit. move for
the deeree for want of jurisdiction’-*-"-'?-2.
But, according to the Allahabad High Court, it is not !egi-
timate to extend the bar of section 21 beyond the limits
provided by the section. and in such a case the piaintiff is
ain an independent suit for the avoidance
a Calcutta case,'~'' a landlord filed a
suit for rent and ejectment under section 66 of the Bengal
Tenancy Act and obtained a decree, in execution ¢f which
the tenure was sold and purchased by himseli. ‘The land
was situated in the jurisdiction of another court. but the
defendant had raised no objection. _When the landlord

‘Anand Rav v. Kishan Das, A.1.R. 1954 Hyderabad 190 (7, 8.) (Reviews
case-law).

*Ishwar v. Naipal, A.L.R. 1956 Pat. 280.

*Zamindar of Btvapuram v. Chitambaram. ¥.L.R. 43 Mad. 675 ; ALR.
1920 Mad. 1019 (F.B.).

‘In Gora Chand v, Prafuila Kumar, A,1.R. 1925 Cal. 907. 909 (Full
Bench of 5 Judges) there aze observations that the executing court can take
into account quzstions of j) jon—whether pecuniary or territorial or in
respect of the judgment debt person, But the actual case was not one of
territorial jurisdiction.

*Hrishihest v. Khantaniam, ALR. 1959 Cal. 257.

*Kishori Lal v, Firm Gajja Ram, ALR. 1951 Pun. 375.

*Nageswara ¥. Ganes2, ALR. 1942 Mad. 675 ; (Case of adjudication
order), Chokkalinga v. Velayudha, ALR. 1925 Med. 117,
*Parshotam Das ¥. Radha Kishan, AJR. 1929 Lah. 449 (Execution).
*See also. Firm Jugniran v. Ganpati Damaji, ALR. 194t Nog. 36

(EB,
'3ee also Magsood Ali v. Hunter, ALR. 1943 Oudh 338, 342.

"On the general question of challenge on the ground of jurisdiction, se
Karashiddaya v. Shree Gajanan, etc., Bank, ALR 1943 Bom. 288. .

'Raghubir v. Horilal, (1931) L.L.R. 53 All. 560 ; ALR. 1931 All. 454.
''Kwija v. Manindra, ALR. 1923 Cal. 619.
“As to position under the Letters Patent, see A.LR. 1960 Cal. 33.


98

went to take possession, the tenant defendant filed a suit
for a declaration that the decree had been passed and the
sale held without jurisdiction. It was contended for the
landlord that the sale was validated by section 21, but this
contention was overruled. Mookeriee. J., said that section
21 “is an exception io the well-est2b! d rule that where
the court has no inherent jurisdiction over the subject-
matter of the suit its decree is a null even though the
parties may have consented to jurisdiction of the court.
This exception cannot obviously be so interpreted as to
have a wider application than what is justified by its
terms. It is impossible for us to bold that section 21 debars
the defendants from questioning the validity of the execu-
tion sale which is the root of the title of the plaintiff’. In
the view taken by the learned Judge the decree was valid
in view of the relevant provisions of the Bengal Tenancy
Act, but the execution sale was a nullity.

It is considered that the view taken by the Madras and
Lahore High Courts is the correct one. If the defendant
waives the objection, the matter shovid be regarded 85
closed. Hence the amendment. This is in conformity with
the view expressed by Mulla’.

As to res judicata and jurisdi

decisions may be seen*-"-*-*.
Section 24 (2)

The latter part of section 24(2), as it stands at present.
does not cover proceedings other than a suit, vide ithe
words “the court which, thereafter tries such suit may

”, Since the earlier part speaks of “suit or
proceeding”, the latter part should also cover both.
Necessary changes have been proposed.

Section 24 and execution proceedings

The question has been raised whether execution pro-
ceedings are covered by the words “cther proceedings” in
section 24. Under the old Code, section 25, execution
proceedings were held not to be covered’. The Calcutta
High Court has taken the same view under the existing
section also’. But other courts have taken a different

ion, the under-mentioned.

1Mulla, C.P.C. (1953) page 133.
*Newton v. Official Trustee, A.I.R. 1954 Cal. 506.

‘Bank of Chettinad v. Chettiyar, A.ILR. 1936 Rangocn 87 (8.B.).
‘Firm Annu Mal v. Brij Lal, A.LR. 1947 Mad. 410.

‘Rajaram v. Central Bank, A.ILR. 1926 Bom. 481 (Fawcett J.).
4Kishori Mohan v. Gul Mohammad, 1.L.R. 15 Cel. 177.

*Ranjit Kumar v. Gour Hari Mukherji, A.B. 1956 Cal. 655.
*Mohammad Habibullah v. Tikam Chand, A.1.R. 1925 All. 276.
*Nasservanji v.Kharsedji, 1.L.R. 22 Bom. 778.

wRajagopala ४. Turuphtia, LL.R. 49 Mad. 7463 A.LR. 1926 Mad,

Te
1 A.LR. 1926 Lah. 465.


99

Since the old section 25 did not contain the words “other
proceedings”. and the word “disposal”, the Patna High
Court has, in a recent case, dissenting from the Caleutta
view, held that the existing section covers execution
proceedings’.

The Caleutta decision mainly relies on the Privy Coun-
cil case? under old section 647 (corresponding to existing
section 141), where it was neld that the words “other
proceedings” in that section did not cover execution pro-
ceedings, but were confined to original matters in the
nature of suits.

Wo specific clarification on this point is necessary in
view of the decisions of the other High Courts.

Section 25

1. The object of this amendment is—

(a) to transfer to the Supreme Court the existing
power vested in the State Government, and

(b) to confer on the Supreme Court the same wide
powers of transfer as it has in criminal cases under sec-
tion 527 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

2. [t is considered, that the section should cover trans-
fer of cases from or to the original side of a High Court to
or from any other civil court. It has, therefore. been
framed in terms wider than those of section 527, Criminal
Procedure Code.

3. In sub-section (1). it is considered unnecessary to use
the word ‘interested’. In sub-section (3), ‘appeal’ has been
mentioned specifically.

4, The amount of compensation which the Supreme
Court can award should, it is felt, be Rs. 2000 (instead
of Rs. 1000 mentioned in section 527, Criminal Procedure
Code). Sub-section (4) therefore differs on that point from
section 527, Criminal Procedure Code.

Section 28

A suggestion has been made that when a summons is
sent for execution to a court in another State, the return
thereon should be made or translated in English so that
the court which issued it may be able to understand the
action taken on the summons. It is considered that this
is a matier which can be dealt with by appropriate provi-
sion in the General Civil Rules and orders in force in
each State, without any amendment of the Civil Procedure
Code.

‘Dashrath Prasad v. Vaidyanath, A.ILR. 1960 Pat. 285.

Tiger Prasad v. Pakirallah (1895) 22 Indian Appeals 44 5 LLLR. 17%
All, 106.



100
(After section 31)
New point—Evidence of officers regarding stamps, etc.

The Law Commission has, in an eatlier Report', recom-
mend the insertion of a special provision in the Criminal
Procedure Code on the subject of evidence of officers of
the Mint, Stamp Office, etc. The question, whether a similar
provision should be inserted in the Civil Procedure Code
also, has been considered. It is felt that it is not necessary
to recommend the insertion of such a provision in the
Civil Procedure Code.

Section 35.3

1. It is considered that the provisions of section 354
should not apply to revisions, just as they do not apply to
appeals. Necessary change has been proposed. Compare
the U.P. amendment.

2. The limit of one thousand rupees has been increased
to two thousand rupees, in view of the fall in the value
of money.

Section 36

Section 36 speaks of provisions relating to ‘execution’
of decrees. It is not clear whether Order XXI, rules 1 and
2, fall within these words (as Order XXI, rules 1 and 2
relate to a stage before’execution). An amendment is
proposed to make the position clear

Section 37

1. Section 37(b) provides that the expression “Court
which, passed a decree” sha!! be deemed to include, where
the court of first instance has ceased to exist or to have
jurisdiction to execute it, the court which, if the suit
wherein the decree was passed was instituted, etc.. would
have jurisdiction to try such suit. This section has caused
a certain amount of controversy in cases where court A
passes a decree, and a part of the area within the jurisdic-
tion of the court A is later transferred to court B. The
questions which have arisen are—

(i) whether court A continues to have jurisdiction
to entertain an application for execution of the decree,
and

(ii) whether the court to which the area is trans-
ferred, (court B) can entertain an application for execu-
tion without a formal transmission of the decree from
Court A to Court B.

125th Report of the Law Commission (Evidence of officers about ferged
currency stamps, etc.—section 509A, Cr. P.C. as pr



101

2. So far as the first question is concerned, an affirma-
tive answer can now be given in view of the position of
the case law. But a controversy still remains on the second
question, and, as would be evident from a recent decision’,
the controversy still survives. because in that case the
एठ-71 had to dissent from a Punjab case*.

The following extract from a Supreme Court decision*
discusses the position on the first question.

“And it is settled law that the Court which actually
Pazsed the decree does not lose its jurisdiction to execute
it by reason of the subject-matter thereof being transferred
subsequently to the ju iction of another court.”*.

But the court refrained from pronouncing on the second
question, namely, whether the court to which the subject
matter of the decree has been transferred can on its own
auchority execute the decree.

of decisions in the High Ceurt
diction over ihe subject-matter
of a deeree 2Ted to another Court that Court is
also comoeient to eniertain an application jor execution of
the decree*.. But the Full Bench of the Madras High
के has taxen a different view, and held that in the
2 of transfer by the court which passed

६. aicne can entertain an avplication
the court ic whose jurisdiction the
3 been iransierred.

ol

ject matter

This view is supported by the decision in a Calcutta
case’. It ig not necessary in this case to decide which of
these two views is correct, because even assuming that the
opinion expressed in ihe Madras case” is correct, the present
case is governed by the principle laid down in the Madras
case”.

'Gapalakrishna v. Laxman, ALR. 1964 Mysore 34 (Hedge and T. K.
Tukol JJ.) (March, 1964 Issue).

*Kasturi Rao v. Mehar Singh, A.1.R. 1959 Pun. 350 (G. D. Khosia J.)

*Merla Ramama v. Naliaparaju (1953) 2 S.C.R. 938 ; ALR. 1956
S.C. 87, para. 12 (Venkatarama Ayyar J.).

‘Seeni Nadsn v. Muthuswamy Pillai, LL.R. 42 Mad. 821 ; ALR.
1929 Mid. 427 5 MasrabKhan v. Debnath Mali, UL.R. (1942) 1 Cal.
289; ALR. 1942 Cal. 321 and Jagannath v. Ichkaram, ALR. 1925 Bom
44. .

‘Lutchman v, Maddan Mohun, LL.R. 6 Cal. $13, Jahar v. Kaminé Devi»
LL.R. 28 Cal. 238 and Udit Narain v. Mathura Prasad, LLUR. 35 Cal.
974-

* Ramier v, Muthukrishna Ayyar, LR. 55 Mad. 301 ; ALR.
1932 Mad. 418 (S.B.).

सर, (1942) 1 Cal. 289 ; ALR. Cal. 321.

*LE.R. 55 Mad. or ; AIR 1932 Mad. 418 (S.B.).

+ *Balrishnayya v. Linga Rao, 1.L.R. (1943) Mad. 804 ; ALR. 1943
Mad. 449.


102

Tt was hela therein that the court to whose jurisdiction
the subject-matter of the decree is transferred acquires in-
herent jurisdiction over the same by reason of such trans-
fer. and that if it entertains an execution application wit
reference thereto, it would at the worst be an irreg:
assumvtion of jurisdiction and not a total absence of ,
and if objection to it is not taken at the earliest oppor-
tunity, it must be deemed to have been waived, and can-
not be raised at any later stage of the proceedings”.

4. The whole controversy is based on the meaning of
section 37, and particularly the word “include” in that
section, B. K. Mukherjea J. (as he then was) had in the
Calcutta case to dissent from the earlier view taken in
LLR. 6 Cal, 613, and to point out that even after transfer
of the area the court which passed the decree remained
the competent court for purposes of execution, even though
the decree-holder might have to apply for transmission of
the decree to another court for obtaining the desired relief
The word “include” in section 37, though in a way extend-
ing the meaning of the expression “Court which passed the
decree”, was regarded in another sense as restricting it and
as excluding to original court and substituting for it another
court in the circumstances which came under clauses (a)
and (b). The Madras Special Bench decision? expressly
decides that the new court to which the area is transferred
could not entertain an application to execute the decree
without transmission by the original court.

5. As against this, the Punjab case’ helds that jurisdic-
tion to execute cannot be confined to entertaining the ap-
vlication, and points out. that af transfer of areas is taken
out of section 37(b), hardly any case is left in which the
court of first instance continues to exist and yet ceases to
have jurisdiction within the meaning of section 37(b). Ac-
cording to this intexp retation, section 87 enlarges the scope
of the expression “Court which passed the decree” with the
object of giving greater facilities to a decree-holder to re-
alice his decree. Since execution involves delivery of pos-
session or other action, it cannot be done unless the pro-
perty is within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. Ac-
cording to the reasoning of the Punjab High Court, the
decree will ultimately have to be executed by the second
court, and it is a question of pure formality that the 7 9-
plication should in the first instance be filed in the first
court. A too narrow interpretation of section 37(b) was,
it was pointed out, likely to defeat the object of the law
rather than further the ends of justice

1 MfasrabKhan v. Debnath Mali V.L.R. (1942) 1 Cal. 289 3 ALR.
1942 Cal. 321.

*Ramier v. Muthukrishna Ayyar, L.R. 55 Mad, Sor : A.LR. 1932
Mad. 418 (8.B.).

‘Kasturi Raov. Mehar Singh, A.L.R. 1959 Pun. 350(G.D. Khosla J.),


103

6. In this position of the case law, a clarification on the
subject is called for. Necessary change is proposed.

Section 39

६. At present, there is a conflict of decisions on the ques-
tio: whether (i) the transferee court must be a court of
competent pecuniary jurisdiction; and (ii) if so, whether
the competence snould be judged with reference to the
decrze or the suit.

2. One view is, that provisions of this section are con~
trolled by section G and a decree cannot be transferred
under sub-section (1} for execution to another court if the
amount or value of the decree exceeds its pecuniary juris-
diction. See the under-mentioned cases.'

The contrary view was taken in & Madras case,” where
the decree was sent on the applications of the decree-holder.
Section 39 (1), it was said, does not contain any such limi-
tation, though section 39(2) does.

3. It has also been held, that the value of the suiz in
which the decree was passed must be within the pecuniary
limits of the jurisdiction of the court to which the decree
is proposed to be sent. See the under-mentioned 085९5.

For 2 different view, to the effect that the decretat
amount devermines pecuniary jurisdiction, see the under-
mentioned cases.*

4, See alco the discussion about the section in a recent
Supreme Court case*.

5. It is considered, that the position should be rnade
clear and that the ‘ee court must have pecuniary
competence (0 deal with the suit in which the decree wae
passed; amount of the decree is immaterial, as pecuniary
jurisdistion of a court is ordinarily judged with reference
to the nature of the claim in the suit, and not the nature
of the relief decreed. Hence the amendment.

"\Shamsunder v. Anath Bandlu, (910) LL.R. 37 Cal. $74.
Durga Charan v. Uma Tara. (1889), LL.R. 16 Cal. 465, 467 (D.B.),
Firm Ganesh Das v. Amuluk Chand, A.I.R. 1940 Cal. 161 (D.B.).

2 Abdulla Saheb v. Ahmed Hussain Saheb, ALR. 1914 Mad. 206 (D.B.).
(Sadasiva Aiyar and Spencer Woe 1914 Mad. 206 (DB.

© git Anchahi_ v. (Firm) Brij Mohan Lal, A.L.R. 1936 Pat. 177, 178
Matrumal v. Madanlal A.1.R. 1957 Orissa 177 3 Sce also ALR. 1922
Pat, 189, 189 5

Gokul Kristo v. Aukhil Chander, I.L.R. 16 Cal. 457, 4०1 to 463, (D.B.);
Rustomjce v. Mahadev, A.I.R. 1940 Bom. 277.

‘Shanti Lal v. Jamai Kiser LL.R. (1940, All. 378: All. 331,
(0.8), which discusses the case law. (794 318) 1949 All. 331, 334,

SRanvia v, Nallaparaju, A.LR. 1956 S.C. 87 (Venkatarama Avyar J.).



104
Section 42

1. Certain recommendations were made in the Four-
teenth Report!-’, for amending section 42 so as to amplify
the powers of the court to which execution has been
transferded.

2. The amendments proposed in the Fourteenth Re-
port, have been carried cut in part and with certain modi-
fications. as follows :—

(a) The transferee court will, under the proposed
amendment, have power to—

(1) transfer a decree again for execution;
(ii) add legal Tepresentatives*-"; and
Gil} attach a decree’.

(0) The Fourteenth Report had recommended, that
the transferee court should have several other powers
aiso, namely, power under Order XX, rule 16 (exe-
cution at the instance of assignees}, power under
Order XXI. rule 50(2) (power to grant leave to execute
decree against partner not served. ete.) and power
under section 152 (correction of mistakes).

This recommendation has sot been carried out.

So far as powers under Order XXI, rule 16 and
Order जड़ा, rule 50(2) are concerned, it is considered
that such powers need not be given to the transferee
court. Whether the decree has been assigned ocr not,
has nothing to do with execution and the power under
Order XXI, rule 16, can therefore be left to the court
which passed the decree. Determination of questions
under Order XXI, rule 50, may involve a considera-
tion of matters decided in the main suit. It will be
better if such proceedings are held only by the court
which passed the decree. It is also considered, that
६0 put the matter beyond doubt, an express provision
should be inserted excluding such matters from the
purivew of the transferee court. Necessary change is
proposed.*.”

(० The power to correct mistakes, etc. under see-
tion 152 must, it is considered, remain with the Ccurt

tiqth Report, Vol. I, pages 437-438, paras. 14 and 15.
*See also Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, pages 386-387,
para. 15.

2As to execution against legal representative, sec Jang Bahadur v. Bank
of Upper India, 55 1.A. 227 3 A-LR. 1928 P.C. 162.

‘For the conflict on this point, see Punjob Co-cperative Bark पा
Bikram Lal, ALR. 1959 Punj. का Prasadi v. Ghulam A.LR. 1951 Pat.
618.

‘Prithi Raf v. Bal Mukand, A.LR. 1940 Pat. 557 recognises power to
attack decree.

*As to the existing position regarding powers of the transferee court to
grant leave under Order 21, rule 50, see Senta! Das v. Babubhai, A.LR.
51963 Punj. 395.

1566 also notes to Order 21, rule 50.


105

which passed the decree. An express provision exclud-
ing that power is not, however, necessary.

3. A provision, it is considered, should be added to the
effect that all steps taken by the transferee court under
the specified powers should be intimated to the transferring
Court. Necessary change is proposed.

4, The U.P. Legislature has made an amendment where- UP.
by the words “as the Court which passed the decree” have Amend-
been substituted for the words “...... as Jf had been passed ™€™'
by itself’. It is considered umnecessary to adopt this
amendment, as the amendments already proposed to section
42 confer upon the tnansferee court some of the powers of
the original court, and that will suffice.

Section 47

This carries out the recommendation in the Fourteenth
Report?, The object is to clarify the application of the
doctrine of res judicata to execution proceedings. The
matter has come up again and again before the courts.
Some recent decisions’ review the case-law on the subject.

Section 47 and euctionspurchasers

A question that has raised some controversy is, whether
an application for possession by an auction-purchaser fails
under section 47. The amendment of 1956 has touched the
question, fo some extent, and a discussion therefore of the
position before and after the Amendment would be con-
venient.

1. Case-law before 1956 amendment
Some of the cases make a distinction hetween—

(a) eases where the auction-purchaser is the
decree-holder, and
(b) other cases,

Further, some of the decisions hold, that an application
for possession is a part of execution and therefore involves
a question relating to “execution, discharge or satisfaction”
of a decree; others take.a different view. Thus, four points
have to be considered.

(a) @) Is a decree-holder auction-purchaser a
“party” to the suit within the meaning of section 47?

386७ the amendments proposed to Section 42.

4z4th Report, Vol. I, pages 439-440, para. r8.

%Amar Singh v. Gulab Chand A.LR. 1960 Raj. 280.

Palaniappa v. Mariappa, ALR. 1960 Mad. 443.
6s Mokan Lal Goenka पर. Benoy (1953) S.CR. 377 5 ATR 1953 S:C.
2B naga te Laxwichand v. Tulsidas, ALR. 1963 Gujarat 1 (PN.


106

(ti) Is a stranger auction-purchaser a “party” tc
the suit?

(b) (0 If a decree-holder is a “party”, is the deli-
very of possession to him a question between the par-
ties and “relating to execution” etc.?

. _ (ii) If a stranger auction-purchaser is a “party”,
is the delivery of possession to him a question between
the parties and relating to “execution” etc.?

On the question (a) 6) above, there has been some con-
troversy. In one case!, the court observed, that the view
that he is not a party to the suit “must perhaps be regard-
ed as no longer tenable” in view of the Privy Council deci-
sion in 45 Indian Appeals 54%, but the court also observed,
that “however that may be”, in the particular case before
the court all the conditions of the section were not satis-
fied. On the other hand, there are decisions to the effect
that even a decree-holder auction-purchaser applying for
delivery of possession is not a party?-,

The Calcutta view is that he is a party®. The Madras
view is that he is a party®.

Again, as regards (a) (ii) above—stranger auction-pur-
chaser—there has been a conflict’. One view is, that he is
a representative of the decree-holder. Another view is,
that he is a representative of the judgment-debtor. A
third view is, that he represents both®-’,

On the point (b) (i}—whether a decree-holder auction-
purchaser's application for possession is a question regard-
ing “execution”, ete—there is difference of opinion.

‘Savlaram v. Vishwa Nath, A.1.R. 1945 Bombay 386 (Macklin and
Lokur JJ.).

*Ganpathy v. Krishnamachariar, 1.8.54 3 ALR. 1917 P.C. 1213
LR 41 Madras 403 (Sir John Edge). 4 7

See the Allahabad cases referred to in Mst. Suraj v. Mst. Gulab, ALR.
1955 All. 49, 57 (F.B.).

“See Sardar Mal v.Kartar Singh, A.I.R. 1939 Lahore 211 and the
cases cited therein.

‘Kailash Chandra v. Gopal Chandra, 1.L.R. $3 Cal. 781_;A.LR. 1926
Cal. 798 (F.B.) Also see Debi Prasad v. Satish Chandra, A.UR. 1944 Cal.
328 (Rau and Biswas JJ.).

*Veyindra Muthu v. Maya Nadan, A.LR. 1924 Madras 324 (F-B.).

See Ram Kumar v. Ram Charan, A.I.R. 1930 Pat. 311 (Macpherson
and Faz] Ali JJ.), and cases referred to therein.

‘See Bhagwati _v. Banwari Lal, 1.1..1९, 31 All, 82 (F.B.) and
Ram Kumar v. Ram Charan, A.LR. 1930 Pat. 311, 313.
|... १३९९० in Arinamalai v. Ramswami, A.ILR, 1941 Madras 161, 169 (F.B)
(Reviewed case-law),


107

One view is, that the matter is one relating to the exe-
ution of the decree’. On this reasoning, a separate suit
by him would be barred’-. Another view is that once the
sale is confirmed, nothing further remains to be. done
towards “execution”, etc., and the question of delivery to
the auction-purchaser, even where he is the decree-holder,
is not a question of “execution”. The reasoning behind
this is, that the decree-holder seeks possession not “in exe-
-eution of his decree” but by virtue of a title acquired as
purchaser’, and that unless the words “relating to” are
unduly extended, it is not possible to hold that the question
involved in giving possession is one relating to execution;
the decree is satisfied not by possession but by sale®,

As regards. (b) (ii) above—stranger auction-pur-
<hasers—one view is that a question for delivery of posses-
sion between him and the judgment-debtor is not one relat-
ing to execution, ९९.7 The reasoning is that a decree is
executed and discharged or satisfied when the property is
put to auction, and sold and somebody deposits the price
‘and it is paid to. the decree-holder. On the other hand, the
view has been taken that such a dispute relates to execu-
‘tion’.
वा, Amendment of 1956

The amendment made in 1956 in section 47 by re-draft-
‘mg the Explanation provides that the auction-purchaser is
deemed to be a party to the suit. This disposes of the old
controversy’ whether the auction-purchaser was a repre-
sentative of~

(i) the decree-holder, or
(ii) the judgment-debtor, or
(iii) both.
The decisions relating to (3) (1) (1) above are therefore
not of much importance now. But the controversy under
(०) 6) (४) above is still important.

Ata
‘See Varalakshmamma v. Jannayya, A.1.R. 1943 Mad. 318, 321,
3862 caselaw discussed in Krishna Iyer v. Subramani

Mad 189 9)" risl Iyer v. Subramaniam, A.ILR. 1939,
‘Kailash Chandra v. Gopal Chandra, A.LR. . 3

Debi Prasad v. Satish, 21.1 1944 Cale 928 1926 Cal, 798 (3
‘Varalakshmamma v. Jannayya, A.1.R. 1943 Mad. 318.

SHargovind v. Bhudar, A.1.R. 1924 Bom.
“(Mcleod C.J. Shah and Crump 4 429-48 Bom. 550 (F.B.)
1 *Savlaram v. Vishwa Nath, A.LR. 1945 Bom. 386 (Macklin and Lokur

Bes We Kishan v. Radha Kishan, AIR. 1957 All. 251, 252, (Desai and
*Ramautar v. Jagrani Bai, A.LR. 1956 Nag. 81, 83, para. 13.
‘Annamalai v. Ramaswami, L.L.R. (1941) Mad. .R. 1947 Mad

61, 169, 170 (Full Bench of 5 138०2 > 438, ALR. 1941 Madras


Stay of
execution,

108

1M. Position after 1956 amendment

Thene have not been many cases directly dealing with
the 1956 amendment. But a similar amendment was
made in U.P. and jt would be of interest to note that the
Allahabad High Court has observed’, that “that does not
settle the matter” and has held, that (i) the question of
possession ‘is one between the purehaser and the court, not
one “between the parties” and & the question has noth-
ing to do with execution, ete, that case, the executing
court-had ordered delivery of possession to the auction-
purehaser; an appeal fram % at iorder was held not main-
tainable, as the oader could not be treated as one passed
under section 47). On the other hand, it has been held by
the Madhya Pradesh High Court’, dissenting from the
Allahabad view, that after the 1956 amendment, a dispute
regarding possession ‘to be given ‘to.a stranger auction-
purchaser is ‘one “relating to execution” and falls under
section 47.

To settle the position, the following changes have been
proposed :——

(i) Section 47, Explanation 1 (existing) is confined
to a plaintiff whose suit or a defendant against whom
@ suit has been dismissed. Portion relating to auction-
purchaser is transferred to another. Explanation—See
below.

(ii) Auction-purchasers are dealt with separately
in another Exptanttien; and in view of the conflict of
decisions on the péint whether a claim for possession
by an auction-puréhaser is or is not a question falling
under section 47, a specific clarification has been made
on that point.

Section 47 and stay

The words “or to stay of execution thereof’ which
occurred in section 244 of the old Code, have been omitted
in the present Code. Hence two divergent views have
been taken as to whether auch orders are appealable. One
view is, that the words omitted may have been regarded
as superfluous, because a Contention that the execution be
stayed is as good as sayitig that the decree should not be
executed and jt thus amounts to a question “relating to the
execution of the decree*’. The other view is, that these
words have been deliberately omitted and questions rélat-
ing to stay of execution gre mo longer within this section
and hence no appeal Hes from orders determining such
avestions!: A third view.can be taken’, namely, that
whether an order of stay will amount to a decree depends

"Han Rithan v. Radha Kian, ATR. 1957 AY. 251, 252, left, b ottoqn
(एवम and Beg 11D. 957 51, 252, left, om

‘Wahidulla Kian v. Ramkishan, 1962 MP.L:J. Notes & (Yearly Digest,
1962, Col. 201.) .

*Subramania vy. Kimaratelu, ULSR. 39 Mad. 541.

Sankrdhan ¥. Martand, LLRs Boty, 241.

SLR. (1940) All. 517, ALR. 1940 All 326.



109

upon the question whether it conclusively determines the
rights and liabilities of thé parties im-regard ६6 the exe-
cution of the decree. The thitd view has been. practically
upheld by the Privy Council!, which has held that an
order deciding that a person is an_“agriculturist” within
the meaning of the Madras Agriculturist Debtors’ Relief
Act and staying. execution of a decréé on that ground, is
appealable. This view is in consonance with the lariguage
of section 47, and should be preferred. No améndinient in
the law is called for.

Appeal against orders under section 47

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report?, that an appeal should riot be allowed against
certain orders under section 47 where the question detided
is one of payment of an amount not exceeding the Court's
small cause powers. It is felt, that no amendment of this
nature is called for in respect of decrees in regular suits,
as a rigid provision would work hardship.

Section 58

Under section 58(1)(a), the period of detention in execu-
tion of a decree is six months if the decree is for a sum
exceeding fifty rupees. This figure of fifty rupees was put
with reference to economic’ conditions which existed at
that time. Conditions have changed since, and what was 50
rupees at that time is equivalent to at least 200 rupees now.
The figures should, therefore, be changed. Hence the
amendment.

Section 60

1. Pensions of private employeesi—Section 60(1), pro-
viso (g) exempts from attachment stipends, etc., of
Government pensioners. The amendments: made by the
Bombay and Madras Legislatures, by inserting clause (gg),
extend it to pensioners of locul authorities. It is considered
that it. shou a extend to pensions of alt employers.. Neces-
sary change has been proposed.

2. Private salaries—The: object of the’ artiendinent to
section: 60 (1), proviso'clause (i) is to extend’ the existing
proviso to: private ay the also. It is. considered that
there is no reason. why ». exemption from’ repeated
attachment, embodied in the proviso, should not extend to
private salaries: -- .

‘Adaikappa v. ChiandraseWhine;: AIR, 1349'P.C. 12.
414th. Report, Vol. I, pags 441, paragraph 20; second-sub-patt


जाए
3. Navy Act—The object of the amendment to clause

(3) is merely to substitute a reference to the latest enact-
ment on the subject. -

4, Right to future maintenance.—A right to future main-
tenance is, by virtue of provisions of section 6 (dd),
Transfer of Property Act, not transferable, “whatever
be the manner in which it is arising, secured, or determin-
ed”. This is the effect of the amendment made to that
Act by Act 10 of 1929. It has been suggested that the
provision in the Civil Procedure Code on the subject should.
also be brought into line with the provision as. contained in.
the Transfer of Property Act. It is, however, considered.
unnecessary. to make any such. change, which would be
purely a verbal one, as the existing working has caused no
difficulty.

5. Explanation 1—The amendment to Explanation 1 is.
intended to achieve the following objects:—

(i) To insert in Explanation 1 a reference to
clause (ia), which has been inserted in 1956, 107
exempting one-third of salary in execution of a decree
for maintenance.

Gi) To provide that even private salaries can be
attached before they are actually payable. At present,
section 60(1), Explanation I, latter half, saves the
attachable portion of private salaries from attachment
until it is actually payable. The result of this provi-
sion, in practice is, that it is only when the salary is
about to be paid on the Ist (or other appropriate date)i
of the month that the creditor can attach it. If the
ereditor obtains attachment on the 30th of the preced-
ing month, he is too early; and if he is Jate even by a
moment after the time fixed for payment on the Ist,
he is 100 late. This practical difficulty was pointed by
Chagla, C.J.,in one case'-?, Attachment before the
actual date of payment should therefore be available.

(iii) To make it clear that in the case of salaries of
public servants, the attachable portion can be attachedi
before or after it is actually payable. This proposi-
tion has, at present, to be deduced by inference From
the earlier half of f Explanation i. As was pointed out
by the Federal C 3, the implication of the Explana-
tion is that the salary of a Government servant is
attachable before it is due and payable. It is consider-
ed, that instead of leaving this proposition to be im-
plied, it would be better if it is expressly enacted:

SVasant v. Jgagannath, A.LR. 1955 Bom. 450, 451-

अ868 also 7. V. Subba Rao १. Mohammad Hussain, A.1.R.j1964 Andhra.
Pradesh 395. (September). .

*State of Punjab v. Tarachand, ALR. 1947 F.C, 23, 28..


ili

6, Explanation 2.—Explanation 2 to section 60(1) defines
“salary”. It contains a reference to clause (h), but clause
(h) no longer contains the expression “salary” (after its
amendment in 1937). The reference to that clause should
therefore be omitted. Secondly, the Explanation makes no
mention of clause (ia) inserted in 1956 which uses the ex-
pression “salary”. The Explanation should refer to that
clause also. Necessary changes have been proposed.

The question has been raised whether an agreement Yaliaity, ot
waiving an exemption granted by section 60 is valid. It is 2&ee™

considered that the matter should be left to the courts for Bok

decision according to the object sought to be achieved by a
particular exemption, etc. It is unnecessary to make any
specific provision on the subject!, as has been done by the
Punjab Amendment which has inserted section 60(3)
making such agreements void.

Section 60 and policies of insurance

In the Law Commission’s Report on Insolvency Laws’,
in the clause dealing with description of property of the
insolvent divisible amongst his creditors, a provision has ‘
been proposed that policies of life insurance, etc., in respect
of the insolvent’s own life shall not be comprised in the
property of the insolvent divisible among his creditors
(except to the extent of a charge on the policies in respect
of the amount of the premium paid on the policies during
the two years preceding the insolvency). The question
whether an exemption from attachment in respect of in-
surance policies should be given, either absolutely or sub-
ject to a certain maximum, has been considered. It has
been decided not to recommend any such change. There
are certain points of difference between insolvency on the
one hand and execution by a single decree-holder on the
other, In insolvency, the hypothesis is that the debtor has
not sufficient assets for meeting his debts, and therefore
(apart from the property specifically exempted), _every-
thing else goes for the satisfaction of the creditors. Second-
ly, in insolvency, the law has to strike a balance between
the debtor's needs and the claims of the whole body of
creditors, while that is not so in the case of execution of a
single decree. Thirdly, in insolvency, the carrying on of
business, the acquisition of property and other economic
activities by the insolvent are subject to the control of the
court, which is not the case in execution

, As examples ofthe conflicting views held on thesubject, the ‘following
decisions may be cited ;— . 7

ALR. 1948 Nag. 392 5

ALR. 1952 Pat, 78 ;

ALR. 1940 Lah. 65.

For the opposite view, see—

ALR. 1950 Bom. 155 5

ALR, 1950 Mad. 114 3

A.ER. 1952 All. 680.

*26th Report (Insolvency Laws) App. I, clause 48(1)(b).

rotection.


nz
Section 60 and tenancies

‘The question whether tenancies to which the Local Rent
Control Act applies, should be éxéntpt from aitachment
has been considered. A provision exempting them from
vesting in the Official Assignee off insolvency has been pro-
posed in the Law Commission's Report on Tnsolvency!, but
the case of execution stands on a different footing, and no
change is, therefore, considered necessary on this point.

Seetion 63

The question has been raised as fo the effect of sec
tion 63(2), (which provides that nothing im the section
shall be deemed te invalidate any “proeseding taken by a
Court” executing one of the several deerees referred to in
the section) on an order allowing a set-off to a decree-
holder auction-purchaser. Does it accept the amount so
allowed to be set-off from rateable distribution? Most
High Courts®*-‘ have answered the question in the nega-
tive, though the Caleutta High Court® takes a contrary
view. The correct: position seems to be, that the word
“proceeding” does not include such order. No clarification
on the subject appears to be necessary.

Section 64 and pre-attdchment agreements

1. The question has been raised whether a transfer
actually made after the attachment but in pursuance of an
agreement made before the attachment is invalidated by
section 64. One view is that the section does not apply in
such cases’-29?,

426th Report (Insolvency Laws), App. I, clause 48 (1).
°Megraj v. Corporation of Madras, A.I.R. 1936 Mad. 797, 798.
‘Ramaswamy v.Krishaasa, A.LR. 1935 Mad. 988, 994.

ke Chandra v. Digambar L.L.R. 1960 Bom. 8 A.LR. 1960 Bom.
230 FB,

‘ALR. 1946 All. 294.
*Ahinath v. Nepal Chandra, A.LR. 1937 Cal. 55, 56.

*Babala Venkata Reddy v. Mangadu Yellappa Chetty, A.LR.
Mad. 4. 5; (Abdur Rehim and Srinivasa Ayvangat JJ.). 1917

*Ghusaram v. Parashram, A.1.R. 1936 Nag. 163, 165 ; (Pollock J.).
{Discusses specific performance). 36 > 165 3 Pollock J.)

ey eon v. Pyaraji, ALR. 1943 Bom. 145 (Attachment after judg-
ment

30 Rango Ramchandra v. Gurlingappo, A.LR. 1941 Bom. 198,200, 201
Attachment before judgment). ane


113
A contrary view has beem taken ir other cases 454,

2, In the draft Report which was circulated for com-
ments, an exception was proposed to section 64 to the effect
that “Nothing in this section applies to any private trans-
fer or delivery of the property attached or of any interest
therein, made in execution of any contract for such trans-
fer or delivery entered into before the attachment.” But,
after careful consideration, it has beén decided not to make
any such exception. A sweeping provision of this kind
might be abused, and the practice of bringing into exist-
ence agreements which are really executed after attach-
ment but are ante-dated to an earlier date, might be en-
couraged by such exception.

3. The decision as to how far such a transfer should be
recognised as valid by the court, would seem often to de-
‘pend on the equities of each ease. Some of the decisions
are based on the specific provisions of Order XXXVI,
rule 10; a few exhibit special features arising out of the
passing of a decree for specific performance. So far as
‘other situations aré concerned, the equities of the case
should, it is considered, be taken by the court into account.

Section 66

A suggestion to the effect that a “defence” based on
benami should also be barred (just as a suit based on
benami is barred) where the name of the Benamidar is
entered in the sale certificate, has been considered. Accord-
ing to this Suggestion, where the real owner is in posses-
sion, and the Benamidar whose name is entered in the sale
certificate sues him for possession, the real owner should
be barred from raising a defence that the plaintiff was
only a nominal purchaser. It has, however, been decided
not to extend section 66 to such cases.

Section 73

A question has been raised as to tie meaning of the
expression “same judgment-debtor” in this section. For
example, where a decree is passed against A as partner
and another decree is passed against A in his. personal
capacity, the question is whether the respective decree-
holders can share by rateable distribution. The principle
appears to be now well-established, namely, that it is not

1Tarak Nath y. Sanat, 1.1L.R, $7 Cal. 274.5 ALR. |.

(D.B.), distinguishing Madan ‘Mohan v. Rebatt ‘stan, ear ad

*Buta Ram ४. Sayyad Mohammad, A.1.R. 1935 Lah. 71, 74.

°Usha Rani v. faghandhu, A.V.R. 1955 Tripura 30, 32.

4As to enforcement of specific performance, see A.ILR. 1945 Bom. 481.

"The case-law is reviewed in Ad.R. 1952 T.C. 467.

"In Nur Muhammad v. Dinshaw, A.LR. 1922 P.C. ४
mot decided. 922 39, the paint was



114

so much the personality of the judgment-debtor as the
property against which relief is claimed, which is regarded
as relevant}.

The point has arisen also as regards the execution of a
decree obtained against a person in his life-time and execu-
tion of another decree obtained against his legal represen-
tative; there also the same principle should apply. As has
been pointed out’, the emphasis is nct on the personality
but on the property?-*,

No change in the law is therefore necessary.

Section 75

One question to be considered is, whether it is neces-
sary to expand the scope of section 75 so as to enable rules
to be made for issue of commissions for any purpose not at
present mentioned in the section, No such necessity has
been felt, and therefore no amendment is proposed.

A suggestion has been made to amend section 75 so as
to give power to the court to appoint Commissioners for
making inventories of books of accounts and movables and
for initialling the zecount books. It is stated, that the
decision of the Supreme Court in Padam v. State of U.P.*
contains observations which imply that such power does
not exist under the Code. It is also pointed out, that the
practice in some of the States is to appoint such
Commissioners in suits for partition, ete. It is, however,
considered unnecessary to make any such amendment, as
the powers that exist under Order XXXIX, rule 7 and
Order XXVI, are sufficient for all practical purposes.

Section 80

The recommendation in the Fourteenth Report® is to
the effect that section 80 be replaced by a provision where-
under the Government, ete., would be entitled to costs if
notice is not given, But it is considered, that the question

Pacific Bank v. Thakur Singh, ALR. 1949 Cal. 396. (S.R. Das J.).

This view is to be preferred to that taken in A.I.R. 1943 Bom. 156 and in
Kritant Kumar ९. Putin Krishna, A.LR. 1938 Cal. 316, which hold that the
judgment-debtors are the same even if one decree is against a person as partner
and the other against him personally,

‘Hott Lal v. Chatura Prasad, ALR, 7947 AM, 77० (F.B.).

*Ramaan Khan v. Hiralal, AIR, 1961 Raj. 118 (Case-law discussed).

“Dundappa v. Annaji, A.W.R. 1953 Bom. 65 (F.B.).

‘*Padam v. State of U. P., (1961) 1 8.0.8, 884 ; ALR. 1961 S.C.
218,

31400 Report, Vol. I, page 476, last two paragraphs. (Shri Chari’s
dissent is in Vol. U1, page 1229). '


115

of costs need not be governed by a mandatory provision.
As a result, the section is proposed ६6 be omitted totally’.
Section 82
1. Section 82, as it stands at preseni, prescribes an
elaborate procedure to be followed before execution of a
decree can be ordered against the Government, etc. It
contemplates the following stages:—

(i) A time has to be specified in the decree itself
for its satisfaction;

(ii) If a decree remains unsatisfied for the time
specified, a report has to be made by the court to the
State Government;

(iii) After the report, the court must wait for 8
further period of 3 months, and can issue execution
only if the decree remains unsatisfied for a further
period of 3 months.

2. It is considered, that this elaborate procedure is not
necessary and causes delay. The intermediate report to
the Government by the court is a formality which should
be removed. Further, the law itself should lay down the
period of waiting, instead of requiring the court to fix the
period in each case. Power should be given to the court
to fix a period in a particular case. Necessary changes
have been proposed.

3. A power to extend the period is also considered
desirable, and has been provided for.

4, The words “such act as aforesaid” in section 82 refer
to an act purporting to be done by a public officer in his
official capacity. at has been made clear.

Section 82 and Jammu and Kashmir

The provisions of section 80 were applied to the
Government of Jammu and Kashmir by the amendment
of 1963. The provisions of section 82 have not, however,
been applied to that Government. The attention of the
Government is drawn in the matter, for such action, if
any, as it may consider necessary.

Section 86 and foreign Governments

While section 86 provides for the filing of suit against
Rulers of foreign States with the consent of the Central
Government, there is no express provision as regards suits
against foreign States. The position was considered in a
recent case by the Calcutta High Court’, where the view

3866 also the body of the Report.

"United Arab Republic v. Mirza, A.LLR. 1962 Cal. 387, (paragraphs. 7
d

bom 20 997 (para. 31), 400 (para. 42) and 401 (pera. 49). (Lahiri



M6

awas taken, that these sections do not apply to foreign
States, which would therefore, be governed by the rules
of customary international law under which they enjoy
immunity. The judgments in the Calcutta case have
‘pointed out the desirability of extending the provisions
cof these sections to suits against foreign States. As the
matter is one of policy, the attention of Government is
invited to the suggestion of the Calcutta Higit Court’.

Section 87B

1. Ih a recent Supreme Court decision? while upholding
the validity of the section the following observations were
made:—

“Before we part with this matter, however, we would
like to invite the Central Government to consider seriously
whether it is necessary to allow section 87B to operate
prospectively for all time. The agreements made with
the Rulers of Indian States may, no doubt have
to be accepted and the assurances given to them may have
to be observed. But considered broadly in the light of the
basic principle of the equality 9०९08 law, it seems some-
what odd that section 87B should continue to operate for all
time. For past dealings and transactions, protection may
justifiably be given io Rulers of former Indian States but
the Central Government may examine the question as to
whether for transacticns subsequent te the 26th of January
1950, this protection need or should be continued. If under
the Constitution all citizens are equal, it may be desirable
to confine the operation of section 878 to past tratsactions
and not to perpetuate the anomaly of the distinction _be-
tween the rest of the citizens and Rulers of former Indian
States. With the passage of time, the validity of historical
considerations on which section 87B is found will wear out
and the continuance of the said secticn in the Code of Civil
Procedure may later be open to serious challenge.”,

2. Since a decision as. to the action to be taken in view
of these observations involves matter of policy 8130, it is
felt that the action to be taken should be left to be
considered by the Government.

3. The section, was inserted by the’ Amendment Act
(2 of 1951) by! which the other sections (83 to 86y were
also ré-cast. Before the Act of 1951, sections 85 and 86
applied to suits against @ “sovereign prince or Ruling

THe’ question was: discussed Particularly wih
‘transactions, at the Asian Aeica तक Consultative Comufiittee,
ceedings of the second session Cain OS ९० 1958), pages I
and: 3rd Session (Colombo, 196०) > page 56 ef seg.

‘Narotant Kishore Deb Varma v. Union of India and anpthir, A.LR.
1964 S.C. 1590 (October, 1964).


117 -

chief’. So long as the Indian States existed as separate
entities, i.e. up to their merger (either into a Union of
States or with the then existing Dominion of India or
Provinces, etc.), there was no doubt that the Rulers of
those States were in, the categery—“sovereign chief or
Ruling prince”—and suits against them were barred except
with the consent of the Central Government’-*, During.
the period ‘between their merger and the passing of the
Act 2 of 1951, the position was not very definite. It was.
held in one Bombay ease® that after merger, the appellant
in that case (the ex-Ruler) was no longer a “sovereign
chief or Ruling prince”. But there ane cases to the
contrary*.

In one Supreme Court case’, it has heen observed that
the protection under section 86, as it stood béfore the Con-
stitution, “continued in view of articie 372 of the Constitu-
tion (unless it was void under the Chapter on fundamental
rights) till we come to the enactment of Act 2 of 1951”.

4. As a matter of policy, Government decided to make
this exemption available to Rulers of former Indian States,
and accordingly, the Amendment Act of 1951 made the
necessary provisions.

5. The following extract from the White Paper on Indian Discussion
States explains the background of these provisions*: — ipWh te

“240. Guarantees regarding rights and privileges.—
Guarantees have been given to the Rulers under the
various Agreements and Covenants for the continu-
ance of their rights, dignities and privileges. The rights
enjoyed by the Rulers vary from State to State and
are exercisable both within and without the States.
They cover a variety of matters ranging from the use
of red plates on cars to immunity from Civil and
Criminal jurisdiction and exempted from customs
duties, etc. Even in the past it was neither considered
desirable nor practicable to draw up an exhaustive list
of all these rights. During the negotiations following
the introduction of the scheme embodied in the Gov-
ernment of India Act, 1935, the Crown Department had
taken the position that no more could be done in res-
pect of rights and privileges enjoyed by the Rulers

\Gaekwar Rly. v. Hafiz, A.LR. 1938 P.C. 165.
*Govind Rum v, Gondal State, A.I.R. 1950 P.C. 99.
‘*The Bontbay case was in respect of a suit filed in December, 1948 (cage

relating to the Ruler of lands in the former pr rincipalit Meira in
the Domittion of India). See Thgkore hanji Kashani Rhanji Calan

Rasul, ALR. 1955 Bom. 449 (Bavdcker J.).

‘Kant Narain v. Chanjra Bhal, AIR. 1951 All. 603, hobting, that
in view of section 86 as it stood then, and of the soctyer agreement माही,
guaranteed personal privileges, etc., the-Ruler of Benares could not be sued.

+Mohan Lal v. Sawai Man Singh Ji, A.TR.-1962 S.C, 93974 755 -pera.

“White Paper on Indian States, page 125, para. 249.


118

than a general assurance of intention of the _Govern-
ment of India to continue them. Obviously it would
have been a source of perpetual regret if all these
matters had been treated as justiciable. Article 363
has, therefore, been embodied in the Constitu-
tion which excludes specifically the Agree-
ments of Merger and the Covenants from the
jurisdiction of Courts except in cases which may be
yeferred 10 the Supreme Court by the President. At
the same time, the Government ot India considered it
necessary that constitutional recognition should be

+ given to the guarantees and assurances which the Gov-

ernment of India have given in respect of the rights
and privileges of Rulers, This is contained in article
362, which provides that in the exercise of their legisla-
tive and executive authority, the legislative and execu-
tive organs of the Union and States will have: due
yegard to the guarantees given to the Rulers with
respect to their personal rights, privileges and
dignities.”.

6. Another recent decision of the Supreme Court? holds,
that where a person applies for consent under section 872
in respect of a certain property i.e. for filing a suit against.
a Ruler in respect of certain property, and the Government
grants partial and conditional consent to the ' applicant
after going through the merits of the applicant’s claim,
that introduces an infirmity in the sanction and such sanc-
tion is invalid, with the result that it is to be construed as
extending to all the properties in respect of which the
sanction was applied for. The judgment points out, that
section 87B authorises the Government eit! her to accord or
to refuse to accord such consent. “It is not open to the
Central Government to impose any conditions on such
consent, or to accord consent only in part, or to refuse it in
part, particularly in cases where the reliefs are claimed on
one and the same cause of action.”

7. It is considered unnecessary to alter the language of
the section on this point.

Section 92 and cypres

1. In connection with section 92, it may be of some use
to draw attention to the legislation regarding cypres
recently undertaken in England and to the provisions in
the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 (Bombay Act 29 of
1950) which have been followed by certain other States
also. Some difficulties were felt in England by virtue of
the limited scope of the cypres doctrine, whereunder, the
court had power to direct the application of the income to
another purpose only where the original object had failed,
etc. It had no power to alter the objects of the trust so

‘Maharaj Kumar Tokendra Bir Singh v, The Secretary to the Government
of India, Minsary of Home Affairs, New Delhi, Writ Petition No,
ided on 2: larch, 1964. sit Retition No. 129 of, 1963


119:

long as they could be carried on literally. Now, there
might be cases where it would be desirable to alter the
very purpose of application as mentioned in the trust ins-
trument, because the original objects have been adequate-
ly provided for by other means, or have ceased to provide
a suitable method of using the property, or have become
obsolete or useless or prejudicial to the public welfare, or
are not substantially beneficial to the class of persons for
whom the endowment was intended originally.

2. The Nathan Committee! went into great detail in
this question. The Committee was satisfied that the most
urgent need was to enable the Charity Commissioners to
give timely assistance to those trustees who were adminis-
tering trusts “no longer adapted to modern conditions”.
Since the alteration of the objects of charities (where the
objects can still be executed) could only be done by a
statutory power, the Committee recommended _ suitable
legislation regarding cypres,

3. The Charities Act, 1960 (8 & 9 Eliz. 2 ch. 58) has
carried out, to a large extent, the recomendations of the
Nathan Committee. Briefly speaking, under section 13 of
that Act the original purpose of a charitable gift can be
altered to allow the property to be applied cypres, where
the original purpose has been fulfilled or cannot be carried
out according to the directions and the spirit of the gift, or
provides the use for part only of the property, or where
the property available by virtue of the gift and other pro-
perty applicable for similar purposes can be used in con-
junction, or where the purposes were laid down with refer-
ence to an area which has ceased to be a unit or a class of
persons which has ceased to be suitable or where the ori-
ginal purposes have been adequately provided for by other
means or ceased (as being useless or harmful to the com-
munity) to be in law charitable or ceased to provide a
suitable and effective method of using the property avail-
able by virtue of the gift. Thus, a failure of the original
purpose is not now the only ground for cypres.

4. Attention may also be drawn to section 56 read with
section 55 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950, where-
under, on an application by the Charity Commissioner, etc.,
the court can sanction an alteration of the original object.
It provides that, if the court is of opinion that “the carrying
out of such intention or object is not wholly or partially
expedient, practicable, desirable, necessary or proper in
the public interest”, the court may direct the property or
income of the public trust or any portion thereof to be
applied cypres to any other charitable or religious pur-
pose. For this purpose, it is lawful for the court to alter
any scheme already settled or to vary the terms of any
decree, etc., or the instrument of trust.

1Report of the Committee on the Law, etc., relating to Charitable Trusts
(7952) Cmd. $710, paragraphs 299, 316, 319, 320, 329.


Notice,

120

5. As to the application of section 92 to High Courts on:
the original side in relation 1७ the local limits, see the deci-
sion eited below!

6. The matter can be considered in detail? when the
Law of public trusts is revised.

7. The doctrine of cypres can even now be applied’ to
suits under section 92. “But its scope will, presumably, be
limited by the rules of the English Law, as unmodified by
Statute.

Section 92 and costs

The Hindu Religious Endowments Commission‘ has
drawn attention to the fact that litigation under section 92
often involves expense for members of the public who
have to move the law, and has recommended that the de-
fendant should in all such cases be made personally liable
for costs if he is in the wrong and that he should not be
entitled to spend the funds of the mstitution unless his
contentions are found to be just and are upheld.

This is a point which cap be appropriately considered
when the law of public trusts is revised.

Section 92 and notice

A suggestion has been received to the effect that a pro-
vision for giving notice. to persons interested in the trust
should be inserted in section 92. The analogy of Order I,
rule 8 has been cited in this connection. The sug; gestion
has not been accepted. A suit under section 92 can be ins-
tituted only by persons who have obtained the consent of
the Advocate-General. It would be contrary to the scheme
ef the section to add as a Party a person who has not
obtained such a consent. It may be that a decree in a suit
under section 92 binds all persons interested in the
frust*.’-’-*. But that is not a point justifying the insertion
of the provision suggested.

(Order I. rule 8 does not ordinarily apply to suits:
under section 92),

‘Fazlehussain v. Yusufally, A.J.R. 1955 Bem. 55, 58, para. 4 (Shah J).

*The Hindu Religioys Endowments Commission (1960—62), Repon,
‘page Mech Chapter VI, para. 29 has also recommended adoption of sections
‘13-14, | s Act, 1960,

See Muthukrishna v. Ramchandra, A.J.R. 1919 Madras 659, 6€9
Seshegiri Aiyyar J.).

‘Report orthe ‘Hindu Re : ous Endowments Commission (1960-—62)
Page 227, Chapter KI, para.20.

“Anjuman Islama v. Latafat Ali, A.I.R. 1950 All. 109, 118.

45. Veeraraghava v. Parthgsaraihi, AIR. 1925 Madras 3०70.

Sunni Central Board, etc. v. Siraj? Flag, AUR. 1954 Ail. 88.

*Khaja Hasanulla v. Royal Masque Trust Board, AAR. .1948 Wisteas
334.

*"Bapagowda v. Vinaygk, BR. 1941 Bom. 317.



121
कल Section 95

4, Arrest and attachment before judgment, ete., are pro-
vided for by Order 38. ‘Where such arrest or attachment
appears to have been applied for on insufficient grounds,
or where the suit of the plaintiff fails and it appears to the
court that there was no reasonable or probable ground for
instituting the same, the court has, under section 9501),
power to award reasonable compensation to the defendant
Stor the expense or injury” caused to the defendant. Now,
the exact scope of the words “expense or injury” has been
a matter of some controversy, and a conflict of decisions
has arisen on the question whether damages may be
awarded under {his head for injury to reputation. One
view is, that such damages can be awarded’*. The matter
was discussed fully in a recent Botubay case’, which held,
that the word “injury” does not necessarily mean injury to
property or person, and includes injury fo reputation and
menial pain. This is also the view of the Madras High
Court’.

2, The Calcutta view, however, is, that damage to prestige
66 a feeling of humiliation is not “injury” within the mean-
ing of section 95'~*-*.

3. The Geaeral principles under Law of Torts’ do not
‘seem to rule out damages for humiliation, ete. In the case
of arrest, particularly, damage to reputation has a very
strong ground for recognition.

4. The position needs to be clarified. Sub-section (2) of
section 5 bars a separate suit, once the application under
section 95 is “determined”. In view of this, it would be
desirable to adcpt the wider view. Necessary change is
proposed,

Section 97

The words “passed after the commencement of the
Code” have become unnecessary with the passage of time.
Hardly any case of preliminary decree passed before the
commencement of the Code, and open to challenge in
appeal, can now be in existence. Hence the amendment.

‘Srinivasa Ragavan v. Sundarajan, AAR. 1955 Mad. 552.
fAs 10 general damages, see Arumugam Pillai y. A.Kedir, AIR. 1926
962.

*Parikh Jivanial v. Shah Chkitalal, 1.L.R. 1959 Bem. 1686 5 ALR
1960 Bom. 326, 328, paras. 7 to 9 (Datar and Tarkunde JJ.).

“The Madras case would be found reviewed in Subrayan v. Kochivarke)
LR tost Ker. 8195 ALR. 1959 Kerala, 18,21. ४४४
*Chandulal v. Purnachandra, (1935) 39 C.W.N. 915.
© पटल vy. Iswardas, LL.R. 59 Cal. 1082 ; ALR. 1932 Cal. 695
286३४ also Seenappa vy. Suryanarayana, A.I.R. 1958 Mysore 136.
*Ratanlal, Law of Torts (1960), page 222 ; Iyer, Law of Terts (1957,
‘pages 333 to 336, paras. 14 and 15. ee ° पका


122

Section 98

1. Existing section 98 is not comprehensive enough,
because it does not cover one case, namely, where a Bench
of more than two Judges is equally divided, and a reference
to another Judge is practicable. Contract clause 36 of the
Letters Patent of Bombay, etc., High Courts, which is, in
this respect, wider than the Civil Procedure Code, It is:
considered that such a case should also be covered. The
matter is dealt with in clause 36 (latter half) of the Letters
Patent of the High Courts of Bombay, Madras and Calcutta’,
clause 28, Patna, clause 27, Allahabad’, and clause 26,
Nagpur.

2. On the other hand, two cases which are already
covered by section 98 and which are not covered in the
Letters Patent, namely, the eases where the reference to a
third Judge is nct possible, or where there is no majority
which concurs in varying the decree, wil} continue to be
covered. These are impliedly covered by section 98(2),
main paragraph, because, where the proviso does not
apply, the main paragraph, will apply.

3. Further, as recommended? in the Fourteenth Report,
the provision relating to reference to another Judge
should be extended to cover points other than points of
law. (At present in such a case the decree must be con-
firmed).

4. Necessary changes have been proposed.

5. See also the working of section 66A(1), proviso,
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, now section 259(2) of the
1961 Act. Contrast section 429, Criminal Procedure Code,
Whereunder the opinion of the third Judge is the conclusive

lecision.

Section 99

A question has been raised as to whether “non-joinder”
should be added in the section, as in Order I, rule 9. It
is considered unnecessary to do so as—

(a) non-joinder of an essential party should be
regarded as a fatal defect, and

(b) non-joinder of a proper party would not, even
now, entail variation, etc., of a decree.

3$ee Abdul Latif v. Abdul Samad, A.I.R. 1950 Assam 80.
2See Ashtabhuja v. Board of Revenue, A.LLR. 1954 All. 521.
3zgth Report, Vol. 1, page 406, para, 48, second sub-para.
4M uhammad Ibrahim v. Sundar, A.LR. 1937 Nag. 88.


123
Section 100

1. The legislature of the erstwhile State of Travancore-
Cochin has inserted! an additional clause (१), which is as
follows: —

(d) “the finding of the lower appellate court on
any question of fact material to the right decision of
the case on the merits being in conflict with the finding
of the Court of first instance on such question.”.

(See now Kerala Act 13 of 1957 to the same effect}.

This runs counter to the accepted scope of second
appeal, and as observed in the Fourteenth Report? of the
Law Commission, it should be repealed by a suitable
measure to be enacted separately.

2. A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report! for resolving the conflict of decisions on the point
as to whether an appeal can be admitted on certain ques-
tions only. It is felt, that the power of the appellate Court
should not be so confined. Hence no amendment is
suggested.

Section 102

This carries out, in part the recommendation made in
the Fourteenth Report’. The object is to restrict the right
of second appeal in certain cases. The proposed draft,
however. differs from the recommendation in the Four-
teenth Report, on the following points: —

(i) the amount has been increased to Rs. 3,000
{The Fourteenth Report suggested Rs. 2,000).

(ii) The restriction against second appeals in suits
below the specified amount will apply, as at present,
only to suits of a smal] cause nature. (The Fourteenth
Report recommended its application to all suits except
suits involving rights over or in respect of immovable
property. It is not however consi dered desirable to
widen the section in that manner)’.

Section 125

The words “made after the commencement of this
Code” are being omitted as obsolete today, after the lapse
of fifty years from the enactment of the Code.

Vide Travancore-Cochin Act 17 of 1951.

4ygth Report, Vol. I, pages 377-378, paragraphs 25-26.

4Gf. 140 Report, Vol. I, page 392, paragraph 16, last sub-paragraph,
and Eswariah v,  Rameswarayya, A.I.R. 1940 Madras 483 and Rekha v.
Rannindan, A.LR. 1936 Pat. 7.

जता Report, Vol. I, page 377, paragraphs 23-24.

3968 also the body of the Report


124

Section 115
This carries out the recommendation made in the Four-
teenth Report!. The object is to clarify the position re-
garding revisions from interlocutory orders®.

There is a conflict of decisions as to revision in cases
where an appeal lies to some court other than the High
Court?-+. The position has been clarified.

Section 133

In the Report of the Hindu Religious Endowments
Commission’, an observation has been made that it isa
matter for consideration whether “accredited and recog-
nised heads of mutts of accepted sanctity and authority”
should not enjoy exemption from personal appearance in
courts. No change is suggested on this point, as it may
not be possible to enumerate in the statute these various
mutts.

Section 135A

It is considered desirable to increase the period from
14 to 40 days in conformity with the position obtaining in
England in relation to members of the House of Commons,—
see articles 105 and 194 of the Constitution also. It is
also considered, that this amendment should apply to
Members of State Legislatures also. The view that the
subject-matter (so far as concerns such Members) falls
within the competence of State Legislatures, under article
#98) of the Constitution, has not been accepted. It is
felt, that the matter falls within entry 13, Concurrent List—
“Civil Procedure including all matters dealt with in the
Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of this
Constitution”.

Section 138

1. Certain changes in the provisions relating to taking
down of evidence, have been suggested in the Fourteenth
Report®, but section 138 is not expressly referred to there-
in, The changes have not been carried out under Order
XVIII, for reasons given separately’. Accordingly, section
138 is also left as it is.

3866 14th Report, Vol. I, pages 422, 423, para. 19(1)(2)(3) and page
420, para. 13. Regarding the point raised at Page 420, no specific recom-
mendation has been made in the 14th Report, and hence no change has been
suggested,

*See the body of this Report.

*Vasu v. Narayanan, A.1.R. 1962 Kerala 261 (Revision lies).

‘Custodian of Evacuee Property v. Nasiruddin A.I.R. 1962 Punjab 218
(F.B.) (Revision does not lie).

‘Report of the Hindu Religious Endowments Commission, (1960-62),
page 37, Chapter IV, para. 10 bottom.

“See 140 Report, Vol. I, page 345, para. 80.

२56६ discussion regarding Order 18, rule 5.


125

2. For this reason, the Assam Amendment’, authorising
dictation, has not been adopted.

Section 139

“Notaries” have powers to administer oath under section
8 (1) (e) of the Notaries Act, 1952.

The question of adding “notaries” in section 139 has been
considered in detail with reference to the suggestions
received through the Ministry of Law to that effect. These
suggestions state that in the absence of a provision, the
courts refuse to accept the affidavits sworn before notaries.
It is, however, considered that the matter should be left
to be dealt with by High Courts under section 139(b) or
otherwise.

Section 144

1. The object of the proposed amendment is to deal with
the power of a court to order restitution when a decree is
set aside or modified otherwise than on appeal. etc—that
is, in a separate suit. There is a conflict of decisions as
to whether section 144 applies in such a case. One view is
that it does*-’-". Ancther view 1s that it does not*--',
The U.P. Amendment on the subject may be seen.

2, The words “court of first instance” are not literally
applicable to such a case. Hence a somewhat elaborate
provision in relation to such setting aside, etc., is added.

The question as to whether proceedings under section
144 are execution proceedings or independent and collateral
proceedings is one on which there is a conflict of decisions १-१,
In many of the decisions, however, on the subject, the point
seems to have arisen with reference to the question whether
an application for restitution falls under the article in the
Limitation Act relating to execution or under the residuary

3868 Assam Act 2 of 1941, section 2(2), amending section 138.

2 ‘*Subrayudu v. Seshasami, 13..R. 40 Mad, 299 ; A.LR. 1917 Mad.
93.

Yagendra v. Hira, 1.L.R. 1948 All. 62 ; A.LR. 1948 All. 252 (F.B.).
‘LL.R. 27 Pat. 873 ; A.LR. 1949 Pat. 133 (F.B.).

‘Ashutosh v. Kundal Kamini, U.L.R. 57 Cal. 226 ; A..R. 1929 Cal.

‘Gopal v, Swarna, A.I.R. 1931 Cal. 42, 43.
1Alfred v. Sirajuddin, AI.R. 1944 Lahore 165, 167.
*Case law is reviewed in A.LR. 1958 Punjab 134 (F.B.).
6 *See also Bhannath v. Kedarnath, LL.R, 13 Pat, 411 ; A.ILR. 1934 Pat,
246.


126

article’. It is not, therefore, considered necessary to
amend the section in the Civil Procedure Code*.

Section 145

The present position as to enforcement of decrees, etc.,
against a surety who has furnished security of his property,
would be found discussed in the undermentioned deci-
sions*5, which collect the case-law on the subject. As to
the proper course to be followed when the security is in
favour of the court, see the Privy Council decisions quoted
below’.

It is considered that an express provision should be
inserted to deal with the power of the court to sell property
where the property has been furnished as security.
amendment’ on the subject has been made in the UP. by
the Amendment Act 24 of 1954. (In the U-P., an Expla-
nation has also been added to deal with the case of a person
to whom attached property has been entrusted for safe
custody.) That aspect is dealt with separately*. Necessary
amendment is proposed.

Section 145 and persons to whom attached property is
entrusted

This is dealt with separately®.

Section 152

It has been suggested that the section should be amended
so as to provide that the Court should not exercise the
power under this section where rights of third party have
intervened. This would be the ordinary practice". It is,
however, considered, that no such express provision is
necessary.

a
15९6 C. 5. Ratanchand v. Multamnul, A.1.R. 1964 Mysore 117; 121,
122 (reviews case-law).
96 eal also Vasudevan v. Choikutty, 1.L.R. (1964), 2 Kerala 597 (Dec.
1964).
3566 now M. M. Barot v. 2, M. Gokalthai (1964) S. C. N. 362,
which sums to resolve the conflict.
ति “Babu Lal v. Hyderabad Municipal Corpn., A.I.R. 1961 Andhra Pradesh
473 418. .
’Jagannatha v. Ramchandra, A.1.R. 1936 Madras 589.
*Raghubar v. Jai, LL.R. 42 All. 158 ; A.LR. 1919 P.C. 56, 3 Re é
श्र Har, RAR. 1943" 185. es 979 36 59 3 Rehoni
7Compare discussion in the Report of the U. P. Committee on Judicial
Reforms (1950-51), Vol. I, page 36.
386९ Order 21, rule 43A (as proposed).
*See Order 21, rule 43A (proposed).
3०866 TLR. 47, All. 44 3 LL-R. 54, Mad. 184 ३ Hatton v. Harris (1892)
AS C. 547, ‘and discussion in Bela Devi v. Bon Behary Roy, A.1.R. 1952
|. 86, 90.



7
Order I, rule 1

The proposed amendment splits up the rule into para-
graphs, so as to show separately each condition to be
Satisfied before the rule applies’.

Order I, rule 3

The proposed amendment is intended to split up the
conditions and state them in separate paragraphs'. For
the history of this provision, see the under-mentioned
decisions*-8, which discuss the difference between the
Indian rule and R.S.C. (1883) Order 16, rule 4.

Order I, rule 3A (New)

This is new. At present, there is no rule empowering
the court to order separate trials where a joinder of
defandants is likely to cause embarrassment or delay. The
desirability of such a rule is obvious‘,

Order I, rule 8
The following changes have been made:—

(a) A provision has been inserted to the effect
that—

(i) the decree under this rule shall bind the
parties on whose behalf the suit is instituted or
defended

(ii) the decree, however, shall not be executed
against such persons withcut leave of the court’.
As to both these points, see the R.S.C.7,

(b) It has been provided, that in granting leave
as above the court may consider facts, ete., particular
to the person seeking exemption from liability in res-
pect of execution’.

{c) A procedure for obtaining such leave has
been briefly dealt with®.

(a) A provision has been added to the effect that
the court can direct two or more persons to sue, ete.,
under this rule on behalf of others. This follows local

Cf. Order 15, rule 4(1), Revised R.S.C. (1962).
*Harendra v. Purna, L.L.R. 55 Cal. 164 ; A.LR. 1928 Cal. 199,
*Bhagvan v. Balku, A.I.R. 1932 Bom. 1, 3.
Cf. Order 15, rule 5(1), Revised R.S.C. (1962).
‘For the present position, see :—
(Kode ” Velandi, 1.L.R. 1955 Mad. 339 ; A.LR. 1955 Mad. 281
(ii) Mootchandra v. Jagadish, A.LR. 1955 All. 385.

“For the present law, see Kodia v. Velandi, LL.R. 1955 Mad. 339,
A.LR. 1955 Mad, 28 (F.B.).

R.S.C. (Revision) 1962, Order 15, rule 12(3).
361. R.S.C. Revision (1962), Order 12, rule 12(4).
१८1. R.S.C, Revision (1962), Order 15, rule 12(4).



128

Amendments!. The direction can be given to one or
more persons (as in the Calcutta Amendment) and is
not confined to two or more persons, (as in the Bombay
Amendment}.

(९) A provision has been added to the effect that
before a suit under this rule is withdrawn or com-
i e claim abandoned, notice shall be given
to the persons interested in the suit. At present, there
is no express provision on the subject. But that seems
to be the practice of most courts. ‘The under-mentioned

decisions discuss the subject?-5-4-*,
As to withdrawal also that seems to be the practice®-’,

(0 Further, a provision has been added to deal
with cases where the persons suing, etc., do not procee
with due diligence®.

Order I, rule 10(2)

The following changes have been proposed, to make the
rule comprehensive:
(a) A power to strike off the name of any person

who has for any reason ceased to be a proper or neces-
sary party, has been added, on the lines of the RS.C.*.

(b) A power to remove any person who has been
unnecessarily joined, has been added?.

Order I, rule 10(5)

Reference to the section of the new Limitation Act
(36 of 1963) has been substituted.

Order I, rule 11

Instead of the words “the suit” the words “a suit” have
been substituted, as in the R.S.C."°.

1Gf. the Bombay and Calcutta Amendments.

*Muthu Karuppa v. Appava, A.LR. 1943 Mad, 161, 164.
*Chintaharan v. Gujabdeb, A.I.R. 1951 Cal. 456.

‘Biram Parkash v. Narendra Das, A.LR. 1961 All. 266, 275.
‘Chander Bhan v. Des Raj, A.1.R. 1952 Pun. 43.

‘Asian Assurance Co. v. Madholal, A.1.R. 1950 Bom. 378.
*Kunju Kombi v. Ammi, A.ILR. 1932 Mad. 31.

Gf. section 92, Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909.

Cf. R.S.C. Revision (1962) Order 15, rule 6 (200०0:

19See R.S.C. Revision (1962), Order 15, rule 18.


129

Order II, rule 2 and partition suits

The applicability of the principle embodied in Order 2,
tule 2 to partition suits presents some problems. But that
is because such suits form a peculiar category. The two
Iain questions are—

(i) Where a claim for partition of a particular pro-
perty is omitted by mistake, inadvertence or ignorance
in the earlier suit, can it be included in a later suit;

(४) Where, in the earlier suit, a claim for partition
of a certain property was intentionally not made, can
it be made in a later suit?

On the first point, there does not appear to be much
uncertainty, as courts have allowed the later suit’-?-3-1,
There are general observations in a Madras case® that all
properties of which existence is known should be included;
but these were made to over-rule the contention that pro-
perty outside the jurisdiction need not be included. They
do not rule out the case of inadvertence.

On the second point, there seems to be some amount of
uncertainty, One view is, that even where a claim for
partition of certain properties is omitted intentionally, a
second suit will lie (if no objection is taken in first suit) ५.
It is also stated that the cause of action in a partition suit
is a recurring one’. Another view is, that where the
exclusion of the property in the first suit was intentional,
a subsequent suit is barred’.

16 is, however, unnecessary to enact any proposition for
such particular kinds of suits. No change in the language
is, therefore, recommended on this point.

Order HI, rule 6

The scope of this rule has been widened, so as to give
the court power to order separate trial of causes of action

whose joinder may cause embarrassment’ or delay. Cf.
the R.S.C.”.

STS aU ner annneee
‘Subramaniam v. Lakshminarasamma, A.1.R. 1927 Mad. 213 (Devadoss
J.). (No “omission” to sue where ignorance).

’Gapulal v. Gajasa, A.I.R. 1932 Nag. 92 inadvertence),

*Fogendra Nath v. Baldev Das, LLL.R. 35 Cal. 961 (Mistake of Com-
missioner in first suit).

‘Sasi Mohan v. Hari Nath, है... 1928 Cal. 459 (reviews case-law),
SBisavangidia v. 7728 7 % ALR. 1923, Mad. $84, Right.
» ALR. 1928

*See Sasi Mohan v. Hari Nati 1. 459, 460 (Suhy és
and Graham JJ.). 459, 460 (Suhrawardy

*Monsharam y. Ganesh, 17 C.W.N. $21, cited in Mitra,
Co-ownership, etc., (1963), page 213.

*Yasoda Kumari v. Sartyabhama, A.ILR. 1960 Pat. 76,

As to embarrassment, see Ramaswamy v. Marimuthu, A.I.R. 1928

d. 764.
2836 R.S.C, (Revision) 1962, Order 15, rule 5 (2), latter half,

Law of


130

Order II, rule 8 (Local Amendments) and separate trial in
case of misjoinder

1. The rules regarding joinder of causes of action are
contained in Order I, rules 3, 4 and 5. Where there is a
breach of these rules resulting in a misjoinder of causes
-of action, an objection can be raised on that ground, pro-
“vided it is taken at the earliest opportunity. When such
an objection is taken, the question arises—-what course the
court should adopt.

2. Usually, the court would not dismiss the suit, but
should give the plaintiff an opportunity to amend the plaint
and proceed with the claim in respect of one of the causes
of action!-?,

3. Some High Courts have inserted a specific rule on
the subject* as Order II, rule 8—to the effect that where an
objection on the ground of misjoinder, duly taken, is
allowed by the Court, the plaintiff shall be permitted to
select the cause of action with which he will proceed and
shall amend the plaint by striking out the remaining
causes of action:

Where the plaintiff has so selected the cause of action,
the Court shall pass an order giving him time within which
to submit the amended plaint (and for making up court~-
fees where necessary}.

If he does not comply with the order, the Court is to
proceed as provided in Order VI, rule 18, and the Court-
fees Act.

4. The question whether such a provision should be in-
serted in the Civil Procedure Code has been considered.
It is felt that there is no need for it.

5. In cases where the joinder, though proper under
Order II, rules 3, 4 and 5, is inconvenient, the Court can,
under Order I, rule 8, order a separate trial. That rule
would not, of course, apply to misjoinder*’.

Order Ul, rule i

A suggestion has been made that a recognized agent
should not be allowed to appear or apply, and that he
should not be treated at par with pleaders. No such change

"Govindanathan v. Anjaneya, A.L.R. 1950 Mad. 7€0, 7€1 (Meck J.).

2Satya Narayan Banerjee v. Radke Noth Das, LLL.R. (1942) 1 Cal. 235 5
ALR. 1942 Cal. 69, 70, tight middle.

*Bhondu y. Rai Singh, ALR. 1948 All. 60, 62.

AAldvidge v. Barrow, LLR. 34 Cal. 662.

55८६ Order 2, rule है, inserted in Punjab, Kerala and Rejasthan.

“Con -cration v. Radha, ALR. 1952 Cal. 222.

*Muthappa v. Muthu, LL.B. 27, Mad. 80, 84.


133

jg considered necessary. Even at present, the right to
“gudience” is not, according to the better view, available
to recognised agents." See also ncw the Advocates Act,
i961

Order III, rule 2 and the Bombay Amendment

1. The High Court of Bombay has made an extensive
and elaborate amendment under Order III, rule 2, where-
under, persons who can be appointed as recognised agents
must be persons holding on behalf of the party either—

(i) a general power-of-attorney, or

(ii) in the case of proceedings in the High Court
of Bombay an attorney of such High Court or an
Advocate, and in the case of proceedings in any dis-
trict, any such attorney or an Advocate or a pleader
to whom a sanad for that district has been issued,
holding the requisite special power of attorney from
parties not resident within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the court.

2. Stated briefly. the effect of this amendment is, that
a recognised agent should either have a general power of
attorney, or he must be an Advocate, etc., authorised by a
special power* executed by 8 party residing elsewhere.
Thus, 3 person who is not an Advocate, etc., can act only
under a general power. The Bombay Amendment, as it
stood in 1930, recognised only holders of general powers.
Cases arose where non-residents had authorised Attor-
neys of the High Courts, ete., by special powers—a situa-
tion which was not then covered. The holders of special
powers were therefcre added later.*

3. It is considered unnecessary to make such a rigid
provision.

Order III, rule 4

Several points have been considered under Order III,
tule 4 which deal with the mode of appointment of
pleaders, powers and the form of the appointment. These
are as follows:— :

(a) Sub-rule (1).—According to the Madras Amend~-
ment, where a person appoints a pleader, the document

1Aswin v. National Rayon, etc., Co. A.LR. 1955 Bom. 262.

*Harchand v. B. N. Rly. AR. 1916 Cal. 181 (1).

As to the distinction between general and special ५ see Vardaji
v. Chandrappa, A.LR. 1916 Bom. हर 156. powers, 5० aah

4Ephrayim v. Turner Morrison & Co., A.1.R. 1930 Bom. $11, 512.

28५ to meaning of the word “person” in Bombay Amendment,
Performing Rights Society Co. v. Indian Morning Post Restaurant, TLR.
1939 Bom. 295 ; A.LR. 1939 Bom, 347, 348.


132

must be “subscribed with his signature in his own hand”.
This does not appear to be necessary.

(b) Sub-rule (2)—The question whether the appoint-
ment should be accepted by the pleader in writing has
been considered. Such a requirement was contained in
the old rule 2, and was removed by the Amendment Act
22 of 1926.1 No change is considered necessary on this
point.

(c) Sub-rule (3) provides that certain applications and
proceedings, mainly applications for review, appeal,
and applications for copies or refund, etc., are deemed to
be “proceedings in the suit”, so that the provision in sub-
rule (2) providing that the appointment of pleader con-
tinues until the “proceedings in the suit” are ended, is
attracted. Now, one suggestion which has been made is
that a pleader should not be allowed to act, ete, in the
High Court (in appeal, ete.), on the basis of the authority
filed by him in the lower court, and that he should file a
fresh appointment in the High Court. It has been stated,
that until the records of the lower court are called for, it
becomes difficult to check up whether the pleader appear-
ing in the High Court had in fact filed his authority in
the lower court. The Patna High Court has added a rule
on the subject’, whereunder, a pieader shal] not act for
any person in the High Court unless his appointment has
been filed in the High Court. It is, however, considered
that no such change is necessary. Counsel’s statement in
the High Court that he has filed his authority in the
lower court can ordinarily be relied upon.

While “appeals” are mentioned in the sub-rule, appli-
cations relating to appeals are nct mentioned. It is
accordingly considered desirable to mention these
specifically.’

There is some conflict of decisions on the point whe-
ther an authority filed by a pleader in the suit continues
to be valid for the purposes of revision. One view is
that the power to file an appeal includes the power to
file a petition or revision.‘ But a contrary view has also
been taken.5 It is therefore considered desirable to add
revisions also.

Another question that has arisen under sub-rule (3)
is, whether applications under Order IX, rule 9 or under
Order IX, rule 13 are proceedings in the suit. As regards
applications for restoration of suit after dismissal for de-

+The present position is discussed in Abdul Rauf vy. Nani Bai, ALR.
1955, Nag. 276.

*Order 3, rule 5B, Patna Amendment.

Compare the Bombay Amendment to Order 3, rule 4(3).

‘J, P. Ojha v. R. Ry ALR. 1962 All. 485.

*Mool Ghand v, Ram Babu, AIR. 1961 M.P. 323,



133

fault (Order IX, rule 9), one view is that they are proceed-
ings in the suit.'-*
But a contrary view has also been taken.?-t

Regarding applications for setting aside ex parte de-
erees (Order IX, rule 13) one view is that a fresh autho-
rity is not necessary. But some doubt is thrown by one
decision."

It is considered unnecessary to insert any express
provision in this behalf. (An amendment on the subject
has been made by the Kerala High Court.’)

(व) Sub-rule (6)—(Local Amendments)—

Sub-rule (6) has been inserted by several High Courts®,
to provide, in effect, that a Government pleader appear-
ing on behalf of the Government or on behalf of any pub-
lic servant sued in his official capacity shall not be re-
quired to present any document empowering him to act,
but that such pleader shall file a memorandum of appear-
ance signed by himself and stating the names of the
parties, the name of the party for whom he appears and
name of the person by whom he is authorised to appear.
After some consideration, it is felt that no such provision
is necessary.

It may be noted that three kinds of documents are pro-

vided for in respect of various situations by Order III, rule

(i) A pleader who is appointed by the party to act

in court, has to file a document in writing signed by

the party, etc., under sub-rule (1)% and pay necessary
court-fees™.

(ii) A pleader who has been engaged for the pur-
pose of pleading only has to file a memorandum for
appearance signed by himself and stating the specified
particulars under sub-rule (5). He need not file a
power of attorney".

tow Lal v. Balla Ram, A.ILR. 1957 Raj. 391 (Reviews the case-
L 1 fede Aziz v. Punjab National Bank Ltd., A.I.R. 1929 Lah. 96 (Jai
al. J.).

3Hyderabad Import and Export Corpn. v. United Tradir ns ALT.
ogo edgrabod Import and ixpor' rpm. v. vading Co., A.LR.

See also Pavoo Rayil v. Kunhiman, (1955) 2 M.L.J. 124, 125.
‘Jwala v. Bhrigu ALR. 1944 All. 238.

“Krishna v. Ranganathan, A.1.R. 1951 Mad. 686 (2).

*See Kerala Amendment to Order 3, rule 4 (3).

386९ Madras, Kearla and Rajasthan Amendments, Order 3, rule 4(6).
*Braja Behari v. Arun Coomar, I.L.R. (1953) 2 Cal. 309, 315.
“Fhamnan Lal y. Parma Nand, A.LR. 1951 All. 451.

“Ramzan v. Gopal Das, A.I.R. 1936 Lah. 199.


134

(iii) A pleader who has been engaged for pleading
only, by anv other pleader (who himself has been
duly appointed to act on behalf of the party concerned)
need not, under the proviso to sub-rule (5), file the
memorandum of appearance.

Order II, rule 5
This follows local amendments." The object is to make
it clear that where service of a process is effected on a
pleader, the pleader should have been appointed to act for
the party.

Order III, rule 6

Under the Bombay Amendment, a party may be re-
quired by the Court to appoint an agent within the juris-
diction of the Court for accepting service of process, ete.
This appears to be a useful provision, and has been adopt-
ed.

Order IV, rule 2

Order IV, rule 2 provides for the particulars to be entered
in the Register of Civil Suits. The Calcutta Amendment
makes an exception in respect of some suits triable by a
Court of Small Causes. This seems to be a matter which
can be best dealt with by local Amendments, and need not
be adopted for the whole of India.

Order V, rule 2

Order V, rule 2 provides that every summons shall be
accompanied by a copy of the plaint or, if so permitted,
by a concise statement. Some High Courts’ have by local
Amendments, omitted the reference to concise statements.
It is, however, considered desirable to retain it. These
concise statements are filed under another rule—Order VII,
rule 9.

Order V, rule 4A (Local Amendments)

Certain High Courts have, by Local Amendments‘,
inserted Order V, rule 4A, pmpowering the Court to dis-
pense with service in proceedings for interlocutory relief
and in proceedings held after the decree, in respect of
defendants against whom the main case has proceeded
ex parte. It is not considered necessary to adopt such a
provision for the whole of India.

‘See the amendments made by High Courts of Andhra Pradesh, Bom-
bay, Gujrat, Madhya Pradesh, Madras and Rajasthan.

39७6 also Civil Justice Committee (1924-25), Report, page 172, Chapter
20, para. 23.

*See Aitahabad, Kerala and Rajasthan Amendments to Order 5, rule 2.

‘See Local Amendments by Allahabad and Orissa.


135

Order V, rule 5

1. The question whether the words “for appearing and
answering the claim” should pe added, to emphasise the
defendant's duty to file the written statement!, has been
considered. It is felt that no such change is necessary, as
the existing rule is adequate.

2, The Madras Amendment to this rule contains elabo-
rate provisions as to the kinds of summonses that may
issue against the defendant. Briefiy speaking, the summons
may (under that Amendment) be issued—-

(i) for settlement of issues; or

(ii) for appearing and stating whether the defen-
dant wishes to contest the suit and (if so) for receiving
directions as to date for filing the written statement,
date of trial and other matters, and (if he does not
contest) for final disposal; or

(iii) for final disposal.

{As to the second category of summons—summons for
receiving directions as to further proceedings, etc.,—the
addition of such a category was recommended by the Civil
Justice Committee)’.

The question whether a provision on the lines of this
Amendment should be incorporated in the Code, has been
considered. It is felt that such a change is not needed’.

Order V, rule 15

1. Order V, rule 15 provides that where in any suit the
defendant “cannot be found” and has no agent empowered
to accept service, service may be made on any adult male
member of his family residing with him. Many High
Courts have made local Amendments whereunder, instead
of the words “defendant cannot be found”, the words
“defendant is absent” or “defendant is absent from his
residence at the time when service is sought to be effected
on him thereat and there is no likelihood of his being found
thereat within 2 reasonable time” have been substituted.
The last mentioned form is the most elaborate and has been
employed in the Calcutta Amendment. It seems to be worth
incorporating, and has therefore been adopted.

2. The genesis of these local Amendments may be ex~
plained. There had been decisions by several High Courts

161. rath Report, Vol. I, page 302, para. II.

2Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 6, Chapter I, para.
15.

3866 also 14th Report, Vol. I, page 302, para. 9.

3888 the focal Amendments made by High Courts of Allahabad, Andhra
Pradesh, Assam, Calcutta, Madhya Pradesh, Madras, Punjab and Rajas-
than.


136

to the effect that service under this rule upon an adult
male member would not be proper service unless it was
proved to the complete satisfaction of the court that
attempts were made to find the defendant, that the defen-
dant could not be found and that he was deliberately
keeping himself out of the way to avoid service. The Civil
Justice Committee’ noted this position and observed that
the decisions “imposed an unnecessary restriction on the
application of this rule which is not contemplated either
by the letter or spirit of the rule”. It observed that there
‘was no reason to suppose that the knowledge of the service
effected on the adult male member would be withheld
from the defendant and recommended the substitution of
the words “where the defendant is absent”.

3. A suggestion has been received to the effect that the
word “male” in this rule should be omitted. Though the
word has been omitted by local Amendment in one State,
it does not appear to be a change which can be safely
adopted for the whole of the country.

Order V, rule 17

In view of the change proposed to Order V, rule 15%,
it is proposed to substitute in rule 17 alsc for the words
“or where the serving officer cannot................ find
the defendant”, the words “or where the defendant is
absent, ete.” The Calcutta Amendment on the subject,
which is on the same lines, may be seen. The effect of
that amendment has now been settled by several decisions
relating to Order V, rule 15, and Order V, rule 174-8,

Order V, rule 19

By a local Amendment, the Calcutta High Court has
substituted “declaration” for “affidavit” in Order V, rule 19.
It is unnecessary to adopt this change.

Order V, rule 19 (proposed)

1. This carries out the recommendation in the Four-
teenth Report®. The object is to provide for simultaneous
‘issue of summons for—

(® service in the ordinary manner, and
(ii) service by post.

‘Civil Justice Committee Report (1924-25), pages 168-169, ChapteT
10, para. 20.

3866 Kerala Amendment.

See amendment proposed to Order 5, rule 15.

‘Tripura M. Bank v. Bansen & Co., A.LLR. 1952 Cal. 781.
®Ganesh Mal v. Keshoram, A.LR. 1952 Cal. 10.

*1yth Report, Vol. 1, page 310, para, 24, last sub-para.


137

2. The suggested alternative that in the beginning, the
summons should be sent by registered post, and if the
defendant does not appear, the case should not proceed
ex parte but the summons should be issued again for service
in the ordinary way, has been examined. The question
whether processes in connection with injunctions, contempts
and proclamations for sale should be excluded totally from
service by post, has also been considered. It is felt, that
from the practical point of view, the course suggested in
the Fourteenth Keport, which has been adopted, is
the simplest and is worth giving a trial. The
amendments made to Order V, rule 9 by certain
High Courts! and to Order V, rule 10 by other High
Courts?, and Order V, rule 21A inserted by some
High Courts’, give a discretion to the court to
send the summons for service by registered post.
It is unnecessary to consider the details of these amend-
ments, but the effect of most of these amendments is that
where summons is sent by registered post, an acknowledg-
ment purporting to be signed by the defendant shall be
deemed to be prima facie proof of service. Case-law on
‘these amendments explains their meaning*--*-7-"", What
is now proposed is, that the summons (by post)'®
should be simultaneously issued. The court may act on
whichever summons is proved to have been served.

3, A saving, preserving the power of the Court to direct
service in another manner, has been provided for. (It may
be useful in cases, for example, where the defendant re-
sides very near the headquarters of the Court, or the Court
proposes to send a special messenger).

Order V, rule 20

1. The Fourteenth Report contains a recommendation"
to empower the court to order substituted service where a
summons sent for personal service has been returned un-
served twice.
1858 amendments to Order 5, rule 9 by High Courts of Allahabad, Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala and Madras.
4966 amendments to Order 5, rule 10 by High Courts of Orissa, Patna
Punjab and Rajasthan,
uh ‘Bombay, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh Amendments inserting Order 5९
tule 20A,
4S, 24. R. 6. Church v. Lakshmana, A..R. 1959 Ker. 297.
‘Sri Krishna Rice Mills v. Rajagopal, A.I.R. 1958 Mad. 528.
“Bai Shanta v. Khalas, A.LLR. 1956 Bom. 144.
7Mohan v. Sunder, A.ILR. 1949 Pun. 295.
*Dua ४. Balli, A.LLR. 1959 Pun, 467.
°K, A. Desai v. Vijoy Singh, A.I.R. 1954 Sau. 84 (existing position).
19As to post, see sections 16 and 114, Evidence Act, and section 27,
+General Clauses Act.
‘14th Report, Vol, I, page 311, para. 25.


138

It is, however, considered unnecessary to insert any such
rigid provision of this nature.

2. It is considered, that where substituted service by
advertisement in newspapers is ordered, the newspapers
should be those circulating in the neighbourhood. Neces-
sary change has been proposed.

Order V, rule 204
This is consequential! See also Fourteenth Report?.

Order V, rule 26

Order V, rule 26 contains two types of provisions for
service of a summons intended for a defendant residing
outside the territories to which the Code extends. Under
the first type, it can be sent for service to a Political Agent
appointed by the Central Government in exercise of foreign
jurisdiction or to a court established or continued in the
exercise of such jurisdiction. Under the second, where the
State Government has, in respect of any court situate in
any such territory, and not established or continued in the
exercise of such jurisdiction, declared that service by such
court of a summons issued under this Code, shall be deemed
to be valid service, a summons can be sent to such court.

It is considered that in the second case, the notification
should be issued by the Central Government, and not by
the State Government. Since external affairs are ex-
clusively in the charge of the Central Government, and
since the corresponding section for summonses received
from countries outside India—section 29—now leaves the
power fo issue notification under the section to the Central
Government, it is proper that the power under Order 5,
rule 26 should also be vested in the Central Government.*-

Secondly, it would appear that the intention of Govern-
ment is, that a provision should be made for the transmis-
sion of summonses under this rule (in both cases) through
diplomatic channets*.

Necessary change has been proposed.

156९ Order 5, rule 19A (proposed).

2r4th Report, Vol. 1, page 310, para. 24, last sub-para.

In Order 5, rule 26 as enacted in 1908, the power was with the Governor_
General in Council. In the adaptation made in 1937, the power was trans
ferred to the State Government, on the ground that the matter fell within
the topic of “administration of justice’.

*This is also the suggestion received from the Government ; see Ministry
of Law, Legal Affairs Deptt. File No. 12(3)-62, J.

5562८ correspondence in Ministry of Law, Legal Affairs Department,
File No. 12(3)/62, J., which was forwarded to the Law Commission for #3
consideration,



139

Order V, rule 26A (New)

1. This rule is new, and inserts an additional provision
dealing with service of summonses meant for defendants
residing outside India. There are two rules which exist
at present on the subject, namely, Order V, rule 25, under
which the summons can be sent by registered post direct
to the defendant (subject to the proviso relating to
Pakistan), and Order V, rule 26, under which, in certain
cases, the summonses can be sent to a Political Agent or
court specified in the rule or in the notification issued
thereunder. These provisions do not, however, provide for
cases where it is intended that the summons should be
served through diplomatic channels and sent to an officer
of the foreign country. A provision authorising such a
course has been suggested by the Government!. The provi-
sion, as drafted, is intended to implement this suggestion.
Reference may be made in this connection to the local
Amendments made in Order V, rule 26 by the High Courts
of Madras and Kerala, though they are not so comprehen-
sive as the proposed provision.

2. Certain points of detail? may be discussed.

(a) The proposed new rule will not alter the exist-
ing practice of sending summonses to the Political
Agent or courts (Order V, rule 26).

(0) The transmission of documents under the new
tule, will be either through the External Affairs Minis-
try or in such other manner as the Central Government
May notify.

(c) It is expected that the documents will be sent
in a language with which the authorities in the foreign
countries will be familiar, but it is considered un-
necessary to make such a provision in the Code of
Civil Procedure’,

3. One point of importance may be noted. Order V, rule
26 authorises a presumption of service when the endorse-
ment by the court, ete., is to the effect that the summons
has been served on the defendant “in manner herein-
before directed”. This seems to contemplate service in
accordance with the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code.
But, in respect of the proposed new rule, it is considered
sufficient to provide that a certificate of service by the
officer of the foreign country concerned shall be evidence
of service. It would not be convenient to adopt the provi-
sion in rule 26 in such cases.

_ ‘Suggestion in Ministry of Law, Department of Legal Affairs, Judicia
Section, File No. F. 12(3)'62, J., which is in substitution of the previous
Suggestion under Order 5, rute 23, contained in File No. F. 17(3)/38. J,

*T hose points arise from Ministry of Law, Legal Affairs Department, File
No. F. 12(3)/62, J.—noting as well as correspondence.

This can be conveniently dealt with by rules made by the High Courts
for civil courts.


Service in
foreign terri-
tory through
Political Age-
mtor Court,

Service

through Bri-
tish Resident
or Agent of
Government,

Mode of
sending such
letter,

140

4. Order V, rule 26, as originally enacted in 1908, is
quoted below :—

“26. Where—

(a) in the exercise of any foreign jurisdiction
vested in His Majesty or in the Governor-General
in Council. a Political Agent has been appointed,
or a Court has been established or continued, with
power to serve a summons issued by a Court under
this Code in any foreign territory in which the
defendant resides, or

(b) the Governor-General in Council has, by
notification in the Gazette of India, declared that
any summons so issued may be served by any
Court situate in any such territory and not estab-
lished or continued in the exercise of any such
jurisdiction as aforesaid,

the summons may be sent to such Political Agent or Court,
by post or otherwise, for the purpose of being served upon
the defendant; and, if the Political Agent or Court returns
the summons with an endorsement signed by such Political
Agent or by the Judge or other officer of the Court that
the summons has been served on the defendant in manner
hereinbefore directed, such endorsement shall be deemed
to be evidence of service.”.

5, The Adaptation of Indian Laws Order, 1937 substitut-
ed “Provincial Government” in clause (b)—now State
Government.

6. The provisions corresponding to Order V, rule 26 in
the earlier Acts are quoted below: —

Code of Civil Procedure (10 of 1877) (Sections 90 and
92) (now Order V, rule 26)

“90. If there be a British Resident or Agent of
Government in or for the territory in which the defen-
dant resides, the summons may be sent to such Resi-
dent or Agent, by post or otherwise, for the purpose of
being served upon the defendant: and if the Resident
or Agent returns the summons with an endorsement
under his hand that the summons has been served on
the defendant in manner hereinbefore directed, such
endorsement shall be conclusive evidence of the
service.

92. When a letter is so substituted for a summons,
it may be sent to the defendant by post or by a special
messenger selected by the Court, or in any other
manner which the Court thinks fit; unless the defen-
dant has an agent empowered to accept service of sum-
mons, in which case the letter may be delivered or
sent to such agent.”.


141
Section 90 of Act 14 of 1882 (now Order V, rule 26)

“90. If there be a British Resident or Agent of ach
Government in or for the territory in which the defen- pritish
dant resides, the summons may be sent to such Resi- Resident
dent or Agent, by post or otherwise for the purpose of or Agent of
being served upon the defendant; and if the Resident or Government.
Agent returns the summons with an endorsement under
his hand that the summons has been served on the
defendant in manner hereinbefore directed, such en-
dorsement shall be conclusive evidence of the service.

Section 90 of Act 14 of 1882 as amended by section 12 of
Act 7 of 1888 {now Order V, rule 26)

“90. If there is a British Resident or Agent, or a Service in
Superintendent appointed by the British Government, foreign terri:
or a Court established or continued by the authority Batish Rev.
of the Governor General in Council, in or for the terri- dent or
tory in which the defendant resides, the summons may Court.
be sent to such Resident, Agent, Superiniendent or
Court, by post or otherwise for the purpose of being
served upon the defendant; and if the Resident, Agent
or Superintendent or the Judge of the Court returns the
summons with an endorsement under his hand that the
summons has been served on the defendant in manner
hereinbefore directed, such endorsement shall be
evidence of the service.”.

7. The reason for the 1888 Amendment (Act 7 of 1888)
appears from the following remarks of the Select Com-
mittee, namely: —

“The section will admit of summonses being sent
for service to Superintendents of foreign States, and
to Courts established or continued by the authority of
the Governor General in Council in foreign territory,
as well as to British Residents and Agents.”.

The 1882 Act was revised and in the draft prepared in
1900 (which became the present Order V, rule 26), em-
phasis was laid on one ingredient, namely, that the offi-
cers and courts must be those who possess powers to
serve a summons in the foreign territories, and that the
summons should not be sent for service to an officer who
had no such power.

8. As to service by the ordinary mode, Order V, rule 18
requires the serving officer to make a return as to service
and the person identifying (if any)

© 8) to Order 5, rule 18, see Nagendra v. Sambu, A.LR. 1923 Pat. 114


142

Witnout examining the peon, or proving his report,
the report would not be evidence.1 An affidavit of the
process-server would be evidence, but where a defendant
denies that he was absent from the house (service having
been effected by affixture), the process-server should, it
has been held, be put in the witness box for cross-
examination.*

Order VI, rule 2

The rule has been slightly re-drafted, to provide that
each allegation should be contained in a separate para-
graph in the pleadings.*

Order VI, rule 144 (New)

1. This mainly carries out the recommendation made
in the Fourteenth Report,‘-5 and requires a party to file an
address for service (“registered address”) at which ser-
vice may be effected on him. Some local Amendments
provide that such service should not be effected when a
pleader has been engaged (unless the court otherwise
directs)’, or make an exception in respect of notices under
Order XXI, rule 22’. It is considered unnecessary to adopt
them. :

2. The draft mainly follows the Calcutta Amendment,
but amendments made by other High Courts have also
been considered in detail’ and a few usefu} points added.

The desirability of such a provision was stressed by
the Civil Justice Committee also.'”

‘Sarad Prosad_ v. Krishna Dome, A.1.R. 1926 Cal. 539,540 (Cuming and
Chakravarti JJ.). (Case of service of notice under Order 21, rule 22.)

*Basappa v. Hansaji, A.LR. 1936 Mad. 660, 661 (Wadsmorth J.).

*Cf. Order 18, rule 6 (2), R.S.C. Revision (1962).

‘14th Report, Vol. I, page 304, para. 14.

"See also Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 62, para. 3
and page 173, para. 24.

*Contrast Order 7, rule 23 (Bombay).

"Contrast Order 7, rule 26 (Bombay).

*Order 6, rule 144 (Calcutta),

Orissa Order 6, rule 14A.

Allahabad Order 7, rules 19--25.

Bombay Order 7, rules 19—26.

Punjab Order 7, rules 19--25.

Madhya Pradesh Order 7, rules 19—25.

Allahabad Order 8, rules 11-12,

Bombay Order 8, rules 11-12.

Allahabad Order 41, rule 38.

Bombay Order 41, rule 38.

1Civit Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 62, para. 3 ; page 173,
‘para. 24.



143

3. It is considered that an express provision imposing
the penalty for failure to file such address is unneces-
sary'. But where the address filed is not genuine, the
suit should be stayed (until the correct address is filed)
or the defence struck off, as the case may be. Necessary
provision is proposed.

Order VI, rule 15

There is a recommendation in the Fourteenth Report*
to provide for verification of a pleading on oath. (The
detailed provisions as to the person before whom the oath
should be taken are contained in local Amendments)*.

It ig considered unnecessary to make such a provision,
as it may not prove very useful in practice.

Order VI, rule 16

Power to strike off matter which is “frivolous or
vexatious” or “an abuse of the process of the Court” has
been added, as in the Revised R.S.C.*.

Order VI, rule 17 and anjendment beyond jurisdiction

i. The question whether a court can grant leave to
amend a plaint if the effect of the amendment would be
to take away the suit from the jurisdiction of the court
does not seem to admit of a definite answer. One view is,
that the court has such a power, and that if after the
amendment the court has no jurisdiction to try the suit
on the basis of the amended plaint, the plaint could be
returned to the plaintiff for presentation to the proper
court.*-*-"

2. A contrary view, however, has been taken in certain

cases,*-” holding that the court cannot allow the amend-
ment,

3, A third possible view is that taken in a Nagpur case,!?
where the position is discussed in great detail. It was

4Contrast Order 7, rule 21 (Bombay, Allahabad, Madhya Pradesh,
etc,), and Order 8, rule 11 (Bombay and Allahabad.)

?r4th Report, Vol. I, page. 299, para. 6 ; page 303, para. 12 and page
330, para. 53.

38९९ Bombay Amendment to Order 6, rule 15.

4See R.S.C. Revision (1962), Order 18, rule 19.

‘Nandula Bhavani vy. Saladi Mangamma, A.1.R. 1949 Mad. 208 (earlier
decision of Madras High Court not cited).

*Kundanmal v. Thikana Siryari, AAR. 1959 Raj. 146.
6 7Goverdhan v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1953 Hyderabad 212, 215, para.
16.
*Singapore v. Govin“aswamy, A.1.R. 1928 Mad. 400.
*E.R.R.M.H.S. Committee v. P. Atchayya, A.LLR. 1957 A.P. 10.
rat ji v. Narottam, A.LR, 1953 Nag. 273 (Hidayatullah and Kaushalen-
isdiction.)

dra Rao JJ.). (Case of pecuniary juri


144

observed there, that “something fundamental” was in-
volved. If the court disallows the amendment simply on
the ground that it had no jurisdiction to entertain it, it
might be shutting out a claim which was otherwise good,
and then the plaintiff would have no remedy in respect
of the claim which he sought to add. He would not ask
for the plaint to be returned merely because he wanted
to make an amendment. Again, the jurisdiction of a
court was determined by the nature of the plaint and
once jurisdiction is found, it inheres in the court until
something supervenes which ousts it. As against this, the
court observed, by allowing an amendment which, taken
together with the criginal claim, exceeded the court’s
pecuniary jurisdiction, the court was in effect trying a
suit beyond its jurisdiction. By adding the new relief, the
court in effect amended the plaint as presented, because
all amendments relate back to the presentation of the
plaint. The court is thereby rendered incompetent to
entertain the claim for amendment at all.

Thus, (i) the plaintiff cannot ask for return of the
plaint, (ii) the court cannot allow the amendment, and
therefore (iii) “the logical procedure to follow would be
to return the plaint together with the application for
amendment for consideration of that Court which has
jurisdiction to consider the original claim and the claim
sought by the amendment not taken separate but
together”.

4. A clarification on the subject appears to be desirable.
Necessary amendment is proposed, w! herunder the amend-
ment will be dealt with by the court, but it will then re-
turn the plaint for presentation to proper court,

Order VI, rule 17 and Bombay amendment

The Bombay Amendment to Order VI, rule 17 provides
that (i) where the amendment of a plaint applied for is
a material one, the Court shall give notice to a defend-
ant who has not appeared, and (ii) where in the absence
Of the defendant the Court grants any amendment in a
form materially different from that applied for, a copy of
the amended plaint shall be served on the defendant.

It is considered that no such provision need be adopted.

Order VU, rule 1

The Madras Amendment to Order VII, rule 1, to the
effect that the plaint should state the age of the minor,
has been considered. Such an amendment would not be
of much practical use for ordinary cases and has not
therefore been adopted."

As to minor plaintiffs, see Order 32, rule 2.


145

Order VU, rule 2

Under the Punjab Amendment, where the suit is for
movables in the possession of the defendants or for debts
whose value cannot be estimated, the plaint shall state
approximately the amount or value.

Tt is considered unnecessary to adopt such a provision.

Order VII, rule 6

1. Where the ground of exemption from limitation is
not stated in the plaint, the question is whether it can be
raised later (without amendment). The Madras view!-23
is that it cannot. But that High Court has also held, that
the ground of exemption need not be stated before the
eccasion for claiming exemption arises’.

2. Another question is whether, when one ground is
stated, plaintiff can take another and consistent ground’.

One view is that when one acknowledgment is plead-
ed, another cannot be set up*. This was the Calcutta view,
but in later cases of the same High Court, a liberal view
has been taken’. But the Madras view is, that a new
ground can be urged only after amendment,*-*-!°,

The Bombay view is that another and consistent
ground can be set up!?.

But can an inconsistent ground be pleaded? A clerical
error'in a Bombay judgment seems to have misled some
courts into thinking that even an - inconsistent plea can
he taken for claiming exemption from limitation’,

*Ramaswami v. Anaiya, A.I.R. 1936 Mad. 545.

*Palani ए. Sevugan, ALR. 1933 Mad. 395 (Cornis 5) (reviews the
९856-89).

°Mahadeva v. Marulai, ALR, 1933 Mad. 674 (Walsh J.).

*Gopalaswami v. Narayanswami, 1.1. हे. 1944 Mad. 572 ; ALR. 1
Mad. 65, 67 dissenting from Gulam” Howan v. Mohaned Ali, agi
1 - 34 Bom. 54०.

‘See Parmeshri y. Fakiria, 1.L.R. 2 Lah, 13 ; ALR. 1922 Lah. 230,

‘Jogeshwar v. Raj Narain (1904), IL.R. 31 Cal. 195, 201, (Macle:
C. J., Hill and Stevens JJ.) (Under old section go), 12 2% (Maclean

See the Calcutta cases discussed in A..LR, 1922 Lah. 230. Al
Gangadhar v. Khaja Abdul, (1909) 14 C.W.N. 128 हे 80 see

°A.LR. 1933 Mad. 874,
*A.LR. 1936 Mad. 545.

“In Bojjana v. Kristappa, A.LR. 1947 Mad 268, 271, para. 9 (Wadsworth
O.C.J. and Govindarajachari J.) ; this Principle was applied 45 an appli=
cation to set aside an execution sale.

“Perey मो, Fisher v. Ardeshir Hormasji, 37 Bom, LR. 165.
See Rustomji, Limitation (1958), page 25, foot-notes (व) and (6).



146

3. A specific claim to exemption is, of course, unneces-
sary if the facts pleaded show the exemption’.

4. Further, if the facts justifying exemption are patent
on the face of the record, they need not be pleaded’.

5. The general rule is that the exemption must be
pleaded’.

6. To summarise the position,—

(i) the strict provision embodied in Order vu,
rule 6 has been administered liberally by most High
Courts (excepting, it would seem, the Madras High
Court);

(ii} there is some confusion about whether the
extra grounds to be set up may be “consistent”, or
may even be “inconsistent”.

7. The adoption of the following proviso at the end of
the rule to clarify the position has been considered —

“Provided that the court may permit the plaintiff
to rely on any ground of exemption from such law,
not shown in the plaint, being a ground which is not
inconsistent with the allegations in the plaint.”

(fhe burden of proof regarding limitation is on the
plaintiff)’.

It is, however, felt that no change is necessary in view
of the decisions of the majority of the High Courts.

Order VII, rule 9

i. Under Order VII. rule 9, as it stands at present,
copies of the plaint are to be filed on the admission of the
plaint. The Madras and Andhra Pradesh Amendments
provide that they should be filed along with the plaint.
The Calcutta Amendment, Order VII, rule 9(1A) provides
that the copies should be filed with the plaint, but the
Zalcutta Amendment to Order VIL, rule 11 gives power to
the court to grant further time. It is considered, that the
copies should be filed within such time as the court may
fix or extend.

2. It is also proposed to make it clear, that the plaintiff
should pay the court-fees and charges for the service of
the summons within the time allowed by the court. Cf.
the Calcutta Amendment to Order VII, rule 9, on this
point. Necessary amendment has been proposed.

15७8 Raghunath v. Syed Samad, (1908), 12 C.W.N. 617, followed it
ALR. 1959 Kerala 243.

+See Rustomji, Limitation (1958), page 25, bottom.

sKalyan Mal v. Ahmad Uddin, ALR. 1934 P.C. 208,210.

‘Sri Krishna Roy ¥. Téskari, A.LR. 1951 Cal. 198, 199.


147
Order VII, rule 11

1. Order VII, rule 11(c) provides that the plaint shall
be rejected where the relief claimed is properly valued
but the plaint is written upon paper insufficiently stamped,
and the plaintiff, on being required by the court to supply
the requisite stamp-paper within a time to be fixed by the
court, fails to do so. Some controversy seems to exist
on the question whether granting of time under this rule
is mandatcry. One view is, that the matter falls outside
section 149 and is entirely governed by Order VII, rule 11,
which is a special provision and, therefore, the party is
entitled to demand some time for making good the defi-
ciency'~-, In a Bombay case‘, both the provisions were
considered but the right to demand time was assumed.
Another view is, that the grant of time is discretionary*,
on the ground that the authority to grant time is in section
149 and not in Order VII, rule 11, which is a disabling
provision.

2, In a recent case’, a single Judge of the Bombay High
Court, though stating there was much to be said in favour
of the latter view, had to take a different view because
of the High Court’s own earlier decision.

3. The Madras High Court has made an express amend-
ment to this rule which, in substance, provides that the
granting of the time is a matter of discretion. The question
whether the Madras amendment should be adopted has
been considered, but it is felt unnecessary to insert any
such provision.

Order VIII—Heading
This is consequential®.

Order VIII, rule 1 and obligatory written statement

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report? to the effect that the filing of a written statement
must be made obligatory in all cases. After some consi-

‘Radha Kanta v. Debendra Ni

rs farayan, 1.L.R. Cal, 3 ALS
Cal, 506, 508. (Mookerjee and Cuming Jj, 1? 77 $803 ALR. 1922

*Subba Reddy v. Venkatanarasimha Reddi, A.ILR, 1937 Mad. 266.

*Venkanna v. Achutaramanna, A.I.R. 1938 Mad.

(Wenkatasubba Rao J.). ° श्र 54%) 343 right hand

‘Achut Ramchandra v. Nagappa, A.L.R. 1914 Bor .
and Shah JJ.) (0808 history of the rales, (274 BOM: 249 250. (Batchelor

“Baijnath v. Umeshwar A.LR. 1937 Pat. 550 (F.B.).

“Shiv Charan v. Behari Lal, A.LR. 1941 Oudh 30,

*Ram Kishan v. Nathu, A.1.R. 1959 Bom. 86, (Mudholkar J.) (Reviews
case-law).

‘See Order 8, rules 6A-6G (Counter-claim),

*1gth Report, Vol. 1, page 302, pata. 11.


148

deration, it has been felt that such a rigid provision need
not be inserted, as it may work hardship on ignorant or
illiterate people residing in villages.

Order VIL, rule 1
1. A provision regarding filing of a list of documents
by the defendant with the written statement has been
added. This carries out the recommendation made in the
Fourteenth Report!, with an important modification,
namely, no provision has been proposed for production of
documents by the defendant with the written statement.

2, Such a provision was recommended by the Civil
Justice Committee also”. Local Amendments on the
subject® may be seeu. Where the list is not filed with the
written statement, some time should be allowed by the
court for filing. The exact time will be left to the court

under the proposed rule‘.
Order VIII, rule J and failure to file written statement

1, In one decision‘, the Madras High Court has pointed
out one defect in relation to Order VIII, rule 1, namely,
that while a person who fails to comply with an order
under Order VIII, rule 9 suffers penalty under rule 10, the
same penalty is not provided for on default under Order
VILL, rule 1. The High Court observed, that this was a
defect which should be set right, if necessary, by appro-
priate amendment.

2. Certain other points have also arisen as to effect of
failure to file a written statement. It would therefore be
convenient briefly to enumerate all those points: —

(i) If a person fails to file a written statement,
when called upon to do so by the court under rule 1,
does the provision in rule 10 of Order VIII apply? The
Madras view® is, that rule 10 does not apply, because
the words “so required” in rule 10, refer back only
to rule 9 and not to rule 1. On this view, the court has
no jurisdiction to pronounce judgment against a@
defendant who has failed to file a written statement
under rule 1. The contrary seems to have been assumed
by the Allahabad High Court’.

(ii) Another question is, whether, if the defendant
has not put in any written statement, does Order VIII,

गा Report, Vol. I, page 316, para. 32, first sub-para.

*Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 39.

4§ee Allahabad, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Kerala Amend-
ments to Order 8, tule 1.

*The Punjab Amendment fixes 10 days.

‘Nagaratnam_y. Kamalathammal, LL.R. 194 Mad. 866 3 ALR. 1945
Mad. 299, 300 (King and Bell JJ.).

*Gopi Charan v. Ram Prasad, A.I.R. 195 All. 283, 234,


149

rule 5 apply? The Calcutta view is, that Order VIII,
rule 5 does not apply where the defendant has not put
in any written statement at all, and further, that the
verification of the plaint is not evidence on which a
suit should be decreed whether the defendant did or
did not appear’. According to the Caicutta view, rule
5 is merely “a rule of construction of the defendant’s
pleading”. (Woodroffe J.). Tais is also the Lahore
view.” हे

The Patna High Court has also held.” that a mere
omission to file a written statement does not amount
to admission of the facts stated in the plaint.

But the Bombay High Court has expressed em-
phatic dissent from_ the Calcutta view, and held* that
Order VIII, rule 5 which is similar in substance to
RS.C., Order XIX, rule 13 covers also a case where the
defendant files no pleading. If there is no pleading of
the defendant, the court observed, obviously “it could
not contain any denial or non-admission.

The Bombay High Court’ has also held, that failure
to file a written statement means that the defendant
admits the allegations in the plaint, but he is entitled
to appear and submit any argument open. to him on
the plaint, for instance that the plaint discloses no
cause of action or that the claim is time-barred.

(iii) Another question that has arisen is whether,
in case of failure to file a written statement, the court
can proceed ex parte. One view is that it can®, while
the Bombay view is that an order that the suit should
proceed ex parte is not justified’.

The Fourteenth Report’ contemplates that if the writ-

ten statement is not filed by the date fixed for the settle-
ment of issues, the matter may be dealt with ex parie.

3. Since most High Courts have held that failure to file

a written statement does not amount to admission of facts

19. 8. Ross and Co. ४. 6. R. Scriven (1916) I.L.R. 43 Cal. 1001, 1010 5

ALR. 1917 Cal. 269 (Sanderson C. J., Woodroffe and Mookerjee JJ.).

*Narendra Singh v. 0. M.King, ALR. 1928 Lah, 769.
3Sonavati v.Kirtyanand, ALR. 1935 Pat. 306, 331, right-hand (Fazl

Ali and Saunders JJ.).

4Shriram y. Shriram, LL.R. 60 Bom. 788 3; A.ILR. 1936 Bom. 285

(Beaumont 0. J. and Rangnekar J.) explained in A.ILR. 1943 Bom. 387.

‘Vinayak v. Chintaman, A.I.R. 1938 Bom. 470, 471 (Beaumont ८०. 1.

and Wassodew 1.2.

*This seems to have been assumed in A.LLR. 1957 All. 283.
7Vinayak v. Chintaman, A.L.R. 1938 Bom, 470.
14th Report, Vol. 1, page 302, para. 11, last sentence.


150

mated in the plaint, the choice is between two courses,
namely, either the court may be permitted to proceed
ex parte as suggested in the Fourteenth Report, or it may
be empowered to proceed under rule 10—‘“the court may
pronounce judgment against him or make such order in
relation to the suit as it thinks fit”. The latter course has
been adopted, as logical’.

Order VHI, rule 2, and joint premisors

A recommendation has been made in an earlier report
of the Law Commission’ to the effect that the question
whether a joint promisor can, when sued for contribution
by his co-promisor, resist the suit, on the ground that in.
the creditor’s suit the co-promisor suing for contribution.
did not (negligently or otherwise) set up defences which
could have been legitimately raised to defeat the claim,
has been considered. This, it is felt, is a matter of sub-
stantive law, and need not be dealt with in a Code dealing
with procedure.

Order VIII, rule 5

Order VIII, rule 5 provides (roughly) that an allega-
tion of fact in the plaint, if not denied, ete., or stated to be
not admitted in the pleading of the defendant, is to be
taken as admitted. Whether this rule applies in a case
where the defendant has not filed a pleading at all, is a
question that has arisen?. No amendment to the rule is,
however, proposed, as it is felt that on the language of the
rule, it should not apply to such cases.

Order VIH, rules 6A to 6G

These are new. The object is to provide for counter-
claim by the defendant*.

The rules have been drafted mainly on the lines of
rules 137 to 146 of the Rules of the Bombay High Court
{Original Side), 1957, pages 38-39. Those rules embody
many points which have been clarified by case-law on the
corresponding rules in the R.S.C. See also Order VIII,
rules 13 to 22 inserted for Bombay City Civil Court.

The provision that even after judgment in the suit is
given, the counter-claim can be proceeded with, has been
taken from the Revised R.S.C.*.

Counter-claim against a person who is not a party to
the suit, has been excluded, to avoid complications.

3566 the amendment proposed to Order 8, rule 10,
*73th Report (Contract Act), page 33, para. 70.
3566 notes under Order 8, rule 1.

4See also the body of the Report,

*R.S.C, (Revision) 1962, Order 15, rule 2(3).


151

It is considered unnecessary to say anything about
“same character”. Rule 68 (3) has been inserted for
comprehensiveness, and will enable the court to apply the
rules regarding court-fees (Order VII, rule 11), ete.

Order VIIL, rule 7

This is consequential’.

Order VIII, rule 8
This is consequential’.

Order VUI, rule 9
This is consequential'.

Order VIII, rule 10

Order VIII, rule 10 deals with the procedure to be fol-
Jowed when a party fails to present a written statement
called for by the court, and begins thus: —

“Where any party from whom a written statement
is so required, fails to present the same....” Now,
the word “so” has been construed as limiting the
operation of the rule to failure to file a written state-
ment that was demanded under Order VIII, rule 9, and
not as covering the more frequent case of a written
statement demanded under Order VIII, rule 1. This
is a lacuna’, The object of the proposed amendment.
is to remove this lacuna.

Order IX, rule 2

Where the plaintiff fails to file the copies of the plaint,
etc., as required by Order VII, rule 9, the question arises
what should be the consequences. of such failure. Under
the Calcutta Amendment. to Order VII, rule 11 read with
Order VII, rule 9(1A) (inserted by the Calcutta Amend-
ment), the plaint shall be rejected in such cases. Under
the Allahabad Admendment to Order IX, rule 2, the court
has the power to dismiss the suit in such a case. In both
the cases, a fresh suit is not barred (Order VII, rule 13 and
Order IX, rule 4); but, in the case of a dismissal, the suit
ean be restored under Order IX, rule 4. An order for
ejection is appealable as a decree, It is considered, that a
provision for dismissal would be proper and should be
adopted. Compare the existing provision for failure to
pay fees, etc.

7566 Order 8, rule 6A—6G (counter-claim),
“Gee notes to Order 8, rule 1.



152
Order IX, rule 4

This is consequential’.

Order IX, rule 5{1)

Order IX, rule 5(1) provides that where a plaintiff
fails to apply for a fresh summons (after the summons on
the defendant is returned unserved), the Court shall dis-
miss the suit (except in certain cases). The period pres-
cribed for the application for a fresh summons is three
months, at present. The original period was for one year,
but it was changed to three months by the Code of Civil
Procedure Amendment Act (24 of 1920), The riod has
been changed into two months by local Amendments by
the High Courts of Bombay and Gujarat, and one month
in Kerala. The proposed amendment reduces it to two
months®.

Order IX, rule 6

The question whether the court should have power to
give a decree, if it thinks fit, on the basis of a pleading
without formal evidence, where the case proceeds ex parte,
has been considered. As pleadings are not required to be
on oath’, it has been considered unnecessary to make such
a change.

It has been held by the Supreme Court’, that even
when the defendant against whom a case has proceeded ex
parte does not assign good cause for his previous non-
appearance, he has a right to participate from the stage at
which he appears. The decision of Wallace J. in the
Madras case* was approved. The under-mentioned deci-
sions’ may be seen as an illustration of the application of
the rule enunciated by the Supreme Court. It is con-
sidered unnecessary to make any provision codifying the
proposition laid down by the Supreme Court.

sSee Order 9, rule 2 as proposed, and Order 7, rule 9 as proposed.

*T he history of this rule and its scope are discussad in Shaw & Co. v. B
Shamaldas andCo., AAR. 1954 Cal. 369, 373.

*See the discussion relating to Order 6, rule 15.

‘Sangram Singh v. Blection Tribunal, ‘Kotah (1955) 2 5-08. 1 5 ALR
1955 S.C. 425, 431, para. 28.

SVenkatasubbiah v, Lakshui, A.I.R. 1925 Mad. 1274.

*Bindu Prasad y. United Bank, ALR. 1959 Pat. 152 5. Mahant Ramyi
Das ¥. Bhupinder Singh, ALR. 1962 Pun, 443 3 Kamara v. Thomas, ALR.
1961 Ker. 287.


158
Order IX, rule 9

By a local Amendment in the Punjab the suits for re-
demption are excluded from the operation of Order IX,
rule 9. This would be the position even apart from the
amendment!. It is considered unnecessary to adopt this
amendment.

Under the Calcutta Amendment copies of the applica-
tion under this rule have to be filed along with the ap-
plication. This is a matter for the Civil rule and need not
be adopted.

Order IX, rule 13 and “duly served”

1. Under Order IX, rule 13, if the court is satisfied
either that the summons has not been served, or that the
defendant was prevented by sufficient cause from appear-
ing, etc., the ex parte decree should be set aside. The two
branches of the rule are distinctive and the defendant,
whatever his position may be in respect of one branch, is
entitled to the benefit of the other branch if he satisfies.
the court that he has made good his contention in respect
of the other branch?.

2. Now, cases may arise where there has been a techni-
cal breach of the requirements of “due service”, though
the defendant was aware of the institution of the suit. It
may well be, that the defendant had knowledge of the
suit in due time before the date fixed for hearing, and yet,
apparently he would succeed if there is a technical flaw’.

is situation can arise, e.g., where the acknowled; gment
on the duplicate of the summons has not been signed.
There may be small defects in relation to affixation,‘ etc.,
under Order V, rule 15. At present, the requirements of
the rules regarding service must be strictly complied with,
and actual knowledge (of the defendant) is immaterial*.
(There are not many decisions which hold that even where
there has not been due service, yet the decree can be
maintained, if the defendant knew the date of hearing.)*

C. 1 reversing:

1 Subbu Rao ४. Raju, 1949 F.C.R. 485 3
A. . ir 3 ALR.

.ILR. 1945 Mad, 225; Shridhar v. Ganu, 1.1... Re 5
1928 Bom. 67.

*Baldeodas v. Subkarandas, A.I.R. 1925 Cal. 627, 628, left (Page J.)-
(Reviews case-law as to affixation 850).

°Cf. Civil Justice Committee Report, (1924-25), page 169, mid
para.

‘Cf, elaborate discussion in Civil Justice Committee Report, pages 168
to 171.

‘Ebrahim Saleji v. Johurmull, A.I.R. 1916 Cal. 181 (2) (Sanderson C.J.,
Woodroffe and Mookerjee JJ.).

*One decision taking such view is Nathu Ram v. Saiim Abdul Karim,
A.LR. 1933 All. 165 (Iqbal Ahmad J.).



154

3. Where a literal conformity with the C.P.C. is want-
ing, the second part of column third of article 164, Indian
Limitation Act, 1908 (now article 123, Limitation Act, 1963)
applies. As to substituted service, see discussion in
under-mentioned decision’.

4, The matter was considered exhaustively by the
Civil Justice Committeet, which recommended a provision
that a decree should not be set aside for mere irregularity.
Local Amendments made by several High Courts (includ-
ing Allahabad, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Madras and
Orissa) have made a provision on the subject, thou; gh there
are slight variations in the language adopted by each. Such
a provision appears to be useful one, and has been adopted
on the lines of the Madras Amendment’.

5. When the defendant cannot be found, and the sum-
mons is served on an adult male member of the family
under Order V, rule 15, the question may arise whether
the service is sufficient in law, if the male member has an
interest in the litigation which is adverse to that of the
defendant. The matter was considered by the Civil
Justice Committee*, which recommended that though such
service should remain “due service” for the purposes of
the Civil Procedure Code, yet Order V, rule 15 should be
amended to provide that in such a case the service shall
not be regarded as coming within the words “duly served”
in article 164 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (now article 123
of the Limitation Act, 1963).

The Calcutta High Court has amended Order V, rule 15
by adding a proviso to the effect that where the adult male
member has an interest in the suit and such interest is
adverse to that of the defendant, a summons so_ served
shall be deemed for the purposes of the third column of
article 164 not to have been duly served. The Orissa
High Court has made an amendment to Order IX, rule 13
to the effect that in such @ case the summons shall not be
deemed to have been duly served within the meaning of
the rule (Order IX, rule 13). The question whether any
provision on the subject is needed has been considered, and
it is felt that no change need be made on this point.

‘Sri Krishna Rice Mills v. Rajagopaul, A.LR. 1958 Mad. 522.
*Rustomji, Limitation Act (1958), pages 957 and 958.

*Bashyam v. Parthasarathi, A.LR. 1954 Mad. 195.

‘Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 172,

“The Madras Amendment was construed in A.LR. 1953 Mad, 528.
“Civil Justice Committee Report (1925), page 170, para, 20,


155
Order IX, rule 13, proviso

1, The proviso to Order IX, rule 13 runs as follows: —

“Provided that where the decree is of such a
nature that it cannot be set aside as against such
defendant only, it may be set aside as against all or
any of the other defendants also.”

The proviso thus empowers the Court to set aside an
ex parte decree in relation to a defendant who has not ac-
tually applied for such setting aside. The proviso was in-
serted in 1908, because, under section 108 of the 1882 Code,
there was a conflict of decisions' as to whether the decree
could be set aside only against the defendant who made
the application, or whether it could be set aside as a

whole?.

2. One question that has arisen under the proviso is,
whether it authorises the setting aside of a decree when
the decree dismisses the suit in relation to a particular
defendant. A narrower view based on the word “against”
is, that such setting aside is not allowed®. But a wider
view seems to have been taken in some decisions‘-°,

3. Another point on which there is some doubt is, whe-
ther in relation to those defendants against whom the pro-
ceedings were not ex parte, the proviso applies. A query
on this point was raised by Mudholkar J. in one Nagpur
case®, and though he thought it possible to decide the case
on some other ground, he observed, that he would have
been inclined to hold that the proviso should be confined
to the “ex parte” decree to which alone the substantive
provision expressly relates. But in a Patna case’ a differ-
ent view seems to have been expressed. (Under the old
Code sections 106 and 108, it had been held® that the case
could not be re-opened with respect to a defendant against
whom a decree not ex parte was passed.)

_4. It is considered unnecessary to encumber the rule
with any amendment on these points.

7The case-law under the old section will be found reviewed ii

+ Chandra v. Chandra Kanta, A.1.R. 1954 Assam 183, 186 (EBD. inKhagesh
*Vasant v. Tukaram, A.I.R. 1960 Bom. 485 contai

discussion ‘of the proviso: 260 Bown. 485 contsins ६ good general

Khai .
(Satie Prasad, Cree Ran 27 4, bas 11% 18 EB)
‘Ram Baran y. Bodh Ram, A.LLR. 1934 All. 1051 (Kendall J.).
® Buramal ५. Har Kishan, (1902) LLL.R. 24 All. 383.
spas Ghdhor
लायी, Bye Gindhari Lah ALR, 1954 Nag 125,126
*Raghubar v. Ramasray, ALR. 1924 Pat. 771, 772.
*Manoku v. Sitaram (1894), LLL.R. 18, Bom. 142.



156

Order X, rule 2

1, It is considered, that at the first hearing, it should be
obligatory on the court to examine such party or his
pleader, etc., who is present for elucidating the matters in
controversy, as the court may think fit.

2. Necessary changes have been proposed’.

Order XI, rule 6

It is considered that objections on the ground of privi:
lege should be specifically included in this rule and should
not be left to the residuary words “any other ground?”
Necessary change in the wording has been proposed’.

Order XI, rule 14

1. Order XI, rule 14 provides that it shall be lawful for
the court “at any time during the pendency of any suit”
to order the production by any party, upon oath, of all
documents in his possession, etc. One question that has
arisen is, whether an order under this rule can be passed
before an application for discovery is made under Order
XI, rule 12. The majority view is, that it can be so order-
ed. This is based on the words “at any time”!-*-°, But a
contrary view also seems to have been taken’ in one case.
The language does not seem to require any change, in
view of the majority opinion.

2, The question whether an express provision exclud-
ing production of documents regarding matters of State
should be inserted, has been considered, and the relevant
provision in the R.S.C. Revision* has been noted. It is
unnecessary to insert any such provision, there being
controversy on the subject under this rule. The privilege
as to inspection can be claimed even after production’,

Order XI, rule 15

__ 1. Order XI, rule 15 entitles a party to give notice for
inspection, ete., of documents “to which a reference has

4$ee also the body of the Report.

°Cf. R.S.C. (Revision) 1962, Order 26, rule 4.

*As to disallowing incriminating questions, see Meenakashi Sundaram
¥. Radhabrishna, ATR. 1960 Madias. 184.

‘Ram Hari ४, Niranjan, 5०0 C.W.N. 845.

*Sriniwas ४, Election Tribunal, Lucknow, A.1.R. 1955 All. 251.

*P. Varalakshmamma v. P. Bala, AIR. 1958 Andhra Pradesh 157,

7Baidyanath vy. Bholanath Roy, A.LLR. 1923 Pat. 337, 338, left (Das &
Kulwant Sahai JJ.). .

*R.S.C. Revision (1962), Order 24, rules 13 to 15.

'K. V. Ramachari v. Krishnamachari, AJ.R. 1924 Mad. 486. Gene-
rally as to privilege claimed with reference to production, see
Nagammas y. Alamelu, A.I.R. 1957 Mad. 401.


187

‘been made” in the pleadings or affidavit of the opposite
party. Now, the question has arisen whether documents
which are merely entered in the list annexed to the plaint
are covered by this rule. One view is, that rule 15 does
not apply to such documents, as they are not documents
to which a “reference” is made in the pleadings!-?-8-4,

2. But a contrary view has been taken in other cases.
According to this view, the list is a part of the plaint for
the purposes of this rule. This view has been taken by
Bombay, Madras and Lahore High Courts’-€-7-8,

In fact, in the Madras case there is an observation, that
probably one of the reasons for requiring the plaintiff to
furnish a list with the plaint was to enable the defendant
to apply for inspection.

A clarification on the subject is proposed.

Order XI, rule 19(2)

1. This rule, which confers power on the court to inspect
any document for which privilege is claimed, is to be read
as subject to the provisions of section 162, Evidence Act, as
has been held by the Supreme Court?-10211.12,

2, The contrary view' is no longer good law, in view of
the Supreme Court’s decision.

3. As to English law, see (a) section 28, Crown Proceed-
ings Act, 1947; (b) old RSC. Order 31, rule 195;

\Chandmull v. Dhanraj, 8.1.1२, 1920 Cal, 416 (Greaves J.),
*Gopal vy. Syed, A.ILR. 1944 Pat. 177.

*Nagpur Glass Works Ltd. v. Onama Glass Works, Ltd, A.LR.
Nag. 239 (Vivian Bose J.). ao 18

‘Braj Behari v, Arun Coo1 LLR. (1 2 Cal.
जाय wy Find un mar, (1953) 309 (Das and

*Ramdayal v. Nurhury (1894) LL.R. 18 Bom, 368,
‘Khetsidas v. Narotamdas (1908) LL.R. 32 Bom, 152.

*Ramnathan v. Annamalai, LL.R. 55 Mad. 421 ; ALR. .
825, 826 (Curgenven J.). %8 ers 1937 Mad

Janki Das v.Kxwhilya Devi, ALR. 1 Lah, है
Covi lya Devi, 943 207; 208 (Beckett J.)
*State of Punjab v. Sodhi Sukhdev Singh (1961) 2 S.CR, 3 Ry
1961 S.C. 493, 513, para. 48. 2४१ (1961) आय के ALR

30368 also Governor-General-in-Council v. Peer Mohd. AIR. 1950 8.९.
228, 234 (F.B.),

31898 also Brijnath Kedarnath y. State (1 Criminal
4134 (Madhya Bhatay. (957) Taw Journat

See also A.IL.R. 1944 Lah, 209, 212,
Mijjatali Talukdar v. Emp, A.LR. 1943 Cal. 539.


138

(०) Revised RS.C., Order XXIV, rule 15 and Revised Order
LXXVII 12, and the under-mentioned caset.

(There is vast literature in England on Crown privi-
lege, but it is unnecessary to go into it for the present pur-
pose.)

4, The rule is also subject to section 123, Indian Evi-
dence Act?. As to the meaning of the words “affairs of
State” in section 123, see the observations of the Supreme
Court®, that they are identical with the words “matters of
State”. i

5, It is considered, that the position on the subject, as
it has emerged from the decision of the Supreme Court,
should be codified. It will suffice if a proposition is insert-
ed to the effect that the rule does not apply to documents
relating to affairs of State.

6. Reference may be made to the express provision in
section 94(3), Criminal Procedure Code, on the subject.

7. Generally, as to procedure to be followed when the
Crown claims privilege, the under-mentioned cases may
be 5९९४-०५

Order XH, rule 2

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report®, to empower the court to award penal costs against
a party unreasonably neglecting or refusing to admit docu-
ments. (Such costs will be in addition to the costs award-
ed at present under tnis rule.)

After some consideration, it has been decided not to
make this change, as it is felt that the existing provision
is adequate.

Order XII, rule 6

1, Certain local Amendments change this rule on two
points—
{i) They empower the court to pass a judgment
(on admission) of its own motion also’, and
(ii) they provide that on such judgment, etc, a
decree shall be drawn up.

ie re Grosvensr Hotel, London (No. 2) (1964) 3 W.L.R. 992.

tLakhu Ram v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1960 Pat, 192, 193 makes it clear
that it is subject to section 123, Evidence Act.

SA.LR, 1961 S.C. 493, 503.

4Dixtai v, Dominion of India, A.I.R. 1951 Bom, 72 (Chagla C. J.).

S(Miss) Rajul Raojibhai v. Provincial Goxernment, LL.R, 7950 Nag. 690:
ALR. 1951 Nag, 212.

मत Report, Vol. 1, pages 316-317, para. 32.

7Under the existing law, this carrot be deve. Abinash 7. Surjyas
LLR. (1948) 1 Cal. 141, 14s.



159

See, particularly, the Madras Amendment _made_ in
pursuance of the recommendation of the Civil Justice
Committee?

2. It is considered that these changes are unnecessary.
Hence no amendment is proposed.

Order XIII, rule 2

A provision has been added to exclude documents
produced for cross-examination, etc., Cf. Order VII, rule
18(2).

Order XHI, rule 5

The Bombay Amendment to Order XIII, rule 5 and
Order VII, rule 17 provides for filing of translation of entries
in other languages. See also Madhya Pradesh and Punjab
Amendments to Order VII, rule 17; the latter provides for
transliteration also.

This is a matter for Civil Rules, and need not be in-
corporated in the Code of Civil Procedure.

Order XUI, rule 7

The Madras Amendment prohibiting return of a docu-
ment, etc., which has become void, has been noted. It is
considered that the provision in Order XIII, rule 9(1),
second proviso, should suffice for normal cases,

Order XIII, rule 9

1. Under Order XIII, rule 9(1), where a person who has
produced a document wants its return (before the suit
is disposed of), the court may allow such return under
the proviso, if he delivers to the proper officer a certified
copy, etc. Now, when the document was produced by a
witness, this rule creates difficulty, as he has also to
deliver a certified copy (and there is no provision as_ to
re-imbursing him for its expenses). The Civil Justice
Committee? suggested that the party exhibiting the docu-
ment should be required to pay the cost of preparing
the copy, etc.

2. The problem has been tackled in different ways by
local Amendments. The Madras Amendment empowers
the court to require the party concerned to substitute a
certified copy within a certain time, failing which the
document is to be returned to the applicant. The Punjab
Amendment provides, that the cost shall be recoverable

b ICivil Justic: Committee (1924-25), Report, page $63, para. 16,
ottom,

Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, pages 364-565, para.



160

from the party concerned. The Madhya Pradesh Amend-
ment provides, that the court shall order the party con-
cerned to pay the cost.

3. It is considered, that the best course would be to
allow the witness himself the facility of putting in a sim-
ple copy; the copy can be compared, etc., and then the
original returned! Necessary change has been proposed.

Order XIV, rule 1(5)

1. The examination of the parties which is referred to
in Order XIV, rule 1(5), appears to be the examnation
under Order X, rule 2. It is considered that this should
be made clear. Necessary change has been proposed.

2. The framing of issues, it is felt, should take place
after hearing the parties or pleaders. A provision to that
effect has been added.

Order XV, rule 2

Local Amendments made by Madras, Andhra Pradesh
and Kerala provide that whenever a judgment is pro-
nounced under Order XV, rule 2, a decree shall follow.

It appears to be unnecessary to insert such an express
provision, in view of section 33.

Order XVI, rule 1

1. This carries out the recommendation made in the
Fourteenth Report? The recommendation in the Four-
teenth Report is confined to witnesses summoned through
court, but, in view of existing Order XVI, rule 1A, the
provision proposed can be applied to all witnesses, The
object is to lay down a procedure for filing a list of wit-
nesses by the parties, and to provide that a person not
mentioned in the list shall not be produced as a witness
without the permission of the Court.

2. In sub-rule (2), the positive form has been consider-
ed preferable to the negative form—“No person shall be
permitted”, etc.

3. The Fourteenth Report recommended a period of
30 days, but it is considered that a period of 10 days should
sl e.

Order XVI, rule 1 and credibility

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report? to the effect that the credibility of a witness should

Cf. Order 13, rule 5(3), as to account books,

‘4th Report, Vol. I, page 325, para. 45 and page 328, para. $0,

14th Report, Vol. I, pages 327-328, para. 49.



161

not be attacked on the ground that he has not been sum-
moned through the court. It is felt that it is unnecessary to
imsert such a provision. A rule as to the value of evidence
need not be inserted in the Civil Procedure Code.

Order XVI, rule 1A
Since the provision regarding list of witnesses has
been transferred’, consequential changes are proposed in
this rule.

Order XVI, rule 2

Where a summons is served by a party, the expenses
of the witness should be paid to the witness by the party
or his agent, and need not be deposited in the court. The
change proposed is intended to make that clear. Cf. the
Caleutta Amendment to Order XVI. rules 2 and 8 and the
Madras Amendment, Order XVI, rule 2(4).

Order XVI, rule 7A (New)

This rule as new, and has been inserted to facilitate
the service of summons by a party. It carries out the
recommendation made on the subject in the Fourteenth
Report’, to the effect, that the Calcutta Amendment (under
which parties are in the first instance responsible for
bringing witnesses) may be adopted subject to the safe-
guard that the impartiality of a witness so brought should
not be suspected. Except in one respect, the proposed rule
follows the provisions of Order XVI, rule 7A, inserted by
the Calcutta Amendment. One important.departure from
the Calcutta Amendment may, however, be noted. Under
the Calcutta Amendment, under rule 7A(1), the court
“shall make over” the summons to the party applying
therefor, except where it appears to the court that the
summons should be served by the court. Under the
Bombay and Gujarat Amendments, Order XVI, rule 1B, the
court may on the application of any party, permit the
service of summons by that party. The discretion of the
court has been put more clearly in the Bombay Amend-
ment, which has been followed in the draft rule on this

joint. See also the amendments made to Order XVI, rule 8
y the High Courts of Allahabad, Andhra Pradesh,
Kerala, Orissa, Madras, Patna and Rajasthan,

Order XVI, rule 8

This is consequential, and is intended to exclude a
summons handed over to parties for service’, from the
operation of the rule. Compare Order XVI, rule 8(1), as
amended by the Calcutta High Court.

1See Order 36, rule 1 (proposed). .». »  ््एणण
midantt Report, Vol. 1, page 326, pare. 48 and page 328, top, para. 49,

*See Order 16, rule 7-A proposed.



162

Order XVI, rule 10

1, Where a summons is served by a party, the person
effecting service should, it is felt, always be examined by
the court under Order XVI, rule 10. That has been provid-
ed for in the proposed amendment.

2, It is considered, that ordinarily process fee should
not be charged for the issue of a proclamation, warrant oT
attachment under rule 10. These processes are necessita-
ted by reason of the disobedience of a witness to a law-
ful order of the court, and should be issued without
charging fees.

Necessary change has been proposed.

Order XVI, rule 12

1. Order XVI, rule 12 empowers the court to impose a
fine upon a witness who has disobeyed a summons for
attendance in court. The wording used is, “The Court
may, where such person does not appear, etc.”. Now, the
question has arisen whether, before the power under this
rule can be exercised, it is essential that the Court should
have issued a proclamation under Order XVI, rule 10(2) or
a warrant under Order XVI, rule 10(3) or an order of
attachment of property under Order XVI, rule 10(3), latter
half. Conficting opinions have been expressed on this
point, as follows:—

(i) One view is that, the fine under rule 12 can-
not be imposed unless the property of the witness
has been attached?-*. According to this view, rules 11
and 12 have to be read together, and rule 12 deals
with the alternative situation to that dealt with in
rule 11. Since rule 11 applies only where there is an
attachment, rule 12 will also apply only where there
is attachment. A contrary view has, however, been
expressed in an observation of the Lahore High
Court.

(ii) Another view is, that no fine can be imposed
unless and until there has been a proclamation which
has been disobeyed’. According to this view the words
“such person” in rule 12 refer to that person who is
described during the whole of rules 10 and 11. Ifa
proclamation is issued and the witness fails to obey it
and fails to show that he did not receive notice, the
fine may be imposed. This view seems to assume
that the words ‘does not appear, or appears but fails,

See Order 16, rule 7A (Proposed). ~

3578 Kumari v. Secretary of State, A.IR. 1920 Cal. 46.

2 Ashutosh v. Secretary of State, A.LR. 1929 Cal. 655 (1).

‘Banteari Lal ५. Emip., A.LR. 1928 Lah. 979,° 980, right-hand (Shadi
Lal 03).

उनके Chand v. Jowoahar Singh, ALR. 1928 Lah. 4735 (Harrison J).



etc.”, in rule 12 refer to appearance on the date men~
tioned in the proclamation.

(iii) According to the third view’, either a procla-
mation under sub-rule (2) of rule 10 or a warrant or
an attachment of property under sub-rule (3) of rule
10 should have been ordered before the fine can be
imposed under rule 10. According to this view, the
words “such person” in rule 12 refer to sub-rules (2)
and (3) of rule 10.

(iv) Another view is, that neither attachment nor
proclamation mentioned in rule 10(2) or (3) is neces
sary, and that the words “such person” in rule 12 refer
to the person mentioned in rule 10(1), who has been
referred to ir all the subsequent provisions as “such

person”?.*,

2. On the language of the existing rule, there is much
to be said for each of these views. But there is no reason
why a provision in the amplest terms should not be made
so as to apply rule 12 in all cases where the witness fails
to comply with a summons. It may be noted, that the
object of the various processes in rules 10, 11 and 12 is to
compel the attendance of the witness. (See section 32
opening lines.) The basis of the jurisdiction is the dis-
obedience to the summons by the witness. The word
“may” in sub-rules (2) and (3) of rule 10 shows that the
issue of a proclamation, etc., is discretionary.

3. It is, therefore, considered desirable to make the
position clear. At the same time, it is proposed that
where none of the three processes has been issued, notice
to show cause shoul] be given to the person concerned,
before a fine can be imposea

Order XVI, rule 16

Under the Punjab Amendment, where a_presidin,
officer is absent, the next date of hearing can be intimate
by another Judge or by a court-official nominated for the
purpose, The previous Punjab view was, that if the

udge is absent, the Reader cannot fix the datet-t-6,

(Where the Judge has authorised the Reader under the
Local Civil Courts Act, it can be done, according to the
Madras High Court.)?

\Hirdey Naroin v. Emp., A.I.R. 1929 All. 850,
*In re Narasayya, 1.L.R. 48 Mad, gar 3 A.I.R. 1925 Mad. 147 (D.B ),
*Ramdeo Prasad v. State, 8-12, 1951 All. 415 (D.B.).

1. ‘See Hukam Chand v. Mani Shibrat Das, 8.1 1९, 1934 Lah, 934 (Hi'ton
"Se also Gulam Haidar v. Dirom Igtal Nath, A.L.R. 1936 Lah. 1600.
*See also Lalla Prasad v. Nand, LL.R. 22 All, 56 (FB).

"See S. M. Raja Goundar v. Sabapathi, A.I.R. 1952 Mad. 798.



5264

It is considered unnecessary to adopt the Punjab
Amendment, the matter being one of minute detail.

Order XVI, rule 21

1, Order XVI, rule 21 provides that where any party to
a suit is required to give evidence or to produce a docu-
ment, the provisions as to witnesses shall apply to him so
far as they are applicable. The first point that has arisen
under this rule is as to the mal-practice of one party call-
ing the other party as a witness. This practice has been
condemned more than once by the Privy Councill-2, Not~-
withstanding such condemnation, the practice appears to
persist,

2. Another point is that this rule applies only where a
party is summoned at the instance of the other party* to
give evidence, etc.

3. The third point is the question of expenses incurred
by a party who appears as his own witness. Several High
Courts’ have inserted a provision to the effect, that when
a party to the suit gives evidence (on his own behalf), the
court may in its discretion permit him to include in the
costs of the suit a sum of money equal to the amount pay-
able for travelling and other expenses to other witnesses
of similar standing. Without such a provision, the rule
does not seem to permit the award of travelling expenses
incurred by a party giving evidence on his own behalf*,

4. All these points have been considered, but it is felt
that an express provision thereon is not necessary,

(So far as the question of costs of party is concerned,
there is an elaborate discussion in the Report of the Civil
Justice Committee)’,

Order XVII, rule 2 and disposal on merits

1. Order XVII, rule 2 says that if on any day to which
the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the parties or any of
them fail to appear, the Court may proceed to dispose of
the suit in one of the modes directed in that behalf by

"Lal Kunwar v. Chiranjit, 11.R. 32 All, 104 (PC).
*Kishori Lal v. Chimni Lal, व... रे, 31 All. 116, 122 PC),
3868 Pir Gouda v. Vishwanath, AR. 1956 Bom. 251 (Gajendragadkar

oy Keres Chetty and Co. v. Subba Rao, A.LR. 1935 Mad. 244 (Beastey

See Calcutta, Madras and Kerala Amendments to Order 16, ule 21,

‘Kanniah Chetty and Co. v. Subba Rao, ALR. 1935 Mad. 244.

7Report of the Civil Justice Committee (1924-25), patas. 528,
Chapter 44, para. 1, middle, and subsequent wack, P St 519,


165

Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit. Thus,.
the court may—

(i) act under Order IX, (but it is not bound te do
so, as has been stressed by the Supreme Court)! ;

(it) grant further adjournment; or
(iii) make such other order as it thinks fit.

2. The words “such other order” have been interpreted

in a number of decisions, but there still remains some un-

* certainty about their exact scope. Ordinarily, the court

would not, in the absence of a party, proceed to dispose of

the suit “on merits” under this rule. But there are

observations to the effect-that the words “such other order”

do not rule out disposal on the merits where sufficient

material is available*-*--, On the other hand, there are
rulings to the contrary’.

3. The matter has some practical importance as regards
the remedy available to the plaintiff or defendant affected
by the actual order passed under Order XVII, rule 2.

4, There is a decision in an earlier Madras case® to the
effect that when a plaintiff has closed his case and there
is evidence which, if unrebutted, would prove his case, it
could hardiy be deemed to be a judicial exercise of dis-
cretion to dismiss the suit for default; the defence evi-
dence shouid, it was held, have been recorded in plain-
tiff’s absence, and the case disposed of on the merits, This
ease does not seem to have been expressly over-ruled in
any of the later Madras cases, It follows a Bombay deci-
sion’, This decision was, however, referred to in the Full
Bench case of Pichamma® and would seem to have been
impliedly over-ruled by that case, as the judgment of
Kumaraswami Sastri J’ which was concurred in by
Sadasiva Aiyar J. in Pichamma’s case, holds that if the
matter is treated as falling outside Order IX, there would be
hardship to the parties because the remedies under Order
IX would not be available, (The actual facts in
Pichamma’s case were of the defendant’s absence and ofa

IGS. ALR. 1955 S.C. 425, 433.
ep peaneares ¥. Shidramappa, A.LR. 1943 Bom. 321, 324, sight

*"Rukam Shak v. Shankargouda, A,ILR. 1941 Bom. 8: } 84, right (Bean-
mont C.J, and Wassoodew: To व 3 84 sight Beau

‘Tulsiran v. Sitaram, ALR. 1959 Cal. 389.
SRam Adhin v. Ram Bharose, AIR. 1925 All. 182 (Mukherji and
Dalal JJ).

*Subramania v. Munusamiiya, ALR. 1916 Mad. 890, 8: ight)
Phillips 1.). ° 2० $97 Ceighe)

*Ningappa v. Gowdappa, (7905) 7 Bom. Law Reporter 261.

*Pishowina v. Sreeramule, (e918) LL.R. 41 Mad, 286 ; ALR. 1918
Mad. 143 (F.B.). * °


166

judgment being delivered in favour of the plaintiff; and
the actual decision was that rules 2 and 3 are mutually ex-
elusive and independent, so that if the party fails to
appear, rule 2 applies and the stringent provisions of rule
3 should not apply.) Rule 3, it was held, should be treated
as applying only to cases where the parties are present
and have not satisfied the court as to the existence of any
adequate reasons for having not done what they had
directed to do. Since the consideration of hardship to the
parties was stressed there, it would appear that a decision
on the “merits” so as to exclude the application of Order IX
at least in cases where the absence was of the defendant,
18 ruled out by Pichamma’s case. If the default consists
in non-appearance, it is rule 2 dealing with such a case
specifically that in terms applies; this is the view reinfor-
ced by later decisions'-*. That the suit should not neces-
sarily be dismissed for the plaintiff's absence and that the
court has got a discretion to grant an adjournment was
stressed in a Lahore case also*. Where the plaintiff had at
an earlier hearing made a definite case, which if rebutted,
would entitle him to a decree, it is not the only course
open to the court to dismiss the case for default of appear-
ance; rather the court should exercise a discretion and ad-
journ hearing as stressed by Fazil Ali J.

In fact, as was observed by Kumaraswami Sastri J. in
the Pichamma’s case, “no Judge with any sense of justice
would dismiss a just claim which he considers proved
simply because a party fails to appear on an adjourned

late”.

5. Perhaps an approach to the matter would be clear,
if two situations are kept apart, namely, plantiff’s absence
and defendant’s absence. In the former case, a misunder-
standing of the law to the effect that the court is bound to
dismiss the suit causes hardship. In such a case, the posi-
tion is that—

(i) an adjournment can be granted;

(ii) a decision on the merits in the plaintifi’s
favour could cause no grievance to any party. Ques-
tion of hardship will arise only if a decision on merits
is given against the plaintiff.

In the case of the defendant’s absence,—

(a) an adjournment can be granted, or

(b) a decision subject to the setting aside proce-
dure under Order IX, rule 13 would cause no grievance.
A decision strictly on the merits, in the sense that the

1Ellammal v.Karuppan, A.LLR. 1936 Mad. 625.
*Gurusanthayya v. Verayya, A.I.R. 1952 Mad. 825.

*Langar Khan v. Zakar, AIR. 1934 Lah. 56 (Jai Lal J.).
*Chamak Lal v. Mauji, A.ILR. 1929, Pat. 248 (Fazl Ali J.).



167

remedy under Order IX, rule 13 is to be excluded,
would cause hardship to defendant.

6. So far as the inter-relationship of rules 2 and 3 is
concerned, the matter can be dealt with separately!-*, The
question now is of the exact scope and application of
rule 2.

7, Even in the case of the absence of the plaintiff,
where the suit is decreed, he would have no grievance, It
is only where the suit is dismissed on the merits that he
may have a grievance because, as stressed by the Madras
High Court, the remedy under Order IX, rule 9 would be
lost. (To this extent, the Allahabad Amendment to
rule 2 is stringent as compared with the Madras view. On
the other hand, in cases where the Allahabad Amendment
results in a decree in favour of the plaintiff, it would be
beneficial and acceptable even according to the Madras
view.)

8. In view of the obscurity of the present position, a
clarification is considered desirable.

While a provision authorising the Court in every case
to dispose of the suit as if the parties had appeared may
be abused, there is no harm, it is felt, if a limited power
to do where the evidence of the defaulting party is sub-
stantially over be inserted, as in the Allahabad Amend-
ment.

Necessary change is proposed.

Order XVII, rule 2 and Allahabad Amendment
Under the Allahabad Amendment to Order XVII, rule

(i) where a substantial portion of the evidence is
concluded, the court may (even if a party is absent)
dispose of the suit on merits. This was construed as
confined to cases where the party failing to appear has
finished his evidence*;

(i) if a pleader is present, then even if he is en-
gaged only for making an application, the party is
deemed to be presentt;

The first point has already been dealt with. As re-
gards the second, it has been observed by the Bombay

See amendment proposed to Order 17, rule 3.
३5३९ also Jhanda Singh v. Saddig, A.LR. 1924 Lahore 545.
31086, Jageo v.Kanhaiya, ALR. 1957 Al . 344. See also ALR. 1957
All. 238 and A.LR. 1962 81], 515. 95 3 $
4As to the effect of Allahabad Amendment, see—
(i) Baldeo Singh v. Ghhaja Singh, A.T.R. 1931 All. 703 5
(i) Fhandoo Mel ¥. Khalsa Singh, AR. 1940 All. 305 5
Gd Tilak Singh v. Pradyumna Singh, ALR. 1937 All. 347-



168

High Court’, that the Allahabad Explanation to Order XVII,
rule 2 regarding pleaders may be said to have changed the
provisions of Order V, rule 1, in their application to Order
XVII, rule 2. In the absence of the Explanation regarding
pleaders, where a pleader is appearing only for applying
for adjournment, and withdraws after the adjournment is
refused, the case is one of the court proceeding ex parte’.

Order XVI, rule 3

1. This is intended to define clearly the scope of rule 3,
so as to state the action to be taken by the Court when—
(i) the parties are present, and
(ii) the parties are absent.

Compare, Pichamma v, Sreeramulu®, which contains a
useful discussion on the subject.

2. The following discussion of the views of various High
Courts will show that at present opinion on the point is
not uniform: —

MADRAS.—The Court should, in a case where the
plaintif is absent, proceed under rule 2 and dismiss the suit
for default, so that the plaintiff may have an opportunity
to apply under Order IX, rule 9 to set aside the dismissal*.

BOMBAY.—The Court should proceed under rule 2 and
dismiss the suit for default®, but if the evidence has been
closed it should proceed under rule 3 and deal with the
suit on the merits*-?,

LAHORE.—Makes a distinction between cases where
there are no sufficient materials on the record and cases
where there are such materials. In the former case, the
Court should proceed under rule 28, but in the latter case
it may proceed to decide the suit under this rule,

\Basalingappa v. Shidrammappa A.I.R. 1943 Bom. 321, 324.

1Habib Baksh v. Johri Mal, A.1.R. 1928 All. 760.

°*Pichamma v. Sreeramulu (1918) LL.R. 41 Mad. 286 ; ALR. 1918,
Mad. 143 (F.B.).

‘Chandramathi v. Narayanswami, (1910) I.L.R. Mad, iC
Pichhamma v. Sreeramulu, (1918) LLR. 47 Mad. 286 ; Air 1१78 Mad
143 | 3, 1 7 (F.B.) ; Elammal v. Karuppan Chetti, A.LLR. 1936 Mad. 625;
Cou thayya v. Veerayya, A.I.R. 1952 Mad. 825.

‘Basayya v. Allayya, A.I.R. 1925 Bom. 328 ; Shrimant v. Smith (1890)
LL. 20 Bom. 736.

*Frappa v. Sidava, AIR. 1931 Bom. 111.

as also discussion in Basalingappa v. Shidramappa, A.I.R. 1943 Bom,
33 (£.8.).

*Hargopal v. Harish Chander (1919) Punj. Rec. No. 48, 9. 120, 47
1.0. 596 ; Sher Ali v. Mangu, (1919) Punj. Rec. No. 150, p. 395, 52 LC. 2925
both sited in Mulla, Code of Civil Procedure, (rath edition), pages 714-
ns.

Shanda Singh v. Sadiq, (1924) LL.R. 5 Lah. 218 ; ALR. 1924 Lahore
345.


169

ALLAHABAD.—The Court should proceed under rule
2 and not under this rule’. But, by an amendment of
rules 2 and 3 made by the Allahabad High Court, the Court
has power to proceed to decide the suit on the merits® in
certain cases under rule 2 also.

PATNA,—This rule does not apply unless the hearing
has commenced?

CALCUTTA.—In order to apply the procedure of rule
3, two elements must be present, viz. (1) the adjournment
must have been at the instance of the party, and (2) there
must be materials on the record for the Court to deal with
the suit; the presence of one element without the other
does not justify* the application of rule 3.

Order XVII, rules 2 and 3 compared

1. The points of difference between Order XVII, rules 2
and 3 may be analysed as follows:—

Rule 2 Rule 3

cases where hearing is
adjourned,

(a) Applies generally to all (a) Applies only where adjournment is
granted.

(i) at the instance of a party; and
(i) by way of granting time for 2 parti-

cular purpose.
(0) Is confined to cases where (6) Not confined to non-appearance (as the
the parties or any of them language stands at present), and applies
fail to appear, where there is failure to do the act for

which time was granted.

(० Court can— (०) Court may proceed to decide the suit
@ proceed to dispose of forthwith.
the suit in one of the
modes directed by
Order IX, or

(i) make such other onder
as it thinks fit.

(4) Object is to state the con- (d) Emphasis is on the court’s power to

sequences of non-appear- proceed, so that non-performance of
ance. Emphasis is on the act in question need not interrupt
discretion of Court. the progress of the suit,

1Ganish Lal ४. Debi Das, (1925) LLL.R. 47 All. 140, 146 ; A.LR. 1925
All. 267 ; Ram Adhin v. Ram Bharose, (1925) ¥-L.R. 47 All. 181, 185 ; A.LR.
1925 All. 182. But see Badam v. Nathu, (1903) I.L.R. 25 All.’ 194 $
Gaura Bibi v. Ghasita, (1912) LR. 34 All. 123.

*Ram Dulari v. Bhola, A.I.R. 1935 All. 398.

प्र °Mahabir Prasad v. Sheodayal, (1928) 1.L.R. 7 Pat. 236 ; ALR. 1928
‘at. 167.

“Brojendra y. Promatha, A.LR. 1933 Cal. 412.


170

2. Cases when the two rules overlap are those where
an adjournment is granted (rule 2) at the instance of a
party—(rule 3), and there is non-appearance as well as
non performance of the act for which adjournment was
sought, so that both the rules are satisfied.

It is these situations which have presented difficulties
and raised questions, leading to three different approaches,
in cases of non-appearance of the parties or either of them.
The three different approaches are (i) only rule 2 should
be applied; (ii) rule 3 can be applied; (iii) if there are
materials on record, rule 3 may apply, otherwise rule 2
applies.

The proposed rule! clarifies the position.

Order XVIII, rule 2
This follows local amendments*-*. The object is to
empower the court to direct or permit a party to examine
any witness at any stage. A similar recommendation was
made by the Civil Justice Committee also’.

Order XVHI, rule 3

The Allahabad Amendment to Order XVIII, rule 3, which
inserts elaborate provisions regarding “statement of case”,
etc., has been considered. It is felt that no such change
is necessary.

Order XVII, rule 3 and examination of party

The Fourteenth Report> has recommended that,
ordinarily, a party who wishes to be examined as a witness
should offer himself first, before the other witnesses are
examined. It is, however, considered unnecessary to make
any such statutory provision. This should be the ordinary
rule®; but a rigid provision on the subject does not seem
to be desirable,

Order XVII, rule 5

The Fourteenth Report’ has recommended that a pro-
vision empowering the Judge to dictate the verbatim record
of evidence should be inserted, and that the rules on the
subject should be brought into line with the more elaborate
provisions contained in section 356 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.

*Order XVIT, rule 3 (proposed).
*See Calcutta Amendment, Order 18, rule 2A and Andhra Pradesh?
Madras, Punjab, etc, Amendments to Order 18, rule 2.

*Fhe provision in the Madhya Pradesh Amendment (Order 18, rule 2)
is expressed in the widest terms.

‘Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 564, middle.
*t4th Report, Vol. I, page 340, para. 71, last sub-para.

“Cf. Gurdial Kaur y. Pyara Singh, AIR. 1962 Pun. 180, 181,
*r4th Report, Vol, I, page 345, parg, 80.


171

After some consideration, it is felt that the existing
provisions are adequate. It is thought, that the existing
wording “under the personal direction......” should cover
dictation. The memorandum under Order XVIII, rule 8
should, of course, continue to be made’.

Order XX, rule 1

1, This is in implementation of the Fourteenth Report?
The iain object is to provide that the Judge need not read
out the full judgment, and that it would suffice if the
findings and the final order are pronounced.

2. Certain local Amendments’ to rule 1 provide for
dictation of the judgment, but it is considered, that no
express provision is necessary on the subject.

Order XX, rule 2

1. Order XX, rule 2 provides that a Judge may pro-
nounce a judgment written but not pronounced by his
predecessor. Though the word used is “may”, one view is,
that the rule casts a duty on the succeeding Judge, and
it is mandatory upon the succeeding Judge to pronounce
the judgment written by his predecessor, and he cannot
re-open the whole matter’. But a contrary view has been
taken in some cases. The former view supports itself on the
ground, that the Legislature did not intend to leave an
uncontrolled and unregulated discretion to the succeeding
Judge, and that a duty is cast on the Judge to pronounce
a judgment in the interests of the public and to save time.

2. The section seems to confer a po wer, but also con-
templates that the power should ordinarily be exercised.
Tt is, however, considered unnecessary to insert any rigid
tule. No change is, therefore, suggested.

Order XX, rule 6 and registered address

The question whether a provision should be inserted
to the effect that the decree should mention the address
for service (consequential on the proposed addition of a
rule® requiring a pleading to be accompanied by the

1G ६ Pramoda v. Harish, 1..L.R. 55 Cal. 1084 ; A.LR, 1929 Cal, ; 78
(Page J.).

14th Report, Vol. 1, page 348, para. 87.

%e.g. Madras Amendment.

‘Cf. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, section 367 (1).

5N. Venkatesu v. N. Suryanarayana, A.1.R. 1959 Andhi P h
16 (D.B.). Hargulal v. Abdul Gany, L.L.R. 14 Rangoon, 136 ; ALR. आह
Rangoon 147, 149 (F.B.) : Lachman Prasad v. Ram Kishan, LL.R. 33 All.
236 (Knox and Karamat Hussain JJ.).

*See Order 6, rule 14A (proposed).


172

address for service) has been considered. (Compare the
amendment made by the High Courts of Madras and
Lahore).

It is felt, that no such provision is necessary.
Order XX, rule 11

Certain local Amendments! provide, that where the
court proposes to pass an order for payment by instalments,
the decree-holder shal} be given an opportunity of being
heard, but his consent should not be required. One result
of this would be, that the court has to exercise a judicial
discretion, and the order would be appealable under
section 47, as has been held in cases under the similar
Madras Amendment?.

it is considered that such a change need not be made.
The present provision is a good and just one.

Order XX, rule 12

1. This rule is new, and is intended to provide that a
decree for specific performance of contracts for the sale
or lease of immovable property should specify the period
within which the purchase money or other amount is to be
paid.

2. An elaborate provision regarding decrees for specific
performance of such contracts was suggested in an earlier
report of the Law Commission*. The recommendation
there was fo the effect, that complete relief (such as
possession, etc., rescission, refund of earnest money, etc.), in
such a suit should be available by application in the suit
itself (instead of in execution as at present), and that
appropriate provision should be made in the Civil Pro-
cedure Code enabling such applications to be made and
orders thereon and also for appeals.

3. It is considered, that so far as a provision authorising
the making of an application and orders thereon is con-
cerned, section 28 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (read
with section 22) would be adequate. So far as appeals
from such orders are concerned, the orders, it is considered,
would fall within the definition of “decree” given in section
2(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. It is thought, that the
only specific provision which is required is to the effect
that the decree should specify the period for payment of
the purchase-money or other amount due under the

lecree.

Necessary amendment is proposed.

"3§ce Madras apd Nagpur Amendments.
*See case-law reviewed in Muthuswami vy. Ramu, A.LR. 1958 Mad.

60.
Sgth Report (Specific Relief Act), pages 40-41, para. 18 read with pages
6-17, para. 35.



173

Order XX, rule 19
This is consequential’.

It is considered unnecessary to amend Order XX, rule
19(3).

Order XXA, rule I

This is in implementation of the Fourteenth Report’. The
object is to make specific provisions regarding the power
of the court to award costs in respect of certain items of
expenditure, including notice expenses, typing charges,
expenses of witness and of obtaining copies, etc.

Order XXA, rule 2

This rule proposes that before the fees of counsel can
be taxed, a certificate of the counsel about payment of the
fees should be filed. The object is to avoid false claims
in these matters.

Order XXA and cost of hearing

The question whether the court should have power to
record, after a particular hearing, its opinion, as to whether
the costs of the hearing have been increased by undue
length, has been considered. It is felt that no such pro-
vision is necessary.

(Such a provision exists in Order LXV, rule 8 of the
Supreme Court Rules of South Australia quoted below: —

“8. (1) On the hearing of a cause or matter theCertifica
Court or Judge before whom it is heard shall if ree ame
quested so to do by any party entitled to attend onfeasonably
such hearing, and may, wii thout any request, certify as pocupied for
to what time has been reasonably occupied on such a
hearing, and such certificate shall be final.

(2) ए on such certificate being given it shall ap-
pear that the hearing has been unduly prolonged the
Court or Judge may order that the party in default
pay to any other party the costs occasioned by the
undue prolongation.)”.

7566 Order 8, rule 6A (proposed).
Cf. 14th Report, Vol. I, following paragraphs :—

(०) and (6)—page 480, para. 11, 3rd and 4th sub-paras.

(©) and (e)—-page 482, paras. 15 and 17.

(४) pages 483-484, para. 20.

(0) page 484, para. 23, second sub-para.

Other recommendations regarding costs contained at page 483;

para. 18, 3rd sub-para., page 483, para. 19, last sentence, and page 484.
para, 24 have been ieft for implementation by the High Courts,


Money
Orders.

Interest.

174

Order XXI, rule 1

1, This is in implementation of the Fourteenth Report',
and siso follows (in part) local Amendments. The object
i8s-——

(4) to enable parties to remit money to court by
money order or through bank (see Fourteenth Report) ;

Gi) to provide that payment to the decree-holder
outside court should be by money-order or through
bank or other mode of payment evidenced in writing
(see Fourteenth Report and Allahabad Amendment) ;

(iii) to make it clear, that on an amount paid
into court or in accordance with the orders of the court,
interest shall cease to run from the date of the service
of notice, (See Bombay and Patna Amendments.)

2. A provision for notification of the payment has been
added. It is considered, that even a payment under rule
101) (c) should be notified.

3. A special form of money order has been referred to
in the Explanation added by the Lahore High Court, and
the word “special” has also been used by the Patna High
Court, but this appears to be unnecessary.

4. The question whether the introduction of payment
by money order would increase the work of the courts
and create opportunities for fraud has been considered.
It is thought, that the experiment is worth trying, as has
been done by several High Courts. (See Local Amend-
ments made by the High Courts of Allahabad, Calcutta,
Madhya Pradesh, Patna, Orissa and Punjab). It is pre-
sumed, that no serious practical difficulties would arise.

5. As to sub-rule (4) dealing with interest, compare
local Amendments made by the High Courts of Bombay
and Patna and also Order XXIV, rule 3 and under-
mentioned decisions?-"-*,

6. The question whether the decree-holder, to whom
notice of payment made by the judgment-debtor is given,
should be allowed some time for com! ing into the Court and
receiving payment of the amount, has been considered with
reference to the point whether interest should be allowed
to run until such time expires. No such provision is, how~
ever, considered necessary.

Order XXI, rule 2(1)

Under the Madras Amendment, any party to the suit
can certify and get recorded a payment or adjustment.
Further a person who has become a surety as well as the

140) Report, Vol. I, pages 443-444, paras. 25-—28.
2Special L. A. Officer v. Ambalal, A.1.R. 1951 Bom. 394.
*Vinayak y. Srikishan, ALR. 1955 M.B, 126,

‘Alleppy, ete. v. Porn, ATR. 1957 T. 241.


175

legal representatives of the judgment-debtor are also
brought under this rule by the Madras Amendment. These
amendments have been considered, but it is felt that it is
unnecessary to adopt them. So far as sureties are con-
cerned, even now they fall under the rule’. So far as
legal representatives are concerned, section 146 is adequate.

No change is therefore proposed, on these points.

Order XXI, rule 2(1)—which decree:

1. A question which has arisen under rule 2(1) is—do
the words “decree of any kind” apply to all decrees, or
only to decrees under which money is payable? Some
High Courts hold that they apply to ail decrees?-3-',

2. But the High Courts of Madras and Andhra Pradesh
hold that they are confined to decrees under which money
is payable*-°-",

For the history of the provision, see the under-men-
tioned cases®-",

3. It is considered that the provision should apply to
all decrees. Necessary clarification is proposed,

Order XXI, rule 2(2) New

The big question under Order XXI, rule 2, is whether
the provision prohibiting the recognition of an unrecorded

payment or adjustment requires to be made more liberal
or more rigid,

The various possible approaches may be considered.

(1) The first is, that the mandatory provision has work-
ed hardship and should be removed. This has been done
in the Punjab by removing sub-rule (3); see the Punjab

1Tambi ५.

Devi, TLL.R. 49 Mad. 325 ; Onkarmal v. Nritva, ALR.

1923 Cal. 313.

ashaik Niamat v. Shaikh Jalil, ALR. 1928 Cal. 715 ; Ellis v.Kitter
FER. 46 Bom. 226 5 ALR. 1922 Bom. 380 (2) (Mcleod ‘C.J. and Shah

pohadi v. Ram Ditta, ALR. 1936 Lah, 842 ; Devidas v. Bala Saheb,
LLLR. 1948 Nag. 486, ALR. 1948 Nog. 3740 7 ४६ Bala: Sahel

‘The point is discussed in Mulla, C.P.C. (1953) at page 754.

$See Chawa Seetharamayya v. Kadiyala, ALR. 1951 Mad. 853.

‘Narayanaswami v, Rangaswami, .L.R. 49 Mad. 716 ; ALR, 1926
Mad. 749.

iAnjaneyulu v. Rangacharyula, A.LR. 1958 Andhra Pradesh 70s
(reviews case-law),

*A.LR. 1928 Cal. 775.

*A.LR. 1926 Mad. 749.



176

Relief of Indebtedness Act (7 of 1934), section हक It
has been expressly excluded in respect of proceedings
under the Bombay Agriculturist Debtors Relief Act (28
of 1947), which takes the place of section 71, Dekhan Agri-
culturists Relief Act*. It has also been held to be inappli-
cable to an inquiry under section 3 of the Madras Agricul-
turists Relief Act, 1938, since the court scaling down a debt

under that Act is not a “court executing a decree”*.

(2) The other approach is that hinted at by Shah J. in
a Bombay case®. He observed, that the wording of sub-
rule (3) is quite clear and admits no escape therefrom “on
such general considerations as have been referred to by
Heaton J. in Trimback v. Hari® and accepted in Hansa v.
Bhawa”’. He observed further—

“Such considerations may afford a sufficient ground
to modify the provision of sub-rule (3) or to repeal
article 1748, of the Indian Limitation Act so as to make
it permissible to the judgment-debtor to apply at any
time to have the payment recorded. But they cannot
afford any sufficient ground for refusing to give effect
to the plain and unimbiguous words of the sub-rule in
words of the sub-rule in question.”.

(3) The Fourteenth Report considered the matter in
detai'’, and took the view that a payment not made through
bank or by postal money order or evidenced in writing,
and an adjustment not made in writing, should not be
recognised by any court executing the decree. It referred
to the Allahabad Amendment in this context, and recom-
mended its adoption’®.

(4) In the draft Report on Civil Procedure Code which
had been circulated, while requiring the payments to be
made in the manner suggested in the Fourteenth Report,
scope had been deliberately left for the recog nition of other
payments if they were certified and recorded as at present.

1Daru Mal v. Todar, A.LR. 1938 Lah. 602.

*Murli Dhar v. Firm Basheshar Lal, 1.L.R. 1938 Lah. 264, A.LR.
1938 Lah. 126, pp lying the Punjab Amendment to an original है ide decree
of the Calcutta High Court sent to Punjab.

*Chhaganlal y. Farasram, A.1.R. 1921 Bom. 142, 143.

4K. Raju v. 0. Mahalakshman, V.L.R. 1943 Mad. 138 3 ALR. 1942
Mad. 597, 598.

SMehbunissa v. Mehbunissa, 1.L.R. 49 Bom. 548; A.LR. 1925 Bom.
309, 310(B.F,)

(1910) LLL.R. 34 Bom. 575.

1(1916) LL.R. 40 Bom. 333.

*Article 174 of the old Limitation Act.

*rgth Report, Vol. I, pages 443-444, paras. 25—28.

As to genesis of Allahabad Amendment, see U. P. Judicial Reform
Committee (1950-51) Report, Vol. I, pages 41-42.


itt

The matter has since been considered in detail, and it is
felt that the time has come to make the provisions of the
law more stringent by recognising only payments made in
the manner suggested in the Fourteenth Report (summa-
ised above) or adjustments proved by documentary evi-
dence. Even such payments and adjustments should, it is
felt, be got recorded, and further, payments not recorded
should continue to be unrecognised as at present. Broadly
speaking, the effect of the proposed amendment will be,
(i) that oral payments and adjustments will have no claim
for recognition in execution and will be incapable of being
got recorded; (ii) payments evidenced in writing or adjust-
ments proved by documentary evidence, can be recognised,
but that too only if they are recorded. The condition of
recording is considered necessary even in the case of such
payments, ete., for the reason that otherwise there may be
room for fraud and forgery.

Order XXI, rule 2 and limitation

The period of limitation for an application for certifica-
tion of payment or adjustment is 30 days under the (New)
Limitation Act, 1963, article 125. Since the provision in
the Civil Procedure Code regarding certification is now
proposed to be made more stringent than at present (by
requiring that the payment should be in the manner
provided in Order XXI, rule 1 as proposed to be amended
or that the adjustment should be proved by documentary
evidence), it is considered that a longer period should be
allowed. It is, accordingly: recommended that the period
should be increased to 90 days'. The Fourteenth Report?
recommended that the period should be deleted, but it is
not considered necessary to go so far.

Order XXI, rule 2 and pre-decree agreements

1. How far a court executing a decree is precluded from
looking at agreements entered into before the decree, is a
matter on which there is some uncertainty. The majority
of the High Courts have taken the view that such an agree-
ment cannot be pleaded in bar of execution. But the
Bombay High Court has held in one case’, that the execut-
ing court can look into a pre-decree agreement to the effect
that the prospective judgment-debtor will within 15 days,
pay something less than the amount for which the decree
was to be passed, and the decree-holder will give up the
balance if such payment was made within 15 days. It was
held, that, the court was bound by its previous decision’ on
this point, though “it had not met with universal approval

36/. (Old) Limitation Act, 1908, article 174. SS
*14th Report, Vol. I, page 444, para. 28.

*Burjorifi v. Madhavial, LLL.R, 58 Bom. 610 ; A.IR. 1934 Bom. 370,
372 (Beaumont C.J., and Barlee J.).
‘Laldas v. Kishordas, (1896) 1.L.R. 22 Bom. 463 (F.B.).


‘an agreement to the effect thai one 0:

178

in other courts”. The Bombay view thus seems to be a
settled one’.

2. There is some douh ce to the position in
Madras also. In an earlier d held that the
executing court could have regerd to an agreement which
provided that execution shall not be issued for a certain
time. But this was distinguished in later caset, holding
that an executing court canno e@ into a pre-decree
agreement which had nothin with “execution”. The
allegation in this case w preliminary
decree, the mortgase-debt ha {the parties

had allowed the decree to be pas: है K
It was held, that the executing court could not take notice

of such agreements.
3. The Andhra Pradesh High Court

ems 10 have allowed
the parties could not
execute a decree to be obtained against the other", Other
Hii gh Courts take the view that thy executing court cannot
look into pre-decree agreements*-*.

4, As the matter does noi really pertain to rule 2, and
as the ordinary rule is that ing court cannot go
behind the decree, no express on is considered
necessary.

p

Order XXI, rule 2 and counter-affidavits

1. Under Order XXI, rule 2(2), the judgment-debtor
may inform the court of the payment or adjustment of the
decree and apply to the court to issue a notice to the decree-
holder to show cause why the ‘payment, ete., should not be

urecorded, etc. The form of notice is given in Appendix F,
form No. 1. A question that has arisen in this connection
is, whether a counter-affidavit by the judgment-debior
(within the period of lisitation provided in old article 174,
now article 125) informing the court about the adjustment,
ete, is sufficient, when there is no preyer for issue of
notice. Case-la4w on the subject is summoriscd below, In

*The point was maised in सका v, Dureadutt, ALR. 1956 Bom. 526,

528, but not decided.

*Chidambaramyy. Krisina LL.R. 40 Mad. 243 3 ALR. 1918 Mad.
1174 (F.B.).
“Generally हु to agreements 10 give time, see Mulla (1953) page 750.
*Gudimall aita, ATR. 1950 Mad, 608,
5Ruka Randi v.Mewiri Pragada, A 1957 AP. 75.

Y *See also Usman y. Maimooty, AAR. 1961 Ket. 179.

"See Co-operative Bank v. Ram Sarup, ALR, 1953 Pun. 267 3
Krithna_ Trading Corpn. v. Ran Saran, ATR. 1962 All. 374. 3 Hukam Chand
ight dhey Krishan, ALR . 128, foitowing Chhoti Navain Singh v.

हक Koer (1902) 6 CAW.N. 796 3 Robert Shimer v. R. M. Skinner,
» 1937 Lah. 537.

छा injunc can be granted ia a separate git, Harendra v. Gopal
A.LR. 1935 Cal. 177. . an « ९५४



179

pointed out that to
treat an va3 to ignore the lan-
gauge of 2 v red notice, ete. The case

5 a later case’,

does not seorm to }
where on applic [८ 90 was treated

as sufficient ९:

an earfier case, the Me

| held, that the
not be treated as
jon 238, A recent decision
have acgepted this position’.
xen by a majority of the
Desai J. in that case
wart of this conclusion: first,
y information to the court but
४४ on an objection by the judg-
joo of ste decree on the ground
possible reply which a decree-
ated in Order XXI, rule 2(3)
i payment, etc.;
thin the limita-
He further pointed
cn why the judgment-debtor
hands, should fail to make
an application. obiection to execution on the
ground of payment wi treated 88 an adplication under
sub-rule (2), there would be no sense in sub-rule (3).

2. The Colex
objection of ४
an “application
on the sub
The sar
Judges in an At
has given several
that rule 2(2) १
an applicatio
meni-debtor to tt
of. satisfaction.

holder
itself, i ars recognition of un ertified

tion period.
out, that there w
when the mat 1

3. A liberal view has, however, been taken by the
High Court of Bombay‘, and by the Andhra Pradesh High
Court’. This view attaches importance to the substance of
the matter. The liberal view seems to be correct. The
matter does not seem to be of sufficient importance to
require an amendment of the rule.

Order XXI, rule 5

Under local Amendments*, in cases where the courts are *
situated within the samme State, the decree can be sent for
execution to the transferee court directly, instead of
through the District Court. It is, however, considered that
the District Judge would be in a position to know and
'Lodd Govind Dass v. Ram Doss, (1913) 24 ML.J. 88.
*Randas Narasinhe, ALR, 1952 Mad. 582.
*ajrang Bahari v. Lackni Narain, (1912) 15 0.1... 88.
‘Bimla Bole ९. Buta Kristina, AAR. 1957 Cal, 308 (Guha 1).

SAkbar Ali v. Dr, Ishear Saran, WLR. (1957) 2 All 75 ALR. 1
All. 622 (Desai and Mukerjee J] Beg J. contra). 957

*Kalyanji v. Dharamgji, ATR, 1935 Bom. 303 (Broomfield J.).
*Chengayya v. Chenga, A.LR. 1959 Andhra Pradesh 632 (F.B.).
38९8 amendments made by Allahabad and Bombay High Courts,

oan



189

check up whether the court to which the papers are sent
through him, is the proper court. Hence no change is
recommended.

Order XXI, rule 11

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report! to remove certain columns from the form of appli-
cation for execution of decree. It is, however, considered
that the particulars to be mentioned in such columns, even
though many of them can be ascertained from other records,
serve a useful purpose, inasmuch as they give all the rele-
vant information at one place. Hence no change is sug-
gested.

Order XXI, rule 11(2) and Bombay Amendment

Order XXI, rule 11(2) (0) (1) provides for mentioning
“attachment and sale” or “sale without attachment” in the
application for execution. It does not expressly mention
Simple attachment. The local Amendment made by the
‘Bombay High Court, adds the words “by the attachment
of”, Cases of simple attachment may arise when a decree
or debt or money in custody of a public officer, etc., is to be
attached.

It is, however, considered unnecessary to adopt this
amendment, as the residuary clause in rule 11 would
suffice.

Section 51 (9), it may be noted, covers attachment
aAimpliciters,

Order XXI, rule 11A (New)

This is new. Since section LI, proviso, now limits the
grounds on which a judgment-debtor can be arrested (after
the 1936 amendment), it is desirable to provide that the
application under Order XXT, rule 11 should state ‘the
grounds on which arrest is sought for. This will assist
the court in taking action under Order XXI, rule 37 (notice
to show cause), and also further proceedings under Order
XXI, rule 40. It has been held‘, that the existence of the
circumstances mentioned in section 51, proviso (a) to (९)
should be alleged either in the execution application or in
an accompanying affidavit. Unless such a circumstance is
alleged (it was pointed out), the court cannot think of the
circumstances and, in its absence, the court cannot take
action under Order XXI, rule 37.

ty4th Report, Vol. TL page 445, para. 29. हु

3866 also Civil Justice Committee (1925), Report, page 383, bottom,
*Amulya v. Pashubati, AR. 1951 Cal. 48, 50, para, 7.

‘Harpal Singh v. Hira Lal, AVR, 1955 All. 402. 03, para, 7 (Raghubar
Dayal and Chowdhry, JJ). 40m) 405 para 7 Rae


181

It may be added, that section 51 is m: latory and even
when an order is passed ex parte, its provisions have to be
complied with'-*.

Order XXI, rule 16

(1) The Calcutta Amendment which, while not dis-
pensing with notice, allows the execution to proceed’, has
been considered. It is unnecessary to adopt this in the

Codet.

(2) The Bombay Amendment, providing that any pay-
ment, etc., not certified or recorded under Order XXI, rule 2
shall not be recognised by the court hearing an application
under Order XXI, rule 16, appears to be unnecessary. That
is the position even apart from such amendment’.

Order XXI, rule 16 and transferee court

As to whether the power under this rule can be exercised
by a court to which the decree may be transferred for
execution, the matter has been dealt with separately®.

Order XXI, rule 17

1, This carries out the recommendation imade in the
Fourteenth Report?-*, The object is to require the court
to allow a defect in an application for execution to be
remedied. (The existing rule leaves a discretion to the
court to reject the application, the amendment takes away
the discretion.) Detailed provisions have also been made
for cases where there is a dispute about the correctness of
the amount stated in the application.

2. In drafting the provision, assistance has been taken
from the Calcutta Amendment. See also the amendments
made by Madras, Allahabad, Patna, etc., High Courts.

4T. Kunhiraman v. Madhavan Nair, A.J.R. 1957 Mad. 761. An earlier
decision (A.LR. 1948 Mad. 9) took a contrary view.
2B.K. Puttaramaniah vy. H. 1. E. & Sons, 81.1. 1959 Mys. 94.

%Sailendra v. Bank of Calcutta, A.I.R. 1948 Cal. 131, 132, para. 10
(Chakravarti and Ellis JJ.).

‘The Calcutta Amendment follows the Report of the Civil Justice Com-
mittee (1925), page 405, para. Ir.

4See Mulla, C.P.C. (1953), pages 759-760.
*See amendment proposed to section 42.
7Cf. 14th Report, Vol. I, page 445, paras. 30-31.

"See also Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, a
and page 406, para. 12, (192425) Report, page 384 Para. 12


182

Order XXI, rule 22

1. Two recommendations relevant to Order XXI, rule 22
were made in the Fourteenth Report‘--. At present, notice
is necessary if one year has elapsed from the date of the
decree. The Fourteenth Report recommended substitution
of a period of three years in its place. Further, it recom-
mended that the failure to issue the notice or to record
reasons for non-issue, etc., should not render the proceed-
ings void, unless substantial injury is caused.

2. A brief statement of the existing position on these
points is given helow:— न

(i) Before 1914 there was a conflict of authority as
to whether omission to isue notice under rule 22
rendered the sale void or voidable. After the Privy
Council decision® holding that it is the notice which
confers jurisdiction, all the High Courts (following
that decision) held. that in the absence of the notice,
the sale was void'- The Madras High Court in
certain decisions regarded the sale as voidable and
distinguished the Frivy Council decision on the ground
that that decision was given under the old Code. while
in the present Code, sub-rule (2) showed that the rule
could be relaxed’, But this view was rejected in Jater
Madras cases®-!",

(ii) Amendments relaxing the rigour of this rule,
have been made by some of the High Courts. e.g.—
Allahabad; Calcutta—see the under-mentioned deci-
sions; Andhra—similar to Madras Amendment;
Assam—similar to Calcutta Amendment; Kerala—
similar to Madras Amendment; Madras—see the under-

1zgth Report, Vol. I, page 447, para. 34, middle and last portion.

6 3566 also Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 387, para.
16.

*Raghunath v. Sundar, LL.R. 42 Cal. 723 था LA. 251 5 ALR. 1914
PC, 129.
‘Shyam v. Satinath, LL.R. 44 Cal. 954.
'Chandi v. Jumna LL.R. 49 All. 830.
*Adkia v. Shankar, AJ.R. 1921 Nag. 126.
tAnil ९. Ahmad, A.I.R. 1940 Cal, 23.
*Kasivisoanathan v. Somasundaram, WL.R. 45 Mad. 875.
pereeral y. Ramanuja, LL.R. 47 Mad. 288 ; A.LR. 1924 Mad, 431
(F.B.).
1° Kanchamalai_ v. Shaheji, LL.R. 59 Mad. 461 ; A.LR. 1936 Med. 205

UDwarka v. Abdul, 48 Cal. W. N. 346 ; Muhadeo v. N. D. U. Tea
Go. 55 C.W.N, 408 ; see also ALR. 1961 Cal. 336.

“Thomas v. Simon, A.LR. 1957 Travancore-Cochin 153 (construing an
amendment similar to the Madras Amendment).



183

mentioned case"; Orissa—similar to Patna Amendment;
Patna—see the under-mentioned decisions'; and Punjab.
Mos! of these amendments are confined to failure to record
veasous while the Calcutta Amendment seems to cover non-
issue of the notice itself.

3. Aiter some consideration it has been decided that it
would no: be proper to make an amendment relaxing the
gour of this rule. The provision for notice being of an
essential character, the position laid down by the Privy
Council need not be disturbed.

4, As regards increase of the period, it is considered
sufficient to increase it to iwo years,

Necessary change is proposed.

Ordey XXI. rule 22 and Insolvency

1. The question whether the provisions of Order 21,
rule 22 should be applied to the Official Assignee or Official
Reveiver in insolvency, where the judgment-debtor has
become insolvent, has been considered. The present posi-
tion is as follows:—

(i) It was held by the Privy Council? under the
corresponding provision in the old Code, that the Offi-
cial Assignee or Official Receiver under the Insolvency
law was “a legal representative” within the meaning
of section 248 of the old Code. In the old Code, how-
ever, there was no definition of the expression “legal
representative”. In the present Code, there is a defi-
nition which does not seem io include the Official
Assignee or Official Receiver in the insolvency*. In a
Calcutta case’, it seems to have been assumed that
Order XXI, rule 22 applies to the Official Receiver in
insolvency. Corresponding English rule is Order XLII,
rule 23(a), R.S.C., under which leave is necessary
where any change has taken place “by death or other-
wise in the parties entitled or liable to execution”.

\Bal Mukand v. Pirthivaj, ALR. 1951 Pat. 333 5 Shyam v. Naurangi.
ALR, 1946 Pat. 2703; Ram Lal v. Ramia, A.LR. am Pat. 454 पु
Raj Kishore v.  Subak, A.LR. 1959. Pat. 89 ; sec also ALR. 1961
Pat. 480, 508; Sukhdeo v. Brahimdeo, A.LR. 1957. Pat. 431;
Ram Saran v. Deo Nandan, ALR. 1957 Pat. 433 5. ALR. 1953
Orissa 295 (construing an amendment similar to Patna).

*Raghnath Das v. Sunder Das, 41 LA. 251, 256 ; LL.R. 42 Cal,
82 3; ALR. 1914 0.0. 129. Sto 258 5 4 7

®That the old Code did not contain this definition has been noticed b:
the Madrrs High Court in Kanchamalai v. Shahaji 1.L.R. 59 Mad. ors
A.LR. 1936 Mad. 205, 207 (F.B.). धर

“See Dinesh Chandra v. Jahan Ali, LL.R. 62 Cal. 457 3 ALR.
Cal. $03 sos (Guha and Charles Bartley, JJ.). “7 1935


184
(i) The Madras High Court has amended this rule
so as to provide (inter alia) that when a party to the
decree has been declared insolvent, notice shall be
issued to the Official Assignee or Receiver in insol-
vency.

2. It seems advisable to adopt the Madras Amendment,
which seem to be supported by the following reasons.

In the first place, upon an order of adjudication, the
insolvent’s property vests in the Official Assignee, and
therefore it would be unrealistic to proceed with the ex-
ecution without notice to him. In the second place, the
order of adjudication may affect the very operation of the
decree (in view of the doctrine of relation back and effect
of insolvency on antecedent transactions, particularly
fraudulent preferences). The issue of a notice would give
the Official Assignee an opportunity to raise these objec-
tions. Thirdly, such an amendment is in conformity with
the principle on which Order XXII, rule 10 is based, namely,
the procedure to be followed on devolution of interest
during pendency of the suit'.

In fact, all further proceedings (for example, appeal
in execution), will have to be continued by the Official
Assignee*.

Necessary amendment is proposed.

3. The proposed amendment will be in addition to am
restrictions or formalities arising out of insolvency whic!
may be necessary under the insolvency law*-.

4. The Madras amendment was construed, in the
under-mentioned case’.

Order XXI, rule 22A (Patna)

1. The Patna High Court has added rule 22A to the
effect that where property is soid in execution, the sale
shall not be set aside by reason only of death of the judg-
ment-debtor between the date of issue of sale proclama-
tion and date of sale, notwithstanding failure to substitute
legal representatives. But, if the legal representative is
prejudiced, the court may set aside the sale.

‘Sce Mulla, Civil Procedure Code (1953), page 962, bottom, and Mullna,
Law of Insolvency in India (1958), page 690, para. 700. See also Ammanna
vy. Ramakrishna Rao, 1.L.R. 1949 Mad. 904 ; A.LR. 1949 Mad. 886.

Of. Muni Lal v. Bari Doab Bank Ltd., A.I.R. 1936 Lah. 368,

२86७ Mulla, Law of Insolvency in India (1958), 250—252, para.
255 and page 689, para. 698. Pages कण 252s Para.

“See also section $1 (3) of the Provincial Insolvency Act and secti
53 (3) of the Presidency Act. हे Bee ane खाना

*Official Receiver, Nellore v. Venkiah, A.LR. 1941 Mad. 606.


185

2. On this point, see the under-mentioned case'-?-%*,
The ordinary rule is, that sale of a judgment-debtor’s pro-
perty does not bind his representatives, at whatever stage
the judgment-debtor might have died®.

3. It is considered unnecessary to adopt the Patna Am-
endment.

Order XXI, rule 24(3)

Some High Courts have made local amendments, which
require that the day on or before which the process should
be returned should be specified*-?.

Tt_is considered unnecessary to adopt this amendment,
which is of a minor character.

Order XXI, rule 26

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report*-* to the effect that where a judgment-debtor applies
for stay of execution under this rule, the court shall require
him to furnish security or impose conditions under the
rule, before granting stay. This recommendation was made
in view of the feeling that the courts tailed to discriminate
between honest and dishonest judgment-debtors and thus
failed to exercise properly the discretion left to them. It
is, however, considered that the existing provision should
continue, and that making it mandatcry would cause hard-
ship.

Hence no change is suggested.
Order XXI, rule 29

Order XXI, rule 29 C.P.C. runs as follows: —

“Where a suit is pending in any court against the
holder of a decree of such court, on the part of the
person against whom the decree was passed, the court
may, on such terms as to security or otherwise, as it
thinks fit, stay execution of the decree until the pend-
ing suit has been decided.”

‘Ajab ४. Hari Charan, A.I.R. 1945 Pat. 1 (F.B.)
*Ramlal v. Ramia, A.I.R. 1947 Pat. 454 (F.B.).
*Kanchamalan y, Sahaji, A.1.R. 1936 Mad. 205 (F.B.) (reviews cases

taw).
‘Marotirao ४. Narayan, A.I.R. 1948 Nag. 300,
*Rajlakshmi v. Banamali, ALR. 1955 Cal. 573.
‘After the date fixed for return, execution is not valid. See Gurdial-
१. Emp., LL.R. 55 All. 119 ; 8.1,7., 1933 AIL 46 (Pullan yo .
7 Civil Justi है
same ad ivil Justice Committee Report (1925), page 406, para. 13 to
*r4th Report, Vol. I, page 449, para. 40,
कि *See also Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 406, pares


186

1. The object of rule 29 is to—

(i) prevent the judgment-deb'
elled to satisfy the decree when
that on balance he owed less than
(or even nothing at all');

(9) prevent multiplicity of proceedings’;

or from being com=
1६ might be proved
the decretal amount

(ii) to provide for adjustment;
(so that the successful plaintiff in a pending suit need
tot take out execution).
2. Therefore, the words “decree ०1 such court” should

be amplificd to cover cases where the decree is of some
other court, but ts being executed by the court in which

the sui pending.

3. At present there is a conflict of de ms on this point.
One view is, that a court to which the decree of any other
court is transicrred, can act under this rule’-*.

4, But another line of cases takes a narrower view®.7-*,

5. The wider view bases itself oa the principle that the
transferee court becomes the “court” which passed the
decree, (section 37) and would, under section 42, become
clothed with the same powers’. The narrower view justi-
fies itself on the language of the section, which requires
identity of the court passing the decree and the court in
which the suit is pen ging.

To clarify the position, necessary change is proposed,
adopting the wider view.

6. As to the converse question—whether the court in
which a suit ts pentting, can act even 1 the decree is trans-
ferred to another court, Bombay High Court has held that

it can”.

het v. J ए० बम, ALR. 1928 Cal. 222, 224.
tMabeth v. क gets, ALR. 1928 Cal. 222, 224 (Page J.)
1Kannamnal v. Muthu Kumarswami, A.1.R. 1936 Mad, 102, 103 (Beasley
“«Kassamal v. Gopi (1888) LL.R. 10 All. 389, 393.
5 vadkripa v. Comilla Union Bank Lid., A.LR. 1934 Cal. 4 (Jack and
बच रथ vy. Umrao, ALR. 1930 All 121 (Sulail i
हब्म 11, 93 (Sulaiman Acting C, J. and
1M-s. Khemchand v. Rambabu, ALR. 1958 M.P, 131, 132.
*Ujacar Singh v. Puran Singh, ALR. 1930 Lah. 961, 968, right-hand
(Walker J
*As to the general sition, see Maharajah of Bobbili v. Ne jt
ALR. 1916 Xo 16. pes aah of Bobbili v. Narasa Rais,
wWNarsidas v. Manhar Singh, ALR. 1931 Bom. 247, 249.



187
Order XXI, rule 31

1. This carries out the recommendation made in the
Fourteenth Report'. In a deeree for delivery of specific
movable proper the award of compensation in lieu of
delivery proveriy is, at present, permissible where the
zudgsmeat-debtor has been attached and the
has continued for at least sir months. The
amendicent sess to reduce this period to 3 months.

ed unnecessary to give power to the

in Crdsr XXI, rule

injunctions is a matter on
‘sy. The Caleutta view?

hat it covered prohib.

i ns to have

rent view, relying upon tie illustration.

. Ths English rule, Order XLIL, rule 80. .5.C. 1883
y ues in the 1962 revisicn) speak: of “manda-
udgment for the speciiic perferm-

ance of any contract
3. Other High Co’

s have held that this sub-rule is
confined to mendatery injunction: aA. change in the
Tan guage does tot app: to be necessary in the present

lygth Report है, pove 455, para. $3.

*See also Civil Justice Committce (1924-25) Report, page 407, para.
*S rath Report, Vol 1,

556० also Report of the Civi

*Sachi Prasad v. Amar Nath Roy, 1.1...
674 (Richardson J. Bar Beact:
point).

“See Hem Chandra y. Narendra Nath, LL.R. 61 Cal. 146 5 A.LR. 1934
Cal, 492, dissenting from Sachi Prasad's case.

१8९९ cave-law reviewed in Joseph v. -Makkaru; A.JLR. 1960 Ker. 127.

“Chinn bha Chetty v. Chengalroya, A.L.R. 1950 Mad. 237.

(1: 27), Page 407, Para. 16.
46 Cal. 103 ; A.LR.{ 1919 Cal,
held his concurrence in’ this



188

position of the case-law. As has been observed the words
of sub-rule (5) are “opposite only to mandatory injunc-
tions and not to prohibitory injunctions!”,

Order XXI, rule 37

1. A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report? to the effect, that the issue of notice to the judg-
ment-debtor before his arrest should be made discretionary,
as it was before the amendment of 1936. The Report ob-
served, that execution by arrest and detention was a very
effective and quick way of realisation of money, and that
the application to issue a notice in the first instance de-
feated the very purpose of this mode of execution, by
enabling the judgment-debtor to abscond before the issue
of warrant. While it did not take the view that no notice
was necessary, it expressed the opinion that it should be
left to the discretion of the court whether to issue a notice
or not, because, if execution by arrest had to continue
and was to be of any value, it should not be compulsory
for the court to issue notice in every ९8५९३,

2. It is, however, considered, that having regard to the
fact that execution by way of arrest is a somewhat anti-
quated mode, it is not desirable to go back to the law
before the 1936 amendment. The change recommended,
therefore, has not been carried out.

Order XXI, rule 39(5)

1, Local Amendments made in implementation of the
Report of the Civil Justice Committee* have omitted the
words “in the civil prison” in sub-rule (5). Others—
Bombay, Madras and M.P.—are more elaborate. The
object in all cases is the same, namely, to provide that
sub-rule (5) will cover the costs incurred by decree-holder
for subsistence expenses and conveyance charges before
the period of actual detention.

2. As execution by arrest is now rare, it is considered
unnecessary to make any such change.

Order XXI, rule 41

Order XXI, rule 41, at present empowers the Court (in
case of a money decree) to examine the judgment-debtor
in order to find out whether any debts are owing to him

and what other property or means of satisfying the decree
je has.

cs pRambrisina ¥. Board of Revenue, ALR. 1954 Nag. 245, 248 (Sinha

"14th Report, Vol. I, page 448, para. 36.
*Cf. U. P. Judicial Reforms Committee (1950-51) Report, page 43.
‘Civil Justice Committee Report (1525), page 407, para. 18.


188

Similar provision is contained in Order XLII, rule 32---
Rules of the Supreme Court. This rule was considered by
the Evershed Committee!. It heard representations to the
effect, that (even with the examination as to the means}
the judgment-creditor had difficulty in ascertaining as to
what the assets of judgment-debtor were, and that was the
reason why the judgment-ereditors resorted to the writ
of “fieri facias” to force the judgment-debtor to realise
his assets; the judgment-debtor knew what assets he had,
while the judgment-creditor did not. The Committee
recommended, that where a judgment-debt remained un-
paid for 14 days, the judgment-creditor should be entitled
to call upon the judgment-debtor to make an affidavit of
his assets. The filing of such an affidavit was, in the
opinion of the Committee, much more effective than the
examination now in vogue, as the judgment-creditor (at
present) attended the examination without any prior know-
ledge of the debtor’s assets and liabilities.

It is considered, that the insertion of a provision on the
lines suggested by the English Committee would be useful
in India also. Necessary change has been proposed. The
period, however, has been fixed at 30 days.

It_is, however, considered unnecessary to make any
specific provision as to penalty for failure to make the
affidavit in such cases. (The English Committee suggested?
that the notice should be endorsed with a “penalty notice”
under Order XLI, rule 5, Rules of the Supreme Court.
Ne; eglect to make the affidavit would thus render the
judgment-debtor liable to a process of execution for com-
pelling him to obey it. This would attract the provisions
of Order XLII, rule 7, R.S.C. providing for writ of “attach-
ment” or committal)?

Order XXI, rule 43A (New)

1. The question has been raised how far a custodian
of movable property whom property attached in execution
is entrusted is Table if he does not look after the property
or restore it when required. Since occasions for so en-
trusting property are frequent, it is considered desirable
to lay down the rule on the subject.

2, The U-P. Legislature has in this connection amended
section 145 by adding the following Explanation’: —

“Explanation.—For the purposes of this section a person
entrusted by a Court with custody of any property attached

व Report of the Committee on Supreme Court Practice and Pro.

cedure (1953) Cmd. pape , Pages 145 and 146, paras. =

form of aflidavit at page 376. 45 4 S 453-454 and
3866 Final Report of the Evershed Committee, para. 454.

ts 2Cf. Vueport of the U. P, Judicial Reforms Committee (1950-51), pages,
36.

Penalty.


190

in execution of any decree or order shall be deemed to
have become Hable as surety for the restitution of such
propesty within the meaning of clause (b).”.

3. The Calcutta High Court has inserted a new order—
XXIA, and rule 11 of that Order contemplates the
ment of the “bond” against the custodian.

७ High Courts of Madras, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala
ava Pradesh have achieved the object by proviling
taking of a bond, vide amendments made by those
to rule 43 of Order XXI.

The Hish Court of Patna has inserted an elaborate
vii rule 43A—which deals at length with the

The High Court of Punjab has added rules 438 to
43D in Order XXI.

5. It is considered that it would be better if provision
making the custodian liable without the formality
f ‘ond. Section 145, however, does not appear to be
the proner place for this. As rule 43 of Order XXI deals
with subject of attachment and the mode of effecting
it in the case of movable property, it would be more
convenicnt if the amendment is placed in proximity with
that rule

6. An elaborate provision dealing with the liability of
the custodian has been proposed, so as to—

(i) deal with the custodian’s liability both to the
decree-holder and to the judgment-debtor, and also
to third parties who may be declared to be owners of
the property;

(ii) make this liability enforceable in execution;

(iii) define the limits of this liability by making
it dependent on his fault:

(iv) allow appeal in respect of orders determining
liability in such proceedings.

Order XXI, rule 42

Local Amendments made by cevtain High Courts make
rovision for pre-payments of expenses of watching corps.
‘his was also the recommendation made by the Civil

Justice Committee!. It is considered unnecessary to adopt
this minor amendment.

1Givil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 407, paragraph 19.


191

Order XXI, rules 464 to 461 (New)
carry out the recommendation made in the
th Report!~.. The object is to make detailed pro-
visions for procedure in garnishee cases. They mainly
folly the Calcutta Amendments. Order XXI, rule 46A
et seq. Cf. also Order 45. R.S.C. 1883, which seems to con-

tinue after the 1932 Revision.
2. Rule 4604 (3) is intended to make the provision com-
prehe

rule 467, it has been rade clear that payment

3. In
by the gi 2 wil" ect him in 0001 the situations,
namely, ere ine order of the court in the garnishee

et aside, and where the decree under execu-
h the proceedings in garnishee were taken)
is set aside. On this noint, rule 46F of the Calcutta
Amendment merely provides for setting aside, ete., of “such
put the language of Order 45, rule 7, Rules of
ne Court, is more elaborate. The latter has been

drawn upon.

proceed'n,
tien (on

Order XXI, rule 48

The wrendment is intended to make the provisions of
rule 48 spplicable to persons who, though not servants of
the Government, are employees of Corporations engaged.
in trade cv industry and established by statute or Govern-
rnent compenies. For the purposes of rule 48 (attachment
of salaries) such persons should, it is considered, be treated
en the saine footing as Goverrment servants.

In drafting the amendment, assistance has been taken
from section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, as amended in

1958.
Order XXI, rule 48A

1, This is new, and is intended to lay down the pro-
cedure for attachment of private salaries. There is no
express provision in the Code on the subject, and up to
now, the attachment of private salaries was difficult,
because they were regarded as not attachable until they
actually became due at the end of the month. Since, the
position is now being altered’. it is considered that a
specific provision should be inserted on the subject, instead
of leaving the attachement of such salaries to be dealt
with under Order XXI, rule 46, which deals with attach-
ment of debts and all movable property not in possession,

ete.

‘14th Report, Vol. I, page 451, para. 45.
22 39858 aby Civil Justicr Committe: (7924-25) Report, page 390, para.
ia3See the amendment proposed to section 60.


192

2. In drafting this provision, the language of Order XXI,
rule 48, dealing with salaries of Government servants, etc.,
has been drawn upon, with suitable changes, and, parti-
cularly, this important modification, that the disbursing
officer of the employer should be within the jurisdiction of
the court.

3. The present position would seem to be that such
salaries are “debts”.

4. Whether the limitation as to the jurisdiction of the
court (namely, that the disbursing officer should be within
jts local limits) should be removed has been considered.
While no such limit exists in the case of salaries of public
employees, it is felt that it should be there in the case of
private employees. The position of public employees is
different, because their scales of pay are laid down precisely
by a centralised authority, and the authority for drawing

ay is also in many cases jssued from one source, so that
the likelihood of dispute or doubt is not great. In the case
of private employees, there is no such centralisation, and it
may be inconvenient if the employer (of a private em-
ployee) whose office is situated in one place, is required
fo deal with a distant court under an attachment effected
py it.

Order XXI, rule 5011)

The change in sub-rule (1) is purely verbal, being in-
tended to substitute the correct reference (section 30 of
the Partnership Act) instead of the old section (section
2A7, Contract Act).

Order XXI, rule 50(2)
1. The expression “such liability is disputed” in Order
जुड़ा rule 50{2) had caused some controversy. But the
narrower view, namely, that the person concerned could

only dispute the fact of his being a partner, was generally
preferred*—*,

2. In a recent Supreme Court case‘, it has now been
held that under this sub-rule, the person can only prove
that he was not a partner, and {in a proper case) that the
decree is the result of collusion, fraud or the like. He
gannot re-open the whole question of the liability of the

rm.

3. Hence no clarification is now needed.

1366 case-law cited in V. V. Subba Rao v. Mohd. Hussai
ee tet nV ov. Mohd. Hussain Khan,
See also discussion under Order 30, rule है;
ancedth ER: 1956 Bom. 513, 515 and ALR. 1955 Mad. 154, for # good
‘Gambir Mal v. J.K. Mills, 023 ०
903 SS Fuze (4964) 7 M.LJ. 92 (S.C); ALR


193

Order XXI, rule 50(2) “Court which passed”

1, Where a decree has been passed against a firm and
execution is sought against persons other than those
mentioned in Order XX{, rule 50(1), the decree-holder has
to apply for leave under Order जुड़ा, rule 50(2) to the “court
whiea passed the decree”, A controversy has arisen as to
whether such leave can be granted only by the court which
passed the decree, or whether the court to which the
decree is transferred for execution can aiso grant such
leave.

One view is that only the former court can grant such
Jeave'.. A contrary view is that by virtue of section 42,
the transferee court can also determine the question*-‘-*,

2, Local Amendments made by certain High Courts
(Patna, Orissa and Allahabad) permit the application to
be made to the transferee court also. This is one of the
points on which clarification was suggested in the Fout+
teenth Report®,

3. The Civil Justice Committee’ also felt, that though
section 42 was widely expressed, yet, in view of the specific
language used in Order XXI, rule 50. it was doubttul
whether the powers under that rule could be exercised by
any executing court, and suggested clarification.

4, It is, however, considered that these provisions should
remain only with the Court which passed the decree. That
Court would be in a better position to deal with such
applications.

Necessary amendment’ is proposed in section 42.

Order XXI, rule 50 and joint family firms

1. A controversy exists as to whether Order XXI, rule
50 applies to joint family firms. One view is that it does
not’, The Calcutta High Court'" expressed the same view
in one case. But, as, in a later decision", it has regarded +

\Pulin v. Iswar, A.

. 1945, Cal. 303 (8. K. Mukherjea & Ellis

*Pottiswami v. Sulaiman, ALR. 1942 Mad. sot.

*Sital ९, Robson and Co., LL.R. 43 All. 394 ; ALR. 1921 All. 199.

‘Bombay Co. Ltd., ४. Kahan, A.LR. 1931 Lah, 736 (Addison & Cold-
stream JJ.).

‘Abdut v. Dhanpat, A.LR. 1931 Lah. $07.

*14th Report, Vol. 1, pages 437-438, Paras, 14-15.

Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 387, para. 15.

‘See 3. 42 (as proposed).

*Maturi ९. Bhagaban, A,ILR. 1950 Orissa 189.

30606 v. Chhajumal, A.ILR. 1942 Cal. 613.
um NYamanadhar v. Jamuna Ram, ALR. 1944 Cal. 138 (Mitter and Blank .


194

Order XXX, rule 1 as applicable 19 joint family firms, it is
card Order ¥XJ, rule 50 as also appli

likely 8 व may res bs
08०१६ to them if the question now e. The Paina Hi
Court re s Order XXX, rule 1 as aonlicahls to join!

family firms', ard has observed that Order XXI, rule 50
should be read with Order XX Xx.

2. The Punish High Court? has held, that in view of
the amendment to Order NXX mac in Punjab. Order XX,

rule 50 also applies in Punjab to joint fa: m3.
2 1६ is hawever considered, that even if the provisions

of O SX. are made annlicable 10 | tamily firms",
der XXf, rule 50 should not apply to
t this proposition should be enacted.
ge is proposed.

su .
Necessary ch2

4, It is considered unnecessary to make any other pro-
vision as regards the property against which decrees passed
against joint family firms may be executed.

Order XXI, rule 53 (7)

This follows local. Amendments*. Where a decree is
sought to be executed by the attachment of another decree,
the procedure is that the court executing the principal
decree (the decree sought to be executed) sends a notice
to the court which passed the subordinate decree (i.e. the
decree to be attached), requesting the latter court to stay
execution of the subordinate decree until the decree-holder
or judgment-debtor in the principal decree applies to the
Jatter court to execute the subordinate decree. ‘The amend-
ment seeks to provide, that the judgment-debtor in the
principal decree should obtain either the decree-holder's
consent or the permission of the attaching court before
he applies to the court for execution of the subordinate

lecree.

A Getailed provision to deal with the cases where
execution of the subordinate decree has been transferred
to another court, has been made jn the Madras Amend-
ment®-', But, as no difficulty has been felt without it,
it has not been adopted.

LAlskh Chandra v. Krishna Chandra, ALR. 1941 Pat. 596.

*Pyij2b National Bank vy, Raj Mal, A.LR. 1959 Pun. 362 (Falshaw and
Dua JP.)

3926 Order 30, rule 10 (proposed).

tcf, Amendments made by High Courts of Calcutta, Madras, Nagpur
and Pama.
बा, Order 21, rule 530) Madras.

486९ also Civit Justice Committee (1925) Report, page 408, para. 20.


195
Order XXI, rule 5366)

1. Where a decree is attached in execution of another
decree, then, so far as the decree-holder of the attached
decree is concerned, the attachment is complete and
effective as soon as notice to the court which is to execute
the attached decree is given. This notice is given under
Orde: XXL, rule 53, sub-rule qa).
the judgment-debter cf the attached
otice of the atiachment hes to
tich notice is served upon him,
judgment-creciter wot a

| ४ extent, the pr
sub-rule (6) of rule 53 is. as stwted by Chagia C.J4, “a
statutory exception to the principle underiying section
64”. As has beer plained in the M ‘ase’, though
the general principle under section 64 hat after com-
pietion of the e >ment, a dealing in regard to the attached
property is forbidden, it does not follow that persons
acting bona fide without notice shouid in no case be
protected.

2. Now, in place of the “notice” referred to in sub-rule
(6), or in addition to that, local Amendments made by
several High Courts have inserted “knowledge”. See the
Jocai Amendments made by the High Courts of Calcutta,
Assam, Allahabad and Punjab. Thus, notice of the order
through court is not necessary.

It may be noted that a recommendation to this effect
was made by the Civil Justice Committee? also.

An amendment on the subject is proposed.

Order XXI, rule 54(1)

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report® to the effect, that under rule 54 an_ intimation
should be given to the judgment-debtor to attend the court
on a given date to take notice of further steps in the matter.
It is considered that a literal impiementation of this recom-
mendation might cause practical difficulties. On the date
on which the attachment is issued under rule 54, the court
woul} not be in a position to fix all the future dates in
the various sta: ges. Again, if a provision is inserted to
the effect that the judgment-debtor should attend at each
subsequent hearing and take notice from time to time of

'Mahadev v. Fanak Singh, A.1.R. 1954 Bom, 251, 253, left hand, para.
fast sub-para (Chagla 0. J. and Dixit J.). See also Lakshninarasinham ©
Lakshininarasimham, LL.R. 50 Mad. 677 3 A.I.R. 1927 Mad. 728.

*Mahadev v. Janak Singh, A.LL.R. 1954 Bom. 251, 253, para. 4.

sLabsivninarasimhan v. Lakshminarasimham, 1.L.R. 50 Mad,
ALR. 1927 Mad. 728. 5 ad. 677

Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 408, paras. 20-21.
‘14th Report, Vol. I, page 448, para. 38.


196

the various stages, that also may fail in practice, because
of events (e.g. an application by a third party under Tule
58) that often interrupt the progress of the proceedings.
Therefore, a provision in a modified form has been intro-
duced, to the effect, that the proclamation shall intimate
to him the date on which the terms of the proclamation
of the sale would be settled under rule 66. This amend-
ment, while not obviating the necessity of giving notice to
the judgment-debtor at subsequent stages (where such
notice is required by law), will save the time taken in the
issue of notice under rule 66,

Order XXI, rule 54(2)

The amendment to rule 54(2) provides that in the case
of a land situated in a village, a copy of the order should
be affixed in the office of the village panchayat also. This
is intended to secure adequate publicity for the attachment.

Order XXI, rule 54(3)

Local Amendments made by several High Courts provide
that the attachment should be effective from the date of the
order, in the case of a transferee without consideration.
The object of this amendment is to nullify any attempt by
a judgment-debtor to deal with his property between the
date of the order and the date of the actual attachment.
These amendments, in a way, constitute a qualification to
the general rule laid down in section 64 and were made
in implementation of the recommendation of the Civil
Justice Committee’. It is, however, felt that the insertion
of such a provision would have the effect of making the
attachment operative at two different dates in relation to
two different classes of persons (transferees without con-
sideration and other transferees), and that there are no
strong reasons to justify such a special provision depart-
ing from the ordinary rule? as to the point of time at which
an attachment becomes effective.

Order XXI, rule 57

Where an application for execution is dismissed either
by reason of the decree-holder’s default or otherwise, the
question arises whether an attachment already effected
ceases or not. At present, the case where the decree-
holder’s default entails dismissal of the application is
covered, but other cases are not. (In the former case, the
cessation of the attachment is, at present, compulsory.)
Local Amendments’ to the rule seek to impose an obligation
on the court to direct in each case whether the attachment

*Givil Justice Committee (1925) Report, page 39, para. 24.
308 this point, see A.LR. 1928, 7.0, 139.

°Cj. the Amendments made by High Courts of Calcutta, Madras
Nagpur, Patna, etc.


197

js to be regarded as continuing or not. This is intended to
avoid doubts which are felt sometimes as to whether the
dismissal was in fact for “default”. The Calcutta and
Bembay Amendments are the most. elaborate*. It is, how-
ever, considered unnecessary to adopt these amendments;
it is felt that where the execution application is dismissed
(for default), the attachment must cease.

Order XXI, rule 57 and attachment before judgment

The question whether the provisions of Order XXI, rule
57 apply to an attachment before a judgment, is not free
from doubt.

Order XXI, rule 57 provides that where property has
peen attached in execution of a decree, but because of the
decree-holder’s default the court is unable to proceed fur-
ther with the execution application, it can dismiss the
application, in which case “the attachment shall cease”.
There is a conflict of decisions on the question whether this
rule applies to attachment before judgment. In view of
the words “attached in execution of a decree”, it has been
move his property, etc., with a view to defeating, etc., execu-
tion application for default does not put an end to the
attachment before judgment’. It is argued in support of
this view, that attachment before judgment is effected only
if the court is satisfied that the defendant intends to re-
move his property etc., with a view to defeating, etc., execu-
tion; hence it stands on different footing from attachments
after judgmentt. On the other hand, some High Courts
have held the rule to be applicable to property attached
before judgment—at Jeast where the attachment has been
followed by an application after the decree for bringing the
property to sale’.

1See Civil Justice Committee (1925) Report, page 409, para. 22.
“sr 388 to Calcutta Amendment, see Pashupati v. Deba A.LLR. 1951 S.C,

As to Madras Amendment, 5०९ Subramaniam v. Sundaram, ALR,
1963 Mad. 217.

*Bohra Akhey Ram v. Basant Lal, LL.R. 46 All. 894 3 ALR. 19:

All. 860, approved in Abdul Hamid v. Asghari Begum, I.L.R. g
x All. 654 रू ATR. 1953 All 173 (F.B.) ; Shibnath Singh v. Shaikh Po)
uddin, 1.L.R. 56 Cal. 416 ; AIR. 1929 Cal. 465, followed in Ayesali v.

Mahanandabarui, AIR. 1949 Cal. 320 (Das Gupta J.).

“See the exhaustive review case-law in Dattatraya V. Rambhaba A.1R-
1962 Bom, 236, 238, 239, 240 ; paras. 8—16 (holding that rule $7 does not
apply to ‘attachment before judgment) (Patel and Abhyankar 11.).

*Venkata Rao v. Surya Rao, 1.L.R. 1950 Mad. 2 ; ALR. 1
Mad: 39.3 Meyyappa v- Chidambaram, I1-R. 47 Mad. 493; ATR.
1924 Mad. 484. (F.B.); Hari v. Shrinivas, 1.L.R. 55 Bom. 693 ; A.LR. 1931
Bom. 350. (Medgavkar & Murphy JJ.) (held to be obiter in ALR.

. 236).


198

A general rule applying provisions of the Code (appli-
cable to attachment made in execution) to attachments be-_
fore a judgment, is now proposed!. That will resolve this
conflict.

Order XXI, rule 58

1. A person making a claim or objection to an attach-
ment need show, at present, merely possession of the pro-
perty. According to the recommendation made in the
Fourteenth Report? the inquiry must be full and cover
questions of ultimate right and tide. To achieve that
objest, nges have been propored.

an
ons of fraud, for ex,
ansfer of Property Act,
ngs under rules 58 to 63,

rovisi: hether quest
those u 53 of the
could be ९: red in preeeed

eensidered unnecesssary to make any such pro-
» this purpose only.

4. It is consideved umnecessary to make an express pro-
as to whether the proceedings under rule 58 et seq
and the decisio: iven thereon will be binding as between
i tehtor and a third party claimant. The
to thet question would depend on the question—
ce th: narties to the suit and what are the maiters

5. It is considered unnecessary to make a provision that
a third porsen who is affected by ihe attachment is not
bond to teke proceedings under these rules and can file a
regular s ‘That is the existing law, and that position
will continue.

Order XXI, rule 88 and limitation

1. When an objection or claim is dismissed after the
provecdings under rules 58 to 62, the suit. if any, by the
agsvieved party, can be filed under Order XXI, rule 63
within the period of 1 year*.

:

Since under the scherne of rules 58 to 63, as proposed,
a full inquiry into title will be held, a suit would be barred’,
under the changed scheme. But where the court doss not *

"See Order 38, rule ITA (proposed).
जता Report, Vol. 1, page 453, para. 49.

*For a recent decision on this aspect, see LL.R. (1956), AP. 874 5
‘ALR. 1957, A.P. 61 (F.B.). 3

aa “Article 98 of the Limitation Act, 1963 corresponding to article 11 of the


199

entertain the claim by virtue of delay or by virtue of the-
claim having been filed after the holding of the sale, the
right of suit may be preserved’. Article 98 of the Limita-
tion Act, 1963 should, in this context, be confined to such
suits, and will require change for the purpose.

2. It is also considered that the period should be redue~
ed from one year to one hundred and eighty days in order
that the matter may not remain hanging for long. This
change may alsu be carried out in article 98.

Order XXI, rule 58 and court-fees

Since orders v
able 8 ig
For the pury of court-fees,
be treated as orders under section 47, Nocessary ri
Aculd be granted by the State G
a notideation under the rele
fees Act 299 icavle to the हि as
ost States in respect of orders under sect

Order XXI, ruie 59
This deals with postsenement of 550. vending isquiry
into ००1५ Following changes have been pro: :

re immovable property is advertised for
osipone the

A recommendation was made inthe Fourteenth
Report? that the sale should not be p ned, but the
court should have a discretion to direct tha i
confirmed until decision of पर
been garried ont, but with an ii
ing power to postpone the sale is preserved
Fourteenth Report contemplated its dsleiion)
certain cas

(2) A provision has been added to the effect that
where the sale has already taken place at the time of
the claim or ebjection, the claim or objection shall not
be entertained. This will resolve the conflict of deci-
sions on the question'-* whether an objection can be
investigated in such cases.

1820 Ocdee 21, ele 58, कक proposed. SS

आती Report, Vol. I, page 453. para. 48, last sentence.

As regards movables, the present position is retained. ay under Order
जा, tule 77, the sale becomes absolute immediaicly.

4$ce also the Civil Justice Committee (1925) Report, page 392, para. 25:

‘The answer is “No” according to some High Courts, See A.LR.
5926 Cal. 468 and ALR. 1937 Cal. 390 5 ALR. 1942 Bom. 263 5 A.
1953 M.B. 264. For the contrary view, see A.LR. 1958 Mysore 140 ; ALR.
1931 Mad. 782 3 A.LR. 1940 Nag. 7.

* Cy. the Allahabad Amendment interpreted in Firm Tundt Rav. Ghur
Lal, ALR. 1939 All. 598.



200

(3) Instead of investigation, the word “adjudica-
tion” is used, as it is intended that the inquiry should
cover questions of title also.

Order XXI, rule 59—Postponing confirmation of the sale

In the draft Report circulated for comments, a provi-
sion had been proposed under which, while the confirma-
tion of the sale itself could be postponed, the sale itself
was (9 be held. One of the comments received on the
draft Report was, that if the sale is held pending the in-
guiry, it may not fetch a satisfactory price. This has been
considered. But it is felt, that in order to save delay, the
power proposed should be given to the Court.

Order XXI, rule 59 (security)

A provision authorising the court to require security or
to impose other conditions has been added. The Calcutta
Amendment to Order XXI, rule 58 may be compared.

Order XXI, rules 60, 61 and 62

The existing rules 60, 61 and 62 contain detailed provi-
sions as to the powers of the court. Since it is intended
that a full inquiry should now be held, these have not
been repeated in extenso,

Order XXI, rule 63

Since the inquiry under these rules is intended to be
conclusive, the provisions of existing rule 63 which allow
a suit to be filed to set aside the decisions passed in such
inquiries are not now needed, except in the cases where
the court refuses to adjudicate upon the claim on the
ground of delay, ete., or on the ground that it was filed after
the sale was held. The operation of rule 63 should, in
effect, be confined to such cases. A provision incorporat-
ing the substance of rule 63, confined as above, is therefore
proposed.

Order XXI, rule 66

4. A recommendation was made in the Fourteenth
Report, that to avoid the difficulties caused by mistakes in
the estimated value of the property as stated in the procla-
mation of sale, the rule should be amended on the lines of
the Patna Amendment, so as to provide (in effect) that
the court should state merely the estimated value, if any,
as given by the parties and insert a statement that it does
not vouch for the accuracy of either. It is considered, that
it would be sufficient to adopt the Calcutta Amendment
which is more simple. That is what has been proposed on
this point.

24th Report, Vol. I, page 454, para. 50.


201

2. Since a proclamation under rule 54, as proposed?,
would have notified to the judgment-debtor the date on
which the terms of the proclamation of the sale are to be
settled, an amendment is proposed to rule 66 to the effect
that in such a case, a fresh notice of that date need not be
given to the judgment-debtor, unless the court otherwise
directs.

Order XXI, rule 67

An amendment has been made by the High Court of
Madras to this rule, the object of which seems to be to em-
phasise that rule 67(1) and (2) deals mainly with the
mode of publication?.

No such change appears to be necessary, in view of the
wording of the rule.

Order XXI, rule 68

This is in implementation of the Fourteenth Report*-*.
The object is to reduce the interval between the proclama-
tion of sale and the actual sale,

Order XXI, rule 69

4. Under rule 69(2), a fresh proclamation of sale is
necessary where the sale is adjourned for a longer period
ihan 7 days, unless the judgment-debtor consents. As re-
gards this sub-rule. two changes have been proposed in the
Fourteenth Report®: —

(i) The period should be increased from 7 days to

30 days,

(ii) the court should have power to dispense with
the consent of the judgment-debtor, where he has fail-
ed to attend in answer to the notice issued under Order
XXI, rule 66.

2. The object of the amendment on the first point is to
dispense with the necessity of a fresh proclamation. In-
crease of the period will naturally reduce the number of
cases in which such proclamation will be required. Simi-
Jar amendments have been made by the High Courts of
Bombay, Calcutta, Punjab, Madras and Andhra Pradesh

1526 Order 21, rule 54, as proposed.

*See also discussion in Seshageri v. Valambal, A.LR. 1952 Mad. 377°
381, 384 (Satyamarayan Rao and Raghav Rao Jj.).

अबतक Report, Vol. I, page 455, para. 55.

1523 als> Civil Justiz: Committee (1924-25) Reports page 390, para.
22.

S1gth Report, Vol. I, page 456, para. 56.



202

{all of which substitute 30 days). This has been adopted.
(The amendments by Allahabad and Patna substitute 14
days.)

3. As regards the second point, though such an amend-
ment has been made by the High Courts of Allahabad and
Patna, it is felt, that the consent of the judgment-debtor
should not be dispensed with merely on the ground that
he has failed to appear in answer to the notice referred to.
He may be present at the time of adjournment and would
like to be heard, and this opportunity need not be denied.
This recommendation of the Fourteenth Report has not
been carried out.

Order XXI, rule 72

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report? to the effect, that a decree-holder should be allowed
to purchase property unless the court has prohibited him
from doing so*. The object of the recommendation was to
avoid the delay that is frequently caused when the warrant
of sale is returned unexecuted in the absence of bidders. An
amendment carrying out this recommendation was propos-
ed in the draft Report which had been circulated. Com-
ments received thereon, however, emphasise the need for
the court being aware of any proposal by the decree-
holder to bid. There is considerable force in this ap-
proach, and a decision has been taken not to disturb the
existing rule. The recommendation has not, therefore,
been carried out.

Order XXI, rule 72A (Bombay)

Order XXI, rule 72A has been added by the High Court
of Bombay to provide that if leave to bid is granted to a
mortgagee, then, as regards him, a reserve price shall be
fixed, which shall not be less than the amount due as
principal, ete.

The history of this rule is this:

The Subordinate Judge of Haveli wrote a letter to the
High Court in 1913, stating that this was the practice fol-
lowed in the mufassil, and as the rule could not now be
made under section 104, Transfer of Property Act, it should
be made under Order KXXIV. The Rule Committee recom-
mended that the old rule 20 of the Supplementary Civil
Circular No. 11 should be restored’, In the absence of such
arule, the mortgagee can (under a general permission to
bid) recover in execution the balance from the mortgagor

114th Report, Vol. 1, pages 456-457, para. 57.
*See also Civil Justice Committee (1925) Repott, page 410, para. 24,

2566 discussion in Vrajlal_v. Venkataswami, LL.R. 52 Bem. 469 :
ALR. 1928 Bom. 123, 125 (Marten C. J.and Blackwell J}. 499


203

or from his estate, if the amount for which the property
is sold is less than the principal, ete., due to him’.

The question whether this amendment should be adopt-
ed has been considered. It is felt that a rigid provision of
such a nature is not necessary. It would to a_ certain
extent, detract from the remedy of the mortgagee under

Order XXXIV, rule 6 also.
Order XXI, rule 75

Local Amendments’, which have been made in imple-
mentation of the recommendation of the Civil Justice Com-
mittee’, empower the court to sell growing crops (after
attachment) where they can be sold to greater advantage
in an unripe state, It is, however, considered unnecessary
to adopt these local Amendments, as they are of a minor
character.

Order XXI, rule 84(2)

1. Undee rule 84 (1), the purchaser has to deposit 25 per
cent. of the purchase money. This requirement can be
dispensed with by the Court under rule 84(2), where the
decree-holder is the purchaser. The Allahabad Amend-
ment provides, that the court shall not dispense with this
requirement where there is an application for rateable dis-
tribution of assets. In this connection, reference may be
made to Order XXI, rule 72(2), under which the setting off
of the purchase-money and the amount due on the decree
is to he “subject to the provisions of section 73”,

2. This raises an interesting question, namely, how far
a decree-holder, who is a purchaser and purchases with the
court's permission under rule 72, is bound to deposit 25 per
cent.

+,,, 3: The matter may be considered under two situations,
The first is, where there is no question of rateable distri-
bution. In such a case it has been held that an express
order exempting the decree-holder from depositing 25 per
cent. is not necessary? As has been pointed out®, in such
a case, to insist on his depositing the amount would be
meaningless,

8, ‘Vrajlal v. Venkataswami, LL.R. 52 Bom. 459 3 ALR, 1928 Bom. 123
128, >

*See amendments made by the High Courts of Calcutta, Madras, Nag pur
and Patna,

SCivil Justice Committee (192425) Report, page 410, para. 25,

‘Nurdin v. Bulagi Mal, A.LR, 1931 Lah. 78 (Tapp 1.)

‘Kanhaiya Lal v. Sans Mal, ALR. 1956 Raj. 18, 19 (Wanchoo 0.
and Dave J.) (reviews the case-taw), oS 9 (Wanchoo G. 7.


204

4, The next situation is, where there is a rateable dis-
tribution. Here the interests of the other decree-hoiders.
are involved; and therefore, even if the decree-holder is
the auction-purchaser, he should deposit the 25 per cent.
of the purchase-money. The Allahabad Amendment makes
an express provision on the subject. But, as has been
pointed out by the Madras High Court!, even in such a
९82९ the decree-holder cannot be compelled to bring into
the court the entire purchase price. Where the purchase
price is equal to or less than the decretal amount, the
deeree-holder’s right to set off is controlled only to this
extent, namely, that he is bound to bring into court such
sums ‘alone as are due to those decree-holders whose ap-
plications in execution were pending on the date of the
sale. Accordingly, in the Madras case, even the literal
wording of rule 199 of the Madras Civil Rules of Practice
was held not to come in the way of the right to set-off.

That rule ran as follows: —

“Provided that if there are several decree-holders
entitled to rateable distribution, the purchase-money
shall be paid into court.”

The court heid, that to the extent to which rule 199 of
the Madras Civil Rules was inconsistent with the provi-
sions in the First Schedule, it was ultra vires under section
457 of the Civil Procedure Code which saved old rules only
to the extent to which they were consistent with the Code*.

5, It would, thus, appear that how far the decree-holder
should be required to deposit the 25 per cent. is a matter
cepending on—

(i) whether there is any likelihood of rateable
distribution, and

(ii) what is the extent of that distribution.

A categorical provision would not, therefore, be helpful.

Order XXI, rule 89

1. The object of this amendment is to make it clear that
a person having an interest at the date of the application
can avail himself of this rule. Compare the discussion in
the Report of the Civil Justice Commitee’.

‘\Murugappa v. Ranasami, ALR. 1935 Mad. 893, 894 (right-hand)
(Wenkatasubba Rao J.).

As to the balance payable under rule 85, see discussion in Varalak-
shmamma v. Jannayya, A.LR. 1943 Mad. 318.

*Civil Justice Committee (1925) Report, page 396.


205
2 The present view is, that such persons are not en-
titled!-8-4,
3. See also amendments made by the High Courts of -
0) Madras®, and
(ii) Allahabad, and
the more specific amendments made by the High Courts
of—
(ii) Nagpur’,
(iv) Patna’, and
(v) Lahore®.
The language of the Madhya Pradesh Amendment has
been adopted.

4. For a history of the rule, see the under-mentioned
case”,

Order XXI, rule 90

Sub-;ule (1)—The words “or purchaser” have been
added to make it clear that an auction-purchaser can also
apply. This will set at rest the conflict of decisions on the
subject?'.

Order XXI, rule 90 and deposit

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report!* to the effect that a person applying to set aside the
sale under rule 90 should be required to deposit an amount

‘Fatima-ul-Hasna v. Baldev, A.I.R. 1926 All. 204. The contrary vi
had been taken in LLR. 34 All. 186. yew

*Pandurang v. Govind, (1916) LL.R. 40 Bom. 557.

*Sarada Kripa v. Harendra. 1.L.R. 49 Cal. 454 ;A.1.R. 1922 Cal, 271,
As to the person purchasing before sale, see Gosto Behari v. Sankar Nath,
A.LR. 1917 Cal. 281.

“Sundaram v. Mamsa, LLR. 44 Mad. 554 3 ALR. 1921 Mad.
(PB) tbefore “Madras Amendment). > gat Mad. 457

‘Deopati Kuer v. Mahabir, I.L.R. 25 Pat. 529 ; A.LR. 1947 Pat.
293.

“Interpreted in_ Guisa Lakshoninarasamma v. Yalamarti, AIR.
Mad. 683 (Leach 0. J. and Shahabuddin J.). > 1943

‘Interpreted in Vithoba v. Mahadeo, AIR. 1948 Nag. 303.
Fuharmal v. Ramdas, ALR. 1937 Nag. 161 (Vivian Bose’ J).

*Gf. Deopati Kuer v. Mahabir Prasad, I.L.R. 25 Pat. 529; LLR,
1947 Pat. 293.

°Cf. Ram Chandra ४. Narain Prashad, ALR. 1935 Lah, 51.

“Deopati Kuer v. Mahabir Prashad, 1.L.R. 25 Pat. 529 3 A.LR. 1947
Pat. 293.

4See Mulla, Civil Procedure Code (1953), under Order 21, rule 9०,
page 899, under “ Auction-purchaser”’,

114th Report, Vol. 1, pages 454-455, Para, 51.

See also


206

not exceeding 124 per cent. of the purchase price!, which
amount can be utilised for awarding costs if the applica-
tion falis. As the amount of such costs would not be very
large, it is considered mmecessary to carry out this recom-

mendation.

Order XXI, rule 90 and objections which could have been
taken earlier

A recommendation was made in the Fourteenth Report?
to the effect, that a sale shall not be set aside on the ground
of any defect in the proclamation of sale at the instance
of any person who did not attend (though given notice to
appear) at the drawing up of the proclamation, or at the
instance of any person in whose presence the proclamation
was drawn up, unless the objection was taken by him be-
fore the sale was held. A similar, but somewhat wider,
amendment has been made by the Allahabad High Court,
the effect of which is that no application to set aside a sale
can be entertained upon any ground which could have
been taken by the applicant on or before the date on which
the sale proclamation was drawn up. The Gujarat
Amendment to this rule, is still wider and runs as
follows: —

Gujarat Amendment to Order XXI, rule 90

“Provided also that no such application for setting
aside the sale shall be entertained without the leave
of the Court upon any ground which could have been,
but was not, put forward by the applicant before the
commencement of the sale.”

It is considered that the Allahabad Amendment should
be adopted. Necessary change is proposed.

Order XXI, rule 90 and absence of attachment

The question whether absence of, or irregularity in
attachment is, a defect in the “publication or conduct of
the sale” has been discussed in several decisions*. At one
extreme is the view that attachment is not necessary at all
before sale‘, At the other extreme stands the view that
sale without attachment is void’. A third view is, that
attachment is an irregularity, but not in publishing or
conducting the sale. According to the fourth view, a sale
is not a nullity because of a defect in the attachment or

10f. Allahabad Amendment.
tyqch Report, Vol. 1, pages 454-455, para. 51.
68 38८८ ALR. 1927 Cal. 847 ; A.LR. 1947 Mad. 213 ; A.I.R. 1930 Leh.
5५
‘ALR. 1939 Bom. 277 (Beaumont C.J.}.
बट, Order था, rule 64.


207

want thereof, but if it causes “substantial injury”, it
can be set aside under rule 90’. The last view seems to be
the correct one. The object of attachment is to bring the
property under the control of the court, and in the case of
immovable property one of the requirements is that the
order of attachment should be publicly proclaimed. The
main object of the proclamation is to give publicity to the
fact that the sale of the proclaimed property is in contemp-
lation. The publication of the attachment is thus a-step
leading up to the proclamation of the sale*.

The question whether it is necessary to insert a provi-
sion to clarify the position on the subject, has been con-
sidered. In the draft Report which had been circulated,
an Explanation had been proposed to rule 90 to the effect
that absence of or defect in attachment shall be regarded
as an irregularity under this rule. After some considera-
tion, it has been decided that no such provision need be
inserted.

Order XXI, rule 92 (1)

1. Under Order XXI, rule $2 (1), where no application to
set aside the sale is made, etc., the court “shall make” an
order confirming the sale. Since it is now proposed? that
when an objection is made to attachment the court may
(while holding the sale) postpone its confirmation, it js
desirable to exclude such a situation from the operation of
rule 92, Necessary change is proposed’.

2. The Madras High Court has made an amendment to
this rule which provides, in effect, that where the amount
depesited by the purchaser is diminished, the resultant
deficiency should be made good before the sale is confirm-
ed. It is considered unnecessary to adopt this amendment,
as such cases would be very rare.

3. Where, however, a deficiency in the amount required
to be deposited is discovered to exist by reason of a mis-
take in calculation on the part of the party, some change
is needed. The existing position is that in such cases the
sale cannot be confirmed even if the deficiency is very
smali*-*. It is felt that in such cases the deficiency should
be allowed to be made good within a time to be fixed by
the court. Necessary change is proposed,

\Swaminath v. Krishnaswaii, AJR. 1947 Mad. 213, 215.
*Sheodhyan v. Bholanath, (1899) LL.R, 27 All. 311, 313.

*See Order 21, rule 59 (proposed).

‘Cf. the amendments made by High Courts of Allahabad and Patna,
*Amrittal v. Sadashiv, ALR. ¥944 Bom, 233 (Lokur J).
‘Kalidas v. Dodda, ALR. 1947 Mad. 56.



208

Order XXI, rule 95

Order XXL, rule 95 deals with delivery of property on
the application of the purchaser of immovable property
sold in execution of a decree. Though an express provi-
sion to the effect that the auction-purchaser is deemed to
be a “party” within the meaning of section 47 is being
inserted!, rule 95 has been retained, as indicating clearly
the procedure to be adopted.

Order XXI, rules 97 to 103

1, The general scheme of rules 97 to 103 has been alter-
ed on the lines of the amendments proposed in rules 5? to
63. In substance, the amendments carry out the recom-
mendation made in the Fourteenth Report! to the effect.
that the executing court should undertake a full inquiry
and determine question of title in cases of resistance or
obstruction in delivery of possession, etc.

2. Apart from this, the following points may be noted: —

In the rule corresponding to rule 98, the words “or on
his behalf” have been added, to cover cases of resistance,
etc, by a person acting without instigation by the judg-
ment-debtor and yet for his benefit*-*.

The question whether persons who did not file a claim
or objection to attachment under rule 58 should be
parred from agitating their claims under rule 97 or rule 100
(chat is, by way of defence to an application under rule 97
or by way of an application under rule 100) has been con-
sidered. | It is felt, that such a provision should not be
inserted. A categorical provision of this nature would
not be justified, as there may be cases where, by reason of
defect in or absence of attachment or other factors, the
person now applying had no knowledge of the attachment,
and could not, therefore, have filed an objection under
rule 58. A provision requiring such persons to obtain
Jeave of the Court before they agitate their rights in such
cases has also not been favoured, as it may work hardship.

The local Amendments to existing rule 98 make certain
changes in matters of detail. Thus, the Bombay Amend-
ment to rule 98 provides that the court may order the per-
son or persons whom it held responsible for resistance or
obstruction to pay, in addition to costs, reasonable com-
pensation not exceeding one thousand rupees (to the
decree-holder or the purchaser), for the delay and expens-
es caused to him in obtaining possession. The Punjab

39566 the amendment proposed to section 47.
*rgth Report, Vol. 1, page 453, para. 49.

3Cf. the recommendation made by the Civil Justice Committee (2925)
Report, pages 498 and 499 para. 33. -
‘Cf. section 74.


209

Amendment to rule 98 provides that the person detained
under rule 98 shall be detained at the public expense and
the person at whose instance he is being detained shall not
be required to pay for his subsistence. It is, however,
considereé unnecessary to adopt these amendments in
matters cf detail.

Order XXI, rule 97 and question of Court-fee and
Limitation

Under the proposed scheme, the orders in proceedings
under rules 97 to 103 will be treated as decrees. Appeals
from such orders will thus have to bear ad valorem court-
fees. It is, however, felt that a reduction of court-fees
in respect of such appeals should be granted by the State
Government as has been done in the case of orders under
section 47.

Under the proposed scheme, the question of filing a suit
to set aside the order passed in proceedings under rules 97
to 103, will not remain. The relevant portion of article 98
of the Limitation Act, 1963, dealing with such suits, will,
therefore. have to be omitted.

Order XXI, rule 102

Order XXI, rule 102 provides that nothing in rules 99
and 101 shall apply to resistance or obstruction, ete., by a
person to whom the judgment-debtor has transferred the
property after the institution of the suit in which the decree
was passed or to the dispossession of any such person. The
wor ds “a person to whom the judgment-debtor has trans-
ferred the property” have created a conflict on this point,
namely, whether an involuntary sale is caught by these
words. One view is that they are caught!-*,

It has also been held that the proper remedy of such a
person is to raise the matter under section 47 and that he
has no locus standi to maintain an application under rule
100 or to sue under rule 103%-*,

A contrary view, however, has been taken by the Patna
High Court, on the ground that since old section 333 of the
Code of 1882 was adopted at a time when the doctrine of
lite pexdente had not been extended to a transfer in exe-
eution, rule 102 cannot be given the extended interpreta-
tion which section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act has
received?-°,

‘Nagendra Nath v. Ram Krishna, A.LLR. 1960 Cal. 299.
*Bepin Chandra v. Hem Chandra, A.I.R. 1939 Cal. 709.
°Khem Chand v. Mool Chand, ALR. 1934 Lah. 457.
‘*Rajaratnam v. Sheikh Hasan Bi, ALR. 1926 Mad. 968.
SHarihar Prasad v. Lakhanlal, A.LLR. 1935 Pat, 230.

‘Guna Durga Prasad Rao v. Krishna Rao, 1.L.R. 24 Pat. 695 ; A.LR.
1946 Pat. 134. 4 95



210

It is considered that the former view is preferable and
wilf prevail. No change in the language is, however, con-
sidered to be necessary on this point.

These rules are new, and have been inserted on the
Jines of the Madras Amendment, Order XXI, rules 104 and
105, which empower the court to set aside ex parte orders,
ete., passed in execution proceedings. They have been
adopted as useful provisions. Order IX does not, in terms,
apply to execution proceedings'. Courts have had to
reso) to section 151, but the position in that respect is
also rot clear‘. The amendment will settle the position®.

Section 5 of the Limitation Act has been mentioned in
the Madras Amendment as applicable to applications under
the new rules. This has been retained in the draft.
Though section 5 of the new Limitation Act of 1963 makes
its provisions applicable to all applications, it expressly
excludes applications for execution. Therefore, it is
desirable to mention that section expressly. It may also
be noted that there is a certain amount of controversy as
to whether the words “special law” in section 29 of the
Limitation Act apply to the Civil Procedure (०१०१,

Order XXII, rule 4 and ignorance of death

The question whether, where a plaintiff is ignorant of
the death of the defendant, delay in substitution of the
legal representative should be excused on that ground, has
arisen in several cases. Each case would seem to depend
on its facts’. No express provision is, therefore, consider-
ed necessary,

Order XXII, rule 4—relaxation of

The question whether the court should have power to
grant exemption in respect of the requirement of substi-
tution in a proper case has been considered. Local Amend-
ments giving such power have been made by the High

@® Arunachalam y. Veerappa, A.1.R. 1931 Mad. 656 (F.B.).

(ii) Bharat ४. Ashgar, LL.R. 45 All. 148.

Gii) Jethmal v. Sakina, A.LLR. 1961 Raj. 59.
ra 11७७४ Hanif v. Ali, 1.1... 55 All. 891 3 A.IL.R. 1933 All. 783, 784
®Hari v. Bulagi, A.LLR, 1930 Lah. 20.
६. ‘Narayana v. Muthu, 1.L.R. 50 Mad. 67 ; A.ILR. 1926 Mad. 980, 983,
984. .
5Cf. A.LR. 1963 8.9, 127.
’Kandaswami v. Kannappa, A.I.R. 1952 Mad. 186, 192, para. 21—holds
that CP.C. is not ३ special law, dissenting from the Nagpur decision in Sita
Ram v. Chuni Lal, 1.L.R. 1944 Nag. 250.

7866 ALR. 1964 S.C. 215 ; see also ALR. 1951 Sim. 257.


211

Courts of Calcutta, Madras, Orissa, etc., in respect of a
defendant who has failed to appear and contest the suit*.
It is, however, felt that such a change should not be made,
as it would impinge upon the rule that litigation should
not proceed in the absence of the heirs of a person who is
dead. These local Amendments have not, therefore, been

adopted.
Order XXII, rule 4 and legal representatives not traceable

A suggestion received from the Calcutta High Court
for the insertion of a provision to deal with cases where
the legal representative of a deceased party is not trace-
able has been considered. Reference may, in this con-
nection, be made to Order XVI, rule 46 of the Rules of the
Supreme Ccurt, now Order XV, rule 15 of the R.S.C. Revi-
sion (1962). The adoption of a somewhat similar provi-
sion was suggested in a judgment of the Calcutta High
Court® also, and the suggestion was repeated in another
case’.

The English rule is intended to cover two cases; first,
where litigation is intended to be started but there is no
“personal representative”, and secondly, where litigation
has already started and then a party dies and there is no
personal representative. History of the English rule is
discussed in a recent case‘, The under-mentioned autho-
rities*-° discuss the practice under the English rule.

It is, however, considered that such cases would not be
many, and, therefore, the suggested provision need not be
inserted,

Order XXII, rule 5

This follows local Amendments*. The object is to en-
able an appellate court to direct a subordinate court to
enquire into, and give its findings on, disputes as to who is
legal representative of a deceased party.

386९ also discussion in the Report of the Civil Justice Committee (1925)
Pages 533 and 177. हु

*William Harold Gibbs v. Deba Prasad (decided 17-3-
Calcutta Law Journal 280, Rey (desided on 17-5-1950) 85

°In the Goods of Golam Nabi Maggo dt. 15-5-1961.

‘Pratt v. London Passenger 77 ४ Board, 1 AER.
(Court of Appeal. m iger Transport rd, (1937) 473 478

SLean v. Alston, (1947) 7 A.B.R. 261.

‘Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 16, pp. 121, 134, 292 (and Vol. 9, page 176
or County Courts).

Cf. the amendments made by the High Court of Madras, etc.


212
Order XXHI, ruie 12

The Allahabad Amendment to Order XXII, rule 12 pro-
vides that the rules relating to abatement shall not apply
to proceedings after the preliminary decree. Actually this
is the position according to the decisions of the most High
Courts'-“, and the Allahabad Amendment seems to have
been necessitated by the fact that that High Court® took a
different view.

In view of the opinion of the majority of the High
Courts, the amendment need not be adopted.

Order XXIII, rule 1(3A)

t is considered, that where a suit is withdrawn by the
next friend acting on behalf of a minor, etc., leave of the
court should be obtained. Necessary amendment :s
posed.

Order XXII, rule 1(3B)

It is considered, that where a suit in which the plain-
tiff is a minor, ete., is withdrawn, the application should
be accormpanied by an affidavit of the next friend as well
as a certificate of the counsel to the effect that the with-
drawal is for the minor’s benefit. The Madras Amend-
ment, Order XXXII, rule 7(1A) provides that where an
application has been made for leave to enter into an agree-
ment or compromise, or withdrawal of 4 suit in pursuance
of a compromise, or for “taking any other action” on be-
half of a minor, ete., certificate of the counsel to the effect
that the agreement, ete. is for the minor’s benefit should be
filed. The proposed amendment has suggested itself on a
study of the Madras Amendment, though it differs from it
hy requiring an affidavit of the next friend also.

Order XXHI, rule 3

It is considered that an agreement or compromise under
Order XXIII, rule 3 should be in writing signed by the par-
ties. A similar provision has been made by the Orissa
Amendment to this rule, which appears to be worth adopt-
ing. It may be stated that oral agreements or compromises
are diffteult of proof*, and are often set up to delay the pro-
gress of the suit.

es
*See Bapu v. Guiad, ALR. 1929 Nag. 142 (FB).

{Busan v. Chhabi Moni, ALR. 1948 Cal. 363 (reviews case-law),
*Mahabu v. Narain, A.LR. 1931 All. 490 (F.B.).

“Cf. discussion in Athappa v. Petia Sami, A.LR. 1956 Mad, 344,
347.


213
Order XXUI, rule 3 and “lawful”

‘The words “lawful agreement or compromise” in Order
XXIIL rule 3 have created some controversy as to whether
they exclude agreements which are voidable under section
19 oi the Contract Act. One view is, that such agree-
ments are not excluded. That view is based on the reason-
ing that the expression “lawful” excludes only two classes
of agreements—those which are “unlawful”? and those
which are void FA,

But a contrary view has been taken in certain other
cases*-!-1T,

The matter requires to be clarified, and the wider view
of these words ३.९, the latter view, should, it is considered,
be incorporated. Necessary amendment is proposed.

Order XXII, rule 3 and the words “so far as relates to”

There is an apparent conflict of decisions as to the
interpretation of the words “so far as relates to the suit”
used in Order XXIII, rule 3. The question that arises in
practice is, whether a decree which records the terms of a
compromise in respect of matters beyond the scope of the
suit is executable, or whether the terms of the decree re-
lating to matters outside the suit can be enforced (as a
contract) only by a separate sui It is not, however.
possible to resolve the conflict of decisions by verbal
changes. since the application of the rule may vary ac-
cording to the facts of each case. As a general amendment
is not thus possible, no change is considered necessary.

‘Qadri Jahan Begam v. Fazal Ahmad, ALR. 1928 All. 494. (Sulaiman
and Kendall JJ.)-

2Hussain Yar Beg v. Radha Kishan, 1.L.R. 57 All. 426 3 A.LR. 1955
All. 137.
3Ram Asray v. Rameshwar, ALR. 1961 All. 529.

Western Electric Co. Ltd. v. Kailash Chand, A.1.R, 1940 Bom. 60
{Kania j.).

sHarbans Singh v. Bawa Singh, A.LLR. 1952 Cal. 72 (Sinha J.).

6 Suraparaju v. Venkatarainam, A.I.R. 1936 Mad. 347 (Wadsworth

? Kuppuswami Reddi 1, Pavanammal, A.I.R, 1950 Mad. 728 Rajamannar
C. J. and Somasundaram J.). Real

*Krishnan v. Rayrappan, A.1.R. 1959 Ker. 130 (reviews case-law).

*Nand Lal y. Ram Sarup, A.IR. 1927 Lah. 546 (2) (Addison and Aghe
Haider JJ.).

‘9 Misrilal v. Sobha Chand, A.LR. 1956 Bom. $69,572, para. 5 (Shab

J).
UPannalal v. Kishanlal, A.I.R. 1952 Nag. 84.

13862 case-law discussed in Ram Jutwan v. Davindra Nath, A.LR. 1960
M. P. 280, 282, paras. 17 and 18.


214
Order XXV, rule 3

Local Amendments to Order XXV, rule 17 provide, in
substance, for a power to require security for costs in cases
in which an element of champerty or maintenance is
proved. These implement the recommendation of the Civil
Justice Committee”. As the problem may not exist in all
States, an all-India Amendment is not necessary.

Order XXVI, rule 7
The change is verbal.

Order XXVI, rule 9

The Calcutta Amendment takes away the power of the
State Government to make rules as to persons to whom
commissions to make local investigations may be issued.

It is, however, felt that the power should continue, as
the State Government may be in a position to know which
persons are properly qualified. Hence no change is sug-
gested.

Order XXVI, rule 16A

A recommendation was made in the Fourteenth Report?
relating to the powers and procedure of Commissioners
while recording evidence. The recommendation was that a
provision should be inserted to the effect, that the Com-
missioner shall, while recording evidence, have regard to
the provisions of the Evidence Act, and that in case the
pleader or other person examining the witnesses presses
any question which the Commissioner has disallowed, he
should record such question and answer but the same
should 90 be admitted in the evidence except by the order
of the Judge.

So far as a provision that the Commissioner shall have
regard to the Evidence Act is concerned, an express rule
in the Civil Procedure Code is not considered necessary‘.
So far as questions objected to by the opposite arty are
concerned, it is considered, that whether or not the objec-
tion is pressed, the suggested procedure should apply.
Necessary amendment is proposed.

e.g. amendments made by Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Madras
and Orissa,

*Report of the Civil Justice Committee, 17, chapter 44, para, 2
(with reference 7० Oudh). Page 517, chapter 44, para, 27

®r4th Report, Vol. I, pages 354-355, para. 99.
‘See sections 1 and 3, Indian Evidence Act, 1872.


215

Order XXVI, rule 17

The Kerala Amendment to Order XXVI, rule 17 pro-
vides, that where the Commissioner is not a Judge of the
civil court, he shall not be competent to impose penalty, but
such penalty may be imposed on the application of the
Commissioner by the court which issued the commission.
It is considered unnecessary to adopt this minor amend-
ment.

Order XXVI, rule 18A (New)

This is new, and is intended to provide that the provi-
sions of this Order apply to execution. Cf. the Madras
Amendment, Order XXVI, rule 23. The Madras Amendment
is useful, as otherwise the provisions of Order XXVI do not
apply to execution'-?,

(Appointment of a Commissioner in execution for
effecting partition, where the parties themselves have
agreed for so effecting the partition, may be allowed)*.

Order XXVI, rule 19

In the Report of the Law Commission‘ relating to British
Statutes applicable to India, a recommendation was made
for examining whether the provisions of certain Acts of
Parliament mentioned in that Report should be incor-
porated in the Civil Procedure Code. The matter has been
considered, and it is felt that the existing provisions of
Order XXVI are adequate for practical purposes for dealing
with requests received from foreign countries for recording
of evidence. No change in the Civil Procedure Code is,
therefore, suggested on this point.

Order XXVI, rule 22

Order XXVI, rule 22 provides that the provisions of
certain rules shall apply to the issue, etc., of commissions
issued at the instance of foreign Tribunals. The new rule
proposed’—relating to questions objected to by a party
should apply to such commissions also. Hence the
amendment.

Order XXVIA (Madras)

The Madras High Court has inserted Order XXVIA,
whereunder the court is empowered to issue a commission
for translation of accounts and other documents which

*Ramnath v. Wasudeo, A.1.R. 1947 Nag. 56, para. 4.

*Manthiri Goudan v. Arunachalam, A.1.R. 1940 Mad, 569, 570.

*See Mt. Nilabati v. Mt. Sukurta, ALR. 1953 Orissa 237.

‘sth Report (British Statutes applicable to India), pages 4o and 41 and
Page 45, item 49.

*Order 26, rule 16A (proposed).



216

are not in the language of the court. The amendment has.
not been adopted, as it is considered that provision re-
garding translation, ete., can be made in the General rules
for subordinate civil courts.

Order XXVII and suits against the Government in respect
of acts of employees

In an earlier Report’ of the Law Commission, a recom-
mendation has been made to the effect that when a suit
for damages is filed against the Government in respect of
any act of its employee, agent or independent contractor,
the employee, etc., should be impleaded as a party to the
suit. It was also stated, that any claim based on indemnity
or contribution by the State may well be settled in such
proceedings, as all the parties will be before the court.
An amendment of the Civil Procedure Code was recom-
mended on these lines.

The recommendation has not been carried out, as it is
felt that a mandatory provision of the nature suggested
is not needed.

Order XXVIL, rule 5

The Fourteenth Report? recommended an amendment to
give the Government a minimum period of three months for
filing a written statement. Compare the Madras Amend-
ment also.

It is, however, considered unnecessary to lay down any
such rigid period applicable to all cases in which the Gov-
ernment is a party.

Order XXX, rule 2

An amendment has been made to Order XXX, rule 2(3)
by the High Court of Orissa, under which the names of the
partners disclosed in the manner stated in Order XXX, rule
2(1) “shall appear in the decree”. The question whether
this amendment should be adopted for facilitating the exe-
cution of the decree against individual partners has been
considered, but it is fe! fe that there is no need for any such
provision.

Order XXX, rule 8

1. The proposed amendment follows the Bombay
Amendment to Order XXX, rule 8 with minor verbal
changes. The following discussion will show the significance
of the Bombay Amendment.

“'Birst Report (Liability of the State in Tort), page 40, para. 1V Gi.
*agth Report, Vol. 1, page 303, para. 13.


217

2. When a person denies that he is a partner and ap-
pears under protest under rule 8, the plaintiff may either
disregard his appearance and serve the other partners
(Order XXX, rule 3), or may insist that the appearance
under protest be struck out. The option is entirely with the
plaintiff. The defendant cannot insist on a decision‘.
Further, he cannot resist the claim on merits independently
from the “firm” (Order XXX, rule 6).

3. The Bombay Amendment deals elaborately with the
case of a person served under Order XXX_ who appears
under protest. In the absence of such a provision, hardship
often results, because, while the plaintiff could postpone the
decision of the question of such person’s being a partner.
such person himself could not get the question decided even
later under Order XXI, rule 50 (according to the better
view). The position is thus “incongruous”, as was observed
by Sir Norman McLeod?.

4, The Bombay Amendment is somewhat similar to the
amendment in rule 7 of Order 48A, R.S.C. made in 1929
in view of the decision in Weir & Co. v. Mcvicar & ९०.५
holding that a person appearing under protest cannot
dispute the liability of the firm, and cannot have the ques-
tion of his partnership decided before other issues. [The
English rule is now replaced by Revised R.S.C. (1962),
Order LXXXI, rule 4, sub-rules (2) to (5)1.

Stated briefly, the effect of the Bombay Amendment is,
that such person can have the question whether he was
a partner decided. If he is held to be a partner, that does
not preclude him from denying the firm’s liability. If it
is held that he was not partner and not liable as such,
that does not preclude the plaintiff from otherwise serving
a summons on the defendant firm, etc., but in that event
the plaintiff shall be precluded from alleging the liability
of that person as a partner, in execution proceedings.

5. The Bombay Amendment was made in pursuance of
the suggestion of Shah 7>, Shah J. held that the combined
effect of rules 3, 6 and 8 of Order XXX was, that persons
served as partners could raise only such defences as were
open to a partner, and could not have the issue as to
whether they were or were not partners tried in the suit
before the final decree was passed.
iSee International, ere. v. Mehta & Co. LLR. 54 Cal 1057 3
1927 Cal. 758, 760.

*Nindalal vy. Baker Jafer & Co., A.LR. 1940 Bom. 390.

sAjit Singh v. Grunnin & Co, ALR. 1925 Bom. 494, 496.

4(1925) 2 K.B. 127, 134 (C.A.).

SRehman Khan v. Bombay Iron Syndicate, A.ILR. 1953 Bom, 23, 26
para, 14 (decided on 13-8-1951) (Shah J); 983 3

ALR.



218

6. A defence on the merits in execution cannot also be
taken by such persons. In Order XXI, rule 50, the expression
“such liability is disputed” has been construed in Bombay
to be confined to liability asa partner. The validity of
the decree qua the partnership property and qua the persons
mentioned in Order XXI, rule 59 (1) (७) (c) cannot therefore
be effected or impaired in proceedings under rule 50-2, The
point has now been decided by the Supreme Court?, which
has held that the person served under rule 50 can only
prove that he was not a partner and (in a proper case)
that the decision was the result of fraud, collusion or the
like.

In view of this position, the Bombay Amendment ap-
pears to be worth adopting.

Order XXX, rule 10

1. How far the word “person” in Order 30, rule 10,
applies to an undivided Hindu family is a question on
which there is some controversy. The Madras High Court*
has is one case held that it applies only to an individual.
In that case, the firm consisted of four minors consisting
of a joint undivided Hindu family, who were described as
“R.M.P.M. Chettiar firm”, ete. The court stated, that the
whole of Order XXX was a reproduction of the rules in
Order XLVIIIA of the Rules of the Supreme Court, and
Order 30, rule 10 was based on Order 488, rule 11 of the
English Rules, which had been held to apply only to a single
individual carrying on business under an assumed or trad-
ing name. The court also relied on the differences in langu-
age between rule 10 of Order XXX and rule 1, because
while the former spoke of “any two or more persons”, the
latter spoke of “any person carrying on business”.

2. On the other hand, some High Courts have taken the
view, that rule 10 applies to a number of individuals carry-
ing on business either under a firm name or under an
assumed name when these individuals do not in law
constitute a partnership resting on contract, provided the
suit is in respect of matters connected with the business
so carried on. Thus, the Caleutta High Court® has applied

\Mandalta v. M. Ranmarain Lid, ALR. 1959 Bom. 525,
*Harkishandas v. Gulabdas, A.L.R. 1956 Bom. $13, 74 {SES (Gajendra-

gadkas and Gokhale JJ.) (Calcutta cases also Das J’s judg-
ment in C. M. Shahani v. Havero Trading Co., 51 C.W.N. 488 agreed
with).

*Gambir Mal v.$.K. Jute Mills (1964) 1 M.L.J. 92 (S.C. sA.LR.
1964 S.C. 243 (February). 4 J. 92 ¢ गे

‘Chidambaram v. National City Bank, 1.1... 1937 Mad. 28 ; ALR.
1936 Mad. 797. (Venkatasubba Rao and Venkataramana Rao JJ.).

*Jamunadhar Peddar Firm v. Jamunaram Bhakat, L.L.R. (1944) 2 Ca
13t ALR. 1944 Cal. 138 (R.C. Mitter and Blank JJ.).


219

this rule to a joint Hindu family (dissenting from the
Madras view) and held that the word “person” must be
given the meaning assigned by the General Clauses Act,
and should include any association or body of persons
whether incorporate or not. The object of rule 10, it was
stated, was to avoid hardship. Business may be carried
on by correspondence, and orders placed through post, and
goods may be supplied on credit on such orders. A pro-
ducer or merchant living in one part of the globe cannot
be expected to know or to make enquiries as to who is the
owner of the business that is being carried on in an assumed
name; in most cases he would only know the name of
the real owner only after he had brought his suit. (See
Order XXX, rule 6). If a decree obtained by such a mer-
chant in a suit instituted against the assumed name was to
be treated as void, it would open up a wide door to fraud,
and would sap the credit on which commercial dealings
largely rest. (It was pointed out, that in England there was
no concept of joint family firms). But in a later case}, the
Calcutta High Court seems to have taken a different view.

3. In an Allahabad case, there are observations that
a joint family is a “person”. But the actual question in
that case was whether there can be a partnership of a joint
Hindu family with itself, and in that context the court
observed, “The members of a joint Hindu family” are a
body of individuals who come under this definition of
“person” (in the General Clauses Act). A partnership has
been held to be an “association” of persons* under. the
Excess Profits Tax Act. The Patna High Court has taken
the wide view in a recent caset-*, So also have the
Kerala® and Orissa* High Courts,

4. In the Punjab the matter has been dealt wicn by
amending Order XXX, rule 1. The Punjab Amendment was
made under a Chief Court Notification issued soon after the
1908 Code came into force. The provision as enacted by
the Legislature applied only to contractual partnerships®.
The position under the Punjab Amendment has been
lucidly explained in the under-mentioned case’. As ex-

Vata कब Factories v. Pars , ALR. .
para. 27 (A, NU Ray J) following Ceeay) कल 3G aa "Bras,
51 C.W.N. 563 (S. R. Das J.).

*Mahabir v. Ram Kishan, A.LR. 1936 All. 855, 856.

34. G. Panda Rao v. Collector of Madras, A.R.194 Mad. 1049
pew mhoar v.Keshab Prasad, A.LR. 1962 Pat. 360 (discusses case-
‘See also Alekh v. Krishna, A.ILR. 1941 Pat. 596 (Fazl Ali J.)
*Tulsidas v. Ebrahimjee, ALR. 1960 Ker. 75.

*Hari Shankar v. General ete, A.LR. 1956 Orissa 186.
*See Atma Ram v. Umar Ali, A.LR. 1940 Lah. 256, 260.

"Firm Nand Gopal v. Pirm Mehnga Mall, ALR.
(Tek Chand J). firm Mehnga Mall, ALR. 1940 Lah. 425, 426


220

plained there, in the Punjab, (1) a joint Hindu family firm
may sue in the firm name (if any); or (ii) all members
may sue joint in their individual names; or (iii) in certain
circumstances (e.g. where a contract is entered into with
the manager), he, as Karta, may sue in his own name
alone.

5. As the controversy seems to survive even now!, some
clarification appears to be desirable.

As to position at Hindu law, see Mulla*.

It is considered that instead of making a separate rule,
the necessary provision should be added in rule 10.

Hence the amendment.
Order XXXII, rule 1

The proposed amendment is intended to make it clear
that the provisions of Order XXXII apply to all kinds of
suits including those in respect of which the age of majo-
rity is governed not by the Indian Majority Act but by the
personal law. The present position on the subject is not
clear as will be segn from the case-law by the discussion
that follows. Two courses are open for clarifying the
position—

(i) To provide that where the suit relates to any
matter in respect of which by virtue of section 2(a)
of the Majority Act, the capacity of any person to act
is not governed by that Act, then Order XXXII shall
not apply to a suit by or against such person, provided
he is a major accor ding to the law applicable to such:
matter.

(it) To provide that even in such matters for the
purposes of Civil Procedure Code, he should be gov-
erned by the age given in the Majority Act. It is
considered for the purpose of procedure that there
should be 2 uniform rule and for that reason the second
course has been adopted.

The present position is this. In suits falling under
personal law, the meaning of “minor” is governed by per-
sonal law, according to some High Courts. According to
the view the provision in section 2(a) of the Indian
Majority Act, 1875, which saves the capacity of any person:
“to act” in matters of marriage, etc., applies to power to
sue also. The following cases*-‘-*.° may be seen for the

een पं ‘ease-law discussed in Tulsi Mulji v. Bbrahimjee, ALR. 106:
er.
?Malla, Hindu Law (1959), paca. 251 (1) and 251 (7).
°*Bat Shirinbai v. Kharshedji, (1898) I.L.R. 22 Bom. 430,

+Ahmed v. Bai Fatina, LL.R. $5 Bom. 160 ; A.LR. 1931 Bom, 76
(Magdavkar and Barlee JJ.) (suit for divorce by Muslim’ wife over 16).

‘Fatima v. Fazlali, A.I.R. 1928 Cal. 303.
*Naksetan v. Habibar, A.ILR. 1948 Cal. 66 ; LL.R. (1946) 2 Cal. 349.

R. 1960"


221

view that the section covers capacity to sue also. On this
view, the “minor” can sue without next friend in such
cases, if he is major under his personal law. In the case
of suits for divorce governed by special Acts, this rule may
extend the majority period’.

On the other hand, the under-mentioned decisions?-*
‘seem to take a different view, on the ground that capacity
to sue is purely a question of procedure.

The following cases*-* review the case-law.

(See another exception under section 32, Presidency
Small Cause Courts Act.)

Order XXXH, rule 1 and costs

An amendment has been made by the High Court of
Punjab to Order XXXII, rule 1 empowering the court to
order the next friend to pay costs. It is felt that such a
power already exists, and that the provisions of section 35
are very wide to cover such an order. The amendment has
not, therefore, been adopted.

Order XXXII, rule 2A

A recommendation was made in the 14th Report* to
the effect that a provision similar to Order XXXII, rule 2A
as inserted by the Madras Hi igh Court should be inserted.
The Report observed, that such a provision would control
vexatious litigation by next friends of minors. Under the
Madras Amendment, the court has power at any stage of
the suit to order the next friend to give security for costs
of the defendant, if it appears that the suit has been
instituted by the next friend “improperly or unreasonably”.
It is, however, considered that the power to demand
security should be there in every case where the court
thinks fit to require security, but the reasons should be
recorded. An amendment on those lines has, therefore,
been proposed.

Order XXXII, rule 3

This carries out the recommendation made in the Four-
teenth Report’, At present, where a guardian for the suit

1866 (i) A.LR. 1925 Sind 95 and (ii) (1898) LL.R. 22 Bom. 431.
*Ithapi v. Kairhirapkil (1881) 1.L.R. 3 Mad, 248,

SAbdul Aziz v. Pathumma, LL.R. 1953 Mad, 118 ; ALR. 1952 Mad-
754-

‘Usman v.Khatoon, 1,1.,२, 17 Luck. 572 ; ALR. 1942 Oudh 243.

‘Najmunissa v. Sirajuddin, L.L.R. 17 Punjab 303 ; ALR. 1941 Lah.
394.

‘14th Report, Vol. 1, page 349, para. 89.
714th Report, Vol. I, page 353, pata. 96


222

e defendant, notice has to be issued

is to be appointed for th
in all cases to the minor defendant. The amendment seeks

to alter this position by providing that the issue of the
notice will be discretionary.

Compare Order XXXII, rule 4A (4) as inserted by the
Nagpur High Court, and the Punjab ‘Amendment inserting
a proviso to the same effect.

As will appear from a few recent decisions, the question
often arises whether a decree against a minor can be set
aside on the ground of the gross negligence of his guard-
jan. Most High Courts have answered the question in the
affirmative!-*-5-*->,

The Bombay High Court has, however, taken the view,

that gross negligence of the guardian cannot be made the
basis of a suit to set aside the decree against a minor®.

As the matter is really one of substantive rights, it
would not be proper to insert a provision on the subject
in this Code’. If necessary, it can be considered when the
Evidence ‘Act is revised. Compare sections 42-44 of that

ct.
Order XXXII, rule 4(3)

1. Punjab has amended this sub-rule to provide that
consent need not be express and can be presumed.

In the absence of such a provision, the question may
arise whether consent should be express. One view is that
it should be express®. Another is that it can be implied®-1°-

It appears to be desirable to clarify the position, and
to provide that it must be in writing, so as to avoid dis-
putes. Necessary amendment is proposed.

2, Generally as to mandatory character of this rule, see
the case cited below”.

3. The Fourteenth Report™ also took the view that the
consent should not be presumed.

1 Mahesh v. Manindra, AJR. 1941 Cal. 401.

*Ganesan v. Subramanyan, A.I.R. 1958 Mad. 148.

*Narayanan v, Gopalan, A.I.R. 1960 Ker. 367.

‘Murli Manohar v. Lachmanji, A.LLR. 1959 All. 342.

‘Iftkhar Hussain v. Beant Singh A.I.R. 1946 Lah. 233 (F.B.).

*Krishna Das v. Vithoba, A.LR. 1939 Bom. 66 (F-.B.),

7See Sarkar’s Evidence, roth Edn., pages 443 and 446.

‘Jagadish v. Harihar, A.I.R. 1924 Cal. 1042.

. ‘scussion in Nirmal v. ५, 4 _
3 ete का Nirmal v. Khandu Ghosh, (1963-64) (172-1964)

\Vasireddi v Lakhmi Narayana, A.1.R. 1925 Mad, 30.

‘Raman v. Raman, A.LR. 1959 Ker. 169.

‘Ramchandra vy. Gopi Krishna, A.1.R. 1957 Pat. 260.

13zq4th Report, Vol. I, page 352, para. 94.



223

Order XXXU, rule 4(4)

1. Two changes were suggested by the Fourteenth Re
port! in Order XXXII, rule 4, as follows: —

(1) Where a court guardian, natural guardian, or
de facto guardian is not fit and willing to act as
guardian in the suit for a minor defendant, the court
can at present appoint any of its own officers to be such
guardian. The recommendation was, that this should
be made obligatory, that is to say, a provision that the
court shall appoint its own officer as a guardian in
such cases should be inserted.

(2) Further, power should be given to the court
to order payment of the costs of that officer from the
minor's property.

2. It is, however, considered that a rigid provision on
the lines suggested on the first point may prove incon-
venient. The recommendation has not, therefore, been
carried out.

3. An amendment on the second point is proposed.

Order XXXH, rule 6

Under the amendment to Order XXXII, rule 6, made
by the Madras High Court, the Court has power to dis-
pense with security in cases where the next friend, etc., is
the manager of a joint Hindu family and the deeree is in
the favour of the family. Under the amendment made by
the High Court of Kerala, a similar power is given where
the next friend, etc., happens to be the parent of the minor,
These amendments appear to contain useful provisions,
which are proposed to be embodied with small modifi-
cations,

Order XXXII, rule 7

A provision has been proposed to the effect that where
an application for the leave of the Court to a compromise,
etc., is made on behalf of a minor, certificate of the counsel
as well as an affidavit of the next friend or guardian for
the suit should be required to the effect that the com-
promise, etc., is for the benefit of the minor, Compare the
Madras Amendment, Order XXXII, rule 7(Q1A), under
which such a certificate is required in respect of an appli-
cation for leave to enter into an agreement or compromise
or withdrawal of a suit in pursuance of a compromise or
for taking any other action on behalf of a minor or another
person under disability. The proposed amendment has
suggested itself on a study of the Madras Amendmeni,
though it requires an affidavit of the next friend, ete., him-
self also. The Madras Amendment appiies to “any other
action”, but it is considered unnecessary to go to that
Jength?.

tigth Report, Vol. I, page 352, para. 95.

3986 also Order XXIII, rule 1, as Proposed to be amended.



224
Order XXXII, rule 15

The Madras Amendment to Order XXXII, rule 15 exclu-
des the operation of rule 2A (security demanded from next
friend or guardian) in relation to persons of unsound
mind, etc. It is however, considered unnecessary, to have
any such provision.

The question whether supervening insanity should be
dealt with has been considered. At present rule 2 does not
apply in such cases."

From the discussion in Annual Practice under Order
XVI. rule 17 and Order XVII, rule 4, it would appear that in
England the action must be carried on by the next
friend (who will usually be the receiver in lunacy).

As such cases are not frequent, no amendment is sug-
gested.

Order XXXII, rule 16

This amendment is intended to bring the rule in line
with the substantive provisions contained in sections 83 to
87B of the Code of Civil Precedure.

Compare the amendment made by the High Court of
Andhra Pradesh.

It is considered unnecessary to add any explanation
defining expressions like “Ruler” ete., as these have been
already defined in sections 83 to 87B.

Order XXXII and “pauper”

A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth
Report? to replace the word “pauper” by “poor person”.
Since, however, the expression “pauper” has come to ac-

uire a special meaning in legal parlance and has become
‘familiar, it is considered unnecessary to disturb it. It is
used in English statutes also’.

Order XXXIH, rule 1

A recommendation was made in the  Four-
teenth Report’, to the effect, that the Ex-
planation to Order XXXII, rule1 should be
amended so as to enable a person who is not entitled to
property worth rupees one thousand to sue as a pauper, or
“alternatively so as to define a pauper as a person who is
not possessed of sufficient means, other than the subject-

13 2Firm Dzokaran Das, v. Debi Sahai, A.LR. 1936 Lah. 7, 8 (Backet

4r4th Report, Vol. 1, page 598, para. 17 (6).
*Appeal (forma pauperis) Act, 1892, 1893 (56 & $7 Vic. C. 22).
“14th Report, Vol. I, page 598, para. 17 (4).


225

matter of the suit to enable him to pay the fee prescribed.
by law.” It appears to be unnecessary to re-cast inte
whole Explanation in this manner, But certain moditica-
tions, which are summarised below, have been proposed:

{i) The amount of rupees one hundred is pro-
posed to be raised to rupees one thousand;

(ii) In considering the question of sufficient
means, the subject-matter of the suit (see Bombay
Amendment) and necessary wearing-apparel are
proposed to be excluded;

(iii) The question whether the date of presenta-
tion of the application or the date of its hearing
should be the relevant date for considering pauper-
ism, has been dealt with.

The decisions on the subject!-25 reveal a conflict
of views. A provision has, therefore, been inserted to
the effect that property acquired by the applicant
after presentation of the petition and before decision
of the application should be taken into consideration.

The Madras Amendment to Order XXXUI, rule 1, Ex-
planation (iii) provides that where a plaintiff sues in a re-
presentative capacity, the question of pauperism shall be
considered with reference to the means possessed by him
in such capacity. It is considered unnecessary to make
an express provision on the subject, though ‘the correct
Position is that reflected in the Madras Amendment.

Order XXXII, rule 3
Under the Allahabad Amendment, persons detained

in prison are exempted from appearing personally for
presentation of a pauper application. It js, however,
considered unnecessary to adopt this amendment, as in its
absence no practical difficulties have been felt.

Order XXXII, rule 5

1. The Allahabad Amendment to Order XXXII, rule
5(a) adds the words “and the applicant on being required by
the court to make any amendment within a time to be
fixed by the court, fails to do so". It is considered un-
necessary to make an express provision on this point.

2. As regards suits barred by any law, the Madras High
Court has added a clause (d-1), under which the court
shall reject the application where the suit appears to be

1G. Muddappa v, G. Rudramma, ALR. 1921 Madras 97.
*Bai Bal Gouri v, Moti Lal, ALR. 1923 Bom. 247.

*Provash Chandra v, Municipal Corporation, Howrah, ALR. 1930 Cal.
147, 149.


226

barred by any Jaw. As contrasted with this, the Allah-
abad High Court has inserted an Explanation to rule 5 to
the—effect that an application shall not be rejected under
clause (d) merely on the ground that the proposed suit
appears to be barred by any law. It may be noted, that
the existing language of rule 5(d)-——“where his allegations
do not show a cause of action” has been interpreted wide-
ly by the courts! It is therefore considered unnecessary
to distarb the language of the rule.

Order XXXII, rule 6

The Madras Amendment to Order XXXIII, rule 6 expands
the scope of the rule so as to allow evidence to be taken
in respect of all the prohibitions specified in rule 5. This
has been considered, and the provisions of rule 7(1) and
rule 7(2) noted, whereunder the evidence is confined to |
pauperism though the arguments are not so confined? It
is considered unnecessary to adopt the Madras Amend-
ment, as such matter need not be raised by way of evi-
dence at this stage.

Order XXXII, rule 8 and interlocutory orders

Whether a temporary injunction (or attachment
before judgment) can be issued during the pendency of
an application for permission to sue as a pauper is not free
from doubt. One view is that for the exercise of these
powers, the suit commerices on presentation of the appli-
cation, while another view is that it commences only
when the application is granted. The under-mentioned
decisions*-‘, take the first view.

Cases taking a contrary view are cited below'-*

The question whether a provision to the effect that the
court shall not be precluded from making any order under
clauses (a) to (e) of section 94 during pendency of the
application has been considered. As the problem may not
occur frequently, no amendment is suggested.

Order XXXUHI, rule 11
1. The change proposed is consequential.”

2. The question whether a dismissal under Order IX,
rule 3 or Order IX, rule 5 should be expressly mentioned in
Order XXXIII, rule 11 has been considered. The Madras

‘Mulla, Civil Procedure Code (1953), page 1065.
3८7, Mulla, Civil Procedure Code, (1953) page 7068.

*Tota Ram, v. Dattu, A.LR. 1943 Bom. 143,144.

‘Channa Lal v. Shama, AIR. 1955 Nag. 259 (reviews case-law).
’Purna Chandra v. Tara Prasad, ALR. 1917 Cal. 852.
*Thimayya v. Sadasivappa ALR, 1952 Mysore, 76.

१86९ Order VII, rule 9 (proposed).


227

Amendment to Order XXXIII, rule 11, which deals elabo-
rately with a claim being abandoned in part, has also been
considered. That amendment further makes a provision
that where the plaintiff is dispaupered, the court may order
the plaintiff to pay the requisite court-fee within the re-
quisite time and in default dismiss the suit and make an
order for court-fee as in the existing rules. It is, however,
considered unnecessary to make these changes of a minor
character.

Order XXXUI, rule 15 and costs

Order XXXIH, rule 15 allows the filing of a second suit
where the application to sue as a pauper is refused. But
the condition for the second suit is that the applicant
“first pays the costs” of the Government and the opposite
party incurred in opposing the application. Whether this
payment of costs is a condition precedent to the very ins-
titution of the second suit is a matter on which the posi-
tion is not clear from decisions.!-?-* The word “first” would
indicate a condition precedent. It is considered that
there should be a power in the court to give time (in suit-
able cases) for payment of the costs. If such a power is
given, the word “first ” should be omitted. Necessary
change is proposed.

Order XXXIN, rule 15 and “refusal”

Order XXXIII, rule 15 speaks of an order “refusing to
allow the applicant to sue as a pauper”. Whether this
applies in cases where the a pplication has been “rejected”
under rule 5 is a matter which is not free from difficulty.
It would suffice to draw attention to only a few of the deci-
sions*-°-6. The language of the rule supports the inter-
pretation that it is confined to “refusal” under rule 7, It
is considered unnecessary to disturb the language.

Order XXXUI, rule 15A (New)
1. This is new.

2. Where the court rejects an application to sue as a
pauper under.Order XXXIII, rule 5 or refuses to allow a
person to sue as a pauper under rule 7, the question arises
whether the court is bound to give time to the pauper to
Bey, court-fees and (on such payment) to treat the plaint as
led on the day on which the application was filed.

1Shiam Sundar Lal v. Savitri Kunwar, A.I.R. 1935 All. 723.
Abdul Rehman v. Aminabi, A.I.R. 1943 Bom. 409.

2Ram Krishna v. Vandaya, A.LR. 1936 Mad. 24.

“Ganesh Prasad v, Radhe Shyam, A.IR. 1950 Nag. 82.

SHarindra v. Continental Bus Service Ltd., A.ILR. 1958 Cal. 182,
‘Ramzan Ali v. Satul ALR. 1948 All, 244, 25%, paras. 47 and so



228

The matter assumes practical importance for the purposes
of limitation with reference to section 3, Explanation,
Indian Limitation Act, 1908, re-enacted in section 3, Expla-
nation, Limitation Act, 1963. The position is not very clear,
as will be seen from an analysis of the decisions of some
of the High Courts attempted below.

Bombay.—in a Division Bench ruling’, the matter was
discussed at some length and the following conclusions
reached :—

(i) An application under Order XXXIII, rule 2, is
required to contain the particulars required for plaints,
is to be signed and verified in the same manner and
is capable of being itself treated as a plaint. If it is
granted, it becomes a plaint under Order XXXIII, rule
है and is numbered and registered.

(ii) Even before deciding whether to grant an
application or not, the court may at any time during
the pendency of the proceedings, treat the application
as a plaint and allow the applicant to pay the re-
quisite court-fees and give up his request to be
allowed to sue as a pauper, as in the under-mentioned
Privy Council case’.

(iii) Even if the court decides to reject the appli-
cation under Order XXXII, rule 5 or refuses to allow
the applicant to sue as a pauper under Order XXXII,
rule 7, it may treat the application as an unstamped.
plaint, and either before or at the time of passing the
order, allow the applicant time under section 149 to pay
the requisite court-fees and upon such payment within
the time allowed, number and register the plaint.

But in doing so the court should have regard to
the provisions of Order XXXII, rule 15 and make the
payent of costs mentioned therein a condition prece-
dey’. In all these cases, for the purposes of limitation
the suit will be deemed to have been instituted on the
day on which the application for leave to sue as a
pauper is made,

(iv) But, once the court passes an order rejecting
the application under rule 5 or refuses to allow, etc.,
under rule 7, without keeping the application alive as
an unstamped plaint and without granting the appli-
cant time to pay the requisite court-fees, the pro-
ceedings come to an end, and it has no power to do so
by a separate and subsequent order. In that situation
the only remedy of the applicant is to file a regular
suit under Order XXXII, rule 15, which suit must be

बे. \Mahadev v. Bhikaji, A.LR. 1943 Bom. 292, 296, 297 (Broomfield and
Lokar JJ.) (case-law reviewed).
*Skinder v. Orde, (1878-1880) 6 LA. 126 ; LL.R. 2 All, 2gr.



228

taken as instituted on the day it is actually filed, and
the pauper cannot avail himself of the time spent in the
pauper proceedings to save the bar of limitation.

This case was, however, not cited before the court
(apparently), in a later Bombay Casel, which held
that where the application is refused under Order
XXXII, rule 7(3), the court cannot under section 149.
allow the applicant to pay the requisite court-fee and
treat the application as a plaint.

Calcutta—The Calcutta decisions are not uniform.
The more recent view is that when an application is re-
jected under rule 7, and the applicant seeks to deposit the
full court-fee, the suit must be considered to have been
instituted only after the payment of the court-fee. This
view was taken by Edgley J.,? dissenting from or distin-
guishing earlier rulings of the same High Court®-*.

Madras and Andhra Pradesh—A number of decisions of
the Madras High Court have recognised the practice of
granting time while rejecting an application for leave to
file a suit as a pauper, the time being granted under section
1495-6.7.8, The practice was stated to have developed out
of a feeling of charity towards bona fide pauper suitors,
and statutory support for this practice without first paying
the costs of parties opposing the application was stated to be
lacking.’.

The Madras practice has been followed in Andhra
Pradesh also’.

Allahabad.—The question has come up before the Alla-
habad High Court more than once in Full Bench decisions.
In an earlier Full Bench ९४४९7, the following propositions
were laid down:—

(a) While rejecting the application under rule 5,
the court can under section 149 allow the applicant to
pay the court-fee and treat the application as a plaint;

1Vanzi Rao y. Pran Lal, A.LR. 1944 Bom. 63.
39 °Biswanath Das v. Khjecrali LL.R. (1939) 2 Cal. 68; A.LR. 1939 0५"
4.
°F2¢adishwaree v. Thinuari, 1LL.R. 62 Cal. 711 3 A.LR. 1936 Cal. 28.
4Kalidasi v. Santosh Kumar, LL.R. (1939) 1 Cal. 112 ; A.LR. 1938 Cale
730 (reviews case-law).
‘Krishna v. Janki, A.T.R. 1935 Mad. 878,
ALR. 1934 Mad. 467.
7Anasuyamma v. Subbareddi, A.I.R. 1943 Mad. 646.
*Brahamaramba v. Seetharamayya, A.I.R. 1947 Mad. 405.
*Ganga v. Suraiya, A.I.R. 1950 Mad. 50, 51.
Sulemani Begun y. Ghulam Mohammed, ALR. 1960 A. P, 381”
382 (D.B.).
UChunnamal v. Bhagwant L.L.R. 1937 All. 22 3 A.LR. 1936 All. 584.


230

(b) But while refusing to allow him to sue him as
a pauper under rule 7, it cannot allow him to pay court-
fee and treat the application as a plaint;

(०) After rejecting the application, it cannot, by a
separate and subsequent order, allow payment under
section 149.

The court made a suggestion! for amendment of the
tule in these words:—

“Order XXXIII, rule 7 may well be amended so as
to empower the court, while refusing to allow the appli-
cant to sue as a pauper, to grant him time to convert
the application into a plaint and pay the necessary
court-fee”.

The Court, however, also poirted out that under rule 15,
the applicant could not be allowed to institute the suit
without payment of costs, and those provisions should not
be evaded. In a later Full Bench case’, it was held, that in
cases where the application was still pending or even at the
time of refusing to grant leave, the court could grart time
under section 149 to pay the court-fee, and if the court-fees
are paid within that time, the plaint would be deemed to
have been filed on the date on which application to sue as
a pauper was made. The Full Bench decision of 1936 was
reviewed in another case*, wherein the following proposi-
tions seem to have been laid down:—

(a) An order under section 149 can be passed only
when the document is before the court. Once the court
has lost seisin of the case, it cannot grant time to pay
court-fee under that section.

(b) But, since it often happens that pauper
applications, where contested, take some time and in
the meantime, the limitation for filing the suit on
payment of court-fees expires, therefore, if a bona fide
application has been filed and the court is not satisfied
that the petitioner is pauper it should, before signing
the order disallowing the prayer to be allowed to sue
as a pauper, grant time for payment of court-fees. If
an oral or written application for time for payment
of court-fees is made, it is the duty of the court to pass
a suitable order on the application, and if by mistake
or oversight it is not done, it can correct its error later
by reviewing the order.

346 page 589 of the A.LR. 1936 All. 584.

°Dzvendra Kumar v. Mahanta Raghuraj, AIR. 1955 All. 154, 158
para. 24 (F.B.).

%Kalap Nath vy. Shyama Nand, A.LR. 1955 All. 159 (Full Bench).


231

Madhya Pradesh High Court holds’ that even if the
application is dismissed, there remains the plaint, and the
court can grant time under section 149 and that time can
be extended also.

Lahore—The Lahore view seems to be, that while
dismissing the application to sue as a pauper, if the court
asks the applicant to deposit the court-fee by a certain
date, and the court-fee is so deposited, the suit would be
deemed to have been filed on the date on which the
application under Order XXXIII, rule 2 was first made®-*,

Patna.—Seems to hold that the time can be given at the
time of dismissing the application’, but not afterwards,

Assam.—Holds that time may be granted under section
1496, if there is a prayer to that effect.

Rajasthan.—The Rajasthan High Court has, in 1954,
made an amendment to rule 15 to the effect, that nothing
in rule 5 or rule 7 shall preclude the court from granting
time for payment of court-fees, and upon such payment,
the suit is deemed to have been filed on the day on which
the original application was presented. (An earlier decision®
of Rajasthan High Court had discussed the matter, but had
not expressed any final opinion on the point.)

(See also Kerala Amendment to Order XXXIII, rule 7).

3. It s considered that the Rajasthan Amendment should
be adopted so as to clarify the position with the modification
that the right to costs of those opposing the application
should also be safeguarded*. It would be convenient to put
this as a separate rule qualifying rules 5, 7 and 15. Necessary
amendment is proposed.

Order XXXII, rule 17 (New)

A recommendation was made in the Fourteenth Report?
for applying the provisions relating to suit by a pauper to
defence of a suit filed against a pauper. This has been
carried out with the modification that it will be confined
to cases where a set-off, etc., is filed.

Compare the Bombay Amendment made in relation to
the City Civil Court.

"Bhanu v. Daluna, ALR. 1959. M.P. 169.
*Ram Het Gir v. Banwari Lal, A.I.R. 1938 Lah. 41, 42.
ot earlier cases, see ILL.R. 17, Lah, 831 ; ALR. 1937 Lah.

‘Mathura Singh v. Sudama Davi, ALR. 1954 Pat. 170.
*Bank of Behar v. Ram Chander, A.1R. 1929 Pat. 637, 639.
“See ALR. 1961 Assam 113.

7Bhairu Dan ए. Ratan Lal, LL.R. (1952) 2 Raj. 497, 508.
*Of. Mahadev v. Bhikaji, A.LR. 1943 Bom. 292, 296.
“ath Report, Vol. 1, page 598, pare. 17 (5).


232
Order XXXIV, rules 3(2), 5(3) and 8(3)

The proposed amendments make it clear, that before
making a final decree in a mortgage suit, notice must be
issued to all interested parties. The Madras Amendment
to Order XXXIV, rule 5(3) may be compared, and the sug-
gestion made in the under-mentioned case may also be
seen!,

A review of the case-law will be found in the following
decisions?-*,

Order XXXIV, rule 15

1. Under the Allahabad Amendment, where a decree
orders payment of money and charges it on immovable
property on default of payment, the amount can be realised
by sale of that property in execution of that very decree.

2. The question whether a decree creating a charge can
be executed and the property sold in execution, or whether
a separate suit is necessary, has been discussed in many
cases. On the one hand, if, after the decree creates a charge,
the elaborate procedure under Order XXXIII has to be
undergone, then the object of creating a charge will not
be easily carried out. On the other hand, the wide wording
of rule 15 suggests, at first sight, a contrary interpretation.

3. Two situations may be considered. One is, where the
decree directs sale or provides that the money charged shall
be recovered from the property. In such a case there is no
difficulty’. But, regarding the second situation, namely,
where the decree does not so direct sale and recovery of
money from the property, and merely creates a charge on
the property, the position is not very clear. The question,
of course, is mainly one of construction of the decree®, But
still some uncertainty appears to exist.

‘The question has mainly arisen where the decree creates
a charge, but is silent about its enforcement, that is it says
nothing further after declaring the charge. One approach
is, that if the decree is executable, then a separate suit is
not necessary’-’. Another approach is, that if the amount
"Suresh Chandra v. United Bank of India, ALR. 1961 Cal. 534, 536+
Para. 9.
*Baljit Singh v. Munshee Lal, A.LR. 1959 All. 251.
*Teeka Ram v. Tara Chand, A.LR. 1954 Nag. 135, 140.
4See the discussion in Manindra ४. Radha Syam, A.ILR. 1953 Cal.

676.
*As to charge of unpaid vendors see Gurupadappa v. Basappa, ALR .
1940 Bom. 276 (Kania J.). ee
*Manindra v, Radha Syam, A.I.R. 1953 Cal. 676, explaining A.I.R:
1945 Cal. 322.
73556 also ALR. 1951 All. 141, 147, 154 (F.B.).


283
is declared to be a charge, a sale in execution is irregular’,
but it is not void’.

4. Though the case-law does not reveal a direct conflict,
the application of the principles laid down in the cases
gives rise to problems, and for that reason, the amendment
made by the Allahabad High Court seems to be worth
adopting. The effect of the amendment would be, that the
mere creation of a charge gives a right to sell the property
charged*.

Necessary change is proposed.

Order XXXVII (summary procedure)

In the Fourteenth Report! recommendations have been
made for—

(a) simplification of rules relating to summary

procedure on the lines of the Bombay Amendment, and

(b) extension of summary procedure to subordinate

courts in important industrial and commercial towns

like Ahmedabad, Asansol, Kanpur and Jamshedpur.

Action under (a) above can be taken by the High Court
under section 128 (2) (a) and action under (b) above can
be taken by the State Government under Order XXXVII,
rule 1(b) as amended in 1956. It is considered unnecessary
to make any provision on these matters of detail in the Code
itself.

Order XXXVIM, rule 8

Verbal changes have been proposed in this rule on the
lines proposed to Order XXI, rule 58.

Order XXXVIIIL, rule 114
This is new, and is intended to clarify the position as
to whether the provisions of Order XXI, rule 57 apply to
attachment before a judgment®. The provision has been
framed in genera! terms, as it would not be appropriate
to apply the provisions of Order XXI, rule 57, only.

Order XXXIX, rule 1

A recommendation was made in the Fourteenth Report’-*
to take away the power of courts to issue an injunction to

~T Seethalakhshmi v. Srinivasa, AAR. 1958 Mad. 23.

2Sudhainoyee v. Fessore ete. Co., ALR. 1945 Cal. 322 (B. K, Mukher-
jea and Akram JJ.). (This was explained in the Calcutta case of 1953 on
the ground that there was no order for sale).

*Kaushalencra v. Sen and Sanyal, ALR. 1953 All. 588 (D.B.).
‘14th Report, Vol. I, page 275, para, 22 read with para, 21.

5See Order 21, rule 58 as proposed.

*See notes relating to Order 21, rule 57.

7igth Report, Vol. 1, page 450, para. 43, last sentence.

4532 alse Civil Justice Committee (1925) Report, page 413, para. 6.


234

stay an execution sale. It was felt that such injunction
held up execution proceedings, and that no harm could
ensure if the sale were to be allowed to go on.

It is, however, considered that there may be cases
where such a power is really needed, particularly where
interests of a third party are in issuet (or, even in the case
of party to the decree. where the decree is challenged on
the ground of fraud, ete.) The change has not therefore
been carried out.

Order XXXIX, rule 2
This is consequential’.

Order XXXIX, rule 2A (New)

1. The object of this amendment is to provide for the
consequences of the breach of an injunction issued under
rule 1, which is at present uncovered. It extends the
existing provisions for breach of an injunction granted
under rule 2. [See Order XXXIX, rule 2, sub-rules (3)
and (4) to injunctions under rule 1 as’ well.]

2. Compare the Calcutta Amendment to Order XXXIX,
rule 1(2), as construed in the under-mentioned case*. See
also Order XXXIX, rule 2A (Allahabad)‘. The position at
present is not very clear®.

3. There is a certain amount of controversy‘-* as to
whether a court to which a suit is transferred can punish
disobedience of an injunction issued by the predecessor
court. From the practical point of view it is advisable to
give this power to the transferee court, and that has been
made clear in that portion of the new rule which
corresponds to existing Order XXIX, rule 2(3).

Order XXXIX, rule 8

The object of the amendment is to provide that orders
under rules 6 and 7 of Order XXXIX can be made without
notice in urgent cases. Cf, Order XXXIX, rule 3. At pre-

185 to applications for injuction by: by a person who was not a party to
the decree, See Deochandra v. Amatendu, ‘ALR. 1958 Pat. 146. Party

386९ Order 39, rule 2A, proposed, which covers the matter contained in
Order 39, rule 2(3) and (4).

2Shyam Sundar v. Satchidananda, I.L.R. (1957) Cal. 315 ; ALR. 1955
Cal. 351. Also see A.ILR. 1934 Cal. 818.

395 to the Allahabad Amendment, see Balbhaddar v. Bala, 8.1 4९, 1930
All. 387, 388 and Janak v. Kedar, A.LR. 1941 All. 140, 141 (cases before
the Amendment).

5866 A.LR. 1963 AP. 136, 137 5 ALR. 1947 Mad. 98 5 Sitaram ४.
Lachmi Narain, A.I.R. 1946 Pat. 47, 495, A-LR. 1936 Pat. 23; Panna v. Seth
ALR. 1945 Nag. 134, ALR. 1955 Cal. 351.

‘¢Mouna Guruswami v. Sheikh Mohaundi, A.1.R. 1923 Mad. 92.

1Mineral Development Ltd. v. State of Bihar, A.LR. 1962 Pat. 443.


235

sent there is no such provision, though courts can take
prompt action by appointing a receiver or granting an in-
junction ex parte‘.

Order XL, rule 1(2) and Allahabad Amendment

Under the Allahabad Amendment to Order XL, rule 1 (2),
the prohibition against removal from possession, ete., of any
person whom a party to the suit has no personal right so
to remove, has been narrowed down to any person not
being a party to the suit. That is to say, where a party
to the suit is to be removed, this prohibition does not apply.
The under-mentioned decisions show the origin and effect
oi the amendment’-"-*

As the view of most of the other High Courts is that
sub-rule (2) does not bar the removal of a party to the
suit from possession*, the amendment has not been adopted.

Order XLI, rule 1

1, Recommendaticns on certain points relating to Order
XLI, rule 1 were made in the Fourteenth Report’ as
follows: —

(i) In case of appeals under special enactments to
which Parts II and III of the Limitation Act do not
apply, exclusion of the time requisite for obtaining
copies of the judgment was not allowed and yet Order
XLI, rule 1 required the appellant to file copies of the
judgment and decree. If parts II and III of the Limi-
tation Act are made ap p! ficable to proceedings under
any enactment, this difficulty would not arise. In the
meanwhile, an amendment similar to Order XLI, rule 1
as made by Madras may be made,

(ii) In the case of partition decrees, the decree con-
tains a number of “allotment papers” and the filing of
these allotment papers put the appellant to heavy ex-
pense in obtaining copies. The Patna High Court has
provided that in appeals from final decrees in partition
suits containing allotment papers, the appellate court
may accept copies of the decree containing only a por-
tion of the papers. This may be adopted by other High
Courts’.

(iii) The requirement that a memorandum of
appeal should be accompanied by a copy of the judg-
ment of the lower court occasions extra expense when

‘ALR. 1943 Bom, 148.

*Tulsa v. Chivanjit, A.LR. 1943 All. 1.

*Biresswar v. Sudhansu, 21.1२, 1947, AN. 157.

‘Anandi Lal v, Ram Swarup, LL.R. 58 All. 495.

*UruXendappa v. Mallesappa, A.I.R. 1960 A. P. 79 (discusses case-law),
कप Report, Vol. I, page 385, para. 2, second sub-para,

7rgth Report, Vol. I, page 386, para. 4.



236

4wo or three suits or appeals have been disposed of
by a single judgment. Ih such cases, though the decrees
are different, the judgment is the same and yet the
apellant is put to the expense of filing more than
one copy of the same judgment. By an amendment
made by the Punjab High Court, this difficulty has
been met by providing that when more cases than one
are disposed of by a single judgment, the appellate
court may dispense with the necessity of filing more
than one copy.

(iv) While the memorandum is required to set
forth the grounds of appeal, there is no provision cor-
responding to Order VII, rule 7 that it should state the
relief which the appellant seeks, though Order XLI, rule
35 requires that the appellate decree shall contain a
clear specification of the relief. It is sometimes diffi-
cult to know precisely what relief the appellant seeks.
Order LVIII, rule 3 of the R.S.C. requires that the notice
for appeal shall state the precise form of the order
which the appellant proposed to ask the court of appeal
to make. A similar provision may be made by amend-
ing Order XLI, rule 17.

2. So far as the first point is concerned, no amendment
is necessary, since the new Limitation Act, 1963, section
29(2) practically applies all sections contained in Parts I
and III of that Act to appeals governed by special laws.

The recommendation on the second point seems to be
a matter of detail, and could be carried out by the High
Courts if they so desire.

The recommendation on the third point has been carried
out in the proposed amendment, which follows the amend-
ment in force in Punjab with shall modifications.

As regards the recommendation on the fourth point, it
may be noted that the emphasis in the Report of the Ever-
shed Committee? was on the grounds of appeal and not so
much on the precise form of the order sought. At that
time, in the Rules of the Supreme Court as in force in
England, there was apparently no provision for statement
of the grounds and it was in that context that the recom-
mendation was made. It is considered unnecessary to add
a provision for stating the precise iorm of the order, as no
practical difficulty has been caused by its absence.

3. The question of condonation of delay is dealt with

trgth Report, Vol. 1, paies 386, 387, para. 6.

*Binal Report of the Committee on Supreme Court Practice and Pro-
cedure (1953), Cmd. 8878, page १61, para. 503.

3566 Order 41, rule 3A (proposed).


237

4. In the Report of the Law Commission on the Regis-
tration Act!,a somewhat revised scheme in respect of
registration of decrees was suggested. Stated broad) ly, the
main feature was, that when a plaint concerning immov-
able property is filed, a copy thereof should be sent to
the registering officer by the court, and when the decree
is passed in the suit, a copy of that aiso should be sent by
the court. Consequentially, it was suggested that if there
was an appeal, a copy of the memorandum of appeal should
also be sent and so on. In this context, a recommendation
was made to the effect that a memorandum of appeal relat-
ing to immovable property should have annexed to it a
Schedule of immovable property.

As the main scheme suggested in that Report has not
yet been implemented, this amendment suggested in the
Civil Procedure Code has not been carried out.

Order XLI, rule 3A (New)

In the Fourteenth Report’, attention was drawn to the
practice which was previously followed of admitting an
appeal subject to objections as to limitations being raised
at the time of hearing, where the memorandum of appeal
was accompanined by a petition seeking condonation of
delay under section 5, Limitation Act. This practice has been
disapproved by the Privy Council, which has stressed the
expediency of adopting a procedure securing at the stage of
admission the final determination {after due notice) of
question of limitation affecting the competence of the ap-
peal. Following this advice, the High Courts of Andhra
Pradesh, Bombay and Madras have made appropriate am-
endments to the rule, and the Fourteenth Report recom-
mended that the similar amendments be made by other High

ourts.

The proposed amendment carries out this recommenda-
tion, and follows the Madras Amendment, Order 41, rule
1(3) with verbal modifications. The Bombay Amendment
is contained in Order XLI, rule 3A (Bombay).

Order XLI, rule 5

An amendment has been proposed so as to empower
the appellate court to stay:—
(i) proceedings for final decree;
Gi) actual making of the final decree,
1६ is considered unnecessary to provide for stay of

execution of the final decree, as such stay could be obtain-
ed in an appeal againct the final decree.

teth Report (Registration Act), pages 37, 38, para. -
*rqth Report, Vol. I, pages 385 and 386, para. 3.

Appeals
relating to
immovabie
Property.


238

The amendment has suggested itself by the Madras
Amendment, which has been incorporated with certain

modifications.

Order XLI, rule 5 and date of effect of stay order

1. There is a conflict of decisions on the question whe-
ther a stay order operates immediately or only when it is
communicated to the court or to the officer conducting the
sale, as the case may be. According to one view an order
takes effect immediately’-*. A contrary view is that an
order is in the nature of prohibitory order and becomes
effective only on communication’.

2. The Caleutta decisions are not uniform®. Mulla
prefers the view® that the order should take effect only
when it is communicated to the executing court.

3. It is, however, considered that ordinarily the order
should be effective immediately, and a provision to the
contrary may be abused by interested parties attempting
deliberately to delay transmission of the order from the
appellate court to the lower court. It is considered un-
necessary to make any amendment in the rule on this

point.

Order XLI, rule 11

1. This carries out the recommendation made in the
Fourteenth Report’. The object is to provide that even
where the appellate court dismisses an appeal without
notice to the lower court, it shall deliver a formal judgment
and a decree shall be drawn up.

2. It appears to be unnecessary to impose this require-
mote the appeal is dismissed for default under sub-
rule (2).

Order XLI, rule 11 and appeals under section 47

A recommendation was made in the Fourteenth Report®
to the effect that in the case of orders in execution of money-
decrees, restrictions should be placed on the right of

‘Karam Ali vy. Raja, A.ILR. 1949 Lah. 108, 113 (F.B.).

Be fakes Mian v. Padampad Singhania, A.LLR. 1951 Pat. 130 (Special
ch).

*Venkatachelapatt Rao v. Kameswaramma, A.1.R. 1918 Mad. 391 (F.B.).

‘Parsotam Saran v. Brahmanand, LL.R. 50 All. 41 ; A.LR. 1927 All,
4ox (E.B.).

"See Jatish Chandra v. Kshirode Kumar, A.ILR. 1943 Cal. 319, 324.

*Mulla, Civil Procedure Code (1953), page 1190.

t14th Report, Vol. I, page 388, para. 9. For uniformity, a generat
amendment is proposed.

*rgth Revort, Vol. I, page 442, para. 21.


239

appeal by requiring the appellant judgment-debtor to de-
posit, or at least to give security for, the decretal amount,
as a condition precedent to the admission of the appeal.
The Report referred to the proposal of the Civil Justice
Committee! to that cffect, and recommended the accept-
ance of the proposal.

The Civil Justice Committee had stated that after trial,
it was only just that such a protection should be given to
the successful decree-holder. It is, however, considered
that the imposition of such a rigid provision may cause
hardship. The change has not, therefore, been carried out.

Order XLI, rule 14

A recommendation was made in the Fourteenth Report?
to the effect, that in the case of parties who had not appeared
in the court below and who had not filed any address for
service, provision may be made to dispense with service
of notice of appeal. A somewhat similar recommendation
was made by the Civil Justice Committee’ also, which
observed that the necessity of serving each of those respon-
dents against whom the suit had proceeded ex parte, with
notice of appeal or of any interlocutory motion, led to an
unnecessary delay. It stated, that this was more specially
the case where the appellant had cbtained an interim stay
of execution, as it would be easy 10 an ex parte defendant
to collude with the defendant-appellant and evade service
of notice. Amendments on these lines have been made b:
the High Courts of Allahabad. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Cake
cutta, Madhya Pradesh. Madras, Mysore and Punjab in
Order XLI, rule 14 and by Orissa and Patna by inserting
Order XLI, rule 14A. It is, however, felt that it is unneces-
sary to carry out the suggested change, as not much delay
is caused by the necessity of service of notice of appeal.

Order XLI, rule 18

The Fourteenth Report recommended the adoption by
High Courts of some local Amendments*-°, whereunder, if on
the day of hearing of the appeal, it is found that the notice
to the respondent has not been served and the appellant fails
to deposit the expenses of serving the notice again, the
court has power to order that the appeal be rejected. This
is a matter of detail which may be left to igh Courts.

*tgch Report, Vol. I, page 393, para. 21.

4Civil Justice Committee (1925) Report, Page 117, para. 27, second
‘sub-para,

‘See the amendment made by the Madras High Court.
3568. 14th Report, Vol. I, page 293, para. 22.


240
Order XLI, rule 18 and refund

A recommendation was made in the Fourteenth Report'-",
for an amendment allowing the refund of process fees
where an appeal is dismissed without notice to the other
party.

It is felt that this should be left to be dealt with by
the practice of the courts. No amendment is therefore
suggested.

Order XLI, rule 20

There is some controversy as to whether a respondent
can be added in an appeal after the period of limitation
for appeal has expired. The decisions on the subject will
be found discussed in the under-mentioned cases’-'. Some
of these decisions proceed on the inherent power of the
Court to add the respondents in such cases.

It is considered, that the correct view is, that after the
period of limitation has expired against a party, he ceases
10 be “interested in the appeal” under rule 20 as interpreted
by the Privy Council’.

Whether such party can be impleaded under the in-
herent power or whether a separate appeal can be filed
against that respondent after obtaining leave of the Court
under section 5, Limitation Act. are different matters.

It is considered unnecessary to make any amendment.
to cover such cases

Order XLI, rule 22

A suggestion has been made to the effect that a respon-
gent should not be ajlowed to file a cross-objection in which
the appellant is not interested. While that would be the
ordinary rule*’-"-", a rigid provision may not be des rable,
because there may be cases where a different rule might
have to be applied'’-".'"| The suggestion has not, therefore,
been carried out.

वर्ष Report, Vol. 1, page 393, para. 22.
3566 also Order 41A, rule 2, inserted in Madras.
3, Anandu v. M. Acharyulu, AIR. 1958 A, P. 43 (F.B.)

4Notified Area Committee, Burta v. Govind Ram, A.1.R, 1959 Pun.
277, 278 (F.B.).

'Chokalingam v. Seethai, 1L.R, 6 Rangoon 29.; ALR. 1927 7, C.

252,

*Venkataswarlu v. Ramamma, LL.R. 1950 Mad. 874, A.LR. 1950 Mad.
379 (F. B.).

"Chanda Bibi v. Mohan Ram, ALR. 1934 Pat. 134.

‘Cooperative Hindusthan Bank Ltd. v, Surendra Nath, A.I.R, 1932 Cal,
527.

°B 4, 0. Ins. Co. v. Ramaath, ALR. 1962 Pat. 140.

\Kantj Fatima v. Jai Narain Ram, 61.7, 1944 Pat. 334.

UBasistha v. Shanker, LR. 29 Pat. 160, 169, A.LR. 1952 Pat. 323.

UMusleha Bibi y. Ram Narain, (1918) LL.R. go All. 536.


241

Order XLI, rule 23A (New)

This carries out the recommendation made in the 14th
Report', and is intended to widen the powers of the
appellate court to remand a case in the interests of
justice’.

See also the Allahabad, Andhra and Madras Amend-
ments to Order XLI, rule 23 and Punjab Order 41, rule 23A.
Under-mentioned, cases on these Amendments are help-
fui.

Order XLI, rule 25

This carries out the recommendation made in the 14th
Report’. The object is to require the lower court (where
a case is remanded) to return the evidence within a period
fixed by the appellate court.

Order XLI, rule 26A (New)

This carries out the recommendation made in the 140
Report’. The object is to require the appellate court,
while remanding a case, to fix the date of hearing before
the lower court, so as to avoid the delay caused by issue of
notices by the lower court.

Order XLI, rule 27

This carries out the recommendation made in the 14th
Report*. The object is to provide that additional evidence
may be allowed by the appellate court if the evidence
could not be produced in the lower court because it was
not within the knowledge, etc., of the party seeking to
produce it now.

See also Allahabad, Madras’ and Patna Amendments,
Order XLI, rule 30

This seeks to make certain amendments regarding
pronouncement of judgments, etc.,of an appellate court, on
the lines of those proposed for triai courts!*.

114th Report, Vol. I, page 405, para. 46.
*As to inherent power of remand, see discussion in—

(i) ALLR. 1931 Mad. 791 5

(it) ALR, 1922 Mad. 505, 508, left 509 left 510 (F.B.).
*Kewalram ४. Mihiial, A.ILR. 1960 All. 655.
‘Veerbhadrappa v. Venkatappa, ALR. 1961 A.P. 226.
*Rantkrishna v. Rangayya, A.1.R. 1954 Mad. 783.
*t4th Report, Vol. I, pages 405-406, para. 47, earlier half.
tr4th Report, Vol. I, page 406, para. 47, last sentence.
अत Report, Vol. I, page 405, para. 45, second sub-para.
१568 Krishna Reddi v. Rami Reddi, A.IL.R. 1954 Mad. 848, 850, para. 4. -
1१38९ the amendment proposed to Order 20, rule 1.


242

Order XLI and first appeals to High Court

Certain recommendations relating to appeals to the
High Court from original decrees of Subordinate Courts
were made in the 14th Report’, which drew attention to
Order XLIA inserted by Madras. These can be carried out
by the High Courts.

Order XLI and second appeals

Certain recommendations have been made in the 14th
Report* as to the memorandum of appeal in second appeals.
These can be considered by the High Courts.

Order XLII, rule 1

Since an express provision regarding restoration of
orders dismissing for default an application under Order
XXI, or for setting aside of ex parte orders on such applica-
tions is proposed’, it is considered that an express provi-
sion allowing appeal from such orders should be inserted.
In drafting the amendments, assistance has been taken
from the Madras Amendment, Order XLII, rule 1, clause
(ij)-

2. As a new rule regarding breach of injunctions is being
inserted‘, a provision making orders punishing such breach
appealable is being inserted.

2 Clause (u)—The change in clause (४) is consequen-
tial’.

Order XLIII, rule 1(m)

There are certain points on which there is some conflict
‘or uncertainty as to Clause (m) of Order 43, rule 1, which
allows an appeal from order “recording or refusing to
record aa agreement, compromise or satisfaction”. These
points are as follows:—

(i) Does an appeal lie where the order is followed
by a consent decree? One view is that no appeal lies*
in such cases, the reason being that once a compromise
decree is passed, all previous orders merge in it. While
the decree is outstanding, it is stated, the person
affected cannot adopt “a short and inexpensive cut”
and appeal against the order. But, as against this, a
contrary view is, that the order is appealable irres-

t1gth Report, Vol. I, pp. 393-394, paras. 20, 22, 23, 24.
*14th Report, Vol. I, page 390, para. 17.
*See Order 21, rules 104 and 105 (proposed).
‘Order 39, rule 2A (proposed),
3866 Order 41, rule 23A (proposed)
13 *Onkar v. Gamna Lakka, A.1.R. 1933 Bom, 205(Murphy and Nanavati



243

pective of whether a consent decree follows it or
not'-7.5, since the rule contains no limitation.

(ii) Is the right of appeal available in all cases, or
is it available only where the order was passed after
contest? One view is, that it is available in all cases*-’,
while another view is that is not available where
there was no contest in the lower court’, (about the
compromise). The latter view is based on the reason-
ing that if there was no contest, there would be no
materials before the court on which to come to a
decision. But the former view supports itself on the
ground that two questions, namely (i) which order is
appealable, and (ii) whether the apreal is likely to
succeed, should be kept separate.

(iii) Is the right of appeal confined to cases where
the order refusing to record the compromise was based
on the ground that the compromise was not valid in
law, or does it extend to cases where there is a dispute
about the factum of the compromise? One view is,
that an order holding that na compromise has been
proved is not appealable’, the reasoning being, that
where the court refuses to record the compromise,
it is not an order “under rule 3”, because that rule
presupposes the existence of an agreement, com-
promise or satisfaction, But in some cases’, an appeal
on facts was allowed’,

It is, however, considered unnecessary to make any
amendment on these points in the rule, as it is felt that
the existing language, which is based on the wording of
Order XXIU, rule 1, need not be disturbed

Order XLIIL, rule 1(w)
1. Order XLII, rule t(w) allows an appeal against

an order granting an application for review.
But Order XLVII, rule 7(1), last sentence, lays down the

‘Mathura Prasad v. Parmanand, A.LR. 1960 M.P. 161 (reviews case-
daw).

*Haridas v. Ishwar, A.LR. 1933 Cal. 94, following A.L.R. 1929 Cal
689 (F.B.).

Ram Narayan v. Ram Krishna, A.J.R. 1936 Mad. 38s.
‘Rama Narayana v. Ramakrishna, A.LLR. 1936 Mad. 385 (Wadsworth J. )

'Suraparaju v. Venkatarathmiah, A.LR. 1936 Mad. 347 (Wadsworth
JD.

‘Amar Nath y. Smt. Malan, A.LR. 1954 Pun, 259.

2 Shanti Sarup v. Firm Jahangir Mal, ALR. 1924 Lab. 248 (Martineau
bh.

ALR. 1933 Cal. 94.

"In Nand Lal v. Ram Sarup, ALR. 1927 Lah. 546, 548, left (Addison
and Agha Haidar JJ.), the view taken in A.LR. 1924 Lah. 248 was cited,
but appears to have been not accepted,



244

grounds on which the order can be objected to in appeal.
Obviously, Order XLUI, rule 1 must be so read as to
harmonise with Order XLVII, rule 7. The position is not
clear at present!.

2. It may be noted that the High Courts of Calcutta,
Patna, Rangoon and Lahore and the Chief Court of Oudh
have taken the same view, so that an appeal lies only on
the grounds mentioned in hat rule’.

3. The Bombay Hig Court held in one case", that an
appeal is open against the order granting the review quite
irrespective of the limitation contained in rule 7. After
this decision, the Bombay High Court has deleted clause
(vw) from rule, so that there is no appea! now‘, except on
the ground mentioned in Order XLVII, rule 7.

4. This is also the view of the Allahabad High Court’.

This was the earlier Madras view also, but some doubt
has been thrown py observations in a later ease’.

As Order XLVII, rule 7(1) is proposed to be modified
so as to allow appeal without restriction as to grounds’,
this controversy will not survive now.

Order XLIV, rule 1(2)

Order 44, rule 1(2) provides that an application by a
pauper for leave to appeal as a pauper must be rejected
unless he can show that the decision is erroneous, etc.
suggestion has been put forth that this provision is
unconstitutional under articles 13 and 14 (since no such
restriction is applicable to appeals by non-paupers). It is,
however, felt that the existing provision is prima facie
reasonable, as it is intended to prevent frivolous appeals.
by a pauper. It can be justified on the ground that a person
who has failed in one court should show a prima facie case

‘For a review of case-law on this point, see का, Agaih v, M. Abdul Kareem,
ALR. 1961 A. P. 201 (F.B.).

*§arajubala Guha v. Aswini Kumar, 1.L.R. (1946) 2 Cal. 527; A.LR.
1946 Cal. 530 (F.B.) 5

‘Sundar Mal v. Upendra Nath, (1915) 1 Pat. L.J. 193 5 35 LC. 15 5

A. T.K., P. L. M. Mathu vy. Lashminarayan, (1928) LL.R. 6 Rang.
254 5
Sikandar v. Baland (1927); L.L.R. 8 Lab. 617, A.LR. 1927 Lah. 435 (2)
(Tek Chand J.).

Bankey Behari v. Abdul Rahman, (1932) LL.R. 7 Luck. 350.

*Daso viKarbasappa, A.I.R. 1926 Bom. 121.

iKunversi v. Pitamberdas, A.I.R. 1927 Bom. 599 ; Shidramappa v. Guru~
shantappa, A..R. 1929 Bom. 183 3 Narayan v. Rango, A.ILR. 1933 Bom.
183.
341 Akbar v.Khurshed Ali (1905) 1.1... 27 All. 695 5 Munnu vy. Kunja
Behari, (1922) LLL-R. 44 All. 605 ; A.I.R. 1922 All. 206.

*Ananthalakshmi v. Hindustan, etc., Trust Ltd., ALR. 1951 Mad. 927.

3566९ Order 47, rule 7 as proposed.


245

‘before he can be permitted to appeal as a pauper. It need
not, therefore, be disturbed.

Order XLIV, rule 1A (New)

This is new and is inserted to empower the court to
grant time for payment of court-fees when the application
for aypeal as a pauper has failed’.

Order XLIV, rule 2
The changes are verbal, as a provision for defence of a
suit as a pauper is being added?. As to filing cross-objec-
tions, see Order XLI, rule 22 (5).

Revision and Stay of Execution

Detailed provisions regarding stay of execution by the
Revising Court were recommended in the Fourteenth
Report*. No amendments have, however, been proposed
on these points, as it is considered that since revision is a
matter of discretion, a statutory provision is not required‘.

Order XLVI, rule 7

Order XLVII, rule 7(1) provides that any order granting
an application for review may be objected to on the ground
that the application was in contravention of the provisions
of rule 4, or after the expiration of the period of limitation
and without sufficient cause. The effect of this provision
as interpreted by the courts is, that it prevents the
appellant from objecting (to the order granting review)
on grounds other than those mentioned in rule 7, both in
a direct appeal from the order granting review and in an
appeal {vom the final decree that may be passed on review’.
It is considered, that this restriction is not called for.
Suitable modifications have, therefore, been proposed to
remove it.

First Schedule, Appendix 8, Form No. 2

Regarding the forms of summons to the defendant, a
recommendation was made in the Fourteenth Report* for
inserting 2 provision that if the written statement is not
presented within the specified time, the suit is liable to
be heard ex parte.

This has not been carried out, as it is considered that
a provision of that character would not be appropriate.

‘Compare Order 33, rule 158 (proposed).
*See Order 33, rule 17 (proposed).
rgth Report, Vol. I, page 420, para. 14.
"Sze also the body of the Report.
cal. pees eee” of the rule, see Sarju Bala v. A.K. Ghosh, A.I.R. 1946
*14th Report, Vol. 1, page 302, para. 11, read with page 301, para. 9.



246

First Schedule, Appendix E, Form No. 16A

This is new and lays down a form of affidavit of assets
to be made by a judgment-debtor where money decree
remains unsatisfied’.

First Schedule, Appendix E, Form No. 24

This is consequent:

First Schedule, Appendix E, Form No. 29

This is consequential”

First Schedule, Appendix G, Forms regarding intimation
by vespenitent as vo dejence

In the Fourteenth Report*-*, a recommendation was
made to the effect that the respondent should be required
to intimate whether he wants to defend the appeal, 50
that the appellant may know whether he should incur the
expenses of preparing a paper-book or a large number
of copies thereof. This has, however, not been carried out,
as it is felt that it would not serve much useful purpose.

First Schedule, Appendix में, Form No. 2A (new)
This is consequential®.

First Schedule, Appendix H, Form Nos, 11 and 11A

The forms for minor defendant and for the guardian
have been split up, as it is considered that the two forms
should be separate. A combined form as at present is
somewhat confusing. In re-drafting the forms, the
following considerations have becn borne in mind: —

(i) Under Order XXXII, rule 3(4) as proposed’,

it will be discretionary for the court to give notice to
the minor;

(ii) Under Order XXXII, rule 3(2) (even as it
stands), the application can be made either by the
minor or by the plaintiff.

See also Form No. 11 as substituted by the former
Nagpur High Court, and compare existing Form No. 4.

1866 amendment proposed to Order 21, rule 41.

386९ Order 21, rule 54, as proposed to be amended.

5566 Order 21, rule 66C 2 (proposed).

4Cf. 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 394, para. 23.

556९ also Forms Nos. 6A, 6B (Appendix G) inserted by Madras.
"See Order 16, rule 1 (proposed).

3566 Order 32, rule 3(4) (proposed).


27
Omission of illustrations

In previous Reports of the Law Commission, the
omission of ilustraticne to the relevant enactments has

been recommended.

No such recommendation is being made in the case of
the Civil Procedure Code. It is considered that since this
is an amending Bill only, such change is not necessary.

(An example of illustrations will be found under Order
XXXV, rule 5.)

Third Party proceedings

1. The Fourteenth Report! recommended that the High
Court may consider the advisability of extending the
application of the third-party proceeding to commercial
towns like Ahmedabad, Kanpur and Asansol. This can
be done under existing section 128(2)(e) of the Civil
Procedure Code. Hence no amendment has been proposed.

2. Some High Courts—Andhra Pradesh, Madras and
Kerala—have dealt with third-party proceedings in a
separate Order, Order VIIIA.

See also (i) rules 151—157, Bombay High Court
(Original) side rules, 1957 and (ii) Order VIII, rules 23—
30, inserted by the Bombay High Court for Bombay City
Civil Court only.

Filing forms of process

The recommendations made in the Fourteenth Report,
for the adoption of a rule requiring the parties to file with
the plaint or application printed forms of process legibly
filled in (leaving only the date of appearance of the
opposite party and the date of issue of process blank) can
be conveniently implemented by the rules of the High
Court. Hence no draft amendment has been prepared.

Consolidation of suits

The question whether a provision for consolidation of
suits is necessary has been considered*. A power to make
such rules is already vested in High Courts under section
128(2)(k). Tn practice, Courts resort to consolidation under
their inherent powers‘. It is, therefore, unnecessary to
insert an express provision in the rule.

‘14th Report, Vol. I, page 276, para. 2, last two sentences.

3Cf. 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 304, para. 15.

°Cf. Onler 17, rule 1, County Courts Rules, 1936,

‘See Gommentary in Malla, C.P.C. (1953) on section t51.



248

APPENDIX III
Comparative TABLE
Showing the recommendation made in the Fourteenth
Report by the Law Commission (Reform of Judicial
Administration) and the provision, whereunder the
recommendation has been dealt with in this Report.

Page of Fourteenth Report, Provision of the Civil Procedure
Volume I Code whereunder “dealt
wit!

Page 273, para. 17 This does not necessitate a
(Urging the conferment of powers on change in the law. It requires
subordinate courts under s, 92, C.P.C.) only suitable orders by State

Wwernment under s. 92.

Page 275, para. 22, read with para. 21. Order 37.

(Summary procedure should be extended (Left for State Governments
to subordinate courts in important — and High Courts.)
commercial towns.)

Page 276, para. 23, last two sentences Note on third party proceedings
(at the end),

{Extension of third party procedure to (Left for High Courts.)
courts in commercial towns.)

Page 299, para. 6. Order V1, rule 15,
Pag? 393, ptra, 12 aad page 330, paca. See also Order IX, rule 6.

< Verification of pizadings to be on oath.) (Not carried out.)

Page 302, para, 11. Order V, rule 5 and
Order VIII, rule 1.
Also Appendix B.

(Form of Suramons be amended boy provide Form No. 2
ing 0) a direction tw the defendant to
file a written statement by adate which (NOt carried out.)
shoutd be the date fixed for the seitle-
ment of issues and_ (ii) a notice to the
defendant that if the written statement
is not filed by that date, the matter may
be dealt with ex parte.)

Page 303, para. 12. See under Fourteenth Report,
Pas 299.
(Written statement to be verified on ४८ 299 5
oath.)
Page 303, para. 13. Order XXVII, rule 5.

(Not less than 3 months time from the (Not carried out.)
date of summonses be given to Govern-
ment for filing of written statement.)

1See Notes on Clauses.


249

ev Te

Page of Foartzznth Report,
Volume I

Provision of the Civil Procedure
Code whereunder dealt
with?

Page 304, para. 14.
(Service of processes be effected on the
registered address of the parties.)

Page 304, para. 15.

(Process forms should be filled in and
filed by parties with plaint.)

Page 310, para. 24, fast sub-para.

(Service of summonses by post.)

Page 311, para. 25.

(Failure to effect service in the ordinary
manner after two attempts to be deemed
a sufficient reason for ordering substi-
uted service.)

Page 316, para. 32, first sub-para.

(Productioa and filing of list of documents
by defendant with his written state~
ment.)

Pages 316-317, para. 32.

(Penal costs against a party for wrongful or
unreasonable refusal co admit docu-
ments.)

Page 325, pare. 45 and page 328, para,
50.

(List of witnesses to be filed.)
Pages 327-328, para. 49.

(Credibility of witnesses brought without
‘summonses not to be doubted on that
ground.)

Page 328, para. 49. last sentence.

(Prozess-fees not payable for witnesses
brought privately.)

Page 327, para. 49, middie.

(Parties should, in the first instance, be
made responsible to procure attendance
of their witnesses, but in that case the
impartiality of witnesses not to be sus-
pected on that ground.)

Order VI, rule 14A (New).
(Carried out.)

Note on filing of form of process
(at the end).
(Lett for High Courts.)

Order V, rule 19A (New), conse-
quentially, Order V, rule 20A
is omitted.

(Carried out in substance.)

Order ५, rule 20,

(Not carried out.)

Order VIL, rule 1.
(Carried out with modification.)

Order XII, rule 2,

(Not carried out.)

Order XVI, rule 1.
(Carried out ia substance.)
Order XVI, rule 1.

{Not carried out.)

Order XVI, rule 7A (5) (New).

(Carried out.)

Order XVI, rule 17A (New).

(Carried out in a different

form.)

1866 Notes on Clauses.


250

Page of Fourteenth Report,
Volume T

Provision of the Civil Procedure
Code whereunder dealt
with"

Page 330, para. $3.

(Judgments on allegations in. pleadings
would be possible if verification of
plaints on oath is required.)

Page 340, para. 71.

(Parties to enter the witness-box before
their other witnesses examined.)

Page 345, para. 80.

(Power to dictate record of eviderce to
be given.)

Page 348, para. 87-

(Only findings on issues and ताल final
orders in the judgments need be read
out.)

Page 349, para. 89.

(Coutts to be empowered to order
next friend to give security for
ment of defendant's costs.)

Page 352, para. 95.

(Appointment of officer of Court to
mandatory on the

the
pay-

be

Page 352, para. 95.
(Court guardian may be awarded cost,
from the minor’s state).

Page 353. para, 96.

(Notice to the minor to be discretionary
with the court.)

Pages 354-355, para. 99, last sentence.

failure of the
appointed natural or de facto guardian, to
agree to act as a guardian of the minor.)

Order VI, rule 15. See also
Order 9, rule 6.

(Not carried out.)

Order XVIII, rule 3.

(Not carried out.)

Concefns section 138, and

Order XVII, rules 5, 8, 13, etc.

(Not carried out. See discussion
under s.138 and Order XVIII,
rule 5.)

Order XX, rule 1.
(Carried out.)

Order XXXII, rute 2A (New).
(Carried out in a modified

form.)
Order XXXI, rule 4.

(Not carried out.)

Order XXXH, rule 4.
(Carried out.)

Order XXXII, rule 3.
(Carried out.)

Order XXVI, rule 168 (New).

(Commissioner recording evidence should (Carried out with modification.)

record the disallowed
the answer thereof. It wil be for the
court to admit or not to admitsuch a
question.)

Page 377, paras. 23 and 24

(The limit of Rs. 1,000 under section 102

C.P.C, be raised to Rs, 2,000, and
this restriction against second appcals
in suits below the specified amount be
extended to all suits, except suits in-
volving rights in respect of immovable
Property.)

uestion and

Section 102.

(Carried out in part and with
modification.)

3966 Notes on Clauses.


251

Page of Fourteenth Report, Provision of the Civil Procedure
Volume I Code whereunder dealt
witht

Pages 377-378, paras. 25-26. Section 100.

(Kerala Amendment of section 100, (Necessary action to be taken
which provides for a second appeal separately.)
in case the finding of the lower appel-
late court on any question of fact was
in conflict with the finding of the trial
court disapproved.)

Page 385, para. 2, last sentence. Order XLI, rule 1.

(Biling of an appeal under special enact- (Not carried out in view of the
ments without copies of the decree or new Limitation Act.)
judgment of the lower court 10 be
permitted.) .

Page 385, para. 3. Order XLI, rule 3A (New).

(Condonation of delay under section 5, (Carried out in substance.)
Limitation Act in filing the appeal to be
decided before admitting the appeal.)

Page 386, paras. 4 and 5. Order XLI, rule 1.

{@ In appeal from final decrees in (Not carried out.)
partition suits containing allotment
papers, the filing of only a portion
of the said papers should be suffi-
cient.

(i) Where more cases than one are dis- (Carried out.)
posed of by a single judgment, only
one copy of the judgment of the
Jower court to be sufficient for filing

an appeal.)
Pages 386, 387, para. 6. Order XLI, rule 1.
(Precise order sought in appeal to be (Not carried out.)
stated.)
Page 388, para. 9. Order XLI, rule 11,

(A brief judgment should be delivered (Carried out.)
by subordinate appellate courts,
when dismissing appeals under Order
4t, cule 11, C.P.C.)

Page 390, para. 17. Order XLI and second appeals,

(Memorandum of appeal co be accompa- (Left for High Courts.)
nied by certified copies of judgments
of both courts.)

Page 392, para. 16, last sub-para. Section 100.

(In admitting second appeals, the judge (Not carried out.)
should state the point or points of law
which arise for consideration.)

Page 392, para. 17. Order XLI and second appeals,
(Certified copies of judgments of both the (Left for High Courts.)

lower courts and a true translation of

the disputed document to be filed with

the memorandum of appeal.)

‘See Notes on Clauses.


252

Page of Fourteenth Report, Provision of the Civit Procedure

Volume I Code whereunder dealt
with!
Page 393, para. 20. Please see under 14th Report,

(The addresses of the appellant and the res- pages 393-394.
pondent to be stated in the memoran-
dum of appeat.)

Page 393, para. 21. Order XLI, rule 14.

(No notice of appeal necessary on per- (Carried out.)
sons against whom proceedings were
ex porte in lower court.)

Page 393, para. 22. Order XLI, rule 18,

(6) Process fee to .be paid with memo-}
randum of appeal ; otherwise ap-
Peal to be rejected ;
(मं) Process fee to be refunded in case } (Left to High Courts.)
of summary dismissal;
Gi) Process forms to be filled dy
appellant.)

Pages 393-394, paras. 20, 22, 23 and 24. Order XLI and first appeals.

(Memorandum of appeal to state appel- (Left to High Courts.)
lant’s address for service ; service of

notice to be permitted by registered
Post 5 contesting respondent to enter
appearance in appeal by filing a memo-
randum of appearance within a specified
Period.)

Page 394, para. 23. First Schedule, Appendix G,

(Contesting respondent to intimate (Cartied out.)
whether he wishes to defend, etc.)

Page 405, para. 45, second sub-para, Order XLI, rule 27.
(Scope of Order 41, rule 27 be expanded.) (Carried out.)

Page 405, para. 46. Order XLI, rule 233.

(Order 41, rule 23 be amended by em- (Carried out in substance.)
Powering the appellate court to remand
a case whenever it thinks it necessary
in the interest of justice.)

ages 405, 406, paragraph 47, earlier half, Order XLI, rule 25.

(Remand order to fix period for re-sub- (Carried out.)
mission of case.)

६586 406, para. 47, last sentence. + Order XLI, rule 264,

(17 the remand order, a date should be (Cerr‘e out.)
fixed cn which the parties should appear
befcre the lower court to receive direce
tions iegarairy the suit.)

3866 Notes on Clauses.


253

Page of Fourteenth Report, Provision of the Civil Procedure

Volume. I Code whereunder dealt
with?

Page 406, para. 48, second sub-paragraph. Section 98.

(Section 98 C.P.C. be amended to bring (Carried out in substance.)
it in line with clause 36 of — Letters
Patent.)

Page 420, para. 14. Revision and stay of execution,

(A provision be made limiting the powers (Not carvied out.)
of the court to grant stay in revision
applications.)

Pages 422-423, paragraph 19 and also. Section 115.
Page 420, para, 13.

(Recommendations for amending section (Carried out in substance.)
11s CPC.)

Pages 437-438, paras. 14-15. Section 42.

(Certain additional powers be conferred (Carried out in part.)
on the court to which a decree is
tuansferred for execution.)

Pages 439-440, para. 18. Section 47.

(Provision for constcuctive res judicata in (Carried out.)
execution proceedings suggested.)

Page 441, paragraph 20, second sub-para. See under “Appeals against
orders under section 47”.
(No appeals against orders in execution
cases regarding Payment of an amount
within the limits of the small cause
काका of the court executing the’ (Not carried out.)
lecree.

Page 442, para. 21, Order XLI, rule 11.

(Admission of appeals againet orders in (Not carried out.)
execution of money-decrees to be
we conditional on deposit of securi-
y

Pages 443-444, paras. 25 and 28. Order XXI, rules 1 and 2.
(Oral pleas of payment of the decretal (Carried out in substance and

amount to be excluded from recogni- rule made more stringent.)
tion by courts.)

Page 444, para. 27. Order XXI, rule 1.
(Special form of money-orders for remit-

ting decretal amounts.) (Not carried out.)
Page 441, para. 28. Order XXI, rule 2.

(No limitation for getting certification of (Not carried out, but other modi-
we. made through a bank or a post fication proposed.)
Office.

Page 445, para. 29. Order XXI, rule 11.

(Modification of the tabular form of (Not carried out.)
execution-application.)

1866 Notes on Clauses.


254

Page of Fourteenth Report, Provision of the Civil Procedure
Volume I Code whereunder dealt
with?

Page 445, para, 30. Order XXI, rule 17.

(Courts not te reject execution-applice- (Carried our.)
tion summarily for defects.)

Page 445. para, 31. Order XXE, rule 17.

(Order of retuen of execution-application (Carried ont;
to be specific as 10 amount.)

Page 447, pata. 34, middle. Order XX1, rule 22,

(Increase of petiod under Order 24, rule (Carried out with modification.)
22 to 3 years.)

Page 447, para. 34, last portion. Order XXI, rule 22.

(Omission to issue notice under Order (Not carried out.)
21, rule 22 not to be fatal.)

Page 448, paragraph 36. Onder XXI, rule 37.

(Notice of arrest of judgment-debtor to (Not carried out.)
be discretionary.)

Page 448, paragtaph 38. Order XXI, rules 54 and 66.

(Change suggested regarding notice under (Carried out with modification.)
Order 21, rule 66.)

Page 449, para. 40. Order XXI, rule 26.

(Stay of execution proceedings under (Not carried ouz.)
Order 21, rule 26 should be conditional
on furnishing of security.)

Page 455 paragraph 43, first sentence, Order XXXIX, rule 1.

(No temporary injunction regarding stay (Not carried out.)
of execution sales.)

Page 451, para. 45. Order AXE rule 462 ef seq.
lew),

(The issue of the existence of a gate (Carried out.)
nishee debt to be tried by the execut-
ing court.)

Page 453, paragraph 48, last sentence. Order XXI, rule 59 (proposed).

(Sale not to be postponed pending objec- {Carried out with modificasion.)
tions against attachment, but confirma-
tion may be postponed.)

Page 453, para, 49 (portion concerning Order XXT, rule 58 er seg.
Order 21, rule 58).

(Inguiry under Order 21, rule 58 10 be (Carried out in substance.)
elaborate and to cover questions of .
title.)

1 See Nates on Clauses.


255

Page of Fourteenth Report,

Volume I

Provision of the Civit Procedure
Code whereunder dealt
with’

Page 453, para. 49 (portion concerning Osder XXI, rule 97 et seg.

Order 21, rule 97).

(Suits under Order 21, rule 103 to be
barred. Inquiry under rule 97 et seq.
to be elaborate.)

Page 454 pata. 50.

(Estimate of the value of the property to
be sold need not be given by court,
etc.)

Pages 454-455 para. 51.

(Application to set aside execution — sale
under rule 90 not to be entertained

sunless amount not excceding 124 per
cent. of sale price deposited.)

Pages 454-455, para. 51.

(Sale not to be set aside at the instance
‘of certain persons for defect in pro-
clamation.)

Page 455, para. 53.

(Period under Orler 21, rule 31 to be
reduced.)

Page 455, para. 54

(Period under Order 21, rule 32 to be
reduced.) .

Page 455, para. 55.

(Period between the date of publication
of the proclamation of sale and actual
sale.)

Page 456, para. 56, first three lines on
the page.

(Adjournment of a sale and fresh pro-
clamation.)

Page 456, para. 57.
(Bid at a court sale by the decree-
holder.)

Page 476, last two paragraphs op the

Page.

(Notice under section 80, C.P.C. to the
Government and under similar provi-
sions to other bodies like railways and
the municipal committees, etc.,to be dis-
pensed with. But a provision for costs
where suit filed without notice to be
made.)

(Carried out in substance.)

Order XXI, rule 66.

(Carried out in part.)

Order XXI, rule 90.

(Not carried out.)
Order XXI, rule 90.

(Carried out in a wider form.)
Order XXI, rule 31.
(Carried out in substance.)

Order XXI, rule 32.
(Carried out.)

Order XXI, rule 68.

(Carried out.)

Order XXI, rule 69.

(Carried out in part.)

Order XXI, rule 72.

(Not carried out.)
Section 80.

(Carried out, but provision for
costs considered unnecessary.)

1866 Notes on Clauses.



256

Page of Fourteenth Report, Provision of the Civil Procedure
Volume I Code whereunder dealt
with?

Page 480, para. 11, third and fourth sub-
paragraphs.

Page 482, paragraphs 15 and 17

Pages 483-484, para. 20.

Page 484, para. 23, second sub-para. . J (Carried out in substance.)

Order XX-A (New).

(Notice charges, expenses on witnesses
brought by summonses, inspection
charges and charges for obtaining copies
of decrees and judgments should be
allowed towards costs of the suit.)

Page 598, paragraph 17 (4). Order XXXII, rule 1.
(Definition of “pauper” to be amended.) (Carried out with modification.)
Page 598, para. 17 (5). Order XXXII, rule 17.
‘Defence 25 a pauper be allowed.) (Carried out with modification.)
Page 598, para. 17 (6). Order KXXIN.

(Expression “pauper” to be replaced by (Not carried out.)
the expression “‘ poor person ”.)

APPENDIX IV
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF OTHER Acts
1. Suits: Valuation Act, 1887

Rules should be made by High Courts under section 9
of the Suits Valuation 3०7,

2. Limitation Act, 1963

(i) The period of limitation under article 125 of
the Limitation Act, 1963 (application for certification of
payment or adjustment, etc.), should be increased from
30 days to 90 days®.

(ii) In article 98 of the Limitation Act, 1963, the
portion relating to a suit under Order 21, rule 63 should
be suitably amended in view of the proposed amend-
ment to Order 21, rules 58 to 63, of the Civil Procedure
Code for expanding the scope of the inquiry under
those rules‘.

(iii) Article 98 of the Limitation Act, 1963 should
be suitably altered by omitting the portion concerning
a suit to set aside the orders passed in proceedings

1868 Notes on Clauses.

4See Appendix II, section 15.

386९ Appendix II, Order 21, rule 2.
“See Appendix II, Order 21, rule 58.



257

under Order XXI, rules 97 to 102, Civil Procedure Code,
in view of the amendments proposed to those rules for
expanding the scope of the inquiry under those rules’.

3. Court Fees Act, 1870

(i) In respect of appeals against orders under
Crder XXI, rule 58, which will be appealable as decrees
under the proposed amendment to the Civil Procedure
Code, a reduction of court-fees should be granted by
State Governments, by issuing a notification under the
relevant provision of the Cou:t Fees Act applicable to
the State. as has been done in most States in respect
of order under section 47, Civil Procedure Code*.

(ii) Similar action should be taken in respect of
appeals against orders under Order 21, rule 97 et seq
as proposed to ke amended®.

4, Indian Evidence Act, 1872

The question how far a decree against a minor can be
set aside on the ground of gross negligence of his guardian
may be considered, if necessary, when the Evidence Act is
revised‘.

5. Law of Public Trusts

Certain points concerning pu'zlic trusts, arising from
the recommendations of the Hindu Religious Endowments
Commission, may be considered when the law of Public
Trusts is revised®.

3566 Appendix If, Order 21, rule 97.
*See Appendix वा, Order 27, rule 58.
>See Appendix व, Order 21, rule 97.
“See Appendix 11, Order 32, rule 3.
356७ Appendix II, section 92.


NOTE BY SHRI S. K. HIRANANDANI

I regret Iam unable to agree with the conclusion of
the majority of the Members that the rule-making power
should continue to vest in the High Courts. In my opinion
the consideration of uniformity is an over-riding considera-
tion which should outweigh all other considerations. It
was with a view to achieving such uniformity that the
power to make rules under the Companies Act which under
the Act of 1913 vested in the High Courts (section 246) was
under the new Act of 1956 conferred on the Supreme Court
(section 643). The same consideration weighed with us
while. making our report on the law of insolvency. In that
report we have recommended that the rule-making power
under the new law should vest in the Supreme Court.

2. Article 44 of the Constitution contemplates a uniform
civil Code applicable throughout the territories uf India.
If we are not able to achieve uniformity in our procedural
laws, it is difficult to see how we can achieve such uni-
formity in our substantive laws. Since Independence the
policy has been to integrate laws and make them appli-
cable to the whole of India. Consistent with this policy
the case for a uniform Civil Procedure Code is fairly
strong.

3. The main justification for vesting the power of
making rules in the High Courts is to provide for local
conditions. Tremendous changes have taken place in the
country in_the political, social, economic and other spheres
since the Code was passed in 1908, Particularly during the
Post-independence period. AI these changes have mini-
mised if not altoget! ver eliminated local variations. Except
perhaps in some minor matters, for which adequate
provision can be made without affecting the general uni-
‘ormity of the Code, I can hardly conceive of any local
conditions which require a different law of civil procedure
for different areas. There is thus little justification for
continuing the power of High Courts to modify the rules
contained in the first schedule to the Code on the ground
of local needs.

4. During more than half a century that the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 has been in force, High Courts have
made numerous amendments which have virtually disin-
tegrated the Code. For example, in Order V which deals
with a comparatively minor matter of the manner of
service of summons, High Courts have Made as many as
40 amendments. In Order XXI, the number of amend-
ments made by the High Courts of Allahabad, Bombay,
Caleutta, Madras, Madhya Pradesh, Patna and Punjab

258


259

have reached the colossal figure of about 200. We have
analysed and classified all these amendments and have
recommended the incorporation in the Code of many of
them which are of a general character and which we think
should apply to the whole of India. It is hoped that after
the Code is revised in the manner proposed by us, it will
be a neat and comprehensive piece of legislation applicable
to the whole of India. If the High Courts are again per-
mitted to make amendments in the rules contained in the
first schedule, the code is likely to revert back to the
chaotic condition in which we find it at present. I will
give one illustration of how the uniformity of the Code
may in some vital matters be affected if the High Courts
continue to exercise the power to amend the rules in the
schedule. We have proposed a radical change in Order
XXI, Rules 58 and 63. We have recommended that where
a claim is filed under Rule 58 the executing Court should
have fuld power to decide the claim and that no suit should
lie. It is possible that some of the High Courts may not
agree with our view and would like to retain the existin,
rules. Such High Couxts would be free to amen
Rules 58 and 63 and restore the position which
obiains at present. The result will be that, while in State
Aa suit will not lie under Rule 63, it will lie in State 8.
Obviously, this will not be a satisfactory state of affairs.
A more serious anomaly is also likely to arise. Supposing
a Court in State A transfers a decree passed by it to a
Court in State B for execution. In such a case both the
Courts would be competent to execute the decree (section
38) but the transferee Court would execute it in such
manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in the State
in which the trans: feree Court is situate (section 40). Now
1६ a property is attached by the Court in State A and a claim
is filed in respect thereof, the claimant cannot file a suit
if the Court rejects the claim. But if a property is attached
by the transferee Court in State B, such a suit would lie.
Thus, in the execution of the sume decree, two different
Jaws would be applicable.

5. In order to achieve uniformity, the draft report on
He Code of Civil Procedure circulated by us to State
Governments, High Courts, ete, proposed the setting up
of an all-India committee consisting of Judges and lawyers.
Excepting the High Courts of Bombay and Madras, no
other High Court has raised any objection to the proposal,
The proposal was approved in principle by majority in the
Conference of Chief Justices of High Courts held in 1962.
The conference merely suggested certain changes in the
composition of the proposed all-India committee.

6. In order that the proposed all-India Committee should
be able to act efficiently and expeditiously, it should be
small and compact committee. I suggest that the committee
may consist of the following persons:

(1) The Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the
Supreme Court nominated by him (Chairman).


260
(2) The Attorney-General. :

(3} Four Judges of High Courts nominated by the
Chief Justice of India, of whom one shall#be a
Judge having experience of the original side,of a

High Court. *
a
(4) Five advocates elected by the Bar Council of
India.

Ti my opinion, ne useful purpose would be served by
giving representation on ihe cormmitiee tz the subordinate
judiciary. Nor do I think that it is necessary to include
in the committee an advocate from each State. We have
now in the All-India Bar Council a representative body
of the Bar, The selection of the advocates on the proposed
all-India committee should be left to that body.

7. In order to provide for iocal conditions which is the
main argument against an all-India committee, tae com-
mittee may be empowered to make rules for a particulas
State or States only, where local conditions warrant such
a course,

8. Tf for any reason the idea of an all-India committee
is not accepted I would suggest another method of achiev-
ing uniformity. Let the rules continue to be made by the
High Courts, but they should be stibject tc the approval
of tle Supreme Court.” It is true that the rules made by
High Courts under clauses (2) and (3) of article 227 require
the approval of the Governor. I am not sure if the rules
contemplated by that article are intended to be of the same
nature as those contained in the first schedule to the Code
of Civil Procedure. But assuming that this is so, I see no
constitutional objection to a law made by Parliament with:
reference to the entry ‘Civil Procedure’ in the Coneurrent
List providing that the rules made by the High Courts in
exercise of the power conferred upon them by that law
should be subject to the approval of the Supreme Court.

13th December, 1964. 8. K. Hiranandani.

GMGIP Minto RAND—TSWg—105M of Law ($276)}—22-9-65—~-2,200,