  
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
   
 
 
Report No.270 
 
 
 
Compulsory Registration of Marriages 
 
 
 
 
 
July, 2017 
  


ii 
 


iii 
 
Report No.270 
Compulsory Registration of Marriages 
Table of Contents 
Chapter  Title Page 
I Introduction and Background 1-6 
II Marriage Registration : A Global Overview 7-9 
III Marriage Registration: Indian Legislative 
Framework 
10-18 
IV Judicial Pronouncements 19-21 
V Revisiting the Reports of the Law Commission 
of India 
22-24 
VI Need for a Central Legislation to Regulate 
Compulsory Registration of Marriages 
 
25-31 
VII Feasibility of Information Technology -Enabled 
Registration 
32-33 
VIII Conclusions and Recommendations 34-38 
  

CHAPTER – I 
Introduction and Background 
 
1.1 Since independence, numerous initiatives have been taken to 
address the issue of  gender inequality. Reform initiatives taken so far 
have succeeded to a large extent, however, c hild marriages, bigamy 
and gender violence continue to  persist in our society, despite 
legislations prohibiting and penalising such practices.1 Several 
disputes are pending before the courts regarding matrimonial status 
of the parties. 2 Women are often den ied the status of wife due to 
absence of record proving a valid marriage.  The courts have time and 
again emphasised on making registration of marriage compulsory, to 
prevent denial of status to women and  to children born out of 
wedlock.3 
 
1.2 Instances of m arriage fraud have also come to light in recent 
times. In the absence of compulsory registration, women are duped 
into marrying without performance of the conditions of a valid 
marriage. This deprives women of societal  recognition and legal 
security. Such fraudulent marriages are especially on rise among non-
resident Indians. 4 Compulsory registration can serve as a means to 
ensure that conditions of a valid marriage have been performed.  
 
1.3 The Births, Dea ths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886  
provided for voluntary registration of births and deaths only for 
certain classes of people and also made a provision for effect ive 
registration of marriages under the Indian Christian Marriages Act, 
1872 and the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936. The said Act s 
                                                           
1 “30% women married under age 18”, The Indian Express  (May 31, 2016). 
2 “Kerala tops states with pending matrimonial cases in family courts”, The Indian Express (Jan 8, 
2017). 
3 See Kanagavalli v. Saroja, AIR 2002 Mad 73. 
4 In view of such fraudulent marriages, Punjab made registration of marriages compulsory through t he 
Punjab Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act 2012. 

2 
 
have been subjected to revisions and amendments from time to time 
since independence.  
 
1.4 While provisions for registration exist under various laws - such 
as the Hindu Marriages Act, 1955, the Special Marriages Act, 1954, 
the Parsi Marriages and Di vorce Act, 1936  and the Indian Christian 
Marriages Act, 1872, however, there is no provision that provides for 
simply keeping a record of all marriages and is available to any and 
every individual in the country  regardless of religion, region or 
customs. 
 
1.5 The Sp ecial Marriage Act 1954, laid down a procedure for 
registration but the Act was primarily intended to enable couples to 
opt out of personal laws, but this did not, however, imply that the 
couple has opted  out of religion. It simply meant that religion has no 
relevance for registration of a marriage under this Act.  
 
1.6    Though the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) 
Bill, 1969 was introduced to include t he registration of marriages, it  
did not cov er all citizens . These am endments applied only to the 
Christian community and it once again remained short of b ecoming a 
national legislation.  
 
1.7 India signed the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women on 30 June 1980 and  ratified it on 9 
July 1993. After that India was expected to submit its report to the 
Committee on Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).  
The first report was submitted in 1998.  The combined fourth and fifth 
periodic reports were submitted  in 2012. The Committee, in its 
concluding observations on this report in the year 2014, in para 39, 
urged India to speedily enact legislation to require compulsory 
registration of all marriages and simultaneously requested to consider 
to withdraw its declaration to Article 16 (2) of the Convention. 

3 
 
 
1.8 Article 16 of the Convention pertains to “Equality in marriage 
and family relations”.  The Committee has expressed its concern in 
para 40 about the co -existence of multiple legal systems with regard 
to marriage and family relations in India which apply to the different 
religious groups and which results in the deep and persistent 
discrimination against women.   
 
1.9 The National Commission of Women had offered a concrete 
solution to a number of problems arising out of non -registration of 
marriages by drafting a Compulsory Registration of Marriages Bill, 
2005 seeking amendment to the Act of 1886. 
 
1.10 In 2007 the Committee on Empowerment of Women, relying 
upon the NCW’s Bill observed that irrespective of religion, registr ation 
of marriages should be made compulsory. 5 The report shed light on 
the plight of Indian women whose husbands, in a number of cases 
refused to acknowledge their marriage before contracting a second 
marriage or leaving their former wives altogether and refusing them 
maintenance, etc. The Committee, therefore, desired that the 
Government shall make registration of all marriages mandatory, 
making the procedure simpler, affordable and accessible.  
 
1.11 In 2006, the Supreme Court in Seema v. Ashwani Kumar & ors.6 
observed that marriages of all persons who are citizens of India 
belonging to various religions should be registered compulsorily in 
their respective States, where the marriage is solemnised. Further, as 
and when the Central Gov ernment enacts a comprehen sive Statute, 
the same shall be placed before the  Court for scrutiny. The judgment 
also referred to the  Bill produced by t he National Commission of 
Women.  
                                                           
5  Committee on Empowerment of Women (2006 -2007), Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and 
Ministry of External Affairs (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) “Twelfth Report on the Plight of Indian Women 
deserted by NRI Husbands”(Aug. 2007). 
62006 (2) SCC 578. 

4 
 
 
1.12 In February 2008, the 18th Law Commission of India , in its  
205th Report titled “Proposal to Amend the Prohibition of Child 
Marriage Act, 2006 and Other Allied Laws ” recommended that 
registration of marriages within a stipulated period,  of all the 
communities, viz. Hindu, Muslim, Christians, etc. should be made 
mandatory by the Central Government. 
 
1.13 Again the Commission in its 211 th Report7 proposed an 
enactment of a “Marriage and Divorce Registration Act” to be made 
applicable to the whole of India and to all citizens. Accordingly, it 
recommended that the Births and Deaths Registration Act, 1886 be 
repealed and Births and Deaths Registration Act, 1969 be re -named 
as “Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 2012”. 
 
1.14 In 2012, another Bill was prepared and then tabled in 
parliament in view of the observations made by the Supreme Court in 
the aforem entioned case. This Bill was introduced to amend the 
Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 to provide for compulsory 
registration of Marriages irrespective of religious denominations of the 
parties.  
 
1.15 The Amendment Bill of 2012  was passed by Rajya  Sabha on 
13.08.2013. However, the said Bill could not be taken up for 
consideration in the Lok  Sabha and lapsed on the dissolution of the 
Fifteenth Lok Sabha on the 21st February, 2014. While considering the 
Bill on a reference from the Rajya  Sabha, the Standing Committee 
hoped that the Bill would act as a milestone to protect women in 
matters of maintenance and property rights in addition to putting an 
effective check on bigamous relationships.  
 
                                                           
7Law Commission of India, “211th Report on Laws on Registration of Marriage and Divorce – 
A proposal for Consolidation and Reform” (Oct., 2008). 

5 
 
1.16 The Legislative Department, on the basis of earlier Bill, prepared 
a fresh draft Bill on the Registration of Birth and Death (Amendment) 
Bill, 2015. The Department of Legal Affairs, vide its letter dated 16 
February 2017, has forwarded a request received from the Legislative 
Department, asking the Commission to examine and submit a report 
with regard to various issues relating to compulsory registration of 
marriages as below: 
 
(i) Whether to pursue amendments in the Registration 
of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 as per the 
Registration of Births and Deaths  (Amendment) Bill, 
2015 or to consider separate standalone legislation to 
provide for compulsory registration of marriages, in 
order to bring uniformity in all laws, including the 
Central and State Personal Laws; 
 
(ii) Whether the amendments are required in the Central 
Laws, including the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (25 of 
1955), the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 (3 of 
1936) and the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 
(15 of 1872); 
 
(iii) IT enablement of registration of all marriages; 
 
(iv) Such other matters as may be considered necessary. 
 
1.17 This Report proposes to amend  the Registration of Births and 
Deaths Act, 1969 to include the compulsory registration of marriages 
within its purview. In brief, it marriage includes marriage solemnised 
between a couple belonging to any caste or religion or tribe under any 
law or custom or usage in any form or manner recognised by law or 
marriage registered under any law including re-marriage.  
 
1.18  Registration of marriage would in fact, help in better 
implementation of already existing laws that aim at preventing child 
marriage et al. It would also aid in eliminating practices such early 

6 
 
and forced marriages. 8 It can be helpful in achieving gender e quality 
and empowering women.  
 
1.19 The recommendation is not aimed at eliminating diversity of 
personal laws and instead accepts prevailing customs/ or personal 
laws concerning solemnisation of marriage ; provided that these 
marriages are registered under the Compulsory Registration of Births 
Deaths and Marriages Registration Act  or any other law for the time 
being in force in the State . The report does not aim to nullify the 
existing provisions for registration of marriages under differen t state 
laws.   
  
                                                           
8 See Biswajit Ghosh, “Child Marriage, Society and the Law: A Study in a Rural Context in West 
Bengal, India” 25(2) International Journal of Law, Policy and the Family 199 (2011). 

7 
 
CHAPTER – II 
Marriage Registration: A Global Overview 
 
2.1 United Nations has recognised the importance of creating a 
record of vital events such as birth, death and marriage . Creation of 
such a civil registry for citizens serve s the purpose of creating a legal 
document that c ould be used to protect and establish rights of 
individuals. This also results in the creation of a database that 
contains vital statistics of important and relevant life events. The 
United Nations defines civil registration as:9 
 
The continuous, permanent, compulsory and universal 
recording of the occurrence and characteristics of vital events 
pertaining to the population as provided through decree or 
regulation in accordance with the legal requirements of a 
country. Civil registration is carried out primarily for the 
purpose of establishing the legal documents required by law. 
These records are also a main source of vital statistics. 
Complete coverage, accuracy and timeliness of civil registration 
are essential to ensure the quality of vital statistics. 
 
2.2  In the Indian context however, the maintenance of vital statistics 
does not serve the sole purpose of record -keeping by the State. In 
many ways it enables social legislations to be effectively enforced. In 
certain countries there is also a specific register relating to 
registrations specifically of ‘family’ events.  
 
2.3 This register has been termed as ‘family album’, ‘household 
register’ et al in various countries. In many countries the official 
recognition of one’s status or of family -related events such as 
marriage is only granted when all such events have been reported and 
registered in the family or civil register.  For instance Japan considers 
a marriage to be legally effective  only when the household register is 
updated with the knowledge of the event - this is known as Koseki. In 
                                                           
9 “Civil Registration Systems”, available at: https://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/sources/civilreg/ 
(last visited on  June 18, 2017). 

8 
 
other countries however, such registers work as centralised 
repositories for family ev ents that would have legal repercussions 
which include births, deaths , marriages and even expatriations, as is 
the case in Germany where the register is known by the name 
familienbuch and France, where it is called livret de famille . However, 
this is not the sole source of official recognition for such events. 
 
2.4 Registration of marriage is not compulsory in all countries. 
However, most countries recognise the need for such registration. 
 
2.5 In South Africa, laws of marriage are laid down in Marriage Act, 
1961. The non-registration does not affect the validity of the marriage 
and marriage can be registered postnuptially. While, a  duly signed 
marriage certificate serves as prima facie proof of the existence of the 
marriage, the existence of the  marriage may still be proved by other 
evidence. Similarly, Sec tion 8 of the Australian Marriage Act, 1961 
provides for registration of marriages. 
 
2.6 The Muslim Marriages and Divorce Registration Act, 1974  of 
Bangladesh also provides  a complete procedure by which all 
marriages solemnised should be registered and non -registration is 
punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend up to two 
years, or fine up to 3000 Taka, or with both.10 
 
2.7  In Pakistan, every marriage solemnised under the Muslim law 
is required to be registered compulsorily under the Muslim Family 
Law Ordinance, 1961. After passing of the Hindu Marriage Bill, in 
                                                           
10  Section 5 of the Act reads: “(1) Where a marriage is solemnized by the Nikah Registrar himself, he 
shall register the marriage at once.  
(2) Where a marriage is solemnized by a person other than the Nikah Registrar, the bridegroom of the 
marriage shall report it to the concerned Nikah Registrar within thirty days from the date of such 
solemnization. 
(3) Where solemnization of a marriage is reported to a Nikah Registrar under sub-section (2), he shall 
register the marriage at once. 
(4) A person who contravenes any provision of this section commits an offence and he shall be liable to 
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which 
may extend to three thousand taka, or with both.” 

9 
 
March 2017, even the Hindus in Pakistan are required to get their 
marriages registered. 
 
2.8 In Turkey,  there is no specific law on registration of marriage 
but the marriage is concluded only through civil ceremony in front of 
the Registrar. This requirement flows from the Turkish Civil Code 
enacted in 1926 which was amended by Turkish Civil Code (2001). 
 
2.9 In Indonesia, Article 2 para 2 of the Marriage Law of 1974 
provides for compulsory registration of marriages.  In Sri  Lanka, 
under Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act, 1951  (promulgated on 1 -8-
1954) marriages solemnised therein are required to be registere d 
compulsorily under section 17 of the said Act.11   
 
2.10 The requirement of celebrating and registering a marriage before 
a public authority and certificate of marriage as the only admissible 
means of proof of marriage is a lso available  in the Civil Codes of 
various countries, for example:- 
 
(1) French Civil Code – Arts.165 to 169. 
(2) Italian Civil Code – Arts. 106, 107 & 130. 
(3) Civil Code of Brazil – Arts.1533 and 1534. 
(4) Portuguese Civil Code of 1966 – Arts.1615, 1616, 1651 & 1653. 
(5) Civil Code of Quebec – Arts.365 & 378 
  
                                                           
11 Section 17(1) of the Act reads: “Save as hereinafter expressly provided, every marriage contracted 
between Muslims after the commencement of this Act shall be registered, as hereinafter provided, 
immediately upon the conclusion of Nikah ceremony connected therewith.” 

10 
 
CHAPTER – III 
Marriage Registration: Indian Legislative Framework 
 
3.1 In India, not recognising unregistered marriage as a valid would 
be highly unsuitable, as many marriages  commonly take place  
informally in gatherings of relatives, with or without presence of 
priests, or in any other customary manner which must also be 
recognised as valid. It was for this reason that, like various other 
countries, India also expressed its reservation even while ratifying the 
Convention of 1993. Customary practices are so prolific and personal 
law systems also prevail making it necessary for the law to accept 
cultural and regional diversity. Therefore the idea is to encourage legal 
education among the people, so that these ce remonies can be 
preceded or succeeded by registration of the event.  
 
3.2 An unregistered marriage is not to be treated as ‘void’ but 
simply in an attempt to encourage registration, there can be small 
penalties attached to non -registration. This would help in a 
circumstance when the spouse has been left destitute and a second 
marriage has been contracted by the other spouse , the proof of first 
marriage will be indisputable and not permit a spouse to abandon his 
family and maintenance obligations etc. 
 
3.3    It is worth noting that there are various laws governing the 
marriage and divorce in India, the Bill seeking Compulsory 
Registration of Marriages is not intended to challenge or interfere with 
any of these prevailing systems of personal laws but to simply ensure 
that marriages under all customs and religions can be registered.  
 
(i) Existing Central Legislation on Registration /Compulsory 
Registration of Marriages and Divorces 
 
a. The Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 
 
3.4 Part IV of the Act (Sections 27 -37) contains elaborate provisions 
for registration of marriages solemnised by Ministers and Clergymen. 
There are in this Part separate registration provisions for marriages of 

11 
 
Christians in general and of Indian or Native Ch ristians.  Part V of the 
Act (Sections 38-59) provides rules for solemnisation -cum registration 
of marriages directly by Marriage Registrars appointed under the Act. 
Part VI (Sections 60 -65) relates to marriages of “Indian Christians” 
and provides rules fo r certification. There are different provisions in 
the Act for the transmission of records of registration of various 
categories of marriage to the Registrar -General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages.  
 
b. The Kazis Act 1880 
3.5 Marriages among the Indian Muslims are solemni sed by religious 
officials known as the “kazi”.  The Act empowers State governments to 
appoint kazis for the purpose of assisting Muslims with solemnisation 
of marriages, etc. Section 4 of the Act makes it clear that presence of a 
State appointed kazi will not be mandatory for any marriage. Before, 
or immediately after, the “nikah” ceremony the kazi prepares a nikah -
nama (agreement containing all terms of contract of marriage) which 
gives full details of the parties and is signed by both o f them, and by 
two witnesses. The kazi authenticates the “nikah -nama” by putting 
his signature and seal on it. Printed forms of standard nikah -nama 
are stocked by all kazis who fill in it the details of the marriages they 
solemnize, issue copies to both pa rties, and preserve a copy in their 
records. These can serve as proof of marriage for the purpose of 
registration of Muslim marriages. 
c. The Anand Marriage Act, 1909 
3.6 This was enacted in order to allow for registration of marriages 
among Sikhs. It deri ved from the word Anand Karaj which means a 
‘joyful union’. The Act was subsumed within the Special Marriage Act 
in 1954 and Hindu Marriage Act in 1955. However, it was amended in 
2012 to again include the registration of marriages of Sikh couples 
who chose to opt out of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. 
 

12 
 
d. The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 
 
  3.7  Section 12 of the Act provides that the priests are required to 
periodically transmit their records to Marriage Registrars appointed 
under the Act. A priest who neglects to certify a marriage or to 
transmit its copy to the Marriage Registrar will be guilty of an offence 
punishable with simple imprisonment up to three months, or with fine 
up to a hundred rupees, or with both. Further, the Marriage 
Registrars are to be appointed by the State Government for various 
areas and they are required to transmit their record s to the Registrar-
General of Births, Deaths and Marriages under Section 9 of the Act. 
 
e. The Special Marriage Act, 1954  
 
3.8  The Special Marriage Act, 1954 is available to all Indian citizens 
irrespective of religion and was originally enacted to enable cross -
community marriages. Marriages are registered under section 15 of 
the Act by the Marriage Officer specially appointed for th e purpose. 
Marriage records by all Marriage Officers , is periodically transmitted 
to the Registrar -General of Births, Deaths and Marriages . Periodicity 
and forms are to be prescribed by the State governments under the 
Rules to be framed for carrying out purposes of this Act (Sections 48-
50). 
 
f. The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 
 
3.9  Section 8 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 lays down for 
registration of marriages. Registration under this Act is to facilitate 
the person to have proof of marriage by way of registration. The State 
Government has been empowered to make rules for registration of the 
marriage. 
 
g. The Foreign Marriage Act 1969 
 
3.10  This Act was enacted to facilitate solemnisation of civil 
marriages by Indian citizens in foreign countr ies. Under section 3 of 

13 
 
the Act, Marriage Officers are to be appointed by the Central 
Government for this purpose , in its Diplomatic Missions abroad. The 
Act provides that an Indian citizen may marry another Indian or a 
foreigner. Like in the Special Marri age Act 1954, under this Act to  
solemnisation and registration of marriages are parts of the same  
transaction. The procedure for solemnisation and registration of such 
marriages is more or less the same as under the Special Marriage Act 
1954. Marriage Certificate Books are to be maintained in all 
Diplomatic Missions. There is no provision in this Act for transmission 
of records to any general registry of the country. It also makes a 
provision for registration of pre -existing marriages solemnised in 
foreign countries under the laws of those countries. 
 
(ii) Developments in States and Union Territories in India 
3.11 Pursuant to the directions/ observations of the Supreme Court 
in Seema v. Ashwani Kumar12 many states have passed law or framed 
rules for compulsory registration of marriages, i.e. 
 
(A) Compulsory Registration of Marriages Acts: 
 
(i) The Punjab Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2012 
provides for compulsory registration of marriages solemnised 
within the State u nder any law governing the parties 
irrespective of their religion, caste, creed or nationality. 
(ii) The Delhi (Compulsory Registration of Marriage) Order, 2014 
extends to all marriages solemnised in Delhi irrespective of 
cast creed and religion professed by the parties to the 
marriage.  
(iii) The Haryana Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act 2008 
provides for compulsory registration of marriages solemnised 
                                                           
12Supra note 6. 

14 
 
within the State, irrespective of caste, religion and creed and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(iv) The Meghalaya Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act 
2012 provides for compulsory registration of marriage s 
solemnised in the State of Meghalaya and for matters 
connected therewith;  amended by the Meghalaya 
Compulsory Registration of Marriages (Amendment) Act, 
2015. 
(v) The Uttarakhand  Compulsory Registration of Marriage Act, 
2010 provides for the compulsory registration of all 
marriages solemnised in the State of Uttarakhand so as to 
prevent child marriages, check bigamy or polygamy, help 
women to exercise their rights of maintenance f rom husband 
and custody of children, enable widows to claim inheritance 
and to serve as deterrent to husband s deserting their wives 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(vi) The Tamil Nadu Registration of Marriages Act, 2009. 
“Marriage” includes all marriages solemnised by persons 
belonging to any caste or religion under any law for the time 
being in force, or as per any custom or usage in any form or 
manner and also includes remarriage. As per Section 3 of the 
Act Marriages to be compulsorily registered. It reads: 
 
Marriages to be compulsorily registered.— Every 
marriage performed on and from the date of 
commencement of this Act shall be registered under 
this Act notwithstanding the fact that the said 
marriage had been entered in the mar riage registers 
governed by any other personal laws of the parties to 
the marriage or custom or usage or tradition). 
 
(v) Similarly, Rajasthan too has enacted the  Rajasthan 
Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act , 2009, wherein it is 
provided for Compulsory Registration of Marriages of citizens 
of India solemnised in the State. 

15 
 
(vi) The Mizoram Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2007 
provides for compulsory registration of marriages solemnised 
in the State of Mizoram, "marriage" includes all the marriages 
contracted by persons belonging to any caste, tribe or 
religion, and the marriages contracted as per any custom, 
practice or tradition, and also includes re-marriages.  
(vii) Further there are the Karnataka Marriages (Registration and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Ac t, 1976, (3) The Himachal 
Pradesh Registration of Marriages Act, 1996, and (4) The 
Andhra Pradesh Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 
2002.   
(viii) In Odisha, the registration of marriages were regulated under 
various Acts and Rules; namely, (i) the Orissa  Mohammedan 
Marriages and Divorces Registration Act, 1949 and Rules, 
1976 for Muslim Community (Section -8 and Rule 2A) (ii) the 
Orissa Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1960 (Rules -4, 4A 
and 4B) (iii) the Indian Christian Marriage Act,1872 (Sections-
6 and 9) and (iv) the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (Section -3). 
Pursuant to the judgement of the Hon ‟ble Supreme Court in 
Seema v. Ashwani Kumar 13, the Odisha Hindu Marriage 
Registration Rules, 1960 and the Odisha Mohammedan 
Marriages & Divorces Registration Rules, 1976 were amended 
in the year 2006 and registration of marriages of Hindu and 
Muslim religions are compulsory since then. 
(ix) In Goa, the process of registration of marriage with the State 
Government is initiated before its solemnisation under 
religious rites and ceremonies of the parties to the marriage. 
The position of registration of marriage in the State of Goa is 
progressive in view of the fact that it is governed under Civil 
Registration Code of 1912 which is mostly based on the 
Portuguese Code of 1867. The said Act is applicable to Daman 
& Diu as well. Even marriage of Roman Catholics solemnised 
                                                           
13 Supra note 

16 
 
under canonical law need to be routed through the Civil 
Registration Office. Marriage of Christian community could 
only to be solemnised by the Priest of the Ch urch when No 
Objection Certificate from the Sub Registrar Office is 
produced before him.  Article 1 of the Code of 1912 provides 
for compulsory registration to fix authenticity and juridical 
individuality of each citizen and to serve as basis of his civil 
rights. Article 4 thereof provides that no other mode of proof 
can be accepted. Article 6, thereof, provides that if lack of 
registration is attributable to an interested party, for proof, 
such party has to resort to judicial proceedings. 
(x) In Puducherry, the Pondicherry Hindu Marriage (Registration) 
Rules, 1969 have come into force w.e.f. 7th April, 1969. All 
Sub-Registrars of Puducherry have been appointed under 
Section 6 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 as Marriage 
Registrars for the purposes of registe ring marriages.  In the 
Union territory of Puducherry, marriages of various 
communities are registered  with the Local Bodies Authorities 
under Municipal/Commune Panchayat limits under the 
provisions of the Registration of Marriages by “Decret” dated 
24.04.1880 or under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 or the 
Special Marriage Act, 1954 by the Sub -Registrars of the 
Registration Department. 14 Previously, the French Civil Code 
was used for registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages in 
the Local Bodies of the Union territory of Puducherry. The 
Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 was implemented 
in March 1979 for registration of births and deaths. However, 
the Registration of Marriages is still under the said French 
Civil Code. 
(xi) In Jammu and Kashmir, as regards Muslims, Section 3 of the 
Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Marriages Registration Act , 
                                                           
14 See Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee On Personnel, Public Grievances, Law 
and Justice , “Fifty Fifth Report on the Registration of Births And Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2012  
(2013). 

17 
 
1981 provides that marriage contracted between Mus lims 
after the commencement of the Act shall be registered in the 
manner provided therein within 30 days from the date of 
conclusion of Nikah ceremony. However, the Act has not been 
enforced. 
(xii) So far as the Union territory of Chandigarh is concerned, the 
Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1966 have been framed. 
(xiii) The Tripura Recording of Marriage Act, 2003 regulates 
compulsory recording of marriage solemnised under the Act 
updated by the Tripura Recording of Marriage (Amendment) 
Act, 2013. 
(xiv) Earlier there were other laws that existed for the purpose of 
registration of marriages . They are: (1) The Bombay 
Registration of Marriages Act, 1953, In  five States provisions 
had been made for voluntary registration of Muslim 
marriages. These are Assam, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa and 
Meghalaya. The Assam Moslem Marriages and Divorce 
Registration Act, 1935; the Orissa Muhammadan Marriages 
and Divorce Regi stration Act, 1949; and the Bengal 
Mohammedan Marriages and Divorce Registration Act, 1876 
are the relevant statutes. Many of these have been repealed 
for replaced by new legal regimes. 
 
(B) Compulsory Registration of Marriages Rules: 
 
(i) Bihar Marr iage Registrat ion Rules, 2006 are with respect to 
the compulsory registration of marriages . The same are 
applicable to the marriages of all citizens of India solemnised 
in the State; 
(ii) Madhya Pradesh C ompulsory Marriage Registration Rules, 
2008 for all marriages solemnised in the State. 
(iii) The Kerala Registration of Marriages (Common) Rules, 2008. 
provides that  all Marriages solemnised in the State shall 

18 
 
compulsorily be registered irrespective of religion of the 
parties. The Rules are now being implemented through the 
Director of Panchayat, who is Chief Registrar of marriage.   
(iv) Compulsory Marriage Registr ation Rules, Chhattisgarh, 2006 
makes marriage registration compulsory for all, irrespective of 
community or religion. 
  
(C) Acts /Rules are under process in some States and Union 
Territories: 
 
The other S tates and Union t erritories are also taking steps to 
make necessary law on the subject.  The proposed draft of U.P. 
Compulsory Marriage Registration Rules, 2014 is under 
consideration of the Government. Some Union Territories,  i.e. 
Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands have 
forwarded draft law to the Union Government. The Nagaland 
Registration of Marriage Bill, 2012 was deferred and again 
discussed in April, 2014 in the Nagaland Legislative Assembly. 
 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
Judicial Pronouncements 
 
4.1 The Supreme Court and the High Courts have time and again 
emphasised on the ne ed to make  registration of  marriages 
compulsory. The most notable decision came  in Seema v. Ashwani 
Kumar15 while dealing with the matter related to issue(s) of marriages 
observed as under: 
 
 “[...] we are of the view that marriages of all persons 
who are citizens of India belonging to various religions 
should be made compulsorily registrable in their 
respective States, where the marriage is solemnised.” 
 
4.2 Thus the Court directed that the States and the Central 
Governments to take the following steps:  
 
 (i) The procedure for registration should be notified by 
respective States within three months from today. This can 
be done by amending the existing Rules, if any, or by 
framing new Rules. However, objections from members of 
the public shall be invited before bringing the said Rules 
into force. In this connection, due publicity s hall be given 
by the States and the matter shall be kept open for 
objections for a period of one month from the date of 
advertisement inviting objections. On the expiry of the said 
period, the States shall issue appropriate notification 
bringing the Rules into force.  
(ii) The officer appointed under the said Rules of the States 
shall be duly authorized to register the marriages. The age, 
marital status (unmarried, divorcee) shall be clearly stated. 
The consequence of non -registration of marriages or for 
filing false declaration shall also be provided for in the said 
Rules. Needless to add that the object of the said Rules 
shall be to carry out the directions of this Court. 
 (iii) As and when the Central Government enacts  a 
comprehensive statute, the same shall be placed before this 
Court for scrutiny.” 
 
4.3   The compliance of  the above order by all S tates and Union 
Territories is yet to be reported. The case has been listed 34 times . It 
                                                           
15Supra note 6. 

20 
 
was last listed on 21.3.2017. Many States and Union Territ ories have 
filed affidavits reporting  compliance of above directives and some are 
yet to file as discussed in the previous chapter. 
 
4.4 In Kanagavalli v. Saroja16, the Madras High C ourt underlined the 
importance of registration in providing security to women. It opined 
that if registration were compulsory, prosecution for bigamy could be 
made easy. If a Hindu male contracts a second marriage and registers 
it, at least the second wife  will have as proof, the document to show 
that the marriage was registered between her and the man. It 
remarked:17 
 
... non-registration of marriages has landed many women 
... in a relationship which while extracting from her, all the 
duties of a wife, leaves her with neither the right under law, 
nor the recognition in society. In addition, the Hindu male 
is able to contract a second marriage without any fear. 
 
4.5 Similarly, i n Baljit Kaur & Anr v. State of Punjab & Anr.18, the 
Punjab and Haryana High C ourt reiterated the ratio  in Seema case  
and opined that making registration of marriage compulsory would 
reduce the disputes related to solemnization of marriages.19 
 
4.6 It has been opined by the  Kerala Court that an instruction that 
marriages solemnised between persons belonging to different religion 
are not registrable under the Common Rules  formulated pursuant to 
the Supreme Court’ s decision in Seema Case  is repugnant and 
contrary to the provisions contained in the Rules.20 In S. Balakrishnan 
Pandiyan v. The Superintendent of Police 21, the high court emphasised 
that the Tamil Nadu Registration of Marriages Act, 2009 is a secular 
law and it makes registration of marriages performed under all 
                                                           
16 AIR 2002 Mad 73  
17 Ibid. 
18 (2008) 151 PLR 326 
19 See also Najma v. Registrar General of Marriages & Anr, 2012 (1) KHC 655 
20 Deepu Dev v. State of Kerala  AIR 2013 Ker 51. 
21 (2014) 7 MLJ 651 

21 
 
religious faiths compulsory. It also held that the Registrars in  the 
State of Tamil Nadu can register the marriage without the presence of 
the parties, only under exceptional circumstances, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing and not otherwise. 
 
4.7 A registered marriage not only establishes the status of the spouse 
but also helps in succession disputes. In Sushma W/o Hemantrao 
Bodas v. Malti W/o Madhukar Machile 22, the Bombay High C ourt on 
the basis of marriage certificate ruled in favour of a valid marriage. 
The court also remarked that registration of marriage facilitates proof 
of marriage in succession and other disputes. 
 
4.8 These judgments indicate that the non -registration of marriage 
may lead to difficulties particularly when  matrimonial disputes arise. 
The National Commission of Women recommended that women must 
insist on registering marriages to prevent cases of fraud. 23 
Compulsory registration of marriage seems a pragmatic solution in the 
light of these cases.  
 
 
 
  
                                                           
22  2009 (111) Bom LR 3974 
23 “Problems Relating to NRI Marriages”, available at:  http://ncw.nic.in/pdffiles/nridodont.pdf (last 
visited on April 26, 2017). 

22 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 Revisiting the Reports of the Law Commission of India 
 
5.1 The 18th Law Commission of India began its work on the request 
of the Supreme Court of India, in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 81 of 
200624, to assist it on certain issues relating to child marriage. The 
Commission submitted its 205 th Report which suggested a law which 
will eradicate the evil of child marriages.  One of the recommendations 
in this report reads as under: 
 
“Registration of marriages within a stipulated period, of 
all the communities, viz. Hindu, Muslim, Christians, etc. 
should be made mandatory by the Government.” 
 
5.2 The 18th Commission took up the subject of Registration of 
Marriage and Divorce, suo motu in light of the directions of the 
Supreme Court dated 14.2.2006 in Seema v. Ashwani Kumar25 that all 
marriages shall be compulsorily registered and that the State 
Governments shall initiate action for rule -making in this regard. The 
Commission examined the existing enactments and observed in its 
211th Report that t here is a great diversity in respect of laws for 
registration of marriages. 
 
5.3 The 18th Commission also noted that the Births, Deaths and 
Marriages Registration Act, 1886 which states that “Births and 
Deaths” are to be registered under the Act by the Registrars of Births 
and Deaths appo inted by the State, but there is no provision for 
registration of marriages and hence the title of the Act is somewhat 
misleading. Under the Act, Registrar -General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages is to keep proper Indexes of the certified copies of Marriag e 
Registers received by him under the provisions of the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954, Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 and Parsi Marriage 
and Divorce Act, 1936. Then there are few other State laws on 
                                                           
24Delhi Commission for Women &Anr.  v.   Union of India &Anr. , W.P.  was called on 
21.04.2014for hearing and dismissed as withdrawn. 
25Supra note 6. 

23 
 
Marriage Registration in Bombay, Andhra Pradesh, West B engal but 
nowhere failure to register a marriage which is otherwise compulsory, 
affects the validity of marriage in any way. The administrative 
machinery for registration of marriages is not regulated everywhere by 
one and the same law. In different parts of the country it is regulated 
by one of the three central laws – the Births, Deaths and Marriages 
Registration Act, 1886, the Registration Act, 1908 and Registration of 
Births and Deaths Act, 1969 – or by a local law, or a combination of 
both. This create s a lot of confusion with registration officials as well 
as people who want to or are required to register their marriages.  
 
5.4 Thus, 18th Law Commission stated that the wide diversity of 
laws relating to registration of marriages mak es the process  
complicated and confusing. It recommended enactment of a “Marriage 
and Divorce Registration Act” to be made applicable to the whole of 
India and to all citizens irrespective of their religion and personal law 
and without any exceptions or exemptions.  
 
5.4 The 18th Commission, in its 212th Report titled “ Laws of Civil 
Marriages in India – A Proposal to Resolve Certain Conflicts, 2008 ” 
suggested to enact law to resolve conflicts between various family laws 
rather than address ing the question of marriage registration directly. 
The report noted that: 
Numerous marriages take place in India which are outside 
the ambit of various personal laws but cannot be governed 
by the Special Marriage Act either for the reason of not 
having been formally solemnised or registered under it. The 
question which law would then apply to such marriages 
remains unresolved. 
 
5.5  Thus, acknowledging this gap, the C ommission recommended 
amendment to both the Special Marriage Act , 1954 and the Foreign 
Marriages Act, 1969 to make registration of marriages compulsory for 
the people without compromising on their religious practices and 
personal laws.  
 

24 
 
5.6 The 18th Commission further  suggested that the term ‘special’ 
deserved reconsideration in light of the fact that cross -community 
marriages are now common. The Report also suggeste d that all 
marriages be required to be registered under the Special Marriage Act 
1954 with the exception  of those between, Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists 
and Jains. The report therefore did not envision a separate legislation 
for Compulsory Registration of Marriages but sought to create an 
umbrella legislation out of th e 1954 Act itself. However, this  
Commission i s disinclined towards such an expansion of Special 
Marriage Act 1954 because it would entail a through revision of for 
instance, provisions relating to prohibited degrees of marriages, 
among many others, which are not questions that directly concern the 
Bill on registration of marriages. 
 
5.7 The suggestions by the 21st Commission deal, only with 
registration of marriages and not with any substantive aspect of family 
law governed by various matrimonial laws – general and community - 
specific. Accordingly, the B irths, Deaths and Marriages Registration 
Act, 1886 be repealed and Births and Deaths Registration Act, 1969 
be re-named as “Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act” with 
a provision that officials working and records maintained under the 
former Act s hall be deemed to be working and maintained under the 
latter Act. 
 
5.8 Registration of Marriages need not lay down conditions as 
required under the Special Marriage Act 1954 but instead aim merely 
at such registration for record -keeping purposes while permitting all 
diverse customs and ceremonies to remain valid proofs of marriage.  
 
5.9 The idea is not to lay down a procedure recognised for 
solemnisation of marriage but only for registration of marriages. Thus  
in effect , the Compulsory Registration of Marriages Bill aims to 
recommend changes along the lines of Compulsory Registra tion of 
Births and Deaths, with no effect on  different Marriages Act s or 
personal law.   

25 
 
CHAPTER - VI 
Need for a Central Legislation to regulate compulsory 
Registration of Marriages 
 
6.1 In view of the developments that have taken place in the States 
and Union t erritories with respect to legislations on 
Compulsory Marriage Registration, the core question for consideration 
arises is as to whether there is a need for Central Legislation on the 
subject? And i f so, then the next question arises  as to whether  to 
pursue amendments in the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 
1969 as per the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 
2015 or to consider a separate standalone legislation to provide for 
compulsory registration of marriages is required? 
 
6.2 Before providing directions for the registration of marriages i n 
Seema v. Ashwani Kumar 26 the Supreme Court noted that, such a law 
would be of critical importance to various issues such as: (a)  
Prevention of child marriages and to ensure minimum age of marriage. 
(b) Prevention of marriages without the consent of the parties. (c) 
Check bigamy/polygamy (d) Enabling married women to claim their 
right to live in the matrimonial house, maintenance, etc . (e) Enabling 
widows to claim their inheritance rights , other benefits and privileges 
which they are entitled to after the death of their husband. (f) 
Deterring men from deserting women after marriage. (g) Deterring 
parents/guardians from indulging in tra fficking of women to any 
person including a foreigner, under the garb of marriage. 
 
6.3 Further, t he Supreme Court observed that t hough, the 
registration itself cannot be a proof of valid marriage per se, and 
would not be the determinative factor regarding validity of a marriage, 
yet it has a great evidentiary value in the matters of custody of 
children, right of children born from t he wedlock of the two persons 
                                                           
26Supra note 6. 

26 
 
whose marriage is registered and the age of parties to the ma rriage. 
That being so, it would be in the interest of the society if registration 
of marriages is made compulsorily. Accordingly directions were issued 
for States/ Union t erritories and Central Government.  The relevant 
part of the Order dated 14.02.2006 reads as under: 
 
“(iii) As and when the Central Government enacts a  
comprehensive statute, the same shall be placed before 
this Court for scrutiny.” 
 
6.4 Prior to the above directions of the Supreme Court  on the 
subject, there have been suggestions/ demand to make registration of 
marriages and divorces compulsory in an official registry at 
international and national level s, i.e., United Nations Organisations 27; 
National Human Rights Commission 28; the Steering Committee on 
Empowerment of Women and Development of Children 29; Committee 
on Empowerment of Women30; National Commission for Women31 Law 
Commission of India ; Parliament Standing Committee ; States and 
Union t erritories. Further, after solemnisation of marriages or after 
divorce many S tatues provide rights, liabilities and obligations  for 
parties (male and female) and children.  Various kinds of rights and 
disputes that arise out of marriages /divorces are –restitution of 
conjugal rights,  offences relating to marriage,  legitimacy of children, 
dispute relating to custody  of children; dispute relating to stridhan or 
dowry, dispute relating to cruelty and harassments ; succession of 
properties, visit to foreign countries, dispute relating to divorce or 
separation; dispute relating to maintenance, period for remarriage etc. 
                                                           
27Article 16(2), Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 
A/RES/34/180, (Dec.18, 1979), and CEDAW 
28National Human Rights Commission, “Annual Report” (1995 -96) para 4.6, available at 
:http://nhrc.nic.in/ar95_96.htm (last visited on May 3, 2017). 
29Planning Commission of India, “Report of the Steering Committee on Empowerment of Women and 
Development of Children for the Eleventh Plan” (2006), available at 
:http://planningcommission.nic.in/aboutus/committee/strgrp11/str11_wcd.pdf (last visited on May 4, 
2017). 
30Supra note 5. 
31National Commission for Women, Draft on the Compulsory Registration of Marriages Bill, 2005, 
available at:http://ncw.nic.in/pdffiles/compmarriagebill.pdf (last visited on May 4, 2017). 

27 
 
On such issues a  large number of disputes  including that of NRIs are 
being adjudicated  in various tribunals/ courts. Non-registration of 
marriage affects women and children . Women are the prominent  
victims of bigamous relationships and property disputes etc. face 
immense difficulty in establishing their marriage. Therefore, it has 
become necessary to enact a law to safeg uard the future of 
married/divorcees and to check child marriages/ trafficking of young 
girls to any person including foreigner under the garb of marriage. 
 
6.5 The Registration of Births and Death Acts, 1969, provides  for 
Registration establishments consisting of Registrar -General, Chief 
Registrar and Registration Division and Registrars  in each State and 
Union territory . It also provides procedures for registration of births 
and deaths and for maintenance of records a nd statistics. Further, by 
virtue of the powers conferred under section 30 of the aforesaid Act, 
rules for compulsory registration of births and  deaths have been 
framed by many State Governments and Union territory 
Administration. In the Statement of Object and Reasons of the Act, the 
need of adequate and accurate countrywide registration data for the 
purpose of national planning, organising public health and medical 
activities and developing family planning programm es etc. has been 
noted. It was felt that in order to develop a sound and unified system 
of registration in the country, a central legislation on the subject 
necessary. 
 
6.6 Therefore, it is  worth considering the  amendment of  the 
aforesaid Act to include Registration of marriage as we ll within its 
scope so that existing administrative machinery is able  to carry out 
registration of marriages in accordance with the specified procedures . 
Further, the States at one office/ place will  be able to maintain 
necessary records and statistics of registration of marriages. This will 
make the proposal financially viable because it will not be causing any 

28 
 
extra financial burden in  establishing separate infrastructure to 
implement the proposal. 
 
6.7 The ultimate object  is to provide a mechanism for ‘compulsory 
registration of marriages’ which is being proposed for all citizens of 
India irrespective of the religion or cast e of the parties, manner , time 
or place of solemnisation of the marriage or custom/ enactment under 
which marriage  is solemnised or  personal laws of the parties. The 
Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 is dealing with only the 
registration of births and deaths.  Therefore, it is not desirable to have 
a separate legislation for compulsory registration of marriages  as it 
may not serve any useful purpose. This Bill will also be a step forward 
in making visible the forms of customs and practices under which the  
marriages are solemnized.   
 
6.8 The current legislative system often leaves unanswered gaps 
where in the absence of pronounced court orders several cases seem to 
fall astray. In the Court on its own motion  (Lajja Devi) v. State (NCT of 
Delhi),32 a full b ench of Delhi High Court identified the conflicting 
legislations that still do not pronounce clearly what is the legal 
minimum age to marry in India. Section 5(iii) of th e Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955 and s ection 2(a) of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 
2006 prescribes 18 as the minimum a ge for the bride and 21 as the 
minimum age for the groom. Muslim Law in India recognizes marriage 
of minor who has attained puberty as valid. The Special Marriage Act 
also prescribes 18 and 21 as the legal minimum age for women and 
men respectivel y. Howeve r, under s ection 11 and 12 of the Hindu 
Marriage Act, marriages where one or more parties do not meet the 
legal minimum age requirement are neither void nor voidable and 
merely liable to pay fine.  Section 3 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage 
Act deems a  marriage where one or more parties is minor as voidable 
at the option of the minor. There is also a question of guardianship, 
                                                           
32 2013 CriLJ  3458. 

29 
 
where the laws are unclear on the point as to whether the husband 
can be a guardian of the wife , according to Section 6 of the Hi ndu 
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 , when he himself has not yet 
attained the age of majority.  
 
6.9 The question then arises that when it comes to compulsory 
registration of marriage should the law encourage this tacit 
compliance of child marriage by allowing these “valid marriages” under 
various personal laws to get registered, or should the l aw not register 
these marriages, where turning a blind eye and not compulsorily 
registering the marriage would actually let the activity continue 
unregulated. This was highlighted in Lajja Devi:33 
 
“… registration of marriages has still not been made 
compulsory. Compulsory registration mandates that the 
age of the girl and the boy getting married have to be 
mentioned. If implemented properly, it would discourage 
parents from marrying off their minor children since a 
written document of their ages would prove the illegality of 
such marriages. This would probably be able to tackle the 
sensitive issue of minor marriages upheld by personal 
laws.” 
 
6.10 Conflict of laws : However, in the absence of a clear status for 
child marriages - be it void, voidable or valid – the required age for 
registration is a question that needs to be decided and answered by 
comparing the freedom and protection given to age relaxations under 
all personal law and the social responsibility of bringing reform 
through law. 
 
6.11 Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 provides that a 
pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of 18 years shall 
not be terminated except with the consent in writing of her  guardian. 
Similarly, Dowry Prohibition Act 1961 also acknowledges that 
marriages do in fact, despite the Child Marriages Restraint Act, take 
                                                           
33 Ibid. 

30 
 
place even when parties are  under the age of 18. The Dowry 
Prohibition Act provides that if the dowry was received when the bride 
was a minor, the dowry should be held in trust by her guardian 
pending the transfer when she attains the age of 18. Further, even 
under Criminal law whil e sections 375, 376 Indian Penal Code 1861, 
consider sexual intercourse with a minor as rape, they also contain 
the exception that ‘Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the 
wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape’.  
 
6.12 Thus, age of c onsent is 16, age for marriage is 18, however, if 
married, consent for sexual intercourse is deemed at 15.  Under the 
Age of Consent Act, 1891, the age of consent for sexual intercourse for 
all girls, married or unmarried was raised from ten to twe lve years in 
all jurisdictions and its violation was subject to criminal prosecution 
as rape . The Protection of children from sexual offences, Act 2012 
defines child as below 18 years of age. The Juvenile Justice 
(Amendment) Act, 2015, section 2(14) (xii) stipulates that a child ‘ who 
is at imminent risk of marriage before attaining the age of marriage 
and whose parents, family members, guardian and any other persons 
are likely to be responsible for solemnisation of such marriage ’ is a 
child in need of care and protection. 
 
6.13 The Majority Act, 1875 makes it clear that the said Act does not 
apply in case of marriages, etc.  So far as the Islamic Law is 
concerned, there have been conflicti ng views regarding the marriage of 
parties below 18 years of age.  Under the Muslim Personal Law, i t is 
provided that if a Mohamme den who has attained puberty and is of 
sound mind can enter into contract of marriage. “Puberty”34 and 
majority are one and the same in the Muslim Law.  The presumption is 
that a person attains majority at 15 but the Hedaya lays down that the 
earliest period for a boy is 12 years and a girl is 9 years.  Majority is 
presumed among the Hanafis on the completion of the fifteen years,  in 
                                                           
34I. Mulla, Commentary on Mohammedan Law (Dwivedi Law Agency, Allahabad, 2013). 

31 
 
the case of both males and females, unless there is any evidence to 
show that puberty was attained earlier.  In the case of a Shia female, 
the age of puberty begins with menst ruation.  Their Lordships of Privy 
Council also held in Nabad Sadiq Ali Khan v. Jai Kishori 35, (a case 
related to a Shia girl) that the age of Puberty for a girl is 9 years.  But, 
according to Hedaya, :  
 
The puberty of a boy is established by his becoming subject to 
nocturnal emission, his impregnating a woman or emitting in 
the act of condition; and if none of these be known to exist, his 
puberty is not established until he have  (sic. has) completed his 
eighteenth year.  The puberty of a girl is established by 
menstruation, nocturnal emission, or pregnancy; and if none of 
these h ave taken place, her puberty is established on the 
completion of her seventeenth year.” 
 
6.14 Thus, the conflict of laws is not simply between different 
personal laws but also various other enactments relating to child 
marriage, dowry prohibition and medical te rmination of pregnancy 
among others. Thus while Bill does not aim at eliminating the diversity 
of personal laws, or regional differences seeking merely the registration 
of marriages regardless of the law under which the marriage s are  
recognised or solemnised, it recommends that these various 
overlapping and contradicting legislations be borne in mind while 
framing the rules of registration.    
 
 
  
                                                           
35(1928) 30 Bom LR 1346. 

32 
 
CHAPTER VII 
Feasibility of Information Technology-Enabled Registration 
 
7.1 The object of the proposed amendment of the Registration of 
Births and Deaths Act, 1969 would be to create a central civil 
registration portal that consists of recor ds of birth, marriage and 
death and  to provide convenient access to the documents. In the 
present era of technology, m anual registration may be  very tedious 
and time consuming.  Some State Governments already provide the 
facilities of compulsory registration of marriages online. Accordingly, 
registration of marriages should be made  possible online  as far as 
possible, in other states as well. 
 
7.2 Online facilities are being provided for several government 
services. For example, the Ministry of External Affairs launched the 
Passport Seva Project in May , 2010 to improve the issuance of the 
passport and related services. Citi zens may submit their passport 
applications and seek appointment on payment of passport fee online 
at their convenience.  A multi -lingual call centre operates in 17 
languages which enables  citizens to obtain passport services related 
information and receive  updates about their passport applications, 
round the clock, seven days a week . Under this program, the 
sovereign functions like verification, g ranting and issuing of passport; 
and the control of data / information, have been retained by Ministry 
of External Affairs.  
 
7.3 Similarly online birth registration  services are  also being 
provided in India. A similar procedure may be followed for registration 
of marriages as well. 
 
7.4 Some States already provide web portals for online registration 
of marriages, but it would be desirable to have a centralised national 
portal for maintenance of records such registration.  The Commission 

33 
 
is of the opinion that availability of forms and doc uments in 
vernacular languages must be ensured to make the said portal easily 
accessible to all citizens.  
 
7.5 Also, i f registration of marriage is lin ked to the unique 
identification number (UID), it would be possible to achieve universal 
tracing of records.  
 
 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER – VIII 
Conclusions and Recommendations 
 
8.1 The merits of registration of marriages have been discussed at 
length earlier in the report.  A large number of countries have made 
registration of marriages  compulsory. In India, because of its size, 
population and the sheer diversity of customary forms of marriages, it 
has often been canvassed that such an endeavour to register all 
marriages would be difficult. However, the difficulty in implementation 
does not overshadow the merits of such an enactment.  
 
8.2 Once enacted, the amended law would enable better 
implementation of many other civil as well as criminal laws. It would 
provide citizens, not new rights but better enforcement of ex isting 
rights under various family laws that grant and provide to protect 
many rights of spouses within a marriage. Registration of a marriage 
under any of the prevailing marriage Acts e.g. the Indian Christian 
Marriages Act. 1872; the Kazis Act, 1880; the  Anand Marriage Act, 
1909; the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936; the Sharia Application 
Act, 1937; Special Marriage Act, 1954;  Hindu Marriage Act, 1955; any 
other custom or personal law relating to marriage  will be acceptable 
and a separate standalone legislation may not be required so long as 
an amendment is made to the Births, Deaths Registration Act to 
include Marriages.  
 
8.3  Under the scheme of the Constitution the power to make laws 
governing marriage and divorce falls under entry 5 of the Concurrent 
List.36 In view of the provisions of article 254 of the Constitution any 
law enacted by a State, which is in force on the date of commencement 
of this Act (Bill of 2015), if not in consonance and in conformity with 
this Act (Bill) shall be void t o that extent. This Bill will not be in 
derogation of any provision of any existing Act dealing with compulsory 
                                                           
36 Seventh schedule, Constitution of India. 

35 
 
registration of marriages, provided the existing law provides for 
stringent consequences for non -registration of marriages or provides a 
better mechanism for such a registration. 
 
8.4 This Bill would supplement the domain of family laws that 
already exist and is not aimed at removing, abolishing or amending 
specific religious/ cultural practices and laws that are accepted under 
personal laws prevailin g in India. The subject of personal laws is wide 
and complex, and this report is not aimed at creating conditions for 
introducing family la w reforms except  the simple procedural change 
that Compulsory Registration of Marriages will entail. 
 
 
8.5 Since, entry 5 of the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution, contains most matters of family law, allowing for the 
States to legislate on these matters, t he recommended Bill would only 
serve as a guiding principle which would apply across the count ry but 
specific amendments to the scheme can be added by the States bearing 
in mind that there may be more effective ways for such registration of 
marriages depending on the context and particularities of different 
States. These differences may merely be p rocedural and not 
substantive. The above proposals shall be in addition to the other 
existing laws and will not affect any rights recognised under any other 
law or custom. 
 
8.6 The Registrar who is responsible for the registration of births 
and deaths shall be  responsible for the registration of marriages as 
well. Clause 8 specifies the people who shall be eligible to submit 
information to the Registrar in order to register the marriage. The 
Amendment Bill should provide that if the Birth or Marriage or Death 
is not registered within the specified time limit, then the Registrar shall 
on the payment of a late fee, register the death or birth (a) within a 
period of 30 days (b) within one year, only with the written permission 

36 
 
of the prescribed authority; and (c) after one year, only on an order of a 
First Class Magistrate. It provides for a penalty of Rs.5 per day in case 
of delay in registration of ‘marriage without a reasonable cause’. 
 
8.7 On line of the Punjab Compulsory Registration Act, 2012,  a 
provision in the Central Act may be considered such that, the Registrar 
may also, suo-moto, or on notice, enter and register any marriage 
which takes place in his jurisdiction, or if either of the parties have a 
permanent residence therein, in the marri age register maintained 
under the Act, after calling the parties concerned and ascertaining the 
facts which are required for such marriage to be registered. 
 
 
8.8 If the Registrar finds that, any entry of a marriage in the register 
kept by him under this Act,  is erroneous in form or substance or has 
been fraudulently and improperly got made, he may subject to such 
rules, as may be made by the State Government with respect to 
conditions on which and the circumstances in which, such entries may 
be corrected or cancelled, correct the error or cancel the entry by 
making a suitable entry in the margin, without any alteration of the 
original entry, and shall sign and attest such an entry, and also 
indicate the date of correction and/or cancellation so made. Provided 
that no such correction or alteration shall be made to the detriment of 
any person without giving him an opportunity of being heard. 
 
8.9 A provision from the Delhi Act is also worth includin g in the 
Central legislation that , in case a marriage is solemnised in any 
country other than India, then the R egistrar of marriage shall satisfy 
himself/ herself- 
 
(a) That the marriage has been solemnised in accordance with the 
laws of that country between p arties of whom at least, one is a 
citizen of India; and, 

37 
 
(b) That at the tim e of registration, the marriage  satisfies all the 
conditions laid down in Section 4 of the Foreign Marriages Act, 
1969 (33 of 1969). 
 
8.10 Village Panchayats, local civil bodies and municip alities should 
create awareness so as to get register all marriages with the local 
administration compulsorily. Further, producing of marriage certificate 
should be made mandatory when anyone writing the name of spouse 
in any application; for getting any benefit on behalf of husband or wife; 
for making application to government  departments; for getting benefits 
of any welfare schemes like agricultural loan, education loan etc. Also, 
a unified database that consists of birth, marriage and death records 
would allow easy tracing of records. 
 
8.11 The Law Commission of India is of the opinion that compulsory 
registration of marriages is a necessary refor m and recommends the 
amendment of the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 suitably 
to include compulsory registration of marriage as well within its scope 
so that existing administrative machinery is able to carry out 
registration. Further, for this purpose i.e. compul sory registration of 
marriages including births and deaths the Commission recommends 
adoption of complete automation process by using the process of 
paperless documentation so the greatest extent possible. 
 
8.12 The Commission is in favour of retaining the prov isions in the 
Registration of Birth and Death (Amendment) Bill, 2015 regarding (i) 
penalty of rupees  five per day in case of  non -registration of marriage 
without a reasonable cause; (ii) providing false information regarding 
the registration of marriage;  and (iii) refusal to furnish certain 
information, such as name and address. 
 

38 
 
8.13 However, the penalty so imposed should be made with respect 
to specific date subject to a maximum of rupees one hundred keeping 
in view the prevailing conditions in our country. 
 
We recommend accordingly. 
 
 
 
 
 
