  
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
Report No.271 
 
Human DNA Profiling – A draft Bill  
for the Use and Regulation of  
DNA-Based Technology 
 
 
 
July, 2017 
  


 
 
ii 
Report No.271 
Human DNA Profiling – A draft Bill  
for the Use and Regulation of  
DNA-Based Technology 
 
Table of Contents 
Chapters Title Pages 
I Introduction 1-3 
II Ethical Framework 4-5 
III International Human Rights Laws 6-10 
IV Constitutional and Legal Aspects of DNA 
Profiling 
11-27 
V Laws in Other Countries 28-36 
VI The Human DNA Profiling Bill, 2016 and Other 
Reports 
37-39 
VII Conclusions 40-41 
VIII Recommendations 42-44 
Annexures   
I Relevant Portion from “National DNA 
Databases, 2011” 
45-53 
II The DNA Based Technology (Use and 
Regulation) Bill, 2017 
54-88 
 
  

 
 
iii 
 
lR;eso t;rs 
 
 
D.O. No.6(3)315/2017-LC(LS)         26 July 2017 
 
Dear Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad ji, 
 
 I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Two Hundred and Seventy 
First Report of the Law Commission of India, titled “ Human DNA Profiling – A draft 
Bill for the Use and Regulation of DNA-Based Technology”. 
 
 Discovery of DNA is considered as one of the most signiﬁcant biological 
discoveries during the 20th century owing to its tremendous impact on science and 
medicine. Of late, it is acting as a very useful to ol of forensic science that not only 
provides guidance in criminal investigation and civil disputes, but also supplies the 
courts with accurate information about all the relevant features of identification of 
criminals. With a view to frame a legislation f or the use and regulation of DNA -based 
technology in civil and criminal proceedings, and identification of missing persons and 
human remains, the Department of Biotechnology  proposed a draft Bill titled “The 
Use and Regulation of DNA -based Technology in C ivil and Criminal Proceedings, 
Identification of Missing Persons and Human Remains Bill, 2016”.  The Draft Bill was 
forwarded to the Law Commission of India in September 2016 for its guidance.   The 
draft Bill was thoroughly examined in the light of a plet hora of judicial 
pronouncements and the constitutional provisions. Thereafter the Commission has 
devised a new draft Bill titled “ The DNA Based Technology (Use and Regulation) 
Bill, 2017” which has been annexed to the Report. 
  
        
 Yours sincerely, 
 
[Dr. Justice B S Chauhan] 
Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad  
Hon‟ble Minister for Law and Justice 
Government of India 
Shastri Bhawan 
New Delhi – 110 115 
 
 
 
 
MkW0 U;k;ewfrZ cychj flag pkSgku 
iwoZ U;k;k/kh’k] lokZsPp U;k;ky; 
v/;{k 
Hkkjr dk fof/k vk;ksx 
fof/k dk;Z foHkkx] Hkkjr ljdkj 
 
Dr. Justice B. S. Chauhan 
Former Judge, Supreme Court of India 
Chairman 
Law Commission of India 
Department of Legal Affairs 
 Government of India 
 
 
prqFkZ ry] ^Ckh* foax] yksd uk;d Hkou] ubZ fnYyh & 110003 @ 4th Floor, ‘B’ Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi – 110 003 
nwjHkk"k @ Phone: 23012708, 23018132  bZZ&esy@email: justicechauhan@gmail.com 
 

CHAPTER-I 
 
Introduction 
 
1.1 DNA stands for deoxyribonucleic acid , the strands of identity that 
living beings receive from their ancestors. Outside of identical twins, no 
two people have the same DNA pattern. DNA fingerprinting also has 
certain distinctive features. 
 
1.2 In 1987, the DNA fingerprinting was utilised as a tool for criminal 
investigation, to est ablish blood relations and trace medical history. 
Investigators would find "anonymous DNA" at the crime scene and 
compare it with the DNA of suspects for possible matches. The 
investigator would generally use a swab to collect bodily substances from 
a suspect's mouth to match it with DNA collected from the crime scene.   
 
1.3 Prior to the use of DNA,  identification was heavily based on finger 
prints, foot prints, blood, or other evidence that a suspect may have left 
behind after committing a crime. The process of matching a suspect‟s 
DNA with DNA found at a crime scene has provided both law 
enforcement agencies and court offi cials with a higher  probability of 
ascertaining the identity of offenders. 
 
1.4 DNA fingerprinting has been very useful for law  enforcement, as it 
has been used to exonerate the innocent. Unlike blood found at a crime 
scene, DNA material remains usable for an endless period of time. DNA 
technology can be used even on decomposed human remains to identify 
the victims.  
 
1.5 Clinical trial and medical research has long been an  important 
area of medical sciences as it has been referred to in  large number of 
mythological and historical texts and scriptures. 
 

 
 
2 
1.6 The Charaka Samhita (textbook of medicine) and Sushruta 
Samhita (textbook of surgery) dating back to 200 B.C. and 200 A.D. 
respectively, focus on India‟s age old proficiency in medical science. 
Today, there are number of laws which govern clinical research  in India, 
some of them being: 
 
 Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 
 Medical Council of India Act, 1956 (Amended in 2002) 
 Central Council for Medicine Act, 1970 
 Guidelines for exchange of Biological Material (MOH Order, 1997) 
 RTI Act, 2005 
 
1.7 Since there are shortcomings in the existing legal provisions with 
regard to identification  of individuals for specified purposes such as 
victims of disasters, missing persons, etc., the Department of 
Biotechnology came up with a draft Bill titled “The Use and Regulation of 
DNA-Based Technology in Civil and Criminal Proceedings, Identification 
of Missing Persons and Human Remains Bill, 2016.”   On 27 September 
2016, the draft Bill was forwarded to the Law Commission of India for 
examination and its revision, if required.  
 
1.8 DNA profiling technology, which is based on proven scientific 
principles 1 , has been f ound to be very effective for social  welfare, 
particularly, in enabling the Criminal Justice Delivery System  to identify 
the offenders. Such tests relating to a party would definitely constitute 
corroborative evidence. 2  Appreciating the use and regulation of DNA 
based technology in judicial proceedings, particularly, identification of 
persons accused of offences under the Indian Penal Code 1860 ( IPC) and 
other laws, identification of missing persons and disaster victim s apart 
from its use in medical sciences; a need has long been felt to ha ve a 
                                                           
1 The DNA test has 99.99 % chance of correct conclusions and is perceived as an objective scientific test 
which may be difficult for an individual to refute. See: Veeran v. Veeravarmalle & Anr., AIR 2009 Mad. 
64; and Harjinder Kaur v. State of Punjab & Ors., 2013 (2) RCR (Criminal) 146. 
2 Simpson v. Collinson, (1964) 1 All ER 262. 

 
 
3 
special legislation to regulate human DNA profiling.  DNA analysis offers 
substantial information which  if misused or used improperly may cause 
serious harm to individuals and the society as a whole.   
 
1.9 The Commission considered the draft Bill  and based on its 
examination of the relevant issues , it came to the conclusion that merely 
amending the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, may not serve the 
purpose. In view of the scope of the use and misuse of  human DNA 
profiling, it has been  felt that it is required to be regulated by a special 
law with well delineated standards, quality controls and quality 
assurance system s to ensure  the credibility of the DNA testing , 
restricting it to the purposes laid dow n in the Act. Thus, there is a need 
to regulate the use of human DNA profiling through a standalone law of 
Parliament so that such use is appropriately regulated and  restricted to 
lawful purposes only. The Law Commission while revising the draft Bill 
has also been conscious of the concerns raised by the Courts regarding 
appropriate use of DNA technology by making it necessary for the DNA 
testing centres to abide by the guidelines  and standards which are listed 
in the Bill and the details thereof will be worked out in regulations.  
 
  

 
 
4 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Ethical Framework 
 
2.1 The ethical framework for human subject ‟s protection has its 
origins in the ancient Hippocratic Oath, which specified that a primary  
duty of a physician was to avoid harming the patient. How ever, this oath 
was not necessarily respected in human experimentation and most 
advances in protection for human subjects came as a response to  abuse 
inflicted on human subjects . Conducting research on hum an subjects 
essentially involves certain binding ethics and standards to be followed 
in a humane and culturally sensitive manner.  
 
2.2          The Declaration of Helsinki, 1964, set the guidelines adopted 
by the 18th World Medical Association General Assembly . It contains 
32 principles, which stress on info rmed consent, confidentiality of data, 
vulnerable population and requirement of a protocol, including the 
scientific reasons of the study, to be reviewed by an  Ethics Committee. 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights  1948 adopted by the 
United Nations General Assembly expressed concern about rights of 
human beings against involuntary maltreatment. The  International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,  1966 (ICCPR) has provided 
that “No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment or punishment. In particular, no one shall be subjected without 
his consent to medical or scientific treatment”. It also refers to various 
“minimum guarantees” in Article 14(3)(g)  such as, „everyone has a right 
not to be compelled to testify against himself or to confess guilt‟. 
 
2.3 In 1988, the Human Rights Committee  (HRC), a group of 
independent experts who issue authoritative interpretations of the 
ICCPR, released General Comment 16 on the right to privacy (Art. 17). In 
this General Comment,  the HRC noted that „the right to privacy is not 
absolute‟. 

 
 
5 
 
2.4 The Indian Research Fund Association (IRFA) was founded 1911. 
This was re -named as  Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), in 
1949, under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  to develop 
research culture and infrastructure to foster community support. In the 
year 1980, ICMR released a document called “Policy Statement on 
Ethical Consideration s involved in Research on Human Subjects”. This 
was the first policy statement giving official g uidelines for the 
establishment of Ethics C ommittees (ECs) in all medical colleges and 
research centres. 
 
2.5 Comprehensive Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research on 
Human Subjects were finalised by ICMR in the year 2000 , which  
researchers in India have to follow while conducting research on human  
subjects. The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Medical Council of 
India Act, 1956 (Amended in 2002 provide that all clinical tri als in India 
should follow these guidelines. These guidelines were revised in the year 
2006, influenced by the Belmont Report and have the same three basic 
ethical principles: Respect for person, Beneficence , and Justice. These 
ethical principles  are fortified by inducting  the following  twelve general 
principles of: 
 
(i) essentiality;  
(ii) voluntariness, informed consent and community agreement;  
(iii) non-exploitation;  
(iv) privacy and confidentiality;  
(v) precaution and risk minimisation;  
(vi) professional competence; 
(vii) accountability and transparency;  
(viii) maximisation of the public interest and of distributive justice; 
(ix) institutional arrangements;  
(x) public domain;  
(xi) totality of responsibility; and  
(xii) compliance. 
  

 
 
6 
CHAPTER-III 
 
International Human Rights Law 
 
 
3.1 Right to Privacy as a basic right was first enunciated in the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948.  Under the Declaration, 
no one shall be subject ed to arbitrary interference with his privacy, 
family, home or correspondence, attacks upon his honour o r reputation.  
Everyone has a right to protection by law against such interference or 
attacks.  Further, the right to privacy has been included in several major 
human rights instruments like  the International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Right,  1966; The Convention on the Right s of the 
Child, 1989 ; as well as Regional Human Rights Convention s in Latin  
America3, the Middle East4 and Europe5. 
 
A. Recommendations by DNA Commission of the International  
Society for Forensic Genetics:  
 
3.2 In an article titled as „DNA Commission of the International Society 
for Forensic Genetics (ISFG)  6: recommendations re garding the role of 
forensic genetics for disaster victim identification (DVI) ‟, the issue of 
establishing the identity of victims of a mass disaster, has been 
examined. Mass disasters can involve natural (e.g. earth quakes, volcano 
eruptions, avalanches, hurricanes, and tsunamis) or non -natural 
catastrophes (e.g. transportation  accidents, terrorist attacks , wars, or 
political upheaval). 
 
3.3 In this regard, the ISFG made certain recommendations on the role 
of forensic genetics in case s of DVI. In such case s the emergency 
                                                           
3 Organisation of American States, American Convention on Human Rights art.11, Nov.21, 1969 
O.A.S.T.S. No.36, 1144 U.N.TS. 123 (entered into force July18, 1978) 
4 Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, art.18U.N.GAOR, 4 th Sess., Agenda Item 5, U.N. Doc. 
A/CONF.157/PC/62/Add18 (Aug 5, 1990) 
5 European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms art.5, N ov.4, 1950, 
213, U.N.T.S. 222 (entered into force Sept 3, 1953) as amended by Protocols Nos. 3,5,8  and 11 (entered 
into force Sept 21, 1970, Dec., 20, 1971, Jan 1 1990 and Nov 1 1998 respectively)  
6 Published in FSI Genetics, Forensic Science International Genetics 1 (200) 3-12 

 
 
7 
response is multidisciplinary and is shared by many agencies dealing 
with deceased victims in matters such as  body removal, victim 
identification and the issuance of the death certificates. This is normally 
the domain of municipality or a l ocally body. The IFSG made the 
following recommendations: 
 
1. Every forensic DNA laboratory should make an effort to contact 
the relevant authority dealing with emergency response and 
establish involvement in a possible mass fatality preparedness 
plan. Policy  decisions about sample collection, scope and final 
goals of the effort will affect the victims‟ families and the work 
stream and should be decided as early as possible.  
 
2.  The internal response plan needs to address turnout capacity, 
sample tracking, and must have names of supervisors responsible 
for different tasks that are updated as personnel changes. 
 
3. Several sample types for DNA testing should be taken at the 
earliest possible stage of the investigation provided traceability is 
guaranteed. Samples mus t be collected from each body or 
recognizable body part, even if identity is already established. 
Proper storage must also be assured. 
 
4. A single accurate reported missing list is of crucial importance for 
streamlining the DNA identification process. Any su bmissions of 
personal effects or family swabs need to be subsumed under a 
single case number. If multiple agencies or companies share 
sample collection and/or testing, the case number should remain 
constant. 
 
5. Multiple direct references and samples from fir st-degree relatives 
should be collected for each missing person. Scientists with a 
background in genetics should be available for training or for 
consultations in the family liaison group. 
 
6. DVI-DNA testing should only be per formed by laboratories with 
demonstrated successful capabilities and continuous experience 
with these specified sample types. 
 
7. The set of loci to be analys ed has to be identified as soon as 
possible in concordance with the scientific community in the 
countries mostly involved. A minimum of 12 independent loci 
should be selected as standard set, but an even greater number of 
loci is preferred. 
 
8. All allele calls and all candidate matches have to be reviewed 
thoroughly. Composite DNA profiles can be generated if derived 
from the same specime n and consistent for overlapping loci. The 

 
 
8 
duplication policy should consider the logistics and circumstances 
of the mass fatality incident. 
 
9. If the standard autosomal STR typing fails to give sufficient 
information, additional typing system such as mtDNA,  Y-
chromosomal STRs, or SNP markers may be used in selected 
cases. 
 
10. A centralized database is required for all data comparison. 
Electronic upload is recommended to avoid transcription errors. 
 
11. Especially if multiple family members are involved, DNA -based 
identification should whenever pos -M. Prinz et al. / Forensic 
Science International: Genetics 1 (2007) 3 –12 9sible be anchored 
by anthropological and/or circumstantial data, a second 
identification modality, or multiple DNA references.  
 
12. In DVI work, DNA st atistics are best represented as likelihood 
ratios that permit DNA results to be combined among multiple 
genetic systems or with other non -DNA evidence. Likelihood ratio 
thresholds should be determined for when DNA data alone can 
suffice for an identificat ion; this will be based on the size and 
circumstances (e.g. closed versus open) of the event. All evidence 
and/or circumstances should be checked in making an 
identification, even if DNA provides the primary or sole evidentiary 
factor. 
 
13. The preparedness pl an of the laboratory needs to include policies 
for family notification, long -term sample disposition, and data 
archiving. 
 
 
3.4 Keeping in view the possibility of f uture mass fatalities it is 
desirable and necessarily required to train forensic geneticists  in DV I 
tasks and  response planning. The skills involved in DVI are closely 
related to both DNA testing in criminal cases  and kinship investigations. 
Validated procedures and the adherence to good l aboratory practices will 
minimise false , negative results and increase the reliability of the 
identifications. DNA should not be considered the sole tool  for 
identification, as many circumstan ces will allow for faster identification  
of the victims using dental records or fingerprint characteristics 7 . 
Moreover, consistent results across multiple modalities will also i mprove 
                                                           
7R. Lessig, C. Grundmann, F. D h               z  h       E               h  i           i     —a 
review of 1 year of continuous forensic medical work for victim identification, EXCLI J. 5 (2006) 128 –
139. 

 
 
9 
the confidence level for each identification. An interdisciplinary approach 
is encouraged and  modalities of it  need to be worked out early among st 
the DVI team members. 
 
 
B. Ethical and Practical Issues relating to DVI: 
 
 
3.5 A number of ethical and sensi tive issues arise during the 
identification of human remains in the particular case of DVI. One major 
factor that undermines cremation or exhumation and identification 
efforts is poor communicati on with the relatives of the missing. 
Understanding the survivor population is important, yet difficult because 
the effects of mass casualties on a pop ulation are varied and complex as 
such instances cause people t o lose not only their family members and 
relatives, but also their means of income. It can deprive children of their 
parents as well as their roots. Survivors suffer from  not only the deaths 
of their family members, but also a series of other traumas8. 
 
3.6 A range of legitimate purposes prevail for the exploration of human 
remains in case of DVI. The issues and questions raised hereinabove are 
specifically related to searching for the purpose of identifying missing 
persons. The main guiding principle is to assist the families of the 
missing.   
 
C. Ethical-legal problem of DNA databases in criminal 
investigation: 
 
3.7 Advances in DNA technology and the discovery of DNA 
polymorphisms have facilitated the creation of DNA database of 
individuals for the purpose of criminal investigation 9. Many ethical and 
                                                           
8From Dust to Dust: Ethical and Practical Issues Involved in the Location, Exhumation, and Identification 
of Bodies from Mass Graves by Erin D. Williams, John D. Crews. Croatian Medical Journal 44(3):251 -
258, 2003 
9 Schneider PM. Datenbankenmitgenetischen Merkmalen von Straftaftatern (Criminal DNA databases: data 
protection and secutiry]. Datenschutz und Datensicherheit 1998; 22:330-3. 

 
 
10 
legal problems arise in the preparation of a DNA database, and these 
problems are required to be properly addressed by the legal provisions on 
the subject.  There are three possibilities in which database can be 
created and dealt with, each of them has advantages and drawbacks.  
Besides, controversial issues aris ing in each of these possibilities  are 
required to be examined for selecting one of the possibilities according to 
the specific need.  
 
(i) A system based on a general DNA fingerprinting analysis of the 
population and a conservation of the DNA profile analysis of all 
the evidence found at the crime scene. 
(ii) A system based on the DNA analysis of samples  for a particular 
list of crimes only and the recording of the DNA profiles of all 
the evidence found at the crime scene for these particular 
crimes. 
(iii) A system based only on the specific analysis of a case, the 
taking of samples from an individual who is known to be 
connected to a fairly high degree with the crime under 
investigation and a comparison of the  evidence which has been 
collected in this particular investigation.10 
  
3.8 When the DNA analysis of evidence found at the crime scene (for 
example blood, hair, saliva, sperm, etc .) is compared with the analysis of 
samples which make u p the database, the i nvestigators can locate the 
possible perpetrator of the crime.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
10 Ethical-legal problems of DNA databases in Criminal investigation (Margarita Guillen, Maria Victoria 
Lareu, Carmela Pestoni, Antonio Salas and Angel Carracedo University of Santiago de Compostela, Spa in) 
in Journal of Medical Ethics 2000; 26:226-271. 

 
 
11 
CHAPTER-IV 
Constitutional and Legal Aspects of DNA Profiling 
 
4.1 The Constitution under Article 51A(h) and (j) casts a duty on every 
citizen of India „to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit 
of inquiry and reform‟ and „to strive towards excellence in all spheres of 
individual and c ollective activity‟. Parliament is competent to undertake 
legislations which encourage  various technological and scientific 
methods to detec t crimes, speed up investigation and determine 
standards in institutions for higher education and development in 
technical institutions  (Entry 65 & 66 of the Union List). The other 
relevant prov isions of the Constitution are, (i) Article 20(3)  which 
guarantees a right against the self-incrimination; and (ii) Article 21 which 
guarantees protection of life and liberty of every person. 
A. Indian Evidence Act, 1872: 
 
4.2 Section 9  of t he Indian Evidence Act,  1872 deals with „f acts 
necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact‟.  Section 
45 provides as to how the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of 
foreign law or of science or art, or identity of handwriting  [or finger 
impressions] etc. Section 51 refers to grounds when opinion becomes 
relevant. S ection 112 provides that birth during the continuance of a 
valid marriage is a conclusive proof of legitimacy with only exception that 
the parents had no access to each other during the period of conception.  
Under section  114 the Court may presum e the existence of any fact 
which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common 
course of natural events, human conduct and public and private 
business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.  
4.3 If the evidence of an e xpert is relevant under section 45, the 
ground on which such opinion is derived is also relevant under section 
51. Section 46 deals with „facts bearing upon opinion s of experts‟. The 
opinion of an expert based on the DNA profiling is also relevant on the 

 
 
12 
same analogy.  However, whether a DNA test can be directed or not has 
always been a debatable issue. 
 
B. Criminal Procedure Code,1973: 
 
4.4 Section 53-A was added  vide the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act,  2005 w.e.f 2 3-6-2006, providing that an accu sed of 
rape can be  examined by a m edical practitioner, which will include 
taking of bodily substances from the accused for DNA profiling. 
 
4.5 It is noteworthy  that, the  said A mendment substituted the 
Explanation to sections 53 and 54, and made it applicable to section 53A 
as well, to clarify the scope of „examination‟, especially with regard to the  
use of modern and scientific techniques including DNA profiling . Section 
53 authori ses the police offic ials to get medical examination of an 
arrested person done during the course of an investigation by  registered 
medical practitioner. The Explanation provides that “ Examination shall 
include the examination of blood, blood -stains, semen, swabs in case of 
sexual offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger nail clippings 
by the use of modern and scientific techniques including  DNA profiling 
and such other tests which the registered medical practitioner thinks 
necessary in a particular case”.  
 
4.6 Section 311 -A was also added to empower the M agistrate to 
order a person to give specimen signatures or handwriting. 
 
C. Judgments Dealing with Self-incrimination of Persons vis-à-vis 
Article 20(3) of the Constitution 
 
4.7 A judgment rendered by an eleven-Judges Bench of the Supreme 
Court in State of Bombay v. Kathi Ka lu Oghad & Ors. 11 dealt with the 
issue of self- incrimination and held: 
 
...Self-incrimination must mean conveying information based 
upon the personal knowledge of the person giving the 
                                                           
11 AIR 1961 SC 1808 

 
 
13 
information and cannot include merely the mechanical 
process of producing documents in court which may throw a 
light on any of the points in controversy, but which do not 
contain any statement of the accused based on his personal 
knowledge. Example was cited of an accused who may be in 
possession of a document which is in his  writing or which 
contains his signature or his thumb impression. It was 
observed that production of such document with a view to 
comparison of the writing or the signature or the impression 
of the accused is not the statement of an accused person, 
which can be said to be of the nature of a personal testimony. 
I may quote another relevant observation of this Court: 
 
When an accused person is called upon by the Court or any 
other authority holding an investigation to give his finger 
impression or signature o r a specimen of his handwriting, he 
is not giving any testimony of the nature of a 'personal 
testimony'. The giving of a 'personal testimony' must depend 
upon his volition. He can make any kind of statement or may 
refuse to make any statement. But his fing er impressions or 
his handwriting, in spite of efforts at concealing the true 
nature of it by dissimulation cannot change their intrinsic 
character. Thus, the giving of finger impressions or of 
specimen writing or of signatures by an accused person, 
though it may amount to furnishing evidence in the larger 
sense, is not included within the expression 'to be a witness. 
[Emphasis added] 
 
4.8 Thus, the Court c oncluded that g iving thumb impressions or 
impressions of foot or palm or fingers or specimen writings or showing 
parts of the body by way of identification are not included in the 
expression 'to be a witness'  as the latter would mean imparting 
knowledge in respect of relevant facts by an oral statement or a 
statement in writing, made or given in court or otherwise. 
 
4.9 In Smt. Selvi & Ors. v. State of Karnataka,12 a three-Judge Bench 
of the Supreme Court considered whether involuntary administration of 
certain scientific techniques like n arco-analysis, polygraph examination 
and Brain Electrical Activation P rofile (BEAP) tests and the results 
                                                           
12 AIR 2010 SC 1974 

 
 
14 
thereof are of a 'testimonial character' attracting the bar of Article 20(3) of 
the Constitution. The Court held: 
 
…it was observed that the scope of ' testimonial compulsion' is 
made clear by two premises. The first is t hat ordinarily it is 
the oral or written statements which convey the personal 
knowledge of a person in respect of relevant facts that 
amount to ' personal testimony ' thereby coming within the 
prohibition contemplated by Article  20(3). In most cases, 
such ' personal testimony ' can be readily distinguished from 
material evidence such as bodily substances and other 
physical objects. The second premise is that in some cases, 
oral or written statements can be relied upon but only for the 
purpose of identification or comparison with facts and 
materials that are already in the possession of the 
investigators. The bar of Article  20(3) can be invoked when 
the statements are likely to lead to incrimination by 
themselves or furnish a link in the chain of evidence. It was  
held that all the three techniques involve testimonial 
responses. They impede the subject's right to remain silent. 
The subject is compelled to convey personal knowledge 
irrespective of his/her own volition. The results of these tests 
cannot be likened to  physical evidence so as to exclude them 
from the protective scope of Article  20(3). This Court 
concluded that compulsory administration of the impugned 
techniques violates the right against self -incrimination. 
Article 20(3) aims to prevent the forcible co nveyance of 
personal knowledge that is relevant to the facts in issue. The 
results obtained from each of the impugned tests bear a 
testimonial character and they cannot be categorized as 
material evidence such as bodily substances and other 
physical objects. 
 
4.10 In Ritesh Sinha v. State of U.P 13  the questions arose as to 
whether a Voice Spectrographic Test without the consent of a person 
offends Article 20(3) of the Constitution and in  case the said provision is 
not violated, whether a magistrate, in abse nce of any statutory provision 
or inherent power under the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code 
                                                           
13 (2013) 2 SCC 357; See also Murlidhar Meghraj v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1976 SC 1929. Kisan 
Trimbak Kothula & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1977 SC 435; and State of Maharashtra v. 
Natwarlal Damodardas Soni AIR 1980 SC 593. 

 
 
15 
1973 (Cr. P.C.) has competence to direct a person to be subjected to such 
a test without his consent. 
 
4.11 The Court held that taking such test would not violate the 
mandate of Article 20(3) of the Constitution as has been held by the 
Supreme Court in Selvi14. However, there had been different views on the 
second question. 
 
4.12 The Hon‟ble Justice Ranjana Desai observed: 
 
In light of this attempted analogy,  we must stress that 
the DNA profiling technique has been expressly included among 
the various forms of medical examination in the amended 
explanation to Sections  53, 53A and 54 of the Cr . P.C. It must 
also be clarified that a `DNA  profile' is different fr om 
a DNA sample which can be obtained from bodily substances. 
A DNA profile is a record created on the basis of  DNA samples 
made available to forensic experts. Creating and 
maintaining DNA profiles of offenders and suspects are useful 
practices since newly  obtained DNA samples can be readily 
matched with existing profiles that are already in the possession 
of law -enforcement agencies. The matching of  DNA samples is 
emerging as a vital tool for linking suspects to specific criminal 
acts. It may also be recalled that the as per the majority decision 
in Kathi Kalu Oghad, ( State of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu Oghad & Ors. , 
AIR 1961 SC 1808 )  the use of material samples such as 
fingerprints for the purpose of comparison and identification 
does not amount to a testimonia l act for the purpose of 
Article 20(3). Hence, the taking and retention of DNA samples 
which are in the nature of physical evidence does not face 
constitutional hurdles in the Indian context.  However, if 
the DNA profiling technique is further developed and  used 
for testimonial purposes, then such uses in the future could 
face challenges in the judicial domain.  
[Emphasis added]. 
 
4.13 However, another judge Hon‟ble Justice Aftab Alam observed: 
 
There are, indeed, precedents where the court by the 
interpretative process has evolved old laws to meet cotemporary 
challenges and has planted into them contents to deal with the 
                                                           
14 Supra note 12  

 
 
16 
demands and the needs of the present that could not be 
envisaged at the time of the making of the law. But, on the 
question of compelling t he accused to give voice sample, the law 
must come from the legislature and not through the court 
process.  
[Emphasis added] 
 
4.14 However it is to be noted that due to the difference of opinion in 
the bench, the matter is pending consideration before the larger bench.  
 
4.15 In Kalawati v. State of H.P; 15 and Ramanlal Bhogilal Shah v. D.K. 
Guha16, the Supreme Court held that Article 20 (3) does not apply at all 
to a case where the confession is made by an accused without any 
inducement, threat, or promise.    In view of the provisions of sections 
24-27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 , and section 162 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure 1973, it is an obligation on the judiciary to ensure 
that confession of the accused is not procured by an inducement, 
threat, promise, or fear 17.  Section 24 of the Evidenc e Act, 1872 is an 
extension of r ight to silence guaranteed under Article 20(3) of the 
Constitution, as it clarifies that any information given by an accused 
under inducement, threat or promise is irrelevant unde r criminal 
proceedings, going by the maxim nemo debet proderese ipsum , i.e., no 
one can be required to be his own betrayer. 18 An accused has a right to 
refuse to produce self-incriminating documents19. 
 
4.16 The Supreme Court in Bhabani Prasad Jena v. Convenor 
Secretary, Orissa State Commission for women 20, whilst pressing upon 
the significance of DNA testing in the process of administration of justice 
held:  
                                                           
15 AIR 1953 SC 131 
16 AIR 1973 SC 1196 
17 State of U P v.  Deoman Upadhyaya,  AIR 1960 SC 1125 
18  hiv N   y   Dhi g    ― igh      i       f  h  A       U     C    i   i    f I  i ‖   1  C   3  
(2007) 
19 State of Gujarat v. Shyamlal Mohanlal Choksi, AIR 1965 SC 1251 
20 AIR 2010 SC 2851 

 
 
17 
when there is apparent conflict between the right to privacy of a 
person not to submit himself forcibl y to medical examination 
and duty of the court to reach the truth, the court must exercise 
its discretion only after balancing the interests of the parties and 
on due consideration whether for a just decision in the matter , 
DNA test is eminently needed. 
 
4.17 In Krishan Kumar Malik  v. State of Haryana 21, the Supreme 
Court explained that even in the absence of section 53A Cr.  P.C., DNA 
profiling could be permissible under law.  The Court observed: 
 
Now after the incorporation of section 53A in Criminal Procedure 
Code with effect from 23.06.2006……..it has become necessary 
for the prosecution to go in for DNA test in such type of cases, 
facilitating the prosecution to prove its case against the accused.  
Prior to 2006, even without the aforesaid specific provisi ons in 
Cr. P.C., the prosecution could have still resorted to this 
procedure of getting the DNA test…….to make it a fool proof 
case….. 
 
4.18 In Sudhir Chaudhary & Ors. v. State (NCT of Delhi) ,22 the Supreme 
Court held that an accused can be directed to give a voice sampl e as it 
was not the testimony but rather it constituted identification data. 
 
4.19 In Leena Katiyar v. State of U.P. & Ors .,23 the Allahabad High 
Court held that even in absence of any inhe rent power or statutory 
authorisation, the Magistrate is competent to direct an accused to give 
voice sample for identification in view of the provisions of section 165 
read with section 65B of the Indian Evidence Act,  1872.  But the Gujarat 
High Court, in Natwarlal Amarshibhai Devani v. State of Gujarat & Ors.,24 
took a contrary view observing that in absence of any provision enabling 
the Magistrate to order Voice Spectrograph ic Tests, the C ourt was not 
competent to direct an accused to give the voice sample. 
 
                                                           
21 (2011) 7 SCC 130 
22 (2016) 8 SCC 307 
23  2015 Cri LJ 4683 
24 2017Cri LJ 1911 

 
 
18 
4.20 In Naveen Krishna Bothireddy v. State of Tela ngana 25 , the 
Andhra Pradesh High Court upheld the order passed by the trial court 
directing the accused to undergo medical tests/ potency test or erectile 
dysfunction (ED)  test, observing that such tests do not violate the 
mandate of Article 20(3) and Article 21 of the Constitution.  
 
4.21 The Courts have persistently held that i n case the accused does 
not want to undergo such tests the Court is at liberty to draw adverse 
inference under Illustration (h) of section114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
187226.   However, in Rohit Shekhar v. Narayan Dutt Tiwari & Ors. 27, the 
Delhi High Court held that “a person can be forced to undertake the test 
for the reason that the valuable right of the party cannot be taken  away 
by asking the said party to be satisfied with compa ratively week adverse 
inference”. 
 
4.22 In Goutam Kundu v. State of West Bengal ,28 the Supreme Court 
observed: 
 
(1) that courts in India cannot order blood test as a matter of 
course; 
(2) wherever applications are made for such prayers in order to 
have rovi ng inquiry, the prayer for blood test cannot be 
entertained. 
(3) There must be a strong prima facie case in that the husband 
must establish non -access in order to dispel the presumption 
arising under Section 112 of the Evidence Act. 
(4) The court must care fully examine as to what would be the 
consequence of ordering the blood test; whether it will have the 
effect of branding a child as a bastard and the mother as an 
unchaste woman. 
(5) No one can be compelled to give sample of blood for analysis. 
 
                                                           
25 2017 (1) ALT (Crl.) 422 (A.P.) 
26 Ibid, Thogorani @ K Damyanti v. State of Orissa & Ors., 2004 Crl. LJ 4003; Sulabai v. Jagannath & 
Anr., 1972 Cr.LJ 1392; Venkateshwarulu v. Subbayya, AIR 1951 Mad 190; Subayya Gounder v. Bhoppala, 
AIR 1959 Mad 396; and Harjinder Kaur, supra note 1. 
27 2012 (2) RCR (Crl.) 889 
28 AIR 1993 SC 2295 

 
 
19 
4.23 In Kanti Devi v. Poshi Ram, 29 the Court dealt with the issue of 
determining the paternity of a child and held: 
 
The result of a genuine DNA test is said to be scientifically  
accurate. But even that is not enough to escape from the 
conclusiveness of Section 112 of the Act, e.g. if a husband and wife 
were living together during the time of conception but the DNA test 
revealed that the child was not born to the husband, the 
conclusiveness in law would remain unrebuttable. This may look 
hard from the point of view o f the husband who would be 
compelled to bear  the fatherhood of a child of which he may be 
innocent. But even in such a case the law leans in favour of the 
innocent child from being bastardised if his mother and her spouse 
were living  together during the ti me of conception. Hence the 
question regarding the degree of pro of of non -access for rebutting 
the conclusiveness must be answered in the light of what is meant 
by access or non-access as delineated above. 
 
4.24 However, i n Nandlal Basudev Badwaik  v. Lata Nandlal 
Badwaik30 the Court held that depending on the facts and circumstances 
of the case, it would be permissible for the Court to direct the DNA 
examination to determine the veracity of the allegation(s) made in a case. 
If the direction to hold such a te st can be avoided, it should so be 
avoided. The reason is that the legitimacy of the child should not be put 
to peril.   
 
D. Right to privacy- Under Article 21 of the Constitution 
 
4.25 The issue has been raised time and again whether right to 
privacy is a fu ndamental right guaranteed under the Constitution . If the 
answer is in the affirmative, then the source and the contours of such a 
right, in view of the fact that  there is no provision in Constitution that 
expressly provides for a right to privacy , needs to be worked out.  In M P 
Sharma v. Satish Chandra, 31 an eight -Judges Bench of the Supreme 
                                                           
29 AIR 2001 SC 2226 
30 AIR 2014 SC 932; See also: Dharam Deo Yadav v. State of U P, (2014) 5 SCC 509; and Dipanwita Roy 
v. Ronobroto Roy (2015) 1 SCC 365 
31 AIR 1954 SC 300 

 
 
20 
Court denied the existence of such a right while dealing with the case of 
search and seizure, observing: 
 
….A power of search and seizure is in any system of jurisprud ence an 
overriding power of the State for the protection of social security and 
that power is necessarily regulated by law.  When the Constitution -
makers have thought fit not to subject such regulation to 
constitutional limitations by recognition of a fund amental right to 
privacy, analogous to the American Fourth Amendment, we have no 
justification to import it, into a totally different fundamental right, by 
some process of strained construction.  
 
4.26 Similarly, in  Kharak Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 32 a six -
Judges Bench reiterated a similar view observing: 
 
….Nor do we consider that Article 21 has any relevance in the context 
as was sought to be suggested by the learned counsel for the 
petitioner.  ………., the right of privacy is not a  guaranteed right 
under our Constitution and, therefore, the attempt to ascertain the 
movements of an individual which is merely a manner in which 
privacy is invaded is not an infringement of a fundamental right 
guaranteed by Part III. 
 
4.27 In Ram Jethmalani v. Union of India,33 Supreme Court dealt with 
the right of privacy elaborately and held as under: 
 
  Right to privacy is an integral part of right to life. This is a cherished 
constitutional value, and it is important that human beings be 
allowed domains of freedom that are free of public scrutiny unless 
they act in an unlawful manner.... The solution for the problem of 
abrogation of one zone of constitutional values cannot be the 
creation of another zone of abrogation of constitutional values.... The 
notion of fundamenta l rights, such as a right to privacy as part of 
right to life, is not merely that the State is enjoined from derogating 
from them. It also includes the responsibility of the State to uphold 
them against the actions of others in the society, even in the con text 
of exercise of fundamental rights by those others. 
                                                           
32 AIR 1963 SC 1295 
33 (2011) 8 SCC 1 

 
 
21 
 
4.28 In R Rajagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu34, the Supreme Court held: 
The right to privacy is implicit in the right to life and liberty 
guaranteed to the citizens of this country by Article 21. It is a 
“right to be let alone”. A citizen has a right to safeguard the 
privacy of his own, his family marriage, procreation, 
motherhood, child -bearing and education among other 
matters.… 
  
4.29 Similar view has been reiterated by the Court observing that 
right to privacy is a right of the citizen , being an integral part of  Article 
21 of the Constitution of India . Illegitimate intrusion into privacy of a 
person is not permissible as the right to privacy is implicit in the right to 
life and liberty guaranteed unde r our Constitution. However, right to 
privacy may not be absolute , as in exceptional circumstance s, 
particularly, in case of surveillance in consonance with the statutory 
provisions reasonable restrictions may be imposed on such a right. (Vide: 
State of Ma harashtra v. Madhukar Narayan Mardikar, 35; Anuj Garg v. 
Hotel Association of India 36 ; Bhavesh Jayanti Lakhani  v. State of 
Maharashtra37; and Selvi v. State of Karnataka38.) 
 
4.30 “The Right to Privacy ” by Charles Warren and Louis D. 
Brandeis.39 is a good starti ng point for a discussion on the legal concept 
privacy. The article opines that privacy or the right to be let alone, was 
an interest that man should be able to assert directly and not derivatively 
from his efforts to prot ect other interests. The right to  privacy has also 
been held to be a fundamental right of the citizen by the apex Court in R. 
Rajagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu ; 40  People‟s Union for Civil Liberties 
                                                           
34 AIR 1995 SC 264  
35 AIR 1991 SC 207 
36 AIR 2008 SC 663 
37 (2009) 9 SCC 551 
38 Supra note 12  
39 4 Harvard L.R. 193 (1890). 
40 Supra Note 34 

 
 
22 
(PUCL) v. Union of India, 41 Mr. „X‟ v. Hospital „Z‟;42 People‟s Union for Civil 
Liberties (PUCL) v. Union of India;43 and Sharda v. Dharmpal44. 
 
4.31 In District Registrar and Collector, Hyderabad  v. Canara Bank,45 
the Supreme Court held that right to privacy is a personal right distinct 
from a right to property. Intrusions in to it by the legislature, i s to be 
tested on the touchstone of reasonableness and for that purpose the 
Court can go into the proportionality of the intrusion vis-a-vis the 
purpose, sought to be achieved as “right to privacy” is part of the right to 
life enshrined in Article 21 of th e Constitution of India. While deciding 
the said case, the Court placed reliance upon a large number of its 
earlier judgments, including Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India 46. The 
Court held that an illegitimate intrusion  into privacy of a citizen is not 
permissible as right to privacy is implicit in the right to lif e and liberty 
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution. 
 
4.32   In State of Maharashtra & Anr. v. Madhukar Narayan Mardikar 47 
the Supreme Court observed that “even a woman of easy virtue is entitled 
to privacy and no one can invade her privacy as and when he likes. ”  
However, s uch a right can be subject to restrictions when there are 
compelling questions of public interest48.  Police can have surveillance on 
a person only in accordance with the rules framed for that purpose as 
right to privacy is not absolute49. 
 
                                                           
41 AIR 1997 SC 568 
42 AIR 1999 SC 495 
43 AIR 2003 SC 2363 
44 AIR 2003 SC 3450 
45 AIR 2005 SC 186 
46 AIR 1978 SC 597 
47 AIR 1991 SC 207 
48 Malak Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1981 SC 760 
49 Govind v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1975 SC 1378; (see also: Bhavesh Jayanti Lakhani v. State of 
Maharashtra, Supra Note 37; and Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973). 

 
 
23 
4.33 In Justice K S Puttaswamy  (Retd.) v. Union of India, 50  the 
Supreme Court while dealing with the case of “ Aadhar card ” (UIDAI) 
observed that there have been contradictory judgments on the issue but 
the law laid down in M P Sharma 51 and Kharak Singh 52, if read literally 
and accepted as a law, the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 
21 would be denude d of vigour and vitality.  The Court referred the 
matter to a larger bench for auth oritative interpretation o f law on the 
issue. 
 
4.34 In the R.K. Dalmia v. Justice S.R. Tendolkar53, the Court held: 
 
that in order to sustain the presumption of constitutionality the 
court may take into consideration matters of common 
knowledge, matters of common report, the history of the times 
and may assume every state of facts which can be conceived 
existing at the time of legislation;… 
 
4.35 Further, the case of M. Nagaraj & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. 54 
is referred to elucidate the concept of r ight to  dignity in the following 
manner: 
 ... This Court has in numerous cases deduced fundamental 
features which are not specifically mentioned in Part III on the 
principle that certain unarticulated rights are implicit in the 
enumerated guarantees. 
 
4.36 While examining the constitutional validity of a law providing 
restrictions on fundamental rights, the proportionality of measures taken 
becomes relevant. The „compelling State interest‟ is just one aspect of the 
broader „strict scrutiny‟ test, which was applied  by the Court in Anuj 
Garg v. Hotel Association of India 55 . The other essential facet is to 
demonstrate „narrow tailoring‟, i.e., the State must demonstrate that even 
                                                           
50 (2015) 8 SCC 735 
51 Supra note 31 
52 Supra note 32 
53 AIR 1958 SC 538 
54 (2006) 8 SCC 212 
55 Supra note 36  

 
 
24 
if a compelling interest exists, it has adopted a method that will infringe 
in the narrowest possible manner upon individual rights. 
 
4.37 In the case of People‟s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India & 
Ors. 56, the  Court has endorsed bio -metric identification of homeless 
persons also so that benefits like supply of food and kerosen e meant for 
persons who are Below Poverty Line reaches to the genuine persons. 
 
4.38 In the case of Lokniti Foundation v. Union of India & Ors .,57 the 
Supreme Court disposed of the writ pet ition upon being satisfied that an 
effective process has been evolved to ens ure identity verification  and 
approved the Aadhar card based verification of existing and new mobile 
number subscribers. 
 
4.39 In Binoy Viswam v. Union of India & Ors .58, the Supreme Court 
examined the validity of the provisions of section 139AA of the Inco me 
Tax Act, 1961, which provided for quoting of Aadhar Number with 
Permanent Account Number and held as under: 
 
that those who are not PAN holders, while applying for PAN, they 
are required to give Aadhaar number. This is the stipulation of 
sub-section (1) of Section 139AA, which we have already upheld. At 
the same time, as far as existing PAN holders are concerned, since 
the impugned provisions are yet to be considered on the 
touchstone of Article 21 of the Constitution, including on the 
debate around Right to Privacy and human dignity, etc. as limbs of 
Article 21, we are of the opinion that till the aforesaid aspect of 
Article 21 is decided by the Constitution Bench a partial stay of the 
aforesaid proviso is necessary. Those who have already enrolled 
themselves under Aadhaar scheme would comply with the 
requirement of sub-section (2) of Section 139AA of the Act. 
 
4.40 Section 8(j) of the Right to Information, Act 2005 provides that 
disclosure of personal information which could cause unwarranted 
                                                           
56 Supra note 41  
57 Writ Petition (C) No. 607 of 2016 decided on February 06, 2017. 
58 WP (C) No.277 of 2017 decided on June 09, 2017. 

 
 
25 
invasion of the privacy of the individual, cannot be furnished unless it is 
necessary in larger public interest. 
 
E. Expert Opinion as evidence  
 
4.41 In cases where expert opinion is required by the court, it becomes 
incumbent on the expert to assist the court by putti ng all the relevant 
materials together with  the exact reasons which led  him to come to a 
conclusion (and not the finding as such) so that the court may draw its 
own conclusion after going through those materials. 
 
4.42 In Tomaso Bruno v. State of U.P.59, it was observed: 
The courts normally would look at expert evidence with greater 
sense of acceptability but the courts are not absolutely guided by 
the report of the experts, especially if such reports are perfunctory 
and unsustainable. The purpose of an expe rt opinion is primarily 
to assist the court in arriving in a final conclusion but such report 
is not a conclusive one. The court is expected to analyze the report, 
read it in conjunction with the other evidence on record and form 
its final opinion as to whether such a report is worthy of reliance or 
not. 
 
4.43 In Ramesh Chandra Aggrawala  v. Regency Hospitals ,60 the court 
held: 
 
“The law of evidence is designed  to ensure that the court considers 
only that evidence which will enable it to reach a reliable 
conclusion. The first and foremost requirement for an expert 
evidence to be admissible is that it is necessary to hear expert 
evidence. The test is that the matter is outside the knowledge and 
experience of the lay person…The scientific question involved is 
assumed to be not within the court‟s knowledge. …… Thus, cases 
where the science involved, is highly specialized and perhaps even 
esoteric, the central rule of expert cannot be disputed. The other 
requirements of the admissibility of expert evidence are; (i ) That 
the expert must be within a recognized field of expertise (ii)That the 
                                                           
59 (2015) 7 SCC 178 
60 AIR 2010 SC 806  

 
 
26 
evidence must be based on reliable principles and (iii) that the 
expert must be qualified in that discipline …” 
[Emphasis added] 
 
4.44 In Prem Sagar Manocha v. State (NCT of Delhi)61 the court held: 
The duty of an expert is to furnish the court his opinion and the 
reason for his opinion along with all the materials. It is for the 
court thereafter to see whether the basis of the opinion is correct 
and proper and then form its own conclusion. 
 
the expert gives an opinion on what he has tested or on what has 
been subjected to any process of scrutiny. The inference drawn 
thereafter is still an opinion based on his knowledge. In case, 
subsequently, he comes across some authentic material  which 
may suggest a different opinion, he must address the same , lest 
he should be branded as intellectually dishonest. Objective 
approach and openness to truth actually from basis of any 
opinion. 
 
4.45 While deciding the said case, the Court placed reli ance upon a 
judgment in National Justice Compania Naviera SA  v. Prudential 
Assurance Co. Ltd.62 and stated: 
 
"if an expert's opinion is not properly researched because he 
considers that insufficient data is available, then this must be 
stated with an indica tion that the opinion is no more than a 
provisional one. In cases where an expert witness who has prepared 
a report could not assert that the report contained the truth, the 
whole truth and nothing but the truth without some qualification, 
that qualification should be stated in the repor t" (Derby & Co Ltd 
and Others v Weldon and Others, The Times, Nov 9, 1990 per Lord 
Justice Staughton). 
 
4.46 The evidence procured through sophisticated machines must be 
given due weightage and there can be no justification to reject the 
opinion of the expert who has  examined the case microscopically 63. The 
fingerprint examination is conclusive as it is an exact science.64  
                                                           
61 AIR 2016 SC 290 
62 (1995) 1 L  y ’    p   5  QB (C      i   D ivision) 
63 Ramanathan v. State of Tamil Nadu AIR 1978 SC 1204 
64 Jaspal Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1979 SC 1708. 

 
 
27 
4.47 While dealing with the provisions of section 112 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872, on the issue of d etermining the paternity of the 
child, the courts held that DNA testing should be made permissible only 
on the direction of the court as no person can be forced to give his blood 
without such direction 65.  The Supreme Court in paternity cases has 
rejected the prayer for permitting DNA evidence and  has relied solely on 
the non-access principle66.   
 
4.48 The Sixteenth Law Commission, in its 185 th Report submitted in 
2003, proposed certain amendments to section 112 which are still 
pending for consideration. The  Commission also dealt with exceptions 
like “(1) Impotence or sterility; (2) blood tests proving a man is not the 
father and (3) DNA tests proving a man is not the father.” 
 
4.49 In the case of Sharda v Dharampal67, the Court observed that if 
everyone started using A rticle 21 as a shield to protect themselves from 
going through the DNA test then it will be impossible to arrive at a 
decision.  The Delhi High Court  also held that DNA testing does not 
amount to violation of any of the rights68. 
   
4.50 There can be no dispute with regard to the settled legal proposition 
that statutory provisions and binding legal principles cannot constitute 
“compulsion” as to violate the basic or constitutional rights of any 
person.  Enforcement of such principles is itself a co nstitutional 
obligation69. 
  
                                                           
65 Sadashiv Mallikarjun Khedarkar v. Nandini Sadashiv Khedakar  1995 Cri. L. J. 4090(Bom) 
66 Kanti Devi v. Poshi Ram, AIR 2001 SC 2226 
67Supra note 44 
68 Kanchan Bedi v. Shri Gurpreet Singh, AIR 2003 Delhi 446 
69 Andhra Sugar v. State of Andhra Pradesh, Air 1968 SC 599; Siddheshwar Sehkari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd. 
v. CIT Kolhapur & Ors., AIR 2004 SC 4716; and Harjinder Kaur, Supra note 1. 

 
 
28 
CHAPTER-V 
 
Laws in other Countries 
 
5.1 Most of the nations have enacted laws dealing with DNA profiling 
within the framework of their constitutional and other legal principles, 
particularly for dealing with the criminal cases. A mechanism has also 
been developed to identify the disaster victims through DNA profiling.  
 
A. Argentina 
 
5.2 The National Criminal Procedure Code was amended in 2009 to 
provide for uniform approach to DNA testing in cases of illegal adoption 
and falsificat ion of identity under Article 218, empowering Judges to 
order compulsory DNA testing in certain circumstances. They have 
established a National Bank of Genetic Data and DNA.  The Argentine 
DNA Law does not leave any option respec ting the right wherein any one 
refuses to DNA testing and prevents the individual from exercisin g the 
right to privacy at all. T hus, in the existing legal regime, it is well within 
the legislative competence of Argentina to legislate in a way that favoured 
one right-truth-over another right-privacy.70 
 
B. United States of America 
 
5.3 The Federal Bureau of Investigation in early 1990‟s designed the 
Combined DNA Index System (CODIS) with the purpose of amalgamating 
forensic sciences and computer technology into an effectual apparatus 
for solving serious crimes.  This has been corroborated by the recent 
judgment of the US Supreme Court in Maryland v. King71  wherein it was 
held that  when officers making an arrest for a serious offence are 
authorized to take and analy se a cheek swab of the arr estee‟s DNA and 
the same is legitimate under the Fourth Constitutional Amendment.  The 
Court observed: 
                                                           
70Prof Elizabeth B. Ludwin King (A Conflict of Interests: Privacy, Truth and Compulsory DNA Testing for 
A g   i  ’  Chi       f  h  Di  pp     )   11  
71 133 S. Ct. 1958 (2013) 

 
 
29 
 
In addition the processing of respondent‟s DNA sample‟s 13 CODIS 
loci did not intrude on respondent‟s privacy in a way that would 
make his DNA identific ation unconstitutional. First, as already 
noted, the CODIS loci come from non -coding parts of the DNA that 
do not reveal the genetic traits of the arrestee. While science can 
always progress further, and those progressions may have Fourth 
Amendment conseq uences, alleles at the CODIS loci are not at 
present revealing information beyond identification. 
 
5.4 In the United States, the type of crimes included in the database 
varies depending on the State. In some States many types of crimes are 
included and in others the database is restrictive and contains 
information pertaining to serious crime only.72 
 
5.5 In Andrews v. State of Florida , 73  the DNA evidence was 
accompanied by Andrew‟s regular fingerprints left on a windowsill, and 
his identification by the most recent victim in a photo -lineup. In this 
case, the strong DNA evidence was admitted. In People of the State of 
New York  v. Joseph CASTRO ,74 a three-pronged test was developed to 
determine whether DNA evidence should be admitted:   
 
I. Is there a generally acce pted theory in the scientific 
community which supports the conclusion that DNA 
forensic testing can produce reliable results?  
II. Are there techniques or experiments that currently exist 
that are capable of producing reliable results in DNA 
identification, an d which are generally accepted in the 
scientific community?   
III. Did the testing laboratory perform the accepted scientific 
techniques in analy sing the forensic samples in this 
particular case? 
                                                           
72Data obtained from National Institute of Justice of the United States of America (www/ojp.usdoj .gov/nij). 
73 533 So.2d 841 (1988). 
74 143 Misc.2d 276 (1989). 

 
 
30 
 
5.6 In U.S. v. Matthew Sylvester TWO BULLS , 75  two additional 
standards added by the Court of Appeals to make a new five-pronged 
test:   
 
I. Whether DNA evidence is generally accepted by the scientific 
community?   
II. Whether the testing procedures used in this case are generally 
accepted as reliable if performed properly?   
III. Whether the test was performed properly in this case?   
IV. Whether the evidence is more prejudicial than probative in this 
case?   
V. Whether the statistics used to determine the probability of 
someone else having the same genetic characteristics is more 
probative than prejudicial under Rule 403. 
 
5.7 In the case of PEOPLE of the State of Illinois  v. Reggie E. MILES ,76 
the evidence included regular fingerprints and semen stains, whose DNA 
was found to match Miles by scientists at Cellmark Diagnostics, a DNA 
identification company in Maryland . This case ended with a general 
strong support for DNA evidence and faith that the techniques can 
produce reliable results.  In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals ,77 
after analysing the details of the standards of evidence previously set and 
the Federal Rules of Evidence, the Court put forth 5 criteria to 
characterize the weight of evidence:   
   
I. Whether the theory or technique has been tested?   
II. Whether the theory or technique has been subjected to peer 
review and     publication?   
                                                           
75 918 F2d 56. 
76 577 N.E.2d 477 (1991). 
77 509 U.S. 579 (1993). 

 
 
31 
III. Whether the theory or technique has a known or potential rate 
of error.    
IV. Whether the theory or technique has standards for controlling 
the technique‟s    operation.    
V. The degree to which the theory or technique has been accepted 
in the relevant    scientific community. 
 
C. Canada 
 
5.8 Canada passed DNA Identification Act on June 30 th, 2000 which 
allowed the establishment of DNA data bank and amended their criminal 
code. The salient features of the Act are: 
 
1. It empowered the judges with the mechanism  to order convicts 
to provide blood, hair samples which will be added in the bank. 
2. The National Data Bank works in accordance with the guidelines 
of the Act and ensures that the privacy is respected.  
3. The samples can be collected only for legal purposes. 
4. Collecting genetic sample is legally valid when the sample is 
collected by health care professional. 
5. A National Forensic Science Commission established to make 
recommendations to the Attorney General to ensure : 
 
 Appropriate use and dissemination of DNA information. 
 Accuracy, security and confidentiality of DNA information. 
 The timely removal and destruction of obsolete and 
inaccurate DNA information. 
 Measures are taken to protect privacy. 
 
 
5.9 In R. v. Stillman78, the majority view of the Canadian Supreme 
Court had been that though unauthorised use of a per son‟s body or 
bodily substances is a “compelled testimony”, but if balance of 
probabilities demonstrate that the evidence would have been discovered 
by alternative non -constructive means, its admission wil l not render the 
trial unfair.  In R. v S.A.B.79, the Supreme Court of Canada Upheld the 
                                                           
78 (1997) 1 SCR 6075 
79 (2003) 2 SCR 678; see also Harjinder Kaur, supra note 1. 

 
 
32 
Constitutional validity of DNA warra nt legislatio n and dealt with the 
issue of weight to be attached to the evidence of DNA experts.   
 
D. China 
 
5.10 China, in 1999 pa ssed a law allowing the Ministry of Justice and 
the Ministry of Interior to establish DNA Banks.  The essential things 
incorporated in this legislation are: 
 
1. The offenders - convicts as well as suspects who are sex 
offenders have to provide for such samples voluntarily. 
2. In case of refusal the prosecutor has the power to compel the 
person to do so. 
3. The written and photographic samples of DNA can be 
retained for 10 years. 
4. People who are suspected of committing a crime for which 
punishment is more than 5 years  are required to give non 
intimate samples. 
 
E. United Kingdom 
 
 
5.11 DNA profiling was first used in a criminal case in England in 1986. 
DNA samples collected from the men living and working within 
the neighbourhood of two rape and murder scenes resulted in two 
positive outcomes. The one man initially convicted was proved to be 
innocent and the guilty criminal was caught, one year later.  
 
5.12 UK has an extensive legal foundation regarding DNA technology.   
In the  UK the question of consent and privacy has been debated and 
ultimately it was held that the court will not order a blood test to be 
carried out against the will of a parent. The essence of every law in UK is 
to protect one‟s personal liberty. Although there are statutory provisions, 
where under blood samples can be taken without parent‟s consent, for 
example, testing for diseases like HIV. 
 
5.13 In 1994, the British Parliament passed the Criminal Justice and 
Public Order Act, which provided the legal  foundation for the National 
DNA Database ( NDNAD). The A ct allows the police to take DNA samples 

 
 
33 
without consent from anyone charged with any of fence that is classified 
as „recordable', and also to search the database speculatively for 
matching profiles. Because of Parliamentary Act , the police is permitted 
to take DNA‟s of the arrested person before the investigating process 
begins so as to make the process faster. The Home office by this step has 
a complete record of active criminal population, making it easy to first 
eliminate the innocents. 
 
5.14 The Court of Appeal, in  R (on the application of S)  v. Chief 
Constable of South Yorkshire 80 , upheld a legislation compelling 
preservation of finger prints, bodily samples,  DNA profiles 
and DNA samples. It was contended that the amended provision was 
incompatible with Articles  8 and 14 of the Human Rights Act, which 
dealt with protection of privacy and he nce it was prayed that the 
fingerprints and  DNA samples of the concerned parties should be 
destroyed. In the said case, a distinction was drawn between the `taking', 
`retention' and `use' of fingerprints and  DNA samples. The statutory 
basis for the retenti on of physical samples taken from suspects was 
addition of new Section  64(1A) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act, 
1984 which provides  that these samples could only be used for  the 
purposes relating  to the „ prevention or detection of crime, the 
investigation of an offence or the conduct of a prosecution‟ . The Court 
observed: 
 
So far as the prevention and detection of crime is concerned, it is 
obvious that the larger the data  bank of fingerprints 
and DNA samples available to the police, the greater the value of the 
data bank will be in preventing crime and detecting those 
responsible for crime. There can be no doubt that if every member of 
the public was required to provide fingerprints and a  DNA sample 
this would make a dramatic contribution to the preve ntion and 
detection of crime. To take but one example, the great majority of 
rapists who are not known already to their victim would be able to 
be identified. However, the 1984 Act does not contain blanket 
provisions either as to the taking, the retention,  or the use of 
                                                           
80 (2003) 1 All ER 148, 

 
 
34 
fingerprints or samples; Parliament has decided upon a balanced 
approach. 
 
5.15 In Saunders v. United Kingdom 81 , the court explained the 
difference between identification and self -incrimination when it comes to 
collection of DNA samples etc., observing: 
 
“….The right not to incriminate oneself is primarily concerned, 
however, with respecting the will of an accused person to remain 
silent. As commonly understood in the legal systems of the 
Contracting Parties to the Convention and elsewhere, it  does not 
extend to the use in criminal proceedings of material which may be 
obtained from the accused through the use of compulsory powers 
but which has an existence independent of the will of the suspect 
such as, inter alia, documents acquired pursuant t o a warrant, 
breath, blood and urine samples and bodily tissue for the purpose 
of DNA testing.” 
 
5.16 In the case of S and Marper  v. United Kingdom,82 the court upheld 
the right to privacy and said that retention of DNA samples is a 
substantial threat to privacy.  
 
F. Scotland  
 
5.17 Evidential, jurisdictional and procedural matters  required 
amendment in the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 to: 
 
 allow challenges to certain evidence relating to fingerprints and 
similar data where this is contained in certificate form; 
 allow DNA samples to be taken by swabbing by a constable 
without authorisation from a senior officer; 
 allow the police to retain DNA and fingerprints given voluntarily 
and with the consent of the person giving the sample ; 
 
5.18 Section 55 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 is 
amended to remove the requirement to obtain authorisation from an 
inspector before a police constable can exercise compulsory powers to 
take a DNA sample by mouth swab, without force. This is achieved by 
amending sections 18, 19, 19A and 19B of the 1995 Act which contain 
                                                           
81 (1997) 23 EHRR 313 
82 [2008] ECHR 1581. 

 
 
35 
the statutory powers to obtain samples of DNA for analysis purposes. 
Section 18 applies where a person has been arrested and is in custody, 
or has been detained under section 14 of the 1995 A ct. Sections 19 and 
19A apply where a person has been convicted of an offence, although 
19A covers only those offenders convicted of a sexual or violent offence as 
defined in sub -section (6). Section 19B details circumstances where a 
constable may use reasonable force while obtaining samples. 
 
5.19 The statutory provision allows the police to use such samples and 
prints, taken with consent, in the investigation of an offence or offences. 
This puts on a statutory footing the current practice where the police  
takes samples or prints with consent and check them against evidence 
from a scene of crime, for example mass DNA screenings in a 
geographical area. It also provides the police with authority, in certain 
circumstances, to retain the samples and prints for use in subsequent 
investigations whereas presently they would be destroyed at the 
conclusion of the investigation in connection with which they were 
obtained. 
 
G. Trinidad and Tobago 
 
 
5.20 Trinidad and Tobago pass ed The Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA ) 
Identification Act, 2000 to provide for DNA forensic analysis, to include a 
DNA report as evidence, to provide for the use of DNA testing to 
determine parentage, and other related matters. It provided for obtaining 
DNA samples by consent but also lays down a proc edure for obtaining a 
tissue sample by a Court order. Under this there is also a provision 
where a child or an incapable person is detained, arrested or charged for 
an offence, a tissue sample shall not be taken from that child or that 
incapable person except by an order of a court, because they may not be 
fit to provide genuine consent.  
 
 
 

 
 
36 
H. Other Countries 
 
5.21 In countries such as Holland, Germany, France or Austria only 
individuals who have committed certain serious crimes are included  in 
the DNA profiling.83  
 
5.22 The relevant portion of the Executive Summary of “National DNA 
Databases 2011 84 ” published by Andrew D Thibedeau, J.D., Senior 
Fellow under the aegis of Council for Responsible Genetics , covering 
several countries with regard to DNA profilin g, including removal criteria 
and sample retention, is annexed to this Report as Annexure - I. 
                                                           
83Schneider PM. DNA databases for offender identification in Europe - the need for technical, legal and 
political harmonization. Proceedings of the 2nd European Symposium on Human Identification. Madison, 
WI, USA: PromegaCorporation,1998. 
84 Available at  www.antoniocasella.eu/dnlaw/DNA-data2011.pdf  Last accessed on 13 July 2017  

 
 
37 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
The Human DNA Profiling Bill, 2016 and Other Reports 
 
A. The Human DNA Profiling Bill 2016 
 
6.1 The Bill 2016 was drafted by the Department of Biotechnology and 
was submitted to the Government of India. The Bill proposed  to form a 
National DNA Data  Bank and a DNA Profiling Board, and for using the 
data for various purposes  specified in the Bill . The proposed DNA 
Profiling Board would have consisted of mo lecular biology, human 
genetics, population biology, bioethics, social sciences, law and criminal 
justice experts. The Board was to define standards and controls for DNA 
profiling. It was also to certify laboratories and handle access of data 
stored by law enforcement agencies. Similar bodies at State levels  were 
also to be formed. 
 
6.2 The National DNA Data Bank, was supposed to  collect data from 
offenders, suspects, missing persons, unidentified dead bodies and 
volunteers. It was to  profile and store DNA data in criminal cases like 
homicide, sexual assault, adultery and other crimes. The data was to be 
available also to the accused or the suspect  for proving his non -
involvement in the crime  or at least to establish that he was not present 
on the place of occurrence at the relevant time.  
 
6.3 The Bill was criticis ed for not addressing the concerns of privacy 
by a large number of organisations and public spirited persons on 
similar grounds  and made various representations to the  statutory 
authorities. The Bill did not make special provisions in respect of funding 
of the Board and how the required funds will be made available to the 
investigating agencies to collect proper reports of samples. Moreover, the 
Bill did not specifically provide as to on what stage the samples could be 
collected.   

 
 
38 
 
B. The A. P. Shah Committee Report85 
 
6.4 In October 2012, an expert committee headed by  Hon‟ble Justice 
Ajit Prakash Shah presented its r eport, suggesting that there should be 
safeguards to prevent illegal  collection and use of DNA data; further 
providing safeguards to prevent the proposed body from misusing the  
same. That there should a mechanism using which citizens can appeal 
against the retention of data. The report also suggested that there should 
also be a mechanism of appeal under which citizens under trial can 
request for a fresh sample to be taken. The samples were  to be taken 
after consent in case of victims and suspects.  
 
6.5 The Committee noted that although the Bill allowed  volunteers to 
give samples, there was no proper procedure to obtain consent and there 
was no mechanism under which volunteer can withdraw his data. That 
before giving the data to a third party, the person mus t be notified and 
consent must be sought, if the third party was not an authorised agency. 
The purpose for which data was being collected should be state d 
publicly, and the data should be destroyed after the purpose has been 
served and the time frame has e xpired. The report said that the  bodies 
collecting, analysing, and storing DNA data should be made to release an 
annual report, detailing their practices and organisational structure.  
These observations alleviate the underlying concern about one‟s right t o 
privacy when DNA databases are created.  
 
C. Malimath Committee Report86 
 
6.6 Section 29 3(4) of Cr. P .C. enlists the scientific experts under the 
Code. The Committee recommended that DNA experts should be 
included in the list of experts under clause (g). 
 
                                                           
85 ―  p     f  h  G   p  f Exp          iv  y‖ (Ch i    by     i   A    h h  F      Chi f     i    D  hi 
High Court), submitted to the Planning Commission on 16 October 2012.  
86 Malimath Committee Report on Reform of Criminal Justice System, 2003  

 
 
39 
6.7 It recommended amendment of Cr.  P.C. conferring all criminal 
courts at all levels with the inherent power to pass appropriate orders as 
maybe necessary to give effect to any order under Cr.  P.C., or to prevent 
abuse of the process of any court or otherwi se secure the ends of justice 
as provided under section 482 Cr. P.C. exclusively for the High Court.  
 
6.8 The Committee also recommended an amendment section 4 of 
Identification of Prisoners  Act, 1920 in line with section 27 of the 
Prevention of Terrorism  Act, 2002 which empowers the Court to direct 
the accused/suspect in writing to give: 
 
(1)  samples of hand writing, finger -prints, foot -prints, 
photographs, blood, saliva, semen, hair, voice to the poli ce 
officer either through a medical practitioner or otherwise, as 
the case may be. 
 
(2)  If any accused person refuses to give samples as provided in 
sub-section (1), the Court shall draw adverse inferen ce against 
the accused. 
  

 
 
40 
CHAPTER-VII 
 
Conclusions 
 
7.1  DNA Profiling , an accurate and well established scientific 
technique is used for d isaster victim identification, investigation of 
crimes, identification of missing persons and human remains, and for 
medical research purposes. 
 
7.2  Most of the countries have enacted appropriate laws within the 
framework of their respective constitution s and other legal frameworks 
for the aforesaid purposes.  
 
7.3  DNA Profiling and use thereof involve s various legal a nd ethical 
issues and concerns are raised and apprehensions exist in the mind s of 
the common man about its misuse which unless protected may result in 
disclosure of personal information, such as health related data capable of 
being misused by persons having prejudicial interests, adversely affecting 
the privacy of the person.  
 
7.4  Whether in Indian context privacy is an inte gral part of A rticle 21 
of the Constitution is a matter of academic debate. The issue  is pending 
consideration before the larger bench of the Supreme Court. 
 
7.5  The Bill of 2017 provides provisions intended to protect the right to 
privacy. The mechanism provided permits for processing of DNA samples 
only for 13 CODIS loci which would not violate in any way the privacy of 
a person  and as a  result will never go beyond identification of a 
particular person. The strict adherence to 13 CODIS loci will eliminate 
the apprehension of revealing genetic traits. 
 

 
 
41 
7.6  The Code of Criminal procedure (Amendment) Act 2005 which 
came into force on 23 rd June 2006 added Explanations to s ections 53, 
53A and 54 to clarify the scope of medical examination particularly in 
respect to the extraction to the bodily substances  and  the explanation 
provides that examination of a person shall include the exam ination of 
blood, blood stains,  semen, swabs in case of sexual offences, sputum 
and sweat, hair sa mples and finger nail clippings by  scientific 
techniques including DNA Profiling and such other tests that the medical 
practitioner deems necessary. 
 
7.7  Thus the Bill of 2017 is in consonance and in conformity with the 
aforesaid provisions which are added by the Amendment Act 2005, which 
also provides for DNA profiling.   

 
 
42 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
Recommendations 
 
8.1 The draft of “The Use and Regulation of DNA -based Technology in 
Civil and Criminal Proceedings, Identification of Missing Persons and 
Human Remains Bill, 2016 ”, which was forwarded to the Law 
Commission of India by the D epartment of Biotechnology, has been 
thoroughly examined by the C ommission.  The Commission has taken 
into consideration the various aspects of DNA profiling and the abse nce 
of an appropriate regulatory mechanism fo r the use, retention and 
expunction of body substances, DNA samples and DNA profiles .  The 
draft Bill has been substantially modified  and a new draft Bill titled “The 
DNA-Based Technology (Use and Regulation) Bill, 2017” has been 
prepared and is annexed to this Report as Annexure – II.   
 
8.2 The salient features of the recommendations are as below: 
 
(a) DNA Profiling Board  – A statutory bo dy: A DNA Profiling 
Board be constituted, which would undertake functions such as 
laying down procedures and standards to establish DNA 
laboratories and granting accreditation to such laboratories ; 
and advising the concerned Ministries / Departments of the  
Central and State Governments on issues relating to DNA 
laboratories.  The Board shall  also be responsible to supervise, 
monitor, inspect and assess the laboratories .  The Board will 
frame guidelines for training of the Police and other 
investigating agen cies dealing with DNA related matters.   
Advising on all ethical and human rights issues relating to DNA 
testing in consonance with international guidelines  will be 
another function of the Board.  It will recommend  research and 
development activities in DNA testing and related issues, etc. 

 
 
43 
(b) DNA profiling would be undertaken exclusively for identification 
of a person and would not be used  to extract any other 
information. 
(c) DNA Data Bank: There shall be a National DNA Data Bank, and 
Regional DNA Data  Banks for t he States, to be established by 
the Central Government .  The Data  Banks will be resp onsible 
for storing DNA profiles  received from the accredited 
laboratories and maintaining certain indices for various 
categories of data, like crime scene index, suspects‟  index, 
offenders‟ index, missing persons‟ index and unknown deceased 
persons‟ index. 
(d) With a view to assist the kith and kin of missing person s, 
provisions have been made for proper identification of missing 
persons on the basis of their bodily samples/substances. 
(e) Appropriate regulations may be notified by the Board for entry, 
retention and expunction of DNA profiles. 
(f) Maintenance of strict confidentiality with regard to keeping of 
records of DNA profiles and their use.   
(g) Sharing of DNA profiles with and by foreign Government or 
Government organisation or Government institutions or any of 
its agencies, for the purpose of this Act. 
(h) The violators of the provisions would be liable for punishment of 
imprisonment, which may extend up to three  years and  also 
fine which may extend up to Rs.2 lakhs.   
(i) The undertrial  may request the trial court for another DNA 
testing if s/he satisfies the court that the previous DNA 
sample(s)/bodily substance(s)  stood contaminated an d hence 
could not be relied upon. 
(j) The DNA experts ma y be specified as Government Scientific 
Experts and be notified as such under clause (g) of sub -section 
(4) of section 293 of Cr. P.C.  

 
 
44 
 
8.3 The draft Bill is prepared to fulfill the very objective of human DNA 
profiling by DNA laboratories which will be under statutory obligations to 
follow stringent standards, quality control and quality assurances.  This 
will promote the establishment of uniform practices to be followed in all 
the laboratories involved in DNA profiling. T he proposed legislation will 
promote the scientific upgradation  and streamlining of DNA profiling  
activities in the country.   The Commission has put in its efforts to 
ensure that the  provisions in the draft Bill are  in conformity with the 
constitutional provisions. 
 
 The Commission recommends accordingly. 
 
 
 
  


 
 
45 
Annexure I 
Relevant Portion from “National DNA Databases 2011” 
Country Entry Criteria Removal Criteria Sample Retention 
Austria Convicted 
persons, suspects 
charged of a 
serious offences 
and all crime 
scene stains. 
Profiles of conv icted 
persons are retained 
indefinitely, suspects‟ 
profiles are removed upon 
acquittal, [but only after 
submitting a written 
request], and crime scene 
stains are kept until a case 
is solved. 
Convicted persons‟ 
samples must be 
destroyed when individual 
reaches age eighty, 
suspects samples are 
retained despite suspects‟ 
acquittal, [a written 
request for destruction 
must be submitted] 
Belgium Persons convicted 
of a “serious 
offence” and crime 
scene stains when 
ordered by a 
prosecutor 
Convicted persons‟ profil es 
are kept for 10 years after 
their death and crime scene 
stains are removed when no 
longer considered useful 
(order of public prosecution 
office is necessary) 
Convicted persons‟ 
samples must be 
destroyed once DNA 
profile is created, 
suspects‟ profiles must be 
destroyed once the 
prosecutor has 
determined that a 
suspects‟ request for 
independent DNA 
analysis will not be 
granted or when the 
result of such request has 
been communicated to 
the suspect. 
Bulgaria Persons indicted 
for a premeditated 
indictable crime 
As to personal data 
registered for purposes of 
national security or crime 
prevention, it must be 
erased if there is no more 
reason for maintain them 
under the Act or pursuant 
to and act.  In determining 
whether to delete said 
personal data including 
DNA profiles, the Ministry 
of Interior must consider 
the age of the individual, 
need of the information, 
completion of an ongoing 
investigation or legal 
process, whether the 
individual has been 
convicted, amnesty status, 
implications of 
rehabilitation, or t he 
expiration of a term 
provided by law.  As to 
personal data registered for 
crime prevention purposes 
only, it must be deleted 
upon written order of the 
 

 
 
46 
Data Commissioner or 
upon a written request of 
the individual in question if 
it was registered 
unlawfully, the underlying 
criminal proceedings have 
been terminated, the 
individual in question is 
acquitted of all charges, the 
individual in question is 
except by reason of 
incapacity, the individual is 
deceased.  
China (Hong 
Kong) 
Persons convicted 
of any “ serious 
arrestable offence” 
and all crime 
scene stains. 
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are kept indefinitely unless 
their conviction is 
subsequently quashed on 
appeal, in which case they 
are removed from the 
database. 
Convicted persons‟ 
samples must be 
destroyed as soon as is 
practicable from such 
time as there is no other 
charge against the person 
in relation to an offence 
which renders the 
retention of the sample 
necessary and all 
proceedings (including 
any appeal) arising out of 
the conviction have been 
concluded; suspects 
samples‟ must be 
destroyed as soon as is 
practicable twelve months 
after the sample is taken 
if they are not charged 
with any offense, or if so 
charged when all charges 
are withdrawn, the 
person is discharged by a 
court before conviction o f 
the offence or all the 
offences, or they are 
acquitted of all charges. 
Croatia Any person whose 
identity is in 
question in the 
course of a 
criminal 
investigation and 
all crime scene 
stains 
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are kept for twenty years 
after the completion of the 
underlying criminal 
proceeding. 
 
Cyprus All convicted 
persons, suspects, 
and crime scene 
stains 
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are removed when their 
record is cleared, suspects‟ 
profiles are removed when 
they are acquitted or 
otherwise cle ared of all 
charges, and crime scene 
stains are kept until they 
All samples follow fate of 
DNA profile 

 
 
47 
are identified. 
Czech Republic All convicted 
persons and crime 
scene stains 
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are kept for eighty years 
after they are entered  and 
crime scene stains are kept 
until they are identified  
All samples follow fate of 
DNA profile 
Denmark Convicted 
persons, suspects 
charged of an 
offence that could 
lead to a prison 
sentence of 1 ½ 
years or more, 
and all crime 
scene stains 
Convicted pe rsons‟ and 
suspects‟ profiles are kept 
until two years after their 
death or upon their 
reaching age eighty and 
crime scene stains are 
retained for the “prescribed 
term” of the case as 
determined by the Danish 
Penalty Act 
All samples follow fate of 
DNA profile. 
Estonia Persons convicted 
or arrested for any 
recordable offence 
and all crime 
scene stains. 
Convicted persons‟ and 
suspects‟ profiles are kept 
for ten years after their 
death and crime scene 
stains are kept for seventy -
five years after they are 
entered. 
All samples are retained 
indefinitely. 
Finland Convicted persons 
serving a prison 
sentence of 3 
years or more, 
suspects charged 
of a crime that 
could lead to a 
prison sentence of 
6 months or more, 
and all crime 
scene stains 
Convicted persons‟ profile s 
are kept for ten years after 
the death of the convicted 
person, suspects‟ profiles 
are deleted within one year 
of a prosecutorial 
determination that there is 
no evidence of an offence, 
charges have been 
dismissed when their 
sentence has been nullified, 
or ten years after the 
suspects‟ death if not 
removed earlier; crime 
scene stains are kept 
indefinitely 
Convicted persons‟ 
samples must be 
destroyed ten years after 
their death, suspects‟ 
samples must be 
destroyed within one year 
of a prosecutorial 
determination that there 
is no evidence of an 
offence, charges have 
been dismissed, when 
their sentence has been 
nullified, or ten years 
after the suspects‟ death 
if not removed earlier. 
France Persons convicted 
of or charged with 
a serious offence 
(list in law) and 
crime scene stains 
when deemed 
relevant 
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are kept for forty years after 
conviction upon their 
eightieth birthday, 
suspects‟ profiles are 
removed by motion of the 
prosecutor or the individual 
upon grounds that their 
storage no longer serves its 
original purpose, and crime 
scene stains are deleted 
forty years after they have 
been analysed. 
Convicted persons‟ 
samples are retained for 
forty ye ars after their 
conviction or until their 
eightieth birthday; 
suspects‟ samples are 
kept until conviction or 
acquittal: i.e., 
procedurally, DNA 
samples are treated as 
regular evidence. 
Germany Persons convicted 
of a serious 
offence or 
repeatedly 
Convicted persons‟ and 
suspects‟ profiles are 
removed when their 
retention is no longer 
Convicted persons‟ and 
suspects‟ samples must 
be d estroyed when they 
are no longer considered 

 
 
48 
committing the 
same minor 
offence, suspects 
charged of a 
serious offence, 
and crime scene 
stains w hen 
related to any 
recordable offence 
necessary and crime scene 
stains must be deleted after 
30 years of their entry. 
useful for investigatory 
purposes. 
Hungary Persons convicted 
of one of the 
crimes categories 
which are listed in 
law, suspects 
charged with an 
offence that could 
lead to a prison 
sentence of 5 
years or more or 
that is listed in 
law, and all crime 
scene stains. 
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are kept until twenty years 
after conviction, suspects‟ 
profiles are retained until 
the underlying proceeding 
is abandoned or the 
individual is acquitted, and 
crime scene stains are 
deleted at the time 
proscribed by law. 
Convicted persons 
samples must be 
destroyed twenty years 
after their conviction and 
suspects‟ samples must 
be destroyed upon their 
acquittal or abandonment 
of the underlying 
investigation or 
proceeding 
Latvia Convicted or 
suspected of any 
recordable offence 
and all crime 
scene stains 
Convicted persons‟ and 
suspects‟ profiles are 
retained for seventy five 
years after their entry and 
crime scene samples are 
kept until they are 
identified 
All samples are kept for 
seventy five years 
Lithuania All convicted 
persons, suspects, 
and crime scene 
stains 
Convicted persons‟ and 
suspects profiles are 
retained for one hundred 
years after their entry or 
ten years after their death 
and crime scene stains are 
kept indefinitely 
All samples must be 
destroyed once they have 
been analysed and a DNA 
profile derived therefrom 
Luxembourg Persons convicted 
of an offence that 
is listed in law 
(order of solicitor 
or examining 
magistrate is 
required), persons 
suspected of any 
recordable offe nce 
(order of solicitor 
or examining 
magistrate is 
required) and 
crime scene stains 
only by order of 
the solicitor, the 
examining 
magistrate or a 
judicial police 
officer acting by 
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are kept for ten  years after 
their death, suspects‟ 
profiles are deleted upon 
their acquittal or ten years 
after their death, and crime 
scene stains are retained 
for thirty years after their 
entry 
Convicted persons‟ 
samples are destroyed ten 
years after their death; 
suspects‟ samples are 
destroyed upon acquittal, 
ten years after their 
death, or upon the 
expiration of the a term 
prescribed by law 

 
 
49 
order of one these 
magistrates 
 
Netherlands Persons convicted 
or suspected of 
any recordable 
offence and all 
crime scene stains 
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are kept for one hundred 
years after the individual‟s 
date of birth, suspects‟ 
profiles are removed upon 
their acquittal, and crime 
scene stains are removed 
when no longer considered 
useful 
Convicted persons‟ 
samples are retained 
indefinitely; suspects 
samples must be 
destroyed upon their 
acquittal 
Slovakia Persons 
condemned to 
punishment other 
than a fine, all 
suspects, if 
warranted by 
possible prison 
sentence, and all 
crime scene stains  
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are retained for ten years 
after conviction , suspects‟ 
profiles are removed upon 
their acquittal, and crime 
scene stains are kept until 
they are identified, when 
the underlying case is 
solved, or after fifteen or 
thirty years depending on 
the severity of the 
underlying offense 
All samples must be 
destroyed “as soon as 
possible” [GET QT FROM 
LAW] 
Sweden Persons serving a 
prison sentence of 
4 years or more, 
suspects charged 
of an offence that 
could lead to a 
prison sentence of 
4 years or more 
(approval of 
prosecutor is 
required), and all 
crime scene stains 
Convicted persons‟ profiles 
are kept for twenty years 
after their entry for 
individuals sentenced to no 
more than six years, thirty 
years for individuals 
sentenced to more than six 
years, or at most twenty 
years after the individual‟s 
death; suspects‟ profiles are 
removed upon acquittal and 
crime scene stains are 
deleted after twelve, twenty, 
or eighty years depending 
on the severity of the 
underlying offense 
Have to be destroyed 
twenty years after their 
creation for individuals 
sentenced to no more 
than six years, thirty 
years for individuals 
sentenced to more than 
six years, or at most 
twenty years after the 
individual‟s death; 
suspects‟ samples must 
be destroyed upon their 
acquittal 
UK Persons convicted 
of any recordable 
offence, arrested 
for any recordable 
offense, and all 
crime scene stains 
 
For Scotland: 
Persons convicted 
of any recordable 
offence, arrested 
for any recordable 
offense, and all 
crime scene stains 
Convicted persons‟ and 
suspects‟ profiles are 
retained indefinitely and 
crime scene s tains are kept 
until they have been 
identified 
 
For Scotland: Convicted 
persons‟ profiles are 
retained indefinitely, 
suspects‟ profiles are 
retained until the 
underlying proceeding is 
abandon or the individual 
is acquitted, and crime 
scene stains are kept until 
All samples are retained 
indefinitely  
 
For Scotland: Convicted 
persons‟ samples are 
retained indefinitely, but 
suspects‟ samples must 
be destroyed upon their 
acquittal or when no 
criminal proceedings are 
initiated 

 
 
50 
they have been identified 
United States 12 states have 
laws authorizing 
arrestee sampling.  
All 50 states 
require that 
convicted sex 
offenders provide 
a DNA sample; 46 
states require that 
all convicted 
felons provide a 
DNA sample.  
Eleven states 
specify certain 
misdemeanour 
among those who  
must provide a 
sample.  There are 
28 states that 
include DNA from 
delinquent 
juveniles in the 
database.  
38 states contains statutes 
that detail expungement 
criteria and procedure.  33 
require the offender to 
initiate the process. 
The criteria for retenti on 
vary from immediate 
removal, if a sample is 
not used, to retention of a 
sample for at least 35 
years, to permanent 
retention for certain 
specified offences. 
 
 
  

 
 
51 
Laws on Point  
Australia  
Commonwealth Crimes Act of 1914 (as amended up to July 2008) The 
Crimes (Forensic Procedures) Act of 2000 No 59 (NSW) 
The Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Act 2007 (SA)  
Austria  State Police Law (SPG)  
Bahrain  L w N    5  f    6 (―I    i y C    L w‖) L w N    6  f    6  
Belarus  Minister of Justice Order No. 471 of December 5, 2008 Ministry of Justice 
Resolution No. 20 of July 21, 2003  
Belgium  Law of 22 March 1999 
Royal Decree of 4 February 2002.  
Bulgaria  
Instruction I-73/2000 
Ordinance on Police Records 
Law for the Ministry of the Interior Criminal Procedure Code  
Canada  DNA Identification Act of 1998  
China (Hong 
Kong)  
The Dangerous Drugs, Independent Commission Against Corruption and 
Police Force Ordinance 
Independent Commission Against Corruption Ordinance 
Police Force Ordinance  
Colombia  Code of Criminal Procedure 
Decision C-025, 2009 of the Colombian Constitutional Court  
Croatia  Police Act 
Code of Criminal Procedure Rules on Police Conduct Law on Prisons  
Cyprus  Police Law 
 
Czech 
Republic  
Criminal Procedure Act 
Law on Police 
Binding Instruction No. 88/2002 of the President of the Police  
Denmark  Law Establishing a Central DNA Profile Register  
Estonia  
Government of the Republic Act Databases Act, Police Act 
Personal Data Protection Act 
Code of Criminal Procedure 
Decree of National Police Commissioner  
Finland  Coercive Measures Act Police Act 
Police Personal Data File Act  
France  
Code of Criminal Procedure 
Law No. 98-468 of June 17, 1998 Law No. 2001-1062 of November 15, 2001 
Law No. 2003-239 of March 18, 2003 
Decree No. 2000-413 of May 18, 2000 
Decree No. 2002-697 of April 30, 2002 
Decree No. 2004-470 of May 25, 2004 
Decree No. 2004-71 of May 25, 2004 
Decree No. 2009-785 of June 23, 2009. Deliberation No. 2008-113 of May 
14, 2008 Circular of the Ministry of Justice of 27 July 2004 

 
 
52 
 
FYR 
Macedonia  
Rules of Legal Procedure (Strafprozessordnung) 
Bundeskriminalamtgesetz (act for the Federal Criminal Investigation Office)  
Germany  Act LXXXV of 1999 on the Criminal Records and Certificates on Criminal 
Record.  
Hungary  Law on Police DNA File Police DNA File Regulations  
Iran  2005 Amendment to the Criminal Procedure Law  
Jamaica  DNA Handling and Recording Regulations Police Instructions on DNA  
Kuwait  Law on Establishing the National DNA Database  
Latvia  
Criminal Procedure Code of the Republic of Lithuania Lithuanian Police 
Activity Law. 
Instructions on DNA Database Management, 
Order of the General Commissar of the Lithuanian Police  
Lithuania  Law No. 163 of August 25, 2006 on the Procedures for Identification by DNA 
Fingerprints in Criminal Cases  
Luxembourg  The Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) Identification Act of 2009  
Morocco  Code of Criminal Procedure 
DNA-investigation in Criminal Proceedings Act  
New Zealand  Criminal Procedures Act 
Law Regulating the Prosecuting Authority  
Norway  Law No. 80 of 23 November 1998  
Panama  Code of Criminal Procedure Police Act  
Poland  Law No. 5 of February 12, 2008  
Portugal  Law No 76/2008 establishes the National System of Judicial Genetic Data 
(h   i  f    ― NDG ‖)  

 
 
53 
  
 
Singapore  Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act Registration of Criminals Act  
Slovakia  The Act n. 417/2002 -Use of DNA analysis for identification of persons  
Slovenia  Police Act 
Code of Criminal Procedure  
South Africa  Criminal Procedure Act  
Spain  Criminal Procedure Law 
Law 15/1999 on Protection of Personal Data  
Sweden  Code of Judicial Procedure Police Data Act  
Switzerland  DNA-Profil-Gesetz DNA-Profil-Verodnung DNA-Analyselabor-V 
erodnung  
UK  
Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) Criminal Justice and Public 
Order Act (CJPOA) Criminal Evidence (Amendment) Act 
Criminal Justice and Police Act (CJPA) Criminal Justice Act (CJA) 2003 
Data Protection Act (DPA) 
Human Rights Act (HRA)  
Ukraine  Approved Regulations on the Operation of the Ministry of Internal Affairs 
Criminal Records Services  
United States  The DNA Identification Act, 1994 Justice for All Act, 2004 
Violence Against Women Act, 2005  
 
 

 
 
54 
Annexure - II 
 THE DNA BASED TECHNOLOGY (USE AND 
REGULATION) BILL, 2017 
 
A BILL to provide for the u se and regulation of Deoxyribo -
nucleic Acid (DNA) based technology ; taking of specified 
bodily samples from certain categories of persons for the 
purposes of DNA analysis, custody trail f rom collection to 
reporting; to provide for the use of DNA profiles in the 
investigation of crime and the use of such profiles in 
proving the innocence or guilt of persons; to establish and 
regulate the administration of the DNA Profiling Board ; 
laying down the standards for laboratories ; to establish 
National and Regional DNA Dat a B anks for the 
maintenance of national DNA database for the purposes of 
identification of victims, accused, suspects, undertrials, 
missing persons  and unidentified human remains; to 
provide for the conditions under which the samples for 
DNA profiles derived from the samples may be retained for 
the periods or within which they must be destroyed; and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:- 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1      (1) This Act may be called the DNA Based 
Technology (Use and Regulation) Act, 2017. 
     (2) It extends to the whole of India.  
     (3) It shall come into force on such date as t he 
Central Government may, by notification, in the 
Official Gazette appoint: 
           Provided that different dates may be 
appointed for different provisions of this Act 
and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed 
as a reference to the coming into force of that 
provision. 
 
2    (1)  In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,- 
(a) “Board” means the DNA Profiling Board 
established under sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(b) “bodily substance s” means any biological 
material of, or from the body of, a person, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
55 
whether living or d ead, unidentified human 
remains, and includes intimate or non -
intimate body samples specified in Explanation 
to section 23; 
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the 
Board ; 
(d) “crime scene inde x” in relation to any offence 
listed in Paragraphs A and B of th e Schedule 
means a list of entries of DNA profiles , in a 
DNA Data B ank derived from bodily 
substances found–– 
(i)  at any place where a n offence was 
committed or is reasonably suspected of 
having been committed; or 
(ii) on or within the body of the victim, or a 
person reasonably suspected of being a 
victim, of an offence; or 
(iii) on anything worn or carried by the victim 
at the time when a n offence was, or is 
reasonably suspected of having been, 
committed; or 
(iv) on or within the body of a  person, or on 
anything, or at any p lace, associated with 
the commission of an offence; 
(e) “DNA Data Bank ” means a DNA Data Bank 
established under sub-section(1) of section 25; 
(f) “DNA Data Bank Director” means a person 
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 27; 
(g) “DNA laboratory” means any labo ratory or 
facility established by the Central Government 
or a State Government or a person or an 
organization which  has been granted 
accreditation under this Act to perform DNA 
testing; 
(h) “DNA profile” means the result of analysis of a 
DNA sample for establi shing human 
identification in respect of matters listed in the 
Schedule; 
(i) “DNA sample” means bodily substances of any 
nature collected for conducting DNA testing 
and includes the materials derived in a DNA 
laboratory from such bodily substances; 
(j) “DNA testing” means the procedure followed in 
DNA laboratory to develop DNA profile; 
(k) “Fund” means Fund of the  Board constituted 
under sub-section (1) of section 40; 
(l) “known sample” means the bodily substance s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
56 
of a person  whose identity is established; 
(m) “medical practi tioner” means a medical 
practitioner who possess any medical 
qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 
2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and 
whose name has been entered in a State 
Medical Register; 
(n) “Member” means a Member of the Board and 
includes the Chairperson; 
(o) “Member-Secretary” means the Member-
Secretary of the Board; 
(p) “missing persons‟ index” means a list of entries 
of DNA profiles , in a DNA Data Bank, derived 
from –– 
(i) Unidentified human remains; 
(ii) the personal effects of persons who are 
missing; and 
(iii) the bodily substances of relatives of the 
missing persons; 
(q) “offenders‟ index” means a list of entries of 
DNA profiles of samples taken from offenders , 
in a DNA Data Bank;  
(r) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made 
by the Central Government under this Act; 
(s) “proficiency testing” means a quality assurance 
measure used to monitor performance and 
identify areas in which improvement may be 
needed and includes–– 
(i) internal proficiency test which is devised 
and administered by the DNA laboratory; 
and 
(ii) external proficiency test, which may be 
open or blind, and which is devised and 
administered by an external agency; 
(t) “quality assurance” includes the systematic 
actions necessary to demonstrate that a 
product or service meets specified standards of 
quality; 
(u) “quality manual” is a document which specifies 
the quality procedures, quality systems and 
practices of an organisation relating to 
standards, quality control and quality 
assurance; 
(v)  “quality system” is the organisational 
structure, responsibilities, proced ure, process 
and resources for implementing quality 
management; 
 
 
 
 
 
102 of 1956. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
57 
(w) “regulations” means the regulations made by 
the Board; 
(x) “specified offence” means an y offence 
punishable with death or imprisonment for a 
term exceeding seven years; 
(y) “suspects‟ index or undertrials‟ index” means a 
list of entries of DNA profiles derived from 
bodily substances taken from the suspects  or 
as the case may be undertrials,  in a DNA Data 
Bank;  
 (z) “unknown deceased persons‟ index” means a 
list of entries of DNA profiles  derived from 
bodily substances or remains of  deceased 
persons whose identity is  not known , 
maintained in a DNA Data Bank; 
 (zz) “validation process” means the process by 
which a procedure is evaluated to determine its 
efficacy and reliability for casework analysis 
and includes–– 
 
(i) developmental validation, being the 
acquisition of test data and determination of 
conditions and limitations, of any new DNA 
methodology for use on case samples; and 
(ii)  internal validation, being an accumulation 
of test data within the DNA laboratory, to 
demonstrate that the established methods 
and procedures are performed  as specified 
in the laboratory. 
 
(2)  All words and expressions used and not defined in 
this Act but defined in the Indian Penal Code, 1860; 
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and the C ode of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall have the same 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act 
and those Codes. 
 
CHAPTER II 
DNA PROFILING BOARD 
 
3 (1)With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint in this 
behalf, there shall be established, for the purposes of 
this Act, a Board to be called the DNA Profiling 
Board. 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name 
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 1860. 
1 of 1872. 
2 of 1974. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment 
of DNA Profiling 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
58 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions 
of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and 
shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at such 
place as may be determined by the Central 
Government. 
(4) The Boa rd may establish regional offices at such 
other places as it may deem necessary. 
 
   4. (1) The Board shall consist of eleven members 
including the Chairperson and Member-Secretary. 
       (2) The Chairperson shall either  be the Secretary to 
the Government  of India in the Department of 
Biotechnology provided he has knowledge and 
experience in biological sciences or  any eminent 
person from the field of biological sciences having 
experience of not less than twenty -five years in that 
field, to be appointed by the Central Government. 
       (3) The Board shall consist of the following, ex-officio, 
members:-  
          
(a) a person nominated by the Chairperson of 
the National Human Rights Commission, 
from amongst its members; 
(b) the Director General, National Investigation 
Agency or Director, Central Bureau of 
Investigation or  their nominee  not below 
the Joint Director , to be nominated by 
rotation; 
(c) the Director General of Police of States to 
be nominated by the Central Government 
by rotation in alphabetical order; 
(d) the Director, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting 
and Diagnostics, Hyderabad , to be 
nominated by the Central Government; 
(e)      the Director, National Accreditation Board 
for Testing and Calibration of Laboratories, 
New Delhi, to be nominated by the Central 
Government; 
(f) the Director of  a Central Forensic Science 
Laboratory to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(g) an officer not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Law and Justice, to be 
nominated by the Law Secretary; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Composition of 
the Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
59 
(h) one r epresentative not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
to represent the Department of 
Biotechnology, Union Ministry of Science 
and Technology  to be nominated by its 
Secretary. 
(4) One person, from amongst persons of 
eminence in the fiel d of biological sciences having 
experience of not less than twenty five years in that 
field to be appointed by the Central Government, as a 
Member. 
  (5) An officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary 
to the Government of India or equivalent , with 
knowledge and experience in biological sciences shall 
be nominated  by the Central Government , as 
Member- Secretary of the Board. 
 
5. (1) The Chairperson shall,-   
 
(a) if he holds the post of Secretary to the 
Government of India, hold the office in the 
Board till he  remains Secretary in the 
department or attains the age of 
superannuation, whichever is earlier; 
(b) if he is appointed from amongst persons of 
eminence in the field of biological sciences, 
hold the office in the Board for a period of five 
years or till he attai ns the age of sixty -five 
years, whichever is earlier. 
 
(2) T he term of office of ex -officio members 
nominated under clauses (a), (b), (c), (f), (g), and (h) of 
sub-section (3) of section 4  shall be fo r a period not 
exceeding three years and the Members nom inated 
under clauses (d) and (e) thereof, shall continue as 
Members till they hold their respective posts. 
(3) The term of office of expert Member  appointed 
under sub-section (4) of section 4  shall be three 
years from the date on which he  enters upon his 
office or attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever 
is earlier. 
(4) The person other than the Secretary to the  
Government of India appointed as Chairperson and 
the Member  appointed under sub-section (4 ) of 
section 4 shall be entitled to such pay and 
allowances as may be prescribed. 
(5) The Member  appointed under  sub-section (4) of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Term of office, 
conditions of 
service of 
Chairperson 
and other 
Members. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
60 
section 4 may be re -appointed for not more than one 
term.  
 
6. (1) The Board sh all meet at such time and place  and 
shall observe such rules of procedure with regard to 
the transa ction of its business in the  meetings 
including the quorum at such meetings,  as may be 
specified by regulations. 
(2) The Chairperson shall preside  over the meetings 
of the Board and if, for any re ason, he is unable to 
attend a  meeting, the senior -most Memb er of the 
Board present, reckoned from the date of his 
appointment to the Board, shall preside at such 
meeting: 
 
   Provided that in case of common date of 
appointment of Members, the Member senior in age 
shall be considered as senior to the other Members. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting 
of the Board shall be decided by a majority of the 
Members present and voting, and in the event of an 
equality of votes, the Chairperson or,  in his absence, 
the person presiding over the meeting shall ha ve a 
second or casting vote. 
(4) The Board shall function under the guidance and 
supervision of the Chairperson. 
(5)All orders and decisions of the Board shall  be 
authenticated by the Member-Secretary. 
 
7. A Member having any direct or indirect interest, 
whether pecuniary or othe rwise, 
in any matter coming up for consideration at a 
meeting of the Board  shall, as soon as possible after 
relevant circumstances have come  to his knowledge, 
disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting , 
which shall be recorded  in the proceedings  of the 
Board, and such Member shall not participate in the 
meeting when that matter is being considered. 
 
  8. (1) The Central Government may remove from office 
the Chairperson or  any Member, who–– 
(a)  has been adjudged as an insolvent; 
(b) has been convicted of an offence involving 
moral turpitude; 
 (c) has become physically or men tally incapable 
 
 
 
 
Meetings of 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member not to 
participate in 
meetings in 
certain cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removal and 
resignation of 
Chairperson or 
Member and 
filing up of 
casual 
vacancies of 
Board. 
 
 

 
 
61 
of acting as a Member; 
 (d) has acquired such financial or other interest 
as is likely to affect adversely his functions 
as a Member; or 
  (e) has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office pre judicial to the 
public interest: 
Provided that the Chairperson or a  Member shall not 
be removed from office on the grounds specified 
under clause (d) or clause (e) except by an order made 
by the Central Government after an inquiry made in 
this behalf in which the Chairperson or such Member 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in the matter. 
(2) If, for any reason other than temporary absence, 
any vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or 
the Member appointed under sub-sections (2) and (4) 
of section 4 , the Central Government shall appoint 
another person to fill such vacancy for the remaining 
period in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(3) The Chairper son or the Member appointed under 
sub-sections (2) and (4) of section 4 may , by a notice 
of not less than thirty days in writing under his hand, 
addressed to  the Central Government, resign from 
his office and the vacancy so caused shall be filled for 
the remaining period from the same category of 
persons by the Central Government: 
    Provided that the Cha irperson or the Member shall, 
unless he is permitted by the Central Government to 
relinquish his office sooner, must continue to hold 
office until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such notice or until a person is duly 
appointed in his place or till the expiry of his term of 
office, whichever is earlier. 
 
9. No act or proceeding s of the Board  shall be invalid 
merely by reason of–– 
(a) any vacancy in,  or any defect in the 
constitution of the  Board; or 
(b) any defect in  the appointment  of a person 
acting as a Member of the Board; or 
(c) any irregularity  in  the procedure of the Board 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vacancies not 
to invalidate 
proceedings of 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
62 
not affecting  the merits of the case. 
 
10. The Board   may,  by  general  or special   order  in 
writing, delegate to the Chairperson or   any  Member 
or Member-Secretary, subject to such conditions, if 
any, as  may  be  specified in the order, its functions 
under this Act (except the power to make regulations  
under section 58), as it may deem necessary. 
 
11. (1) The Board may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, appoint such officers and other 
employees, as it considers necessary, for the efficient 
discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The s alaries and allowances payable to, and the 
terms and other conditions of service of the officers 
and employees appointed under sub -section (1) shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 
 
12. The Board shall for the purposes of this Act, perform 
the following functions, namely :- 
(a)  advising concerned Departments  and Ministries of 
the  Central Government and the State 
Governments on all issues relating to DNA 
laboratories including planning, organisational 
structure, size, number, strategic location and 
operating standards; establishment and 
management of new DNA laboratories ; 
upgradation of existing DNA laboratories; and 
making recommendations on funds required for 
such purposes; 
(b)  facilitating and assisting the Central Government in 
establishing DNA Data Banks; 
(c)  laying down guidelines, standards and procedures 
for establishment and functioning of DNA 
laboratories and DNA Data Banks including 
manpower, infrastructure and other related issues 
concerning monitoring of their performance and 
activities; 
(d) giv ing approval and i ssuing certificate of 
accreditation to the DNA laboratories, its renewal 
and cancellation thereof; 
(e)  supervising, monitoring, inspection and assessment 
of DNA laboratories and DNA Data Banks, 
 
 
 
Delegation of 
powers of 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Officers and 
other employees 
of Board 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions of 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
63 
including quality control; 
(f)  development of training modules  and framing 
guidelines for training of manpower including the 
police and investigating agencies dealing with DNA 
related matters; 
(g)  conducting, monitoring, regulating, certifying and 
auditing of DNA training programmes for DNA 
laboratories and DNA Data Banks; 
(h)  identifying scientific advances  and recommending 
research and development activities in DNA 
testing and related issues including intellectual 
property issues; 
(i)  laying down procedures for communication of 
information rel ating to DNA profile in civil and 
criminal proceedings and for investigation of 
crimes by law enforcement and other  investigating 
agencies; 
(j)  recommending methods for optimum use of DNA 
techniques and technologies for administration of 
justice or for such other relevant purposes as may 
be specified by regulations; 
(k) disseminating best practices concerning the 
collection and analysis of DNA sample so as   to 
ensure quality and consistency in the use of DNA 
techniques; 
(l)   advising on all such matters, under this Act, as 
may be referred to it by the Central Government or 
the State Government; 
(m) making recommendations for provision of privacy 
protection laws, regulations and practices relating 
to the access to, or the use of, stored DNA samples 
and their analyses, and ensure –– 
(i) implementation and sufficiency of such 
protection; 
(ii) appropriate use and dissemination of DNA 
information; 
(iii) accuracy, security and confidentiality of DNA 
information; 
(iv) timely removal and destruction of obsolete, 
expunged  or inaccurate DNA information; 
and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
64 
(v) such other steps as may be required to protect 
privacy; 
(n) providing a forum for the exchange and 
dissemination of ideas and information  on DNA 
based technology; 
(o)  sensitis ing and creating awareness among public 
and other stakeholders including police officers, 
prosecutors and judicial officers  on use and 
regulation of DNA based technology; 
(p) deliberating and advising on all ethical and human 
rights issues relating to DNA testing in 
consonance with intern ational guidelines 
enumerated by the United Nation s Organisation 
and its specialised agencies, inter alia, relating to- 
(i) the rights and privacy of citizens; 
(ii) the issues concerning civil liberties; 
(iii)issues having ethical and other social 
implications in adoption of DNA testing 
technology; and 
(iv) professional ethics in DNA testing; 
(q)  establishing procedure for co -operation in criminal 
investigation between various investigation 
agencies within the country and with any foreign 
State, international organisation or institution; 
(r)  identifying and elaborating procedure for inter-State 
co-operation in dealing with DNA testing; 
(s) advising the Central Government on any 
modifications required to be made in the lists 
contained in the Schedule; 
(t)  framing guidelines for storage and destruction of 
bodily substances including known sample; 
(u)  undertaking any other activity which in the opinion 
of the Board advances the purposes of this Act; 
and 
(v)  performing such other functions as may be 
assigned to it by the Central Government , from 
time to time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
65 
CHAPTER III 
ACCREDITATION OF DNA LABORATORIES 
13. (1) N o laboratory shall undertake DNA testing , 
analysing or any other procedure to generate data 
and perform analysis relating thereto under this Act 
without obtaining accreditation from the Board. 
(2) A laboratory seeking accreditation for one or more 
fields of accreditation or seeks to add a field of 
accreditation shall apply to the Board for 
accreditation in writing in such form and manner 
along with  such fees and supporting documents as 
may be specified.  
(3) Every laboratory functioning as on the date of 
commencement of this Act, shall, before expiry of a 
period of sixty days from the date of commencement 
of this Act, make an application, as provide d in sub-
section(2), to the Board for obtaining accreditation 
which shall be decided by the Board within thirty 
days from the receipt of the application: 
Provided that such laboratory may after making an 
application, continue to undertake DNA testing or 
any other procedure relating thereto, for a period of 
three months. 
(4) A laboratory seeking accreditation shall comply 
with onsite assessment requirements, specified 
standards and such other requirements as may be 
specified. 
 (5) The applications for accred itation renewal shall 
be made to the Board at least sixty days prior to the 
expiration date of the current certificate of 
accreditation in the specified manner along with fees. 
(6) Any failure to submit an application for renewal in 
accordance with this section shall result in a lapse of 
accreditation, if the Board has not approved the 
renewal application prior to the expiration of the 
current certificate of accreditation. 
 
14. The Board may, upon the receipt of application for 
accreditation or renewal ther eof, and after carrying out 
inspection of the  laboratory, its records and books, and 
on being satisfied that it fulfils all requirements  under 
this Act, may, by order, grant accreditation to such 
laboratory for a period of two years or renew it  for the 
 
 
 
 
Application for 
obtaining 
accreditation 
and renewal 
thereof. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Granting of 
accreditation or 
renewal thereof. 
 
 
 

 
 
66 
same period , as the case may be, subject to such 
conditions as it may deems fit: 
Provided that no application shall be rejected without 
recording reasons for the same, and without giving the 
applicant an opportunity of being heard. 
 
15. ( 1) The Board may sus pend or revoke the 
accreditation granted to a DNA laboratory, if such  
laboratory ceases, or as the case may be fails: 
(a) to undertake DNA testing or any other 
procedure relating thereto; 
(b) to comply with any of the conditions subject 
to which the accreditation has been granted; 
(c) to comply with provisions of this Act or any 
other law for the  time being in force; 
(d) to comply with the guidelines  issued by the 
Board under this Act; or 
(e) to submit or offer for inspection its laboratory 
or books of accounts and any other  relevant 
documents, including audit reports, when so 
demanded by the officers or  agency 
authorised by the Board. 
(2) Where the Board is of the opinion that any delay in 
revoking accreditation given to a DNA laboratory is 
prejudicial or detrimental to the public interest, it may 
suspend the accreditation forthwith pending final 
decision on such revocation. 
(3) The order of r evocation of accreditation of a  DNA 
laboratory shall be made by the Board after giving  an 
opportunity of being heard to the laboratory. 
(4) On the revocation of accreditation of the DNA 
laboratory or on lapse of accreditation of DNA 
laboratory under sub -section (6) of section 13, the 
laboratory shall transfer all bodily substances, DNA 
samples and records relating to DNA testing from its  
laboratory to such other DNA laboratory as may be 
directed by the Board and it shall not retain any such 
substances or sample or record. 
 
16. Any laboratory aggrieved by an order of rejection of 
its application for accreditation or renewal thereof 
under s ection 14 or an order of suspension or 
revocation of accreditation under section 15 may 
prefer an appeal to the Central Governmen t or such 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of Board 
to suspend or 
revoke 
accreditation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appeal against 
revocation or 
withdrawal of 
accreditation. 
 
 

 
 
67 
other authority as that  Government may, by 
notification, specify within a period of sixty days from 
the date of such order, which shall be decided by the 
Central Government or the authority, as the case may 
be, within a period of sixty days. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
STANDARDS, QUALITY CONTROL , INFRASTRUCTURE 
OF DNA LABOR ATORY AND TRAINING OF ITS 
PERSONNEL  
 
17.  (1) Every DNA labo ratory which has been granted 
approval for  undertaking DNA testing or any other 
procedure under this Act shall–– 
(a) follow such standards and procedures for quality 
assurance for collection, storage, testing and 
analysis of DNA sample; 
(b) establish and m aintain such documentation,  
quality system; 
(c) prepare and maintain quality manuals containing 
such details; 
(d) share DNA data prepared and maintained by it 
with the National DNA Data Bank  and the 
Regional DNA Data Bank in such manner, 
 
as may be specified by regulations. 
 
(2) The DNA laboratory shall report the results of the DNA 
testing in conformity with the provisions of this Act.   
 
 
18. Every DNA laboratory shall,- 
 
(a) appoint a person in charge of the laboratory, who 
possesses such educational qualifi cations, 
experience and other eligibility criteria;  
(b) employ such scientific and  technical staff, 
possessing such educational qualifications and 
experience; and 
(c) other staff and employees who shall possess such 
qualifications and experience,  
for discharging duties and performing functions under 
this Act, as may be specified by regulations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obligations of 
DNA laboratory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Qualifications 
and experience 
of person in-
charge, 
scientific and 
technical staff 
and other 
employees of 
DNA laboratory. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
68 
19.(1) The person in charge of every DNA laboratory shall 
take such measures for facilitating skill upgradation 
and advancement in the knowledge of its employees in 
the field of DNA testing and other related fields, as  may 
be specified by regulations. 
    (2) The person in charge of every DNA laboratory shall 
ensure that its employees undergo regular training in 
DNA related subjects, in such institutions, level and 
intervals, as may be specified by regulations. 
    (3) The person in charge of every DNA laboratory shall 
maintain such records relating to the laboratory and its 
personnel as may be specified by regulations. 
 
 
20. (1) Every DNA laboratory shall,- 
(a) possess such infrastructure; 
(b) maintain such security and follow such procedure 
to avoid contamination of DNA samples; 
(c) establish and follow such documented evidence 
control system to ensure integrity of physical 
evidence; 
(d) establish and follow such validat ion process and 
written analytical procedure; 
(e)  prepare such indices; 
(f)  use such equipment for the methods it employs; 
(g) have such documented programme for calibration 
of instruments and equipment; 
(h) conduct annual quality audits with such 
standards; 
(i) install such security system for the safety of DNA 
laboratory and its personnel; 
(j)  charge such fees for conducting DNA testing or any 
other procedure relating thereto, not exceeding  
twenty-five thousand rupees; 
as may be, prescribed by regulations. 
 (2) The DNA laboratory shall, after deriving the DNA 
profile, and depositing it with the DNA Data  Bank, 
return the biological sample or remaining material for its 
preservation to the investigating officer in a criminal case 
till the disposal of the case or the o rder of the court and 
 
Responsibilities 
of person in 
charge of DNA 
laboratory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Measures to be 
taken by DNA 
laboratory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
69 
in all other cases it shall be destroyed with an intimation 
to the person concerned. 
      Explanation: For the purposes of this section,- 
(a) “analytical procedure” means an orderly step by 
step procedure designed to ens ure operational 
uniformity; 
(b) “quality audit” means an inspection used to 
evaluate, confirm or verify activity related to 
quality; 
(c) “calibration ” means a set of operations which 
establish, under specified conditions, the 
relationship between values in dicated by a 
measuring instrument or measuring system, or 
values represented by a material, and the 
corresponding known values of a measurement. 
 
21. (1) No bodily substance s shall be taken from a person 
who is arrested as an accused of a crime (other than  the 
specified offences) unless the consent is given for the  
taking of the bodily substances. 
 
(2) If the consent required under sub -section(1) for taking 
of bodily substances from a person is refused without good 
cause or cannot be obtained despite all re asonable efforts, 
the required bodily substance s may be taken on the order 
passed by the Magistrate, if he is satisfied that there is 
reasonable cause to believe that the bodily substance s 
may confirm or disprove whether that person was involved 
in committing the crime. 
 
22.(1) Subject to sub-section (2) any person who- 
(a) was present at the scene of a crime when it was 
committed; or 
(b) is being questioned in connection with the 
investigation of a crime; or 
(c) intends to find the whereabouts of his missing or 
lost kith and kin, in disaster or otherwise, 
may voluntarily consent in writing to bodily substance s 
being taken from him for DNA testing.  
(2) If the consent of the parent or guardian of a volunteer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consent for 
taking bodily 
substances. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bodily 
substances 
given 
voluntarily. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
70 
who is below the age of eighteen years is refused without 
good cause or cannot be obtained despite all reasonable 
efforts, such su bstances may be taken from such  person 
with the sanction of a Magistrate. 
 
23. (1) For the purposes of this Act, samples for DNA 
testing may be collected from the following sou rces, 
namely:–– 
(a) bodily substances; 
(b) scene of occurrence, or scene of crime; 
(c) clothing and other objects; or 
(d) such other sources as may be specified by 
regulations. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1),- 
(a) any intimate body samples from li ving persons 
shall be collected, and intimate forensic 
procedures shall be performed, by a medical 
practitioner; 
(b) any non -intimate body samples shall be 
collected and non -intimate forensic procedure 
shall be performed by the technical staff trained 
for the collection of samples for DNA testing 
under the supervision of a medical practitioner or 
a scientist having expertise in molecular biology 
or such other person as may be specified by 
regulations:   
Provided that before collecting bodily substances for DNA 
testing of a victim or a person reasonably suspected of 
being a victim who is alive, or a relative of a missing 
person, or a minor or a disabled person, written consent of 
such victim or such relative or the parent or guardian of 
such minor or  disabled person and, in case of refusal of 
consent on behalf of a minor, by the order of the Court, 
shall be taken. 
     Explanation.––For the purposes of this section,–– 
(a)  “intimate body sample” means a sample of blood, 
semen or any other tissue, fluid, urine or pubic hair; or 
a swab taken from a person‟s body orifice other than 
mouth; or skin or tissue from an internal organ or 
body part, taken from or of a person, living or dead; 
(b) “intimate forensic procedure” means any of the 
following forensic procedures conduct ed on a living  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sources and 
manner of 
collection of 
body samples 
for DNA testing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
71 
person, namely:- 
 
(i) external examination of the genital or anal area, 
the buttocks and breasts in the case of a female; 
(ii) taking of a sample of blood; 
(iii) taking of a sample of pubic hair; 
(iv) taking of a sample by swab or washing from the 
external geni tal or anal area, the buttocks and 
breasts in the case of a female; 
(v) taking of a sample by vacuum suction, by 
scraping or by lifting by tape from the external 
genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts in 
the case of a female; 
(vi) taking of a photograph or video recording of, or 
an impression or cast of a wound from, the 
genital or anal area,  buttocks and  breasts 
in the case of a female; 
 
 
(c)  “non-intimate body sample” means any of the 
following taken from or of a person, living or dead, 
namely:- 
(i) handprint, fingerprint, footprint or toe print;  
(ii) a sample of hair other than pubic hair; 
(iii)a sample taken from a nail or under a nail; 
(iv) swab taken from any part of a person‟s body 
including mouth, but not any other body orifice; 
(v) ) saliva; or 
(vi) A skin impression 
 
(d) “non-intimate forensic procedure ” means any of the 
following forensic procedures conducted on a living 
individual, namely:- 
 
(i) examination of a part of the body other than the 
genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts in 
the case of a female, that requires touch ing of the 
body or removal of clothing; 
(ii) taking of a sample of hair other than pubic hair; 
(iii) taking of a sample from a nail or under a nail; 
(iv) taking of a buccal swab with consent; 
(v) taking of a sample by swab or washing from any 
external part of the body other t han the genital or 
anal area, the buttocks and breasts in the case of 
a female; 
(vi) scraping or lifting by tape from any external part of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
72 
the body other than the genital or anal area, the 
buttocks and breasts in the case of a female; 
(vii) taking of a handprint, fin gerprint, footprint or toe 
print; or 
(viii) taking of a photograph or video recording of, or 
an impression or cast of a wound from, a part of 
the body other than the genital or anal area, the 
buttocks and  breasts in the case of a female; 
 
24. If the trial court is satisfied with the plea of the 
accused person that the bodily substances taken from 
his person or collected from the place of occurrence of 
crime had been contaminated, the court may direct 
the taking of fresh bodily substances for re -
examination. 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
DNA DATA BANK 
 
25. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification , 
establish a National DNA Data Bank and such 
number of Regional DNA Data Banks for every State, 
or two or more States, as it may deem necessary. 
 (2) A Regional DNA Data Bank shall  share all DNA 
data stored and maintained by it with the National 
DNA Data Bank. 
 (3) The National DNA Data Bank shall receive DNA 
data from Regional DNA Data Banks and shall store 
the DNA profiles received from the DNA laboratories in 
such format as may be specified by regulations. 
 
26. (1) Every DNA Data Bank shall maintain the 
following indices for various categories of data, 
namely:-  
(a) a „crime scene index‟; 
(b) a „suspects‟ index‟ or „undertrials‟ index‟; 
(c) an „offenders‟ index‟; 
 (d) a „missing persons‟ index‟; and 
 (e) „unknown deceased persons‟ index. 
 (2) In addition to the ind ices referred to in sub -
section(1),  every DNA Data Bank shall maintain, in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking of bodily 
substances for 
re-examination. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment 
of DNA Data 
Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maintenance of 
indices by DNA 
Data Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
73 
relation to each of the DNA profiles, the following 
information, namely:–– 
a. in case of a profil e in the suspects‟ index or 
undertrials‟ index or offenders‟ index, the 
identity of the person from whose bodily 
substances the profile was derived; and 
b. in case of profiles, other than the profiles in 
the suspects‟ index or offenders‟ index, the 
case refer ence number of the investigation 
associated with the bodily substances from 
which the profile was derived. 
(3) The indices maintained under sub -section (1) shall 
include information of data based on DNA testing and 
records r elating thereto, prepared by a DNA 
laboratory. 
 
27.(1) The Central Government shall appoint a 
National DNA Bank  Director for the purposes of 
execution, maintenance and supervision of the 
National DNA Data Bank , on the recommendations of 
a selection committee to be constituted by the 
Government in such manner and consisting of such 
persons as may be prescribed. 
(2) The National DNA Data Bank Director shall be a 
person possessing such educational qualifications in 
biological sciences, eligibilities and experience, as may 
be specified by regulations. 
(3) The National DNA Data Bank Director shall be a 
person not below the rank of Director to the 
Government of India or equivalent who shall report to 
the Member-Secretary. 
(4) The National DNA Data Bank Director shall 
exercise such powers and pe rform such duties,  as 
may be specified by  regulations, under the direction 
and control of the Member-Secretary. 
(5) The Central Government may appoint a Regional 
Data Bank Director , who shall be a person not below 
the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Govern ment of 
India or equivalent and, he shall report to the 
Member-Secretary. 
 
28.(1) The Board may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, appoint such officers and other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DNA Data Bank 
Director. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Officers and 
other employees 

 
 
74 
employees, as it considers necessary, for the National 
DNA Data Bank and the Regional DNA Data Bank, for 
the efficient discharge of their functions. 
 (2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the 
terms and other conditions of service of the Directors 
of the National and Regional DNA Data Bank s 
appointed under sub-sections (1) and (5) of section 27 
and the officers and other employees appointed under 
sub-section (1) shall be such as may be specified by 
regulations. 
 (3) The Board may appoint such expe rts to assist the 
DNA Data Bank  in the discharge of its functions, on 
such remunera tions and terms and conditions, as 
may be specified by regulations. 
 
29. (1)  The criteria and procedures to be followed by 
the National DNA Data Bank Director on receipt of a 
DNA profile for comparison with DNA profiles 
maintained in the DNA Data Bank and 
communication of the results shall be made to such 
persons and in such manner as may be specified by 
regulations: 
      Provided that if the DNA profile is derived from the 
bodily substances of a living person who is neither an 
offender nor a suspect, no c omparison shall be made 
of it with the DNA profiles in the offenders‟ index or 
suspects‟ index maintained in the DNA Data Bank. 
     (2) Any information relating to a person‟s DNA 
profile contained in the suspects‟ index or offenders‟ 
index of the DNA Data  Bank shall be communicated 
only to the authorised persons. 
 
30. (1) On receipt of a DNA profile from the Government 
of a foreign State, or an international organisation 
established by the Governments of foreign States or 
any institution of such Government  or international 
organisation, the Director of the National DNA Data 
Bank may compare such DNA profile with the DNA 
profiles contained in the crime scene index, the 
offenders‟ index, the suspects‟ index, the missing 
persons‟ index and the unknown deceased  persons‟ 
index, to determine whether there is a match between 
the profiles and he may communicate any of the 
following information to such Government or 
of National DNA 
Data Bank and 
Regional Data 
Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comparison 
and 
communication 
of DNA profile. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sharing of DNA 
profiles with 
and by foreign 
Government or 
organisation or 
institution or 
agencies. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
75 
organisation or institution, as the case may be, with 
the prior approval of t he Central Government, through 
any agency authorised by it, namely:– 
(a) if there is no match between the profiles ; 
(b) if there is a match between the profiles, any 
information relating to such matching DNA 
profile;   
(c) if, in the opinion of the Director, National 
DNA Data Bank , the DNA p rofile is similar to 
the one contained in the DNA Data Bank, 
information relating to such similar DNA 
profile. 
(2) After receiving the similar DNA profile under clause 
(c) of sub -section (1), if foreign Government or 
organisation or institution referred to  in that sub-
section informs that the possibility of a match between 
the similar DNA profile with the DNA profile provided 
by it has not been excluded, any information in relation 
to such similar DNA profile may also be furnished in 
the manner specified in sub-section (1). 
(3) The Central Government may in consultation with 
the Board,-  
(a) decide and determine the nature and extent of 
sharing DNA profiles in respect of criminals, missing 
persons and unidentified bodies with the Government 
of a foreign Stat e or an international organisation 
established by the Governments of States or an 
institution of any such Government or international 
organisation, as the case may be; 
(b) request or seek similar information from such 
foreign state, organisation or institutions,  
and the provisions of sub -sections (1) and (2) of this 
section shall mutatis mutandis apply to all such cases  
 
31. (1) The information contained in the crime scene 
index shall be retained. 
      (2) The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall 
expunge forthwith the DNA profile,  
 
 (i) of a suspect, after the filing of the police report 
under the statutory provisions or as per the  
order of the court; 
 (ii) of an under trial, as per the order of the court; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retention and 
expunction of 
records.   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
76 
 
under intimation to him , in such m anner as may be 
specified by  regulations.  
 
(3) The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall, 
on receiving a written request of a person who is 
neither an offender nor a suspect, but whose DNA 
profile is entered in the crime scene index or missing 
persons‟ index of the DNA Data Bank, for removal of his 
DNA profile therefrom, expunge forthwith the DNA 
profile of such person from DNA Data Bank, under 
intimation to the person concerned, in such manner as 
may be specified by regulations: 
Provided that where such DNA profile is of a minor or a 
disabled person, expunging shall be made on receiving 
written request from a parent or the guardian of such 
minor or disabled person. 
 
(4) All other criteria for entry, retention and 
expunction of any DNA profile in or from the DN A Data 
Bank and DNA laboratories  shall be such as may be 
specified by regulations. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
CONFIDENTIALITY OF AND ACCESS TO DNA 
PROFILES, SAMPLES AND RECORDS 
 
32. The DNA profiles, DNA samples and any records 
thereof, forwarded to , or in custody of the  Director of the 
National DNA Data Bank or the Regional DNA Data Bank , 
or a DNA laboratory or any other person or authority 
under this Act shall be kept confidential. 
 
33. All DNA data including DNA profiles, DNA samples and 
records thereof, contained in a ny DNA laboratory and 
DNA Data Bank shall be used only for the purposes of 
facilitating identification of the person and not for any 
other purpose. 
 
34. Any information relating to DNA profiles, DNA samples 
and records thereof maintained in a DNA laborator y shall 
be made available for the following purposes, namely:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidentiality 
of DNA profiles, 
DNA samples 
and records. 
 
 
Use of DNA 
profiles, DNA 
samples and 
records for 
facilitating 
identification of 
persons. 
 
 
Availability of 
DNA profiles, 
DNA samples 
and records in 
certain cases. 

 
 
77 
(a) to law enforcement and investigating agencies 
for identification purposes in criminal cases; 
(b) in judicial proceedings, in accordance with 
the rules of admissibility of evidence; 
(c) for facilitating prosecution and adjudication of 
criminal cases; 
(d) for the purposes of taking defence by an 
accused in the criminal case in which he is 
charged; 
(e) in the case of investigations relating to civil 
disputes or other civil matters or offences or 
cases listed in the Schedule, to the concerned 
parties to such disputes or matters or 
offences or cases with the approval of the 
court, or concerned judicial officer or 
authority; and 
(f) in such other cases, as may be specified by 
regulations. 
 
35. Access to such information c ontained in the National 
and the Regional DNA Data Banks may be made 
available, as the respective DNA Data Bank D irectors 
considers appropriate,- 
(a) to a person or class of persons, for the sole 
purpose of proper operation and maintenance 
of the DNA Data Bank; and  
(b) the personnel of any DNA laboratory for the 
sole purpose of training,  
in accordance with such terms and conditions as may be 
specified by regulations. 
 
36. A person who is authorised to access an index of the 
DNA Data Bank for the purposes of inclu ding information 
of DNA identification records or DNA profile in that index, 
may also access that index for the purposes of carrying 
out one -time keyboard search on information obtained 
from any DNA sample collected for the purpose of criminal 
investigation, except for a DNA sample voluntarily 
submitted solely for elimination purposes. 
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, “one time 
keyboard search” means a search under which 
information obtained from a DNA sample is compared 
with the information in the index of the DNA Data Bank, 
without resulting in the information obtained from the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Access to 
information for 
operation, 
maintenance 
and training. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Access to 
information in 
DNA Data Bank 
for one time 
keyboard 
search.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
78 
DNA sample being included in the index. 
 
37. Access to the information in the crime scene index 
shall be restricted in such manner as may be specified by 
regulations, if such information relates to a DNA profile 
derived from bodily substances of,- 
(a) a victim of a n offence which forms or formed 
the object of relevant investigation; or 
(b) a person who has been eliminated as a 
suspect in the relevant investigation. 
 
38. (1) No person who receives the DNA profile for entry in 
the DNA Data Bank shall use it or allow it to be used for 
purposes other than those for which it has been collected 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall 
communicate, or authorise the communication of, or allow 
to be communicated, any information on DNA profiles 
contained in the DNA Data Banks or the informatio n 
communicated under sections 29 and 30. 
(3) No person to whom informati on is communicated or 
who has access to information under this Act shall use 
that information for any purpose other than for which the 
communication or access is permitted under the 
provisions of this Act. 
 
CHAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AUDIT AND REPORTS 
39. The Central Government may, after due appropriation  
made by Parliament by law, in this behalf,  make to the 
Board grants of such sums of money as the Central 
Government may consider necessary. 
 
40. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the 
DNA Profiling Board Fund and there shall be credited –– 
(a)  any grants and loans made to the Board under  this 
Act; 
(b) all sums received by the Board including fees  or  
charges, or donations from such other source  as 
may be decided upon by the Central Government; 
 
 
 
 
Restriction on 
access to 
information in 
DNA Data 
Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prohibition on 
unauthorised 
use of 
information of 
DNA profiles, 
samples and 
data 
identification 
records. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grants by 
Central 
Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
DNA Profiling 
Board Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
79 
(c) recoveries made of the amounts granted from the 
Fund; and 
(d) any income from investment of the amount of the 
Fund. 
(2) The Fund shall be applied by the Board for meeting,–– 
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the 
Chairperson and Member , the administrative 
expenses including the salaries, allowances 
payable to or in respect of officers and other 
employees of the Board; and 
(b) the expenses on objects and for the purposes 
authorised under this Act. 
 
  41. (1) The Board shall prepare, in s uch form and at such 
time in each financial year, as may be prescribed, its 
budget for the next financial year showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure of the Board and forward the 
same to the Central Government. 
 
(2) The Board with the prior approva l of the Central 
Government, shall adopt financial regulation which 
specifies in particular, the procedure for drawing up and 
implementing the Board‟s budget. 
 
 42. The Board shall prepare, in each financial year in such 
form and at such time , as may be pr escribed, its annual 
report giving a full account of its activities during the 
previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the 
Central Government. 
 
43. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and prepare an annual s tatement of 
accounts in such form as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India. 
 (2) The Comptroller  and Auditor-General of India and  any 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the 
accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the same 
rights and privileges and authority in connection with such 
audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has 
in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, 
in particular, shall have the right to demand the production 
of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Budget. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounts and 
Audit of Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
80 
documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Board. 
 (3) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Controller 
and Auditor General or any other person appointed by him 
in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall 
be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the 
Board. 
(4) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the 
Controller and Auditor -General annually and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor -
General. 
44. The Central Government shall cause the annual report 
and auditor‟s report to be laid, as soon as may be after they 
are received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
45. Whoever, by virtue of his employment or official 
position or otherwise, has in his possession, or has access 
to, individually identifiable DNA information kept in the  
DNA laboratory or DNA Data Bank and wilfully discloses it 
in any manner to any person or agency not entitled to 
receive it under this Act, or under any other law for the 
time being in force, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years, and also with 
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
 
46. Whoever, without authorisation, wilfully obtains 
individually identifiable DNA information from the DNA 
laboratory or DNA  Data Bank shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years 
and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
 
47. Whoever accesses information stored in the DNA Data 
Bank otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years and als o with fine which 
may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual report 
and auditor's 
report to be laid 
before 
Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalties for 
unauthorised 
disclosure of 
information in 
DNA Data 
Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalties for 
obtaining 
information 
from DNA Data 
Bank without 
authorization. 
 
 
Penalties for 
unlawful access 
to information 
in DNA Data. 
Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
81 
48. Whoever knowingly provides a DNA sample or result 
thereof in any manner to any person not authorised to 
receive it, or obtains or uses, without authorisation, such 
sample or result of DNA analysi s, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years 
and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
 
49. Whoever knowingly and intentionally destroys, alters, 
contaminates or tampers with biological evidence which is  
required to be preserved under any  law for the time being 
in force, with the intention to prevent that evidence from 
being subjected to DNA testing or to prevent the production 
or use of that evidence in a judicial proceeding, shall be 
punishable with imp risonment for a term which may 
extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees. 
 
 
50. (1) Where an offence under this Act , which has been 
committed by a company o r institution, every person who  
at the  time the offence was commit ted was in charge of, 
and was responsible to, the company or institution for the 
conduct of the business of the company or institution , as 
well as the company or institution,  shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 
 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment provided 
in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due  
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company or institution and it is proved that the offence has 
been committed with the consent or connivance of or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company or 
institution, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence a nd 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Penalties for 
providing or 
using DNA 
sample or result 
without 
authorization. 
 
 
 
Destruction, 
alterations, 
contamination, 
tampering with 
biological 
evidence.  
 
 
 
 
Offences by 
companies or 
institutions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
82 
Explanation.––for the purposes of this section,–– 
(a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a  partner in 
the firm. 
 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
51. The Chairperson, Members  and other  officers of 
the Board shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to 
act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be 
public servants within the meaning of s ection 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
 
52. No suit, prosecution or other  legal proceedings shall lie 
against the Central Government  or any  officer of the 
Central Government or the Chairperson or any Member or 
officer of the  Board acting under th is Act for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended  to be done under 
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder. 
 
53. (1) If  at any time the Central Government is of the 
opinion – 
(a) that,  on account of circumstances beyond the 
control of the Board, it  is  unable to discharge the 
functions or  perform  the duties assigned to it by 
or under the provisions of this Act;  or 
(b) that  the Board has persistently defaulted in 
complying  with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under t his Act or in the 
discharge  of the functions or performance of the 
duties imposed on it by or under the   provisions of 
this Act and as a result of such default, the 
financial position of the Board or the 
administration of the Board has suffered; or 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary 
in the  public interest to do so,  
 
it may, by notification, supersede the Board for such 
period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairperson, 
Members, 
Officers to be 
public servants. 
 
 
 
Protection of 
Action taken in 
good faith. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
supersede 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
83 
the notification and the Chairperson and other  Members 
shall, as from the date of supersessio n, vacate their offices 
as such: 
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the 
Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to 
the Board to make representations against the proposed 
supersession and shal l consider the repres entations, if 
any, of the Board: 
Provided further that in the event of supersession, the 
Central Government shall appoint an administrator who 
shall be an official not below the rank of a Secretary. 
(2) The Central Government shall cau se a  copy of the  
notification issued under sub -section (1) and a full report 
of any action taken under this section and the 
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House of Parliament at the earliest. 
 
54. (1) The Central Government may issue such directions, 
as it may deem fit, to the Board and the Board shall be 
bound to carry out such directions. 
 
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government 
and the Board as to whether a question is or is not a 
question of policy, the deci sion of the Central Government 
thereon shall be final. 
 
55. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of opinion that 
it is expedient so to do,  by notification, vary or amend any 
entry in the Schedule relating to - 
    (a) offences under special laws in item B; or 
    (b) civil disputes and other civil matters in item C; or 
    (c) other offences or cases in item D, 
and any such varying or amendment shall, as from the 
date of the notification, be deemed to have been varied or 
amended in the Schedule. 
 
(2)  Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as 
soon as may be after it is issued, be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
 
56.  No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Board is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central  
Government to 
issue directions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
vary or amend 
Schedule. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Courts not to 
have 
jurisdiction. 

 
 
84 
empowered by or under this Act to determine.  
 
57. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing powe r, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely:- 
(a) the allowances payable to the  Chairperson and  
Members of the Board under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 5; 
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the 
terms and other conditions of service of officers and 
employees of the Board appointed under sub -
section (2) of section 11; 
 (c) the other cases for which the information relating to 
DNA profiles, DNA samples and records relating 
thereto shall be made availabl e under clause (f ) of 
section 34; 
(d) the form in which and the time at which the Board 
shall pre pare its budget under sub -section (1) of 
section 41; 
(e) the form in which and the time at which the Board 
shall prepare its annual report under section 42; 
(f) the form in whi ch the annual statement of accounts 
shall be prepared by the Board under sub -section 
(1) of section 43; 
(g) the furnishing of audited copy of accounts to the 
Central Government under sub -section (3) of 
section 43; and 
(h) any  other matter which is to be, o r may be, 
prescribed, or in   respect of   which provision   is 
to  be, or may be, made by rules for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. 
 
58. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and after previous publication, by 
notification in official Gazette, make regulations consistent 
with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out 
the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of Board 
to make 
regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
85 
any of the following matters, namely:- 
(a) the time and the place at which the Board shall 
meet and the procedure it shall observe with 
regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings (including quorum at such meetings), 
under sub-section (1) of section 6; 
(b) the other relevant purposes for the optimum use 
of DNA techniques and technologies under clause 
(j) of section 12; 
(c) the form of application, the particulars it shall 
contain and the fee it shall accompany and the 
manner in which it shall be made to the Board by 
every DNA laboratory for approval or for renewal, 
as the case may be, for the purpose of 
undertaking DNA testing, under sub-section(2) of 
section 13; 
(d) the period for which the approval or renewal 
may be granted, under section 14; 
(e) the standards and procedures that a DNA 
laboratory shall follow for quality assurance for 
collection, storage, testing  and analysis of DNA 
samples under clause (a); the documented 
quality system that a DNA laboratory shall 
establish and maintain  under clause (b); the 
quality manual with the details therein that every 
DNA laboratory shall establish and maintain 
under clause (c); sharing of the DNA data 
prepared and maintained by DNA laboratory with 
the State DNA Data Bank and the National DNA 
Data Bank and the manner thereof under clause 
(d), of section 17; 
(f) the educational and other qualifications and 
experience in respect of person in charge of a 
DNA laboratory , technical and managerial staff , 
and other employees of DNA laboratory under 
section 18; 
(g) the measures to be taken by the person in 
charge of a DNA laboratory under sub -section (1) 
of section 19; 
(h) the training which the employees of a DNA 
laboratory shall undergo, the institutions where 
such training shall be given, the levels and 
intervals for such training under sub -section (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
86 
of section 19; 
(i) the records to be maintained by the person in 
charge of a DNA laboratory under sub -section (3) 
of section 19; 
(j)the measures to be taken by DNA laboratories 
specified under sub-section (1) of section 20; 
(k) the other sources for collection of DNA sample 
under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 23; 
(l) the other person under whose supervision DNA 
sample may be collected under clause (b) of sub -
section (2) of section 23; 
(m) the form at in which the National DNA Data 
Bank shall receive DNA data from Regional DNA 
Data Banks and store the DNA profiles und er 
sub-section (3) of section 25; 
(n)the standards in accordance with which 
information of data based on DNA analysis shall 
be prepared  by a DNA laboratory und er sub -
section (1) of section 17; 
(o)the educational qualifications in science and 
other qualifications and experience of the 
Director of the National DNA Data Bank und er 
sub-section (2) of section 27; 
(p)the powers and duties of th e Director of the 
National DNA Data Bank under sub-section (4) of 
section 27; 
(q)the salaries and allowances payable to, and the 
terms and other conditions of service of the 
Directors of the National and Regional DNA Data 
Bank and other officers and employ ees und er 
sub-section (2) of section 28; 
(r) the remunerations and the terms and conditions 
of experts under sub-section (3) of section 28; 
(s) the criteria and the procedure to be followed by 
the Director of the DNA Data Bank under sub-
section (1) of section 29; 
(t) the manner in which the DNA profile of a person 
shall be expunged from the suspects‟ 
index/undertrials‟ index under, sub-section (2) of 
section 31; 
 (u) the manner in which the DNA profile of a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
87 
person shall be expunged from the crime scene 
index or missing persons‟ index under sub -
section (3) of section 31; 
(v) the criteria for entry, retention and expunction 
of any DNA profile und er sub -section (4) of 
section 31; 
(w) the manner in which access to the information 
in the DNA Data Bank shal l be re stricted under 
section 37; 
(x) The Board shall have the power to frame 
regulations and give effect to the provisions of 
this Act including those dealing with financial 
matter. 
 
59. Every rule and   every regulation  made under this Act 
shall be laid, as soo n as may  be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in   session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in   one 
session or in   two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately fo llowing the 
session or the   successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation 
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation  should 
not  be  made, the  rule or regulation shall  thereafter have 
effect on ly in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the  case may   be;  
so,  however,  that  any  such  modification  or annulment 
shall  be without   prejudice to   the validity   of  anything 
previously done under that rule or regulation. 
 
60. (1) If any diffic ulty arises in giving effect  to 
the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by 
order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent  with the provisions of this Act , 
as may appear to be necessary, for removing the difficulty: 
 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section 
after the expiry of  the period of  two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 
 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each H ouse of 
Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to remove 
difficulties. 

 
 
88 
SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2(j), 12(s), 34(e) and 55(1)] 
 
List of matters for DNA testing 
 
A.   Offences under Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) where DNA testing is useful for 
investigation of offences. 
 
B.   Offences under special laws: 
 
(i)     The Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956); 
(ii)    The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971); 
(iii)   The Pre -conception and Pre -natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibit ion of 
Sex Selection) Act, 1994 (57 of 1994);  
(iv)    The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 
2005); 
(v)     The Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (22 of 1955); 
(vi)    The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention o f Atrocities) 
Act, 1989 (33 of 1989); 
(vii)    The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988). 
 
C.    Civil disputes and other civil matters:  
 
(i)    Parental dispute (maternity or paternity); 
(ii)    Issues relating to pedigree;  
(iii)  Issues relating to ass isted reproductive technologies (surrogacy, in-vitro 
fertilization and intrauterine implantation or such other technologies); 
(iv)  Issues relating to transplantation of human organs (donor and recipient) 
under the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994 (42 of 1994); 
(v)    Issues relating to immigration or emigration; 
(vi)   Issues relating to establishment of individual identity.  
 
D.  Other offences or cases: 
 
 (i) Medical negligence;  
(ii) Unidentified human remains; 
(iii)  Identification of abandoned or disputed children and related issues. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 