                          
  
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
Report No.272 
 
Assessment of Statutory Frameworks of  
Tribunals in India 
 
 
 
October, 2017


ii 
 
  


iii 
Report No. 272 
Assessment of Statutory Frameworks of  
Tribunals in India 
Table of Contents 
Chapter Title Page 
      I Introduction 1-9 
     II Tribunal System: A Global Perspective  10-20 
    III Tribunal System in India 21-33 
    IV Revisiting Recommendations of the Previous Law Commissions 34-42 
     V Uniformity in Appointment, Qualifications, Tenure and Conditions 
of Service  
43-53 
    VI Power of Judicial Review under the Constitution 54-64 
    VII Appeals to High Courts and the Supreme Court 65-77 
   VIII Bypassing the Jurisdiction of High Courts 78-85 
    IX Exclusion of Jurisdiction of all courts by an alternative mechanism 
and Access to Justice 
86-93 
     X Conclusions and Recommendations 94-100 
 Annexure I – The Tribunals Merged vide Finance Act, 2017 101 
 Annexure II – Removal Provisions relating to Tribunals 102-107 
 Annexure III –Tribunals from where the appeal lies to the High 
Court 
108 
 Annexure IV – Tribunals from where appeal lies to the Supreme 
Court 
109 
 Annexure V – Tribunals from where appeal lies to the Appellate 
Tribunals/Authorities 
110-111 
 Annexure VI – The Acts which precludes the jurisdiction of Civil 
Courts 
112-114 

CHAPTER – I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1. The term ‘Tribunal’ is derived from the word ‘Tribunes’, which means 
‘Magistrates of the Classical Roman Republic’.  Tribunal is referred to as the office of 
the ‘Tribunes’ i.e., a Roman official under the monarchy and the republic with the 
function of protecting the plebeian citizen from arbitrary action by the patrician 
magistrates. A Tribunal, generally, is any person or institution having an authority to 
judge, adjudicate on, or to determine claims or disputes – whether or not it is called a 
tribunal in its title.1 
 
1.2. ‘Tribunal’ is an administrative body established for the purpose of discharging 
quasi-judicial duties. An Administrative Tribunal is neither a Court nor an executive 
body. It stands somewhere midway between a Court and an administrative body. The 
exigencies of the situation proclaiming the enforcement of new rights in the wake of 
escalating State activities and furtherance of the demands of justice have led to the 
establishment of Tribunals.2 
 
1.3. The delay in justice administration, is one of the biggest obstacles which have 
been tackled with the establishment of Tribunals.3 According to H.W.R Wade, “The 
social legislation of the twentieth century demanded tribunals for purely administrative 
reasons; they could offer speedier, cheaper and more accessible justice, essential for 
the administration of welfare schemes involving large number of small claims. The 
process of Courts of law is elaborate, slow and costly….Commissioners of customs 
and excise were given judicial powers more than three centuries ago. Tax tribunals 
were in fact established as far back as the 18th century.”4 
 
1.4. In due course of time, a need for a system of adjudication has arisen which is 
more suited to give response to the emerging requirements of the society which may 
                                                 
1 Walker, David M., Oxford Companion to Law, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-866110-X, 1980 
at p.1239. 
2 Kagzi, M.C.J, The Indian Administrative Law, Metropolitan Book Co. Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, 3rd edn., 1973 
at pp. 276 and 279. 
3 Sinha, S. B., “Judicial Reform in Justice-Delivery System” (2004) 4 SCC (Jour) 35. 
4 Wade, H.W.R & Forsyth, C.F., Administrative Law, Oxford University Press, United Kingdom, 10th 
edn., 2009 at p. 773. 

2 
not be so elaborate and costly as provided by the Courts of law. The primary reason for 
the creation of Tribunals was to overcome the crisis of delays and backlogs in the 
administration of justice. Therefore, the Administrative Tribunals have been 
established to overcome the major lacuna present in the Justice delivery system in the 
light of the legal maxim Lex dilationes semper exhorret which means ‘The law always 
abhors delays’.5 
 
1.5. The delay in disposal of cases relating to civil matters is significantly increasing 
arrears, and the courts seem helpless in this matter. “The necessities of the modern 
collectivist State with the aim of the creation of a socialist society are multipurpose”. 
The State has ceased to be neutral with the giving up of the philosophy of laissez faire 
and has become vigorous so as to affect every man in every sphere.6  
 
1.6. To overcome the situation that arose due to the pendency of cases in various 
Courts, domestic tribunals and other Tribunals have been established under different 
Statutes, hereinafter referred to as the Tribunals. A ‘tribunal’ in the legal perspective is 
different from a domestic tribunal. The ‘domestic tribunal’ refers to the administrative 
agencies designed to regulate the professional conduct and to enforce disciple among 
the members by exercising investigatory and adjudicatory powers.  Whereas, Tribunals 
are the quasi-judicial bodies established to adjudicate disputes related to specified 
matters which exercise the jurisdiction according to the Statute establishing them. 
Similarly, Ombudsman looks into the complaints of grievances suffered by the citizen 
at the hands of some organ of the administration. 
 
1.7. The increase in number of statutory Tribunals mirrors the rise in State activities. 
Because the legislation has progressively bestowed benefits on individuals and 
subjected their everyday lives to propagating control and management, the scope for 
dispute between an individual and the State has emerged.7 Tribunals are cheaper (cost 
effective) than Courts but their constitution and functions are different from the Courts. 
                                                 
5 K. I. Vibhute, “Administrative Tribunals and the High Courts: A Plea for Judicial Review” 29 JILI 524 
(1987). 
6 Supra Note 2 at 271. 
7 Elliott, Mark, Beatson, Jack, Matthews, Martin, Administrative Law: Text and Materials, Oxford 
University Press, New York, 3rd edn., 2005 at p. 679. 

3 
However, a Tribunal is more suited than a Court to undertake the task after considering 
all relevant issues of law, fact, policy and discretion.8 
 
1.8. According to Chantal Stebbings, “The reasons for the diversity, lack of 
coherence, uncertainty of status and inherent individual weaknesses which have 
rendered both theoretical analysis and practical reform so problems lie to a considerable 
extent in the historico-legal context of the statutory administrative tribunal as an 
institution in the nineteenth century.” He further adds, “The term ‘tribunal’, not being 
a term of art, referred to any dispute-resolution body or process, from the regular courts 
of law, through domestic bodies regulating clubs, societies and professions, to ministers 
making decisions in the course of their administrative duties.”9 
 
1.9. According to Neil Hawke, “Administrative tribunals might well be referred to 
as ‘administrative courts’ since usually their task is to adjudicate disputes which arise 
from the statutory regulation of a wide variety of situations, some of which will involve 
decisions or other action by administrative agencies, or relationship between private 
individuals.”10 
 
1.10. The Franks’ Report (1957) identified the advantages of Tribunals as ‘cheapness 
(cost effectiveness), accessibility, freedom from technicality, expedition and expert 
knowledge of their particular subject.’ It enumerated three broad principles that should 
govern the operation of the Tribunals as well as the planning inquiries, which are 
openness, fairness and impartiality in the following words: 
 
‘Tribunals are not ordinary courts, but neither are they 
appendages of Government Departments. Much of the 
official evidence … appeared to reflect the view that 
tribunals should properly be regarded as part of the 
machinery of administration, for which the Government 
must retain a close and continuing responsibility. Thus, 
for example, tribunals in the social services field would 
be regarded as adjuncts to the administration of the 
                                                 
8 Groves, Matthew, Lee, H. P., Australian Administrative Law: Fundamentals, Principles and Doctrines, 
Cambridge University Press, New York, 1st edn., 2007 at p. 77. 
9 Stebbings, Chantal, Legal Foundations of Tribunals in Nineteenth Century England, Cambridge 
University Press, New York, 1st edn., 2006 at p. 3. 
10 Hawke, Neil, Introduction to Administrative Law, Cavendish Publishing Limited, United Kingdom, 
1st edn., 1998 at p. 65. 

4 
services themselves. We do not accept this view. We 
consider that tribunals should properly be regarded as 
machinery provided by Parliament for adjudication 
rather than as part of the machinery of administration. 
The essential point is that in all these cases Parliament 
has deliberately provided for a decision outside and 
independent of the Department concerned, either at first 
instance … or on appeal from a decision of a Minister or 
of an official in a special statutory position… Although 
the relevant statutes do not in all cases expressly enact 
that tribunals are to consist entirely of persons outside 
the Government service, the use of the term ‘tribunal’ in 
legislation undoubtedly bears this connotation, and the 
intention of Parliament to provide for the independence 
of tribunals is clear and unmistakable.’ 11 
 
1.11. According to Robin Creyke, “Tribunals generally have more speedy 
processes and less formal procedures than courts, including an absence of any 
requirement to follow rules of evidence. Tribunals are generally cheaper than Courts 
and there may be limits on legal representation in Tribunal hearings.”12   
 
1.12. As per Robson, “administrative tribunals do their work more rapidly, more 
cheaply, more efficiently than the ordinary courts …. possess greater technical 
knowledge and fewer prejudices against government; …. give greater heed to the social 
interests involved …. decide disputes with conscious effort at furthering the social 
policy embodied in the legislation.”13 
 
1.13. The Tribunals have the power to adjudicate over a wide range of subjects that 
impact everyday life. Tribunals function as an effective mechanism to ameliorate the 
burden of the judiciary. The law Courts with their elaborate procedures, legalistic fronts 
and attitudes were deemed incapable of rendering speedy and affordable justice to the 
parties concerned. Particularly in technical cases, it was felt that the nature of the 
statutes required adjudicatory forums comprising of persons having expert knowledge 
of the working of these laws. The Tribunals emerged not with the sole promise of 
speedy, effective, decentralised dispensation of justice but also the expertise and 
                                                 
11 Drewry, Gavin, “The Judicialisation of Administrative Tribunals in the UK: From Hewart to Leggatt” 
28 TRAS 51 (2009).   
12 Supra Note 7.  
13 Supra Note 2 at 284.  

5 
knowledge in specialised areas that was felt to be lacking in the judges of traditional 
Courts.14 According to M. C. J. Kagzi, “The provisions declaring the proceedings 
before the tribunal judicial proceedings, giving it the powers of a civil court for certain 
procedural matters, and requiring it to hear the parties go to prove that the tribunal is 
required to act judicially and not mere judiciously.”15  
 
1.14. The Law Commission of India in its 14th Report (1958) titled “Reform of 
Judicial Administration” recommended the establishment of an appellate Tribunal or 
Tribunals at the Centre and in the States. Later, in its 58th Report (1974) titled ‘Structure 
and Jurisdiction of the Higher Judiciary’, the Law Commission urged that separate 
high powered Tribunal or Commission should be set up to deal with the service matters 
and that approaching the Courts should be the last resort.  
 
1.15. The High Court Arrears Committee set up under the chairmanship of Justice J. 
C. Shah (1969), recommended for setting up of an independent Tribunal to handle 
service matters pending before the High Courts and the Supreme Court. Later on, the 
Swaran Singh Committee which was appointed to study, ‘the required changes in 
fundamental laws’, recommended in 1976 that the Administrative Tribunals may be set 
up under a Central law, both at the State level and at the Centre to decide cases relating 
to service matters. 
 
1.16. Based on the recommendations of the Swaran Singh Committee, Part XIV-A 
was added by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, titled as 
‘Tribunals’ which provided for the establishment of ‘Administrative Tribunals’ under 
Article 323-A and ‘Tribunals for other matters’ under Article 323-B. The main 
objective of establishing Tribunals as set out in the Statement of Objects and Reasons 
of The Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) Act, 1976 is as under:  
 
‘To reduce the mounting arrears in High Courts and to 
secure the speedy disposal of service matters, revenue 
matters and certain other matters of special importance 
in the context of the socio-economic 
                                                 
14 Jain, M.P., Jain, S.N., Principles of Administrative Law 1989, Lexis Nexis, India, 7th edn., 2011 at p. 
1996. 
15 Supra Note 2 at 279.  

6 
development and progress, it is considered expedient to 
provide for administrative and other tribunals for 
dealing with such matters while 
preserving the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in 
regard to such matters under article 136 of the 
Constitution.’ 
 
1.17. With the enactment of Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, a large number of 
cases relating to service matters pending before various Courts were brought within the 
jurisdiction of the Tribunals. Administrative Tribunals created under Article 323A have 
been freed from technical rules of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and procedural shackles 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but, at the same time, they have been vested with 
the powers of Civil Court in respect of some matters including the review of their own 
decisions and are bound by the principles of natural justice.16  
 
1.18. The Tribunal has to exercise its powers in a judicious manner by observing the 
principles of natural justice or in accordance with the statutory provisions under which 
the Tribunal is established. There may be a lis between the contending parties before a 
statutory authority, which has to act judiciously to determine the same. There may not 
be a lis between the contending parties, the tribunal/authority may have to determine 
the rights and liabilities of the subject. In both the situations, it will be known as a 
quasi-judicial function. The word ‘quasi’ means ‘not exactly’. “Where a statutory 
authority is empowered to take a decision which affects the rights of persons and such 
an authority under the relevant law required to make an enquiry and hear the parties, 
such authority is quasi-judicial and decision rendered by it is a quasi-judicial act.”17 
  
1.19. The Law Commission of India in its 124th Report (1988) titled ‘The High Court 
Arrears - A Fresh Look’,  while taking note of the recommendations of “The High 
Courts Arrears Committee” (1969) observed that:  
 
‘1.15. … It is here a germ for the first time of creating 
specialist Tribunals as alternatives to the High Court 
with a view to curtailing the jurisdiction of the High 
                                                 
16 Basu, Durga Das, Commentary on the Constitution of India, Lexis Nexis, New Delhi, 8th edn., 2011 at 
p. 10650; See also, State of West Bengal v. Kamal Sengupta, (2008) 8 SCC 612. 
17 Quasi-Judicial, Justice (R) Shabbir Ahmed, available at: 
http://sja.gos.pk/assets/articles/Quasi%20Judicial.pdf (last visited on 25-09-2017); See also Rex v. 
Electricity Commissioners, (1924) 1 KB 171. 

7 
Court to control the inflow of work which may indirectly 
help in tackling the problem of arrears and backlog of 
cases. …  
1.21. … The Law Commission is of the firm view that, 
wherever possible, proliferating appellate and wide 
original jurisdiction should be controlled or curtailed 
without impairing the quality of justice. …  
1.27. To sum up, the approach of the commission is to 
reduce number of appeals, to set up specialist 
courts/tribunals, simultaneously eliminating the 
jurisdiction of the High Court which, when translated 
into action by implementing the reports submitted by the 
present Law Commission, would, on a very superficial 
assessment, reduce the inflow of work into the High 
Court by nearly 45% of its present inflow.’ [Emphasis 
added] 
 
1.20. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, 
Public Grievances, Law and Justice in paragraph 13.3 of its Seventeenth Report on 
the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006, observed that “….After 
making the provision for an appeal to the High Court, the very purpose for which 
this Central Administrative Tribunal was constituted, will be defeated because these 
were constituted for a specific purpose that employees should get the speedy remedy 
and the High Courts should not be over-burdened.”  
 
1.21. The Law Commission in 215th Report (2008) titled “L. Chandra Kumar be 
revisited by Larger bench of Supreme Court of India”, pointed out that the 
Administrative Tribunals were conceived and constituted as an effective and real 
substitute for the High Courts as regards service matters are concerned. The power 
of judicial review of the High Courts cannot be called as inviolable as that of the 
Supreme Court. The very objective behind the establishment of the Administrative 
Tribunals will stand defeated if all the cases adjudicated by them have to go before 
the concerned High Court. However, the Commission did not record any 
explanation/reason as to how the power of judicial review of the High Court could 
be less inviolable than the Supreme Court, particularly after the seven-Judge Bench 
judgment in L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India. 18 
                                                 
18 AIR 1997 SC 1125. 

8 
 
1.22. In Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd v. Essar Power Ltd,19  the Supreme Court 
of India made a reference to the Commission to examine and submit a Report 
pertaining to various issues relating to the Tribunals with regard to persons 
appointed, manner of appointment, duration of appointment etc., routine appeals to 
the Supreme Court affecting the constitutional role assigned to the Supreme Court, 
direct statutory appeals to the Supreme Court from the order of Tribunals bypassing 
the High Courts and to exclude jurisdiction of all the Courts in absence of equally 
effective alternative mechanism for Access to Justice at grass root level. The 
reference is in the following words: 
 
‘The questions which may be required to be examined by the Law 
Commission are: 
 
I. Whether any changes in the statutory framework constituting various 
Tribunals with regard to persons appointed, manner of appointment, 
duration of appointment, etc. is necessary in the light of judgment of 
this Court in Madras Bar Association (Supra) or on any other 
consideration from the point of view of strengthening the rule of law?  
 
II. Whether it is permissible and advisable to provide appeals routinely 
to this Court only on a question of law or substantial question of law 
which is not of national or public importance without affecting the 
constitutional role assigned to the Supreme Court having regard to 
the desirability of decision being rendered within reasonable time?  
 
III. Whether direct statutory appeals to the Supreme Court bypassing the 
High Courts from the orders of Tribunal affect access to justice to 
litigants in remote areas of the country? 
 
IV. Whether it is desirable to exclude jurisdiction of all courts in absence 
of equally effective alternative mechanism for access to justice at 
grass root level as has been done in provisions of TDSAT Act 
(Sections 14 and 15)? 
 
V. Any other incidental or connected issue which may be considered 
appropriate?’ 
 
 
1.23. It is in this backdrop, the Commission has to consider and answer the questions 
raised by the Supreme Court in respect of constitution of Tribunals, appointment of 
                                                 
19 (2016) 9 SCC 103. 

9 
their respective Chairman and members and their service conditions. Further, whether 
power of Judicial Review, a basic feature of the Constitution conferred upon the High 
Courts under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution can be diluted or taken away 
totally denying the litigants right to approach the High Court in writ jurisdiction against 
the jurisdiction and order of the Tribunal and also, whether such litigants should not 
have a right of statutory appeal against an order of the Tribunals, as providing the 
remedies under Article 136 of the Constitution is admittedly not a right of Appeal rather 
a means to approach the Supreme Court and it is the discretion of the Supreme Court 
to entertain the petition or not.  

10 
CHAPTER – II 
TRIBUNAL SYSTEM: A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 
 
2.1 Almost all the nations have enacted laws dealing with the Tribunals within their 
Constitutional framework. In several countries, including France, though the 
adjudicatory forums other than the regular courts discharge the function of 
adjudication, the same is not considered as a judicial function and these forums are not 
recognised as Courts. So far as the United Kingdom and India are concerned, the 
adjudicatory functions discharged by the institutions other than the regular civil and 
criminal Courts are treated as supplementary to the Courts.20  
 
A. Tribunal System in France 
 
2.2 The French judicial system provides for a special Tribunal known as the 
Tribunal des Conflits for disposing of conflicts that involve both judicial and 
administrative functions. The matters that come before this Tribunal are complex and 
are governed by the complicated rules of procedure21 France has a dual legal system 
unlike the English-speaking countries.22 However, the judicial review is not absolute 
in France as some administrative acts are exempted from the purview of judicial 
control. Also, the judicial review of administrative acts in France is subject to time 
limits23. 
 
2.3 The Counseil d’Etat was established for the adjudication of disputes between 
an individual and State officials who acted in violation of law. In the course of time, a 
proper system of Three-Tier Tribunals was created.  The Counseil d’Etat has been 
converted from an executive into a judicial or quasi-judicial body by the gradual 
separation from its executive functions by way of transferring the executive functions 
to the Committees (sections) which have assumed the role of the Courts.24 Tribunal 
                                                 
20 Malik, Lokendra; Lata, Kusum; Kaur, Avneet, Constitutional Government in India (Satyam Law 
International, New Delhi, 2016) at p. 191. 
21 Bartlett, C. A. Hereshoff, “The French Judicial System” 33 CLT 952 (1913). 
22 Supra 19 at p. 190. 
23  Ziy Bekir Bugucam, “Common Principles of Judicial Review of Administration in Europe: A 
Comparative study of France, the UK, the ECHR, and the EU” 5 LJR 78 (December, 2011). 
24 Dicey, A.V., The Law of the Constitution, Oxford University Press, United Kingdom, 1st edn., 2013 at 
p. 347. 

11 
Administratif is the Original Court in France having a wide jurisdiction covering almost 
all kinds of administrative cases. The decisions of the Tribunal Administratif and other 
similar institutions are subject to appeal or revision before the Conseil d'Etat. 
 
2.4 The Cour administrative d'appel considers appeals against the judgments of the 
Tribunal Administratif. But, neither have they had the jurisdiction to consider appeals 
involving a question/issue of the legality of municipal and cantonal elections nor to 
consider appeals against regulations on the grounds that the authority has exceeded its 
powers. 
 
2.5 In common law Countries, unlike France, there is a better coordination between 
forums performing ‘administrative adjudication’ and forums vested with the task of 
‘judicial adjudication’. The administrative forums operate under judicial supervision. 
In India, the framers of the Constitution did not accept the French system and entrusted 
the power of judicial review to the High Courts and the Supreme Court.  
 
B. Tribunal System in England 
 
2.6 Tribunals are one of the most important pillars of the judicial system of 
England. A large number of Tribunals have been created to deal with various issues 
such as social security, property rights, employment, immigration, mental health etc. 
Most of the Tribunals are concerned with the claims by citizens against the State. 
Examples of tribunals which operate in the United Kingdom are Employment Tribunals 
which are concerned with the disputes between private individuals and organisations, 
Leasehold Valuation Tribunals that are concerned with the disputes between lessees 
and lessors, over service charges or the valuation of properties.25 Besides this, there are 
other Tribunals also which deal with the matters falling within their respective 
jurisdiction. There are significant differences between Tribunals and Ordinary Courts 
in England which can be summarised as: 
 
i. There is a special expertise and experience of members. Most of 
the Tribunals are presided over by a lawyer (serving judge in some 
                                                 
25 Creyke, Robin, Tribunals in the Common Law World, The Federation Press, United Kingdom, 2008 
at p. 20. 

12 
cases), he or she will normally be sitting with non-lawyers either 
having specialised qualifications or laymen or women with 
specialised qualifications.  
 
ii. Flexibility enables the Tribunal to develop and vary its procedure 
to suit the characteristics of the jurisdiction and the needs of its 
users whether unrepresented individuals or sophisticated city 
institutions.26  
 
2.7 In England, Tribunals emerged as exclusive judicial bodies in the twentieth 
century with the establishment of Local Pension Committee under the Old Age 
Pensions Act, 1908 and the Umpire under the National Insurance Act, 1911. Since then, 
there has been an increasing recognition of judicial status of the Tribunals as they have 
developed their own distinctive identity.27 
 
2.8 In 1932, the Donoughmore Committee which was set up to consider the 
safeguards that were required on judicial and quasi-judicial decisions in order to secure 
the supremacy of law – a constitutional principle, submitted its Report. 28  The 
Committee recommended that judicial decisions should be left to the ordinary Courts 
of law. Tribunals should be established on special grounds and only if their advantages 
over the ordinary Courts were beyond question, that the rules of natural justice must be 
observed and the Courts be given adequate power to ensure that they acted within their 
domain.29 The Committee observed : 
 
The word ‘quasi’, when prefixed to a legal term, generally 
means that the thing which is described the word, has 
some of the legal attributes denoted and connoted by the 
legal term, but that it has not all of them. 
 
2.9 In 1957, the Franks’ Committee30 made a number of specific recommendations 
and most of them were implemented by the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1958. These 
are: 
 
                                                 
26 Id. at 21. 
27 Legal Action Group, “Introduction to Tribunals” 15 (2011). 
28 Ibid. 
29 Id. at 4. 
30 Supra Note 11 at 47. 

13 
i. Establishment of a Council on Tribunals (an advisory ‘non-
departmental public body’) to oversee the constitution and working 
of the various Tribunals. The Chairmen of Tribunals should be 
appointed by the Lord Chancellor. The members of Tribunals 
should be appointed by the Council on Tribunals rather than by 
ministers: this was rejected, though ministers were required to ‘have 
regard to’ any general recommendations about membership that the 
Council might make.  
ii. Tribunal Chairman should be legally qualified. This was 
implemented in respect of some categories of tribunal, but not 
others. 
iii. A Tribunal should give written notice of its decision and the reasons 
for it. The 1958 Act merely left it to the Tribunals to give their 
reasons on request.  
iv. Hearings should generally take place in the public.  
v. There should be a right of appeal to the High Court on points of law: 
this was broadly implemented by way of a ‘case-stated’ procedure.31 
vi. Parties should be entitled to legal representation and legal aid should 
be available.  
 
2.10 In 2001, Sir Andrew Leggatt Committee reviewed the existing Tribunal system 
and submitted its report titled ‘Tribunals for Users – One System, One Service’. As per 
the Report, there were perceived deficiencies in the Court system, such as delay, 
expense, technicality and formality, lack of expertise and conservative social and 
political views. Hence, a new ‘independent, coherent, professional, cost-effective, user 
friendly’ and structurally reformed Tribunal system was proposed with the intention to 
strengthen independence, unified administration and harmonised procedures.   The 
Report inter alia suggested: 
 
a. The Lord Chancellor should assume responsibility for all appointments to 
Tribunals (in consultation, as necessary). 
b. The Tribunal System should be divided into Divisions in a structure which is at 
once apparent to the user in accordance with the subject-matter 
c. Members should be appointed to a specific Division, with the ability to sit in 
other divisions after necessary training. 
d. There should be a single route of appeal against the decision of all the Tribunals, 
to a single appellate Division. 
                                                 
31 Supra Note 10 at 47. 

14 
e. There should be Presidents for each of the nine first-tier Divisions.  Where 
possible, there should be made full-time appointments.  They should normally 
be Circuit judges, or senior lawyers. 
f. There should be a Tribunals Service Committee to produce a service approach 
of the highest quality and responsive to the user. 
g. The Tribunals Service should be an executive agency of the Lord Chancellor’s 
Department, separate from the Court Service. 
 
2.11 The British Parliament enacted the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act, 
2007. The Act, instead of providing for a single Tribunal system, introduced a new 
system of two generic Tribunals along with providing for a unified appeal structure. 
Power was given to the Lord Chancellor to transfer the jurisdiction of existing 
Tribunals to the two new Tribunals. He was also vested with the general duty to provide 
administrative support to the new Tribunals. A Tribunal service called the 
‘Transforming Public Services’ was set up to provide common administrative support 
to the newly created Tribunals.32 
 
C. Tribunal System in the United States 
 
2.12 The United States Supreme Court is generally considered as an Appellate Court 
as it reviews the decisions of all the lower courts in the country including the State 
Supreme Courts.33 Due to strict adherence to the doctrine of separation of powers, it 
does not exercise administrative adjudication.  
 
2.13 According to the US Constitution, judicial power cannot be vested in 
administrative bodies which are not Courts. The power exercised by administrative 
Tribunals is not ‘judicial’ but only ‘quasi-judicial’. The essential attributes of judicial 
power are, the finality of decisions, free from any interference from the other two 
branches of the State, i.e., the Executive and the Legislature.  
 
                                                 
32 Excerpts from the ‘Explanatory Notes to the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act, 2007’ prepared 
by the Ministry of Justice, British Parliament. 
33 Outline of the U.S. Legal System, 28 BIIPUSDS (2004).  

15 
2.14 The administrative Tribunals deal with multiple problems which require expert 
knowledge and experience. United States of America has followed a natural line of 
evolution. The American Bar Association appointed a Special Committee on 
Administrative Law in 1933.  The Report of the Special Committee called for greater 
judicial control over administrative agencies. This lead to the appointment of the 
Attorney General’s Committee by President Roosevelt in the year 1939 investigate the 
need for procedural reforms in the field of Administrative Law. The Report of the 
Committee resulted in the enactment of Administrative Procedure Act, 1946, which 
constituted a statutory code relating to the judicial control of administrative action in 
the USA.  
 
2.15 The Act constitutes a great landmark in the development of Administrative 
Law. The procedure to be followed while discharging various functions and definite 
avenues of judicial review are codified in the Act. The Statute empowers the Courts to 
review decisions of administrative bodies only on questions of law and interpretation 
of statutes. However, the Supreme Court has clarified that there should not be literal 
interpretation of the provisions as that would render the scope of judicial review 
meaningless.  
 
D. Tribunal System in Canada 
 
2.16 The administrative justice sector in Canada is very large and well-established. 
Tribunal system, having distinct character and voice are considered as one of the two 
pillars of Canada’s justice system.34 But the emergence of the Tribunal sector is a 
recent phenomenon which was established to regulate the aspects related to expanding 
economy, administration of social programs etc.35   
 
2.17 Administrative Tribunals in Canada make decisions on behalf of the federal and 
the provincial Governments when it is impractical or inappropriate for such 
Government to do so. Tribunals are set up by the federal or provincial legislation, 
known as “empowering legislation.” Tribunals are commonly known as 
                                                 
34 Supra note 20 at 7. 
35 Id. at 9. 

16 
‘Commissions’ or ‘Boards’, and make decisions about a wide variety of issues, 
including disputes between people or between people and the Government. Their 
decisions may be reviewed by the Courts. Because Tribunals engage in fact-finding 
and have the power to impact personal rights, they are often seen as “quasi-judicial.”36  
 
2.18 Administrative Tribunals are independent and specialised Governmental 
agencies established under the federal or provincial legislation to implement the 
legislative policy. Appointment to such agencies is usually by Order-in-Council. 
Members are ordinarily chosen for their expertise and their experience in the particular 
sector which is regulated by the legislation. 
 
2.19 Different kinds of Administrative Tribunals and Boards deal with disputes 
relating to the interpretation and application of laws and regulations, such as 
entitlement to employment insurance or disability benefits, refugee claims, and human 
rights. Administrative Tribunals are less formal than Courts and are not part of the 
Court system. However, they play an essential role in resolving disputes in the 
Canadian society. Decisions of Administrative Tribunals may be reviewed by the Court 
to ensure that the Tribunals act fairly and according to the law.37 
 
2.20 Many Administrative Tribunals have a hearing process to determine conflicting 
rights and obligations or to assign rights or entitlements between the disputing parties. 
Many Tribunals have wide powers to summon witnesses and records and to take 
evidence under oath. These Tribunals get their powers either directly from their 
enabling legislation, or indirectly by general laws about the Tribunal process. Some 
Tribunals may be governed by multiple statutes or rules of procedure. For example, the 
Ontario Child and Family Services Review Board gets its powers from the Child and 
Family Services Act, 1990, the Inter-country Adoption Act, 1998 and the Education 
Act, 1990. 
 
                                                 
36 Administrative Tribunals in Canada, available at: 
http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/administrative-tribunals/ (last visited on 31-07-
2017). 
37 Canada’s Court System DJC 12 (2015). 

17 
2.21 Even where no right of appeal is provided or when a Statute specifically forbids 
it, it is a principle of the Canadian Constitution that superior Courts have jurisdiction 
to review any Administrative Tribunal’s function i.e., judicial review, and usually they 
do not focus on whether the decision made by the Tribunal is a right decision or not 
but whether the decision is made in a correct manner and within the scope of its 
empowering legislation. The Courts review administrative decisions based on their 
reasonableness.  If a Tribunal acts outside its jurisdiction or fails to act reasonably, a 
superior Court may set aside its decision and send the matter back for redetermination; 
in some cases it may substitute the Tribunal’s finding with its own. However, if a 
decision is made properly i.e., following the procedure, considering the facts fairly and 
within the Tribunal’s power, Courts will not overturn a Tribunal’s finding of fact and 
will only overturn a decision if it made an error of law or acted unfairly while deciding 
the matter. The Federal Court of Canada, which is just below the Supreme Court of 
Canada in the hierarchy, hears the appeals against the decisions made by the Tribunals. 
 
2.22 In In re: Residential Tenancies Act Case,38 the Canadian Supreme Court held 
that Tribunals could not take away the core functions and judicial power vested in the 
judiciary. When the dispute is primarily civil in nature, the case has to be heard only 
by the judiciary and not by quasi-judicial Tribunals. 
 
2.23 Administrative Tribunals perform a wide range of functions, including research 
and recommendation (e.g., law reform commissions), rule-making and policy 
development (e.g., the Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications 
Commission and provincial securities commissions), grant allocation (e.g., the Canada 
Council for the Arts and regional development agencies), adjudication (e.g., labour 
relations boards, landlord and tenant boards, immigration and refugee boards, 
municipal boards and human rights tribunals) and standard setting (e.g., environmental 
assessment boards, workers’ compensation boards and health and safety commissions). 
In addition to such permanent agencies, there are ad hoc Administrative Tribunals, such 
as arbitrators and inquiry commissions, mandated to deal with a specific subject matter. 
Some of the Acts and the Tribunals functioning thereunder are set out herein below:  
Table 
                                                 
38  1981 (1) S.C.R. 714; See also, Massey-Ferguson Indust. Ltd. v. Sask., 1981 (2) S.C.R. 413. 

18 
 Name of Acts Tribunals 
1.  The Canadian Agricultural Products Act, 
1983 
Canadian Agricultural Review 
Tribunal 
2.  The Canadian Human Rights Act, 1977 Canadian Human Rights Tribunal 
3.  The Civil Resolution Tribunal Act, 2012 Civil Resolution Tribunal 
4.  The Protecting Canadian Condominium 
Act, 2015 
Ontario Canadian Condominium 
Authority  
5.  The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 Landlord and Tenant Board 
6.  The Ontario Energy Board Act, 1998 Ontario Energy Board 
7.  The Ontario Labour Relations, 
Employment Act, 1995 
Ontario Labour Relation Board 
8.  The Ontario Securities and the Commodity 
Future’s Act, 1990 
Ontario Securities Commission  
9.  The Public Service of Ontario Act, 2006 Public Service Grievance Board  
10.  The Workplace Safety and Insurance Act, 
1998 
Workplace Safety and Insurance 
Appeals Tribunal 
11.  
Child and Family Services Act, 1990; Inter-
country Adoption Act (1998) and The 
Education Act (1990) 
Ontario Child and Family Services 
Review Board 
12.  The Ontario Heritage Act, 1990  The Conservation Review Board  
E. Tribunal System in Australia 
 
2.24 Tribunals form an important part of the Australian judicial system. They 
provide citizens with an independent and impartial review of Government decisions 
that affect their interests. They also reduce the burden on a congested Civil Court 
system. They provide relatively simple, low-cost access to a swift and fair justice 
service to the citizens and corporations across Australia.39 
 
                                                 
39 The Development of Tribunals in Australia, available at: https://www.mcgirrtech.com/development-
of-tribunals-in-australia/ (last visited on 07-08-2017). 

19 
2.25 In 1975, the Australian Government established the Administrative Appeals 
Tribunal as a general Administrative Tribunal to review a broad range of Government 
decisions which include social security, veterans entitlements, Commonwealth 
employees compensation, taxation, migration, freedom of information, corporations, 
insurance, fisheries and many other areas. Other Administrative Tribunals established 
by the Commonwealth include the Social Security Appeals Tribunal, the Veterans 
Review Board and the Migration and Refugee Review Tribunals, National Native Title 
Tribunal and the Superannuation Complaints Tribunal. 
 
2.26 There is a range of Tribunals in the States which review administrative 
decisions of the Governments. The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal has 
jurisdiction to determine a wide range of private disputes. The Administrative 
Decisions Tribunal in New South Wales has a limited jurisdiction in relation to private 
disputes. Tribunals such as the Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal of New South 
Wales are primarily concerned with resolving private disputes such as building and 
tenancy disputes. Commonwealth Tribunals are strictly Administrative Tribunals 
whereas the State Tribunals are both Administrative as well as Civil.40 In several 
Australian States like Queensland and New South Wales, Tribunals function as the 
equivalent of a Small Claims Court. The Court of Appeal is a division of the Supreme 
Court which hears all appeals from the Supreme and District Courts as well as various 
Tribunals.41 Some of the Acts and the Tribunals functioning thereunder are set out 
herein below: 
Table 
 Name of Acts Tribunals 
 Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act, 
1975 
Administrative Appeal Tribunal 
 Equal Opportunity Act, 1984 Equal Opportunity Tribunal 
 Migration Act, 1958 Migration Review Tribunal 
 Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act, 
2013 
New South Wales Civil and 
Administrative Tribunal 
                                                 
40 Tribunals in Australia: Their Roles and Responsibilities, available at: http://www.aat.gov.au/about-
the-aat/engagement/speeches-and-papers/the-honourable-justice-garry-downes-am-former-
pre/tribunals-in-australia-their-roles-and-responsib (last visited on 07-08-2017).  
41 Queensland Court’s, available at: http://www.courts.qld.gov.au/courts/court-of-appeal (last visited on 
07-08-2017). 

20 
 Resource Management and Planning 
Appeal Tribunal Act, 1993 
Resource Management and 
Planning Appeal Tribunal 
 Queensland Civil and Administrative 
Tribunal Act, 2009 
Queensland Civil and 
Administrative Tribunal 
 State Administrative Tribunal Act, 2004 State Administrative Tribunal of 
Western Australia 
 Victorian Civil and Administrative 
Tribunal Act, 1998 
Victorian Civil and Administrative 
Tribunal 
 Workers Rehabilitation and Conciliation 
Act, 1988 
Workers Rehabilitation and 
Conciliation Tribunal 
 
 
 
  

21 
CHAPTER – III 
TRIBUNAL SYSTEM IN INDIA 
 
3.1. In India, the function of dispensing justice is entrusted to regularly established 
Courts on the pattern of Common law system. History of tribunals in India stands 
reflected dating back to the year 1941,42 when first Tribunal was established in the form 
of Income-Tax Appellate Tribunal. The Tribunals were however, set up to reduce the 
workload of courts, to expedite decisions and to provide a forum which would be 
manned by lawyers and experts in the areas falling under the jurisdiction of the 
Tribunal. The Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) Act of 1976 brought about a 
massive change in the adjudication of disputes in the country. It provided for the 
insertion of Articles 323-A and 323-B in the Constitution of India, whereby the goal of 
establishment of Administrative Tribunals by the Parliament as well as the State 
Legislatures, to adjudicate the matters specified in the sub-clauses is made possible.43 
 
3.2. There is a distinction between Article 323-A and 323-B as the former gives 
exclusive power to the Parliament and the latter gives power to the concerned State 
Legislature which is concurrent in nature by which the Parliament and the State 
Legislature can by law, constitute Tribunals for the respective subjects specified 
therein. This is evident from the explanation appended to Article 323-B of the 
Constitution. The provisions of both these Articles are to be given effect irrespective 
of any other provision of the Constitution or any other law for the time being in force. 
 
3.3. The judicial system of India is divided into three tiers. The subordinate courts 
are vested with the original jurisdiction in all matters except those, which are barred 
either expressly or impliedly. The High courts in general have appellate and revisional 
jurisdiction in the respective States along with the jurisdiction to issue prerogative 
writs. Some of the High Courts have original jurisdiction. The High Courts also 
entertain appeals/writs against the judgments rendered by some of the Tribunals. The 
Supreme Court has been conferred with original jurisdiction under Article 131 
                                                 
42 Justice D.K. Jain’s speech in Chandigarh Judicial Academy on the eve of Silver Jubilee of the 
Chandigarh Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal on November 19, 2011.   
43  Sarayu Satish, “The Tribunal System in India – Increasing in Importance but Increasing in 
effectiveness?” WLR 2. 

22 
(disputes between two or more States, or between the Government of India and one or 
more States, or disputes arising out of the election of the President and Vice-President 
of India) and advisory jurisdiction under Article 143, where the President of India may 
seek the opinion of the Court on a particular issue of fact or law of general public 
importance. It can issue the prerogative writs under Article 32 of the Constitution and 
has appellate jurisdiction against the orders passed by the High Courts, Tribunals or the 
Appellate Tribunals established under various Statutes. The Court also has discretion 
to entertain Special Leave Petitions under Article 136 on substantial question of law or 
issues of general public importance.   
 
3.4. Due to growing commercial ventures and activities by the Government in 
different sectors, along with the expansion of Governmental activities in the social and 
other similar fields, a need has arisen for availing the services of persons having 
knowledge  in specialised fields for effective and speedier dispensation of justice as the 
traditional mode of administration of justice by the Courts of law was felt to be 
unequipped with such expertise to deal with the complex issues arising in the changing 
scenario.44  
 
A. Justice Rankin Committee Report - 1924 
 
3.5. Justice Rankin Committee was set up to “Enquire in to the operation and effects 
of the substantive and adjective law, whether enacted or otherwise, followed by the 
Courts in India in the disposal of Civil suits, appeals, application for revision and other 
civil litigation...”.45 The Committee submitted its Report suggesting various reforms to 
deal with the pendency of cases, as delay and backlog of cases had been a problem 
even in pre-independence period also.  
 
 
 
B. Administrative Reforms Commission - 1966 
 
 
3.6 The Administrative Reforms Commission of India, set-up a Study Team on 
Administrative Tribunals to explore the possibilities of establishing administrative 
Tribunals in different spheres. The study team recommended in 1969, the setting up of 
                                                 
44 R.C. Saksena, “Adjudication by Tribunals in India” 37:2 JILI 223 (1995). 
45 Jensen, Erik Gilbert and Heller, Thomas C., Beyond Common Knowledge: Empirical Approaches to 
the Rule of Law, Stanford University Press, 2003 at p. 157.                                                                                                                                                                                                       

23 
Civil Services Tribunals to act as the final adjudicatory authority in respect of orders 
inflicting the major punishments of dismissal, removal and reduction in rank.  
 
C. Wanchoo Committee - 1970 
 
3.7. The Committee recommended for the establishment of Income-Tax Settlement 
Commission, to serve as an alternative dispute resolution body in the administration of 
fiscal laws, the primary objective of which was to increase the realisation of revenue. 
It was felt that there should be a provision for compromise and settlement which should 
be fair, prompt and independent. 
 
3.8. The Committee also recommended the setting up of a Direct Taxes Settlement 
Tribunal which would ensure fair and quick decisions. It was further recommended that 
the constitution of the settlement body be such, which will ‘encourage officers with 
integrity and wide knowledge and experience to accept assignments on the Tribunal’. 
The status and emoluments of its members were recommended to be as that of members 
of the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT).46 
 
D. The High Courts’ Arrears Committee Report - 1972 
 
3.9. In 1969, Justice J.C. Shah Committee, popularly known as The High Courts’ 
Arrears Committee, was set up by the Union Government which pointed out that there 
was an urgent need to set up independent Tribunals to exclusively deal with service 
matters of Government employees in view of the pendency of large number of writ 
petitions filed by Government servants pending in the Supreme Court and various High 
Courts. 
 
3.10. Law Commission in its 58th Report (1974) titled ‘The Structure and Jurisdiction 
of the Higher Judiciary’ went into all the aspects relating to the Reform of Judicial 
Administration, including the question of delay in disposal of cases in the Courts. The 
Commission recommended that a separate high powered Tribunal or Commission 
should be set up to deal with the service matters and that ‘Litigation’ should be the last 
resort as there is an imperative need to reduce arrears in the higher courts.  
                                                 
46 Vatika Farms Private Limited v. Union of India, (2008) 216 CTR Del 37. 

24 
 
E. Swaran Singh Committee Report - 1976 
 
3.11. With the acceptance of welfare ideology, there was a mushroom growth of 
public services and public servants. The Courts, mainly the High Courts were inundated 
with service cases. Therefore, the Swaran Singh Committee recommended the 
establishment of administrative Tribunals as a part of adjudicative system under the 
Constitution.47 The Committee further recommended the setting up of Tribunals in 
three broad areas to combat delays in the Indian legal system. It also recommended that 
the decisions of the Tribunals should be subject to scrutiny by the Supreme Court under 
Article 136 of the Constitution. The jurisdiction of all other Courts including the writ 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32 and the High Courts under Article 
226 of the Constitution be barred. 48  The suggestions of the Committee can be 
summarised as under: 
 
i. Administrative Tribunals may be set up under the Central Law, both 
at the State level and at the Centre to decide cases relating to service 
conditions. 
ii. Provision may be made for setting up an All-India Labour Appellate 
Tribunal to decide appeals from Labour Courts and Industrial 
Tribunals. 
iii. Disputes relating to revenue, land reforms, ceiling of urban property, 
procurement and distribution of food grains and other essential 
commodities shall be decided by the Tribunals. 
  
F. Background and Significance of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 
 
3.12. The objective behind establishing the ‘Tribunals’ was to provide an effective 
and speedier forum for dispensation of justice, but in the wake of routine appeals 
arising from the orders of such forums, certain issues have been raised because such 
appeals are obstructing the constitutional character of the Supreme Court and thus, 
disturbing the effective working of the Supreme Court as the appeals in these cases do 
not always involve a question of general public importance. The Supreme Court is 
primarily expected to deal with matters of constitutional importance and matters 
                                                 
47 K.C. Joshi, “Constitutional Status of Tribunals” 41:1 JILI 116 (1999). 
48 Thiruvengadam, Arun K., The Oxford Handbook of the Indian Constitution 414 (Oxford University 
Press, United Kingdom, 1st edn., 2016). 

25 
involving substantial question of law of general public importance. Due to 
overburdening, the Supreme Court is unable to timely address such matters. 
 
3.13. Though the term ‘tribunal’ has not been defined, but there are cases wherein 
Courts have laid down the requisites of tribunals. In Jaswant Sugar Mills Ltd., Meerut 
v. Lakshmichand,49 it was held that to determine whether an authority acting judicially 
was a Tribunal or not, the principal test was whether it was vested with the trappings 
of a Court, such as having the authority to determine matters, authority to compel the 
attendance of witnesses, the duty to follow the essential rules of evidence and the power 
to impose sanctions. 
 
3.14. Most of these tribunals/authorities are a kind of ‘Court’ performing functions 
which are of ‘judicial’ as well as ‘quasi-judicial’ nature having the trappings of a Court. 
It has many trappings of the court to ensure justice and fair play; and it has many 
flexibilities devoid of technicalities of regular court to ensure speedy and affordable 
justice. The word ‘judicial’ was explained in Royal Aquarium and Summer and Winter 
Garden Society v. Parkinson50: 
 
The word ‘judicial’ has two meanings. It may refer to the 
discharge of duties exercisable by a judge or by justices in court, 
or to administrative duties which need not be performed in court, 
but in respect of which it is necessary to bring to bear a judicial 
mind – that is, a mind to determine what is fair and just in respect 
of the matters under consideration. 
 
3.15. The basic test of a Tribunal within the meaning of Article 136 is that it is an 
adjudicating authority (other than Court) vested with the judicial power of the State.  In 
Associated Cement Co. Ltd. v. P.N. Sharma,51 it was held that the procedure which is 
followed by the Courts is regularly prescribed and while exercising powers, Courts 
have to conform to that procedure while on the other side the procedure which the 
Tribunals have to follow may not always be strictly prescribed. It was held that “the 
basic and fundamental feature that is common to both the Courts and the tribunals is 
                                                 
49 AIR 1963 SC 677. 
50 (1892) 1 QB 431(452). 
51 AIR 1965 S.C. 1595. 

26 
that they discharge judicial functions and exercise judicial powers which inherently 
vest in a sovereign State”. The Tribunal has some but not all the trappings of the Court. 
 
3.16. In Durga Shankar Mehta v. Raghuraj Singh,52 the Supreme Court of India held 
that the expression ‘tribunal’ according to Article 136 does not mean something as 
‘Court’ but includes within it, all adjudicating bodies, provided they are constituted by 
State to exercise judicial powers as distinguished from discharging of administrative or 
legislative functions.  
 
3.17. In Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi v. Employees of the Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi,53 the 
Supreme Court held that the award of a Tribunal can be challenged under Article 136 
of the Constitution if the Tribunal is the creature of Statute and observes the provisions 
of special Act and when it is vested with the functions of the Court or necessary 
trappings of the Court. Whereas, in Associated Cement Co. Ltd. v. P.N. Sharma,54 it 
was held that the Courts alone have no monopoly to exercise judicial power and thus, 
the vesting of trappings of the Court is not an essential attribute of a Tribunal. 
 
3.18. In Kihoto Hollohon v. Sri Zachilhu, 55  referring to its earlier decision in 
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Shyam Sunder Jhunjhunwal,56 the Supreme Court set 
out a test to determine whether an authority exercising adjudicatory powers is a 
Tribunal or not: 
 
‘….there is a lis an affirmation by one party and denial by 
another-and the dispute necessarily involves a decision on the 
rights and obligations of the parties to it and the authority is 
called upon to decide it. 
 
All tribunals are not courts, though all Courts are Tribunals. The 
word ‘Courts’ is used to designate those Tribunals which are set 
up in an organised State for the Administration of Justice. By 
Administration of justice is meant the exercise of judicial power 
of the State to maintain and uphold rights and to punish 
‘wrongs’. Whenever there is an infringement of a right or an 
                                                 
52 AIR 1954 SC 520. 
53 AIR 1950 SC 188. 
54 AIR 1965 SC 1595. 
55 AIR 1993 SC 412 
56 AIR 1961 SC 1669. 

27 
injury, the Courts are there to restore the vinculum juris, which 
is disturbed.’ 
 
3.19. The difference between a Court and a Tribunal is the manner of deciding a 
dispute. However, the Supreme Court in Virindar Kumar Satyawadi v. The State of 
Punjab,57 observed that: 
 
‘What distinguishes a Court from a quasi-judicial tribunal is that 
it is charged with a duty to decide disputes in a judicial manner 
and declare the rights of parties in a definitive judgment. To 
decide in a judicial manner involves that the parties are entitled 
as a matter of right to be heard in support of their claim and to 
adduce evidence in proof of it. And it also imports an obligation 
on the part of the authority to decide the matter on a 
consideration of the evidence adduced and in accordance with 
law. When a question therefore arises as to whether an authority 
created by an Act is a Court as distinguished from a quasi-
judicial tribunal, what has to be decided is whether having 
regard to the provisions of the Act it possesses all the attributes 
of a Court.’  
 
3.20. Tribunals basically deal with the cases under special laws and therefore they 
provide special adjudication, outside Courts. In State of Gujarat v. Gujarat Revenue 
Tribunal Bar Association,58 it was observed that: 
‘…..a particular Act/set of Rules will determine whether the 
functions of a particular Tribunal are akin to those of the courts, 
which provide for the basic administration of justice. Where 
there is a lis between two contesting parties and a statutory 
authority is required to decide such dispute between them, such 
an authority may be called as a quasi-judicial authority, i.e., a 
situation where, (a) a statutory authority is empowered under a 
statute to do any act (b) the order of such authority would 
adversely affect the subject and (c) although there is no lis or 
two contending parties, and the contest is between the authority 
and the subject and (d) the statutory authority is required to act 
judicially under the statute, the decision of the said authority is 
a quasi-judicial decision. An authority may be described as a 
quasi-judicial authority when it possesses certain attributes or 
trappings of a ‘court’, but not all. In case certain powers under 
C.P.C. or Cr.P.C. have been conferred upon an authority, but it 
has not been entrusted with the judicial powers of the State, it 
cannot be held to be a court.’ 
 
                                                 
57 AIR 1956 SC 153. 
58 (2012) 10 SCC 353. 

28 
3.21. The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 brings into existence the ‘Tribunals’ 
contemplated under Article 323-A(2), to deal with various matters. The Act specifically 
provides that it will not be applicable to:  
 
i. any member of the naval, military or air force or of any other armed 
forces of the union;  
ii. any officer or servant of the Supreme Court or of any High Court, 
and  
iii. any person appointed to the secretarial staff of either House of 
Parliament or to the secretarial staff of any State Legislature or a 
House thereof or, in the case of a Union Territory having a 
legislature, of that legislature. Later on in the year of 1987, even the 
officers and servants of the subordinate courts were also excluded 
from the purview of the Act. 
 
The Act provides for the establishment of three kinds of administrative Tribunals: 
 
i. The Central Administrative Tribunal,  
ii. The State Administrative Tribunals and  
iii. The Joint Administrative Tribunals. 
 
3.22. The adjudication of disputes pertaining to service matters require specialised 
bodies because of the delay in Court room procedures. In Kamal Kanti Dutta v. Union 
of India,59 it was observed that: 
 
‘There are few other litigative areas than disputes between 
members of various services inter se, where the principle that 
public policy requires that all litigation must have an end can 
apply with greater force. Public servants ought not to be driven 
or required to dissipate their time and energy in court-room 
battles. Thereby their attention is diverted from public to private 
affairs and their inter se disputes affect their sense of oneness 
without which no institution can function effectively. The 
constitution of Service Tribunals by State Governments with an 
apex Tribunal at the Centre, which, in the generality of cases, 
should be the final arbiter of controversies relating to conditions 
of service, including the vexed question of seniority, may save 
the courts from the avalanche of writ petitions and appeals in 
service matter. The proceedings of such Tribunals can have the 
merit of informality and if they will not be tied down to strict 
                                                 
59 AIR 1980 S.C. 2056. 

29 
rules of evidence, they might be able to produce solutions which 
will satisfy many and displease only a few.’ 
 
3.23 The Supreme Court had an occasion to examine section 12(2) of the 
Administrative Tribunals, Act, 1985 in A.K. Behra v. Union of India,60 wherein it was 
held that the said provision enables the appropriate Government to designate one or 
more members as Vice-Chairman and entitles the members so designated to exercise 
such powers and perform such functions of the Chairman as may be delegated to him 
cannot be regarded “as destroying the principle of independence of judiciary or of 
administrative tribunals.”  
3.24 However, Justice Dalveer Bhandari, in his dissenting opinion held: 
‘53. --- the Administrative Tribunals --- are an alternative 
institutional mechanism or authority designed to be not less 
effective than the High Court, consistently with the amended 
Constitutional scheme but at the same time not to negate judicial 
review jurisdiction of the Constitutional Courts. 
54. There is no anathema in the Tribunal exercising jurisdiction 
of High Court and in that sense being supplemental or additional 
to the High Court but, at the same time, it is our bounden duty to 
ensure that the Tribunal must inspire the same confidence and 
trust in the public mind. This can only be achieved by appointing 
the deserving candidates with legal background and judicial 
approach and objectivity.’ 
G. National Green Tribunal 
 
3.25 The Supreme Court, in M.C. Mehta v. Union of India, 61  said that as 
environment cases involve assessment of scientific data, it was desirable to set up 
dedicated environment courts at a regional level with a Judge and two experts, 
keeping in view the expertise required for such adjudication. There should be an 
appeal to the Supreme Court from the decision of the environment Court. The 
judgment highlighted the difficulties faced by judges while disposing of 
environmental cases. It further observed that, ‘environment Court must be 
established for expeditious disposal of environmental cases’. 
 
                                                 
60 (2010) 6 S.C.R 347. 
61 1986 (2) SCC 176. 

30 
3.26 In Indian Council for Environmental-Legal Action v. Union of India,62 the 
Supreme Court directed that, ‘environmental Courts having civil and criminal 
jurisdiction must be established to deal with the environmental issues in a speedy 
manner’. 
 
3.27 In A.P. Pollution Control Board v. M.V. Nayudu,63 the Court referred to the 
need for establishing environmental Courts which would have the benefit of expert 
advice from environmental scientists/technically qualified persons, as part of the 
judicial process, after an elaborate discussion of the views of jurists of various 
countries.  
 
3.28 In A.P. Pollution Control Board v. M.V. Nayudu II,64 the Supreme Court 
referred to the constitution of appellate authorities under plenary as well as delegated 
legislation. With regard to the Appellate authorities constituted under the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981, the Court noted that except in one State where the appellate 
authority was manned by a retired High Court Judge, in other States they were 
manned only by the bureaucrats. These appellate authorities did not have judicial or 
environmental expertise on the Bench. The Court held that the Law Commission 
could examine the disparities in the constitution of these quasi-judicial bodies and 
suggest a new scheme to bring in uniformity in the structure to have effective 
supervision of the orders passed by administrative or public authorities, including 
that of the Government.  
 
3.29 As a consequence, the National Environment Tribunal Act, 1995 and 
National Environment Appellate Authority Act, 1997 were enacted. But the same 
were found to be inadequate giving rise to demand for dealing with the 
environmental cases more efficiently and effectively. The Law Commission in its 
186th Report suggested multi-faceted Courts with judicial and technical inputs 
referring to the practice of the environmental Courts in Australia and New Zealand. 
                                                 
62 1996 (3) SCC 212. 
63 1999 (2) SCC 718. 
64 2001 (2) SCC 62. 

31 
As a result NGT was formed as a special fast-track, quasi-judicial body comprising 
of judges and environment experts to ensure expeditious disposal of cases. 
 
3.30 In Techi Tagi Tara v. Rajendra Singh Bhandari,65 while dealing with the 
issue related to the power of Executive to frame appropriate rules for the 
appointment of Chairperson and members of the State Pollution Control Boards, the 
Supreme Court, relying upon its earlier judgment in State of Punjab v. Salil 
Sabhlok66 held that it was beyond the competence of NGT to frame rules in respect 
of appointment of Chairperson and Members of the SPCBs. The Court directed the 
States to frame appropriate guidelines or recruitment rules taking into consideration 
the institutional requirements of the SPCBs and also taking into consideration the 
law laid down by the Supreme Court.   
H. Choksi Committee – 1977 
 
3.31 A Committee was set up to examine and suggest legal and administrative 
measures, for the purpose of simplification and rationalisation of Direct Tax Laws. The 
Committee recommended the establishment of a “Central Tax Court” with an all-India 
jurisdiction, under a separate Statute. The recommendations of the Committee 
necessitated the amendment of the Constitution. The Committee suggested the 
desirability of constituting “Special Tax Benches” consisting of judges having special 
knowledge of the subject in such cases, in High Courts, to deal with the large number 
of pending tax cases, by having, continuous sitting throughout the year.  
I. Raghavan Committee Report - 2002 
 
3.32 The “High Level Committee on Competition Policy,” submitted its Report and 
recommended to enact a new law and the setting up of the Competition Commission 
of India, which would effectively deal  with specified anti-competitive practices in its 
‘adjudicatory effort’ and would have powers to mete out deterrent punishment to the 
violators.  It was recommended that the investigative, prosecutorial and adjudicative 
                                                 
65 Civil Appeal No. 1359 of 2017, decided on 22 September, 2017. 
66 (2013) 5 SCC 1 

32 
functions should be separated to respect the need of judicial independence. 67  In 
pursuance thereof, the Competition Act, 2002 was enacted. 
 
J. The Finance Act, 2017 
 
3.33 The Finance Act, 2017 has merged eight tribunals on the ground of 
functional similarity and has given the power to the Government to appoint and 
remove the members. The tribunals merged are listed in a tabular form, which is 
annexed as Annexure-I. 
 
3.34 In exercise of the powers conferred by section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017, 
the Central Government has framed ‘The Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal and other 
Authorities (Qualifications, Experience and other Conditions of Service of Members) 
Rules, 2017.’ These rules are applicable to the Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Chairperson, 
Vice- Chairperson, President, Vice- President, Presiding Officer, Accountant Member, 
Administrative Member, Judicial Member, Expert Member, Law Member, Revenue 
Member, Technical Member, Member of the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or, as the 
case may be, Authority as specified in column (2) of the Eighth Schedule of the Finance 
Act, 2017. Nineteen Tribunals/Appellate Tribunals/ Authorities constituted under their 
respective Acts are mentioned in column (3) of the Eighth Schedule. The constitutional 
validity of the Finance Act and the rules is challenged by way of Writ Petition which 
is pending before the Supreme Court.68  
 
3.35 The Tribunals have been established in almost all the countries for the reason 
that they are cheaper (cost-effective), accessible, free from technicalities, 
expeditious and proceed more rapidly and efficiently as manned by experts, while 
                                                 
67 Anusha Ramesh, “Tribunalisation of India’s Competitive Regime” 9 NUJSLR 272-273 (2016). 
68 In Jairam Ramesh v. Union of India, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 558 of 2017, it is alleged that The 
Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal and other Authorities (Qualifications, experience and other conditions of 
service of members) Rules, 2017 be declared ultra vires the NGT Act, 2010, as the same suffers from 
vice of excessive delegation. Notice has been issued to the Ministries of finance, law and justice, 
environment, parliamentary affairs, the Cabinet Secretariat and the National Green Tribunal (NGT); See 
also Central Administrative Tribunal (Principal Bench) Bar Association through its President v. Union 
of India, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 640 of 2017; All India Lawyers Union v. Union of India, Writ Petition 
(Civil) No. 778 of 2017; and Social Action for Forest and Environment v. Union of India, Writ Petition 
(Civil) No. 561 of 2017. 

33 
the Courts are too remote, too legalistic and too expensive. The concept of 
Tribunalisation was developed to overcome the crisis of delay and backlogs in the 
administration of justice. However, the data officially available, in respect of 
working of some of the Tribunals do not depict a satisfactory picture. Though the 
disposal rate of the Tribunals in comparison to the filing of cases per year had been 
remarkable i.e., at the rate of 94%, the pendency remains high. Some of the figures 
of pending cases before the Tribunals are as under:                                                 
       Tribunal      As On                                                                                                                                        Number of 
Pending Cases 
1. Central Administrative 
Tribunal 
  July, 2017             44,333 
2. Railway Claims Tribunal  30-09-2016             45,604 
3. Debt Recovery Tribunal  03-07-2016             78,118 
4. Customs, Excise and Service 
Tax Appeal Tribunal   
 End of 2016               
            90,592  
5. Income Tax Appellate 
Tribunal   
 End of 2016             91,538 
 
  

34 
             CHAPTER – IV 
REVISITING RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PREVIOUS LAW 
COMMISSIONS 
 
4.1 The Right to Fair and Speedy Trial is very much a part of right to life and 
personal liberty, a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of 
India and therefore, any kind of delay in the expeditious disposal of cases infringes the 
same. The Law Commission of India has expressed its concern over the delay in justice 
delivery system in its Fourteenth Report (1958) and made recommendations for 
reforming the administration of Justice delivery system which have been implemented 
from time to time to revamp the judicial system with a view to reduce delay and enlarge 
access to justice.69 
 
A. 14th Report of Law Commission of India, 1958 
 
4.2 The delay in disposal of cases is as old as the law itself. The inordinate delay 
increases the cost of litigation and results in the miscarriage of justice. But at the same 
time, the speedy justice does not mean a hasty or summary dispensation of justice. It 
should be ensured that there is determination of facts in controversy and thereafter there 
is application of the legal principles to those determined facts. 
 
4.3 A major issue before the Law Commission was whether to recommend the 
creation of tribunals for specific subject/areas. The Commission examined the 
Comparative experiences in England, France and the United States before concluding 
that the ‘creation of a general administrative body like the Counseil d’Etat in France is 
not feasible’ in India.70 
 
4.4 The Commission recommended the establishment, at the Centre and in the 
States, of an appellate Tribunal or Tribunals presided over by a legally qualified 
Chairman along with experienced civil servants as members to which memorials and 
appeals from Government servants could be referred in respect of disciplinary action 
                                                 
69 N. N. Mathur, Changes Required in Working and Procedural Laws for Speedy Processing, 32 IBR 
337-344 (2005). 
70 Supra note 49 at p. 415. 

35 
taken against them. The establishment of such a Tribunal was expected to serve a 
double purpose of speedy and cost-effective justice. Besides this, the existence of a 
speaking order passed by a Tribunal was to assist the Courts to reject frivolous petitions 
summarily. The Commission did not agree to any curtailment of the existing 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the High Courts empowering them to exercise 
the power of judicial review.  
B. 58th Report of Law Commission of India, 1974 
 
4.5 The Commission in its 58th Report on ‘Structure and Jurisdiction of the Higher 
Judiciary’ observed: 
 
‘In regard to service matters, it is urged that a separate high 
powered tribunal or Commission should be set up to deal with 
service matters and this Commission should be presided over by 
a judge of the status of the Supreme Court Judge assisted by two 
independent experts, and the decisions of this tribunal or 
commission should be final, subject to the right of the public 
servant to approach the Supreme Court under Article 136 on the 
ground that his fundamental rights are violated. The terms and 
conditions of the service of members of this tribunal or 
commission should be similar to those of the judges of the 
Supreme Court. 
..But, if the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court and the 
Supreme Court remains intact, and the decision of the service 
Court is subject to review by these higher Courts, we do not see 
how the creation of Service Courts will reduce the growing 
volume of arrears in these Courts. 
…In our opinion, the existing legal and constitutional position 
affords sufficient protection. We do not, therefore, recommend 
the creation of a separate Service Tribunal.’ 
4.6 The Commission recommended alternative dispute resolution mechanism to 
provide an amicable settlement to the parties at a speedier and cheaper rate. 
 
C. 79th Report of Law Commission of India, 1979 
 
4.7 The Commission in its 79th Report on ‘Delay and Arrears in High Courts and 
Other Appellate Courts’ expressed its concern over the arrears in High Courts. 
Recognising the necessity for speedy justice, it was observed: 

36 
 
‘1.5 Speedy justice is of the essence of an organised society and 
it is in the interest of both the State and the citizen that disputes 
which go to the law courts for adjudication are decided as early 
as possible. Justice delayed, is, in most cases, justice denied. At 
the same time, it is obvious that in order to speed up the decision 
of cases, the basic norms that are necessary for ensuring justice 
should not be dispensed with. This is the great problem facing 
any person or group of persons entrusted with the task of 
devising measures to secure elimination of delay and speedy 
clearance of arrears in courts. 
1.5A Delay in the disposal of cases apart from causing hardship 
to the parties has a human aspect and has the effect of 
embroiling succeeding generations in litigation started by the 
ancestors… 
 1.14 In 1974, when the Law Commission reviewed the structure 
and jurisdiction of the higher judiciary, it focussed its special 
attention on the imperative need to reduce arrears in the higher 
courts and dealt with a number of questions, including writ 
petitions, taxation, industrial disputes and matters relating to 
conditions of service of the judges. The Report also deals at 
length with appeals to the Supreme Court, both civil and 
criminal including appeals with special leave.’ 
  
D. 115th Report of Law Commission of India, 1986 
 
4.8 The Commission examined the vertical hierarchy of Tribunals and Courts 
involved in tax litigation and recommended for the setting-up of a Central Tax Court 
to eliminate the jurisdiction of High Courts in Tax matters. The feasibility of setting up 
of a central Tax court for Direct and Indirect Taxes, was expressed in the following 
words: 
 
‘1.5 Administration of justice primarily aims at providing 
mechanism for resolution of disputes arising in the society. 
Different form have been set-up to different types of disputes e.g. 
civil courts, criminal courts, labour courts, tax tribunals etc. 
Specific forum especially devised to deal with specific disputes 
caters to the needs of persons who seek resolution of these 
specified types of disputes. 
  … 

37 
2.36 On the setting up of the Central Tax Court, all present 
references pending in any High Court shall stand transferred to 
the Central Tax Court. 
                   …  
2.39 Setting up of a Central Tax Court will make a deep dent on 
the arrears in the High Court and other pending proceedings 
will get accelerated treatment.’ 
 
E. 124th Report of Law Commission of India, 1988 
 
4.9 The Commission in its Report titled ‘The High Court Arrears – A Fresh Look’ 
made various recommendations observing: 
 
‘It is here a germ for the first time of creating specialist 
Tribunals as alternatives to the High Court with a view to 
curtailing the jurisdiction of the High Court to control the inflow 
of work which may indirectly help in tackling the problem of 
arrears and backlog of cases.  
… The Law Commission is of the firm view that, wherever 
possible, proliferating appellate and wide original jurisdiction 
should be controlled or curtailed without impairing the quality 
of justice. 
……To sum up, the approach of the commission is to reduce 
number of appeals, to set up specialist courts/tribunals, 
simultaneously eliminating the jurisdiction of the High Court 
which, when translated into action by implementing the reports 
submitted by the present Law Commission, would, on a very 
superficial assessment, reduce the inflow of work into the High 
Court by nearly 45% of its present inflow.’ 
 
4.10 In support of its recommendations for establishing the specialised 
Courts/Tribunals, the Commission made reference to the position prevalent in Australia 
observing: 
 
‘Tribunals outside the established courts have been created - 
Administrative Appeal Tribunals, Arbitration Tribunals, 
Workers’ Compensation Tribunals, Pension Tribunals, 
Planning Appeal Tribunal, Equal Opportunity Tribunals, etc. 
This activity of creating Tribunals is founded on a belief that the 
established Courts are too remote, too legalistic, too expensive 
and, above all too slow.’  

38 
 
F. 162nd Report of Law Commission of India, 1998 
 
4.11 The Commission in its Report titled ‘Review of Functioning of Central 
Administrative Tribunal; Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal; and 
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal’ made an alternative recommendation for the 
constitution of National Appellate Administrative Tribunal observing: 
 
‘The Supreme Court has laid down in L. Chandra Kumar’s case 
(Supra) that an aggrieved party can have recourse to the 
jurisdiction of the respective High Court under Article 226/227 
of the Constitution of India, against the decision of the Central 
Administrative Tribunal. The repercussions of this development 
of law have already been felt. The Karnataka Government has 
sought to abolish the Karnataka State Administrative Tribunal. 
In the news items in the recent past, it has appeared that even 
the Central Government is proposing to abolish CAT. The 
remedy of judicial review by the High Court provided against 
the decision of the Administrative Tribunal and a possible 
further appeal to the Supreme Court under Article 136 is not 
only time-consuming but also expensive. Besides this, the 
various High Courts may interpret differently any statutory 
provision concerning the service conditions governing the 
employees. Thus, the lack of uniformity in the High Court 
decisions and consequently in CAT benches will create 
confusion in the mind of the litigant. It will further make the 
public lose faith in seeking justice through the judiciary, and 
thus undermine the democratic norms.  
…..An appeal, on substantial questions of law and fact may lie 
to the proposed Appellate forum, against the decision of the 
Central Administrative Tribunal.  
….The proposed forum may have branches all over the country 
to reduce the cost of litigation to the litigant.  
….The decision of the proposed Appellate court will be binding 
on all benches of CAT. The proposed forum will be of status 
higher than a High Court but below the Supreme Court.  
… It is the need of the hour that for expeditious disposal of cases, 
all cases which raise one or more common questions of law and 
on the basis of which, the cases can be disposed of by a common 
judgment, should be grouped together and heard together. Thus 
in the 79th Report of the Law Commission of India on delay and 
arrears in High Courts and other appellate courts, this 
recommendation has been echoed….’ 

39 
 
4.12 Regarding the position of the Administrative Tribunal after L. Chandra Kumar, 
the Commission observed: 
 
‘It is no longer an alternative mechanism to the High Court, but 
a tribunal whose decisions are subject to scrutiny by the High 
Court, albeit by a Division Bench.  
….The Supreme Court has also held that though these tribunals 
are subject to the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts, they are 
yet competent to decide questions relating to the constitutional 
validity of the statutory provisions and rules except, of course, 
the provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 under 
which they have been constituted. The Supreme Court has also 
rejected that there ought to be no technical/administrative 
members in these tribunals. They said that these non-judicial 
members provide an input which may not be available with the 
judicial members. In the light of the above dicta of the Supreme 
Court, not much room is left for the Law Commission of India to 
suggest any substantial measures or recommendations with 
respect to the functioning of these tribunals.’ 
 
G. 186th Report of the Law Commission of India, 2003 
 
4.13 On ‘Proposal to Constitute Environment Courts’ the Commission 
recommended  that Environment Courts must be established to reduce the pressure and 
burden on the High Courts and the Supreme Court. It was however, recommended that 
these Courts will also have appellate powers against orders passed by the concerned 
authorities under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and The Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986 with an enabling provision that the Central Government may notify these Courts 
as appellate Courts under other environment related Acts as well. The Commission also 
expressed an opinion that such a law can be made under Article 253 of the Constitution 
of India read with Entry 13A of List I of Schedule VII to give effect to decisions taken 
in Stockholm Conference of 1972 and Rio Conference of 1992. 
 
4.14 It was further recommended that it will be a Court of original jurisdiction on all 
environmental issues and also an appellate authority under all the three Acts, viz., 
Water Act, Air Act and Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and will reduce the burden 
of High Courts/Supreme Court. There will lay a statutory appeal directly to the 

40 
Supreme Court against the judgment of the proposed Environment Court. On the 
question of appeal, it was recommended that:  
 
‘It is now proposed, as stated earlier, that there will be an 
Environment Court in each State (or group of States) and will 
have appellate jurisdiction. It will have appellate jurisdiction 
which is now being exercised by officers of the Government 
under the special Acts. Pending appeals under the Water 
(P&CP) Act, 1974, Air (P&CP) Act, 1981 and under the Rules 
framed under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 must be 
transferred to the proposed Environment Court in each State and 
all future appeals must be filed in the said Court.’ 
 
H. 215th Report of Law Commission of India, 2008 
 
4.15 In Report titled ‘L. Chandra Kumar be revisited by Larger Bench of Supreme 
Court’ it was observed by the Commission that Administrative Tribunals are a valuable 
and indeed an essential part of adjudicatory system of a democratic State. The Tribunals 
have come to stay. Special Tribunals are likely to grow rather than diminish. The 
impression that the Tribunal constituted under the Act of 1985 is dependent upon the 
Government is misconceived. The functioning of the Tribunal is not at all controlled 
by the Government, in any manner whatsoever. In this regard, it was observed: 
 
‘7.8 The High Court is at the apex of the State Judicial 
apparatus. Unless the base level, where litigation is initiated and 
vertically moves upward to the High Court by way of appeal or 
revision, is restructured and this proliferating appellate 
jurisdiction is either controlled or curtailed, the inflow of work 
in the High Court would neither be regulated nor diminished. 
The Law Commission expressed the view that, wherever 
possible, proliferating appellate and wide original jurisdiction 
should be controlled or curtailed without impairing the quality 
of justice. The approach of the Commission is to reduce number 
of appeals, to set up specialist courts/tribunals, simultaneously 
eliminating the jurisdiction of the High Court. 
8.1 ….. However, to allay the apprehension that the Tribunal 
may be controlled in certain matters by the Government, the 
Chairman of the Tribunal can be given powers akin to that of 
Chief Justice of a High Court. In that connection, a provision in 
the Act of 1985, similar to the one as Article 229 of the 
Constitution, with regard to laying down conditions of service of 
employees of the Tribunal can be vested with the Chairman. 

41 
More independence in financial matters, as enjoyed by the Chief 
Justice of a High Court can be vested with the Chairman of the 
Tribunal. Nodal Ministry for the Tribunal can be Ministry of 
Law and Justice, instead of Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions. 
8.2 ….. if there may be an impression that there has to be at least 
one appeal provided against the orders passed by the Tribunal 
before the matter may reach the Supreme Court, intra-tribunal 
appeal, similar to the one provided in every High Court either 
by way of letters patent appeal or a writ appeal, can be provided 
under the Act of 1985 itself.’ 
 
4.16 The Commission took note of the fact that the Administrative Tribunals were 
conceived and constituted as an effective and real substitute for the High Courts as 
regards service matters. Moreover, the power of judicial review of the High Courts 
cannot be called as inviolable as that of the Supreme Court. The very objective behind 
the establishment of Administrative Tribunals is defeated if all the cases adjudicated 
by them have to go before the concerned High Courts. 
 
4.17 The aforesaid observation that, ‘judicial power of the High Court is not as 
inviolable as that of Supreme Court’ has been recorded without furnishing any basis or 
explanation and runs counter to the law laid down by the seven-Judge Bench in L. 
Chandra Kumar (Supra). In fact, after the pronouncement of the Supreme Court on 
this respect, there was no occasion for the Commission to make such an observation, 
particularly when no such opinion has ever been expressed by any court or authority 
including the legislature. 
 
I. 232nd Report of Law Commission of India, 2009 
 
4.18 In Report titled as ‘Retirement Age of Chairpersons and Members of Tribunals 
– Need for Uniformity’, the Commission recommended that the age of retirement of 
Chairpersons should be uniformly fixed at 70 years for all the Tribunals. Likewise, the 
age of retirement of Members of all the Tribunals should be fixed uniformly at 65 years. 
It was observed: 
 
‘1.2 It needs no mention that enhanced age of retirement is 
prescribed in the higher echelons of the administrative and 

42 
judicial services because the professional experience gained by 
those working in them needs to be fully tapped for the good of 
the society. It may be pointed out that the Government incurs a 
lot of expenditure on orientation-training of its employees, 
especially, at the senior level, and, therefore, their enriched 
professional experience in running the affairs of the government 
could be utilized for the good of the common man.        … 
1.8 For selection and appointment in Tribunals, a set procedure 
is prescribed where the time spent in inviting applications up to 
the selection and then clearance from the Government at various 
levels, is six months to a year...’ 
 
4.19 Regarding the retirement age of the Supreme Court and High Court judges, the 
following observations were made: 
 
‘1.9 …..There has already been a lot of debate as to whether the 
retirement age of the Supreme Court and High Court Judges 
should be the same for the precise reason that the functions and 
duties carried out by them are of the same nature and, therefore, 
if the age of retirement of a Supreme Court Judge is 65 years, 
the same should be so with regard to High Court Judges. If the 
Judges or Chief Justices of the High Courts, who retire at the 
age of 62 years, wish to take up assignment in Tribunals, which 
is, as mentioned above, taken by them after their retirement, 
their work-period in Tribunals may be 2-3 years. Obviously, 
when Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed in any 
Tribunal, their retirement age must at the least be 70 years, their 
date of retirement as a Supreme Court Judge being 65 years…’ 
 
4.20 The Commission then recommended that there should be no difference in the 
retirement age of the Chairpersons, who come from the judicial stream i.e. High Courts 
or the Supreme Court, and it should be uniformly fixed at 70 years. Moreover, no 
distinction be made in the retirement age of the Members, whether coming from 
judicial stream or administrative stream.  
 
  

43 
         CHAPTER – V 
UNIFORMITY IN APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS,  
TENURE AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE 
 
5.1. Tribunals have been established with the object of discharging quasi-judicial 
duties by acting judicially which differentiates them from other administrative bodies. 
A Tribunal is neither a Court nor an executive body, but they have an obligation to act 
judicially.71 Tribunals are endowed with the judicial functions as distinguished from 
purely administrative or executive functions. Thus, for the efficient and effective 
working of these Tribunals, persons who have served in the higher judiciary should be 
appointed in accordance with the principles laid down by the Constitutional Courts.72   
 
5.2. As a quasi-judicial body, the Tribunal performs the judicial functions for 
deciding the matters in a judicious manner. It is not bound by law to observe all the 
technicalities, complexities, refinements, discriminations, and restrictions that are 
applicable to the courts of record in conducting trials, but at the same time, a Tribunal 
is required to look at all matters from the standpoint of substance as well as form and 
be certain that the hearing is conducted and the matter is disposed of with fairness, 
honesty, and impartiality.73 
 
A. Uniformity in the Appointment System 
 
5.3. An independent judiciary is a sine-qua-non for the survival of healthy 
democracy. It is only when the judiciary is free from any pressure, either from the 
executive or legislature, the rule of law will prevail. Independent judiciary germinates 
from the doctrine of ‘separation of powers’ which is the very essence of a healthy 
democracy and forms an inseparable part of basic structure of the Constitution.74 
Independence of judiciary constitutes the foundation on which rests the edifice of 
democratic polity. The judiciary is insulated from other wings of the Government so 
                                                 
71  Supra Note 2 at 279. 
72 Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi v. Employees of the Bharat Bank Ltd., Delhi, AIR 1950 SC 188. 
73 Mc. Mohan, Omar T., “A Fair Trial before quasi-judicial Tribunals as required by due process” 29 
MLR 105 (1946).  
74 Registrar (Admn.)  High Court of Orissa v. Kanta Satapathy, AIR 1999 SC 3265; and State of Bihar 
v. Bal Mukand Sah (2000) 4 SCC 640. 

44 
that “judges may act free from any pressure from any one as to how to decide any 
particular matter”.75 Independent, impartial and fearless judiciary is our Constitutional 
creed.76 Independence of judiciary means “freedom from interference and pressures 
which provides the judicial atmosphere where he can work with absolute commitment 
to the cause of justice and constitutional values.” Thus, there must be a security in 
tenure, freedom from ordinary monetary worries, freedom from influences and 
pressures within (from others in the Judiciary) and without (the Executive).77 It has 
different dimensions, which includes freedom from other power centres, economic and 
political, and freedom from prejudices acquired and nourished by the class to which 
the judges belong.  It is for the independence of judiciary that it was sought to be kept 
apart and separate from the executive.  Once the judiciary is manned by people of 
unimpeachable integrity, who can discharge their responsibility without fear or favour, 
the objective of independent judiciary will stand achieved.78 
   
5.4. In S.P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of India,79 the court held that the Tribunals 
are not an end in themselves but a means to an end; even if the laudable objectives of 
speedy justice, uniformity of approach, predictability of decisions and specialist justice 
are to be achieved, the framework of the Tribunals intended to be set up, to attain them 
must retain the basic judicial character so as to inspire public confidence. 
 
5.5. As the Tribunals are vested with the judicial powers which had been hitherto 
vested in or exercised by Courts, the Tribunals should possess the same independence, 
security and capacity which are possessed by the judges. However, if the Tribunals are 
intended to serve an area which requires specialised knowledge or expertise, the 
appointment of Technical members in addition to judicial members must always be 
welcomed, as they can provide an input which may not be available with the judicial 
members. When any jurisdiction is shifted from Courts to Tribunals on the ground of 
pendency and delayed Court proceedings and the jurisdiction so transferred does not 
                                                 
75 S.P. Gupta v. Union of India AIR 1982 SC 149. 
76 Union of India v. Pratibha Banerjee, AIR 1996 SC 603; See also, Union of India v. Sankal Chand 
Himatial Sheth, AIR 1077 SC 2328; and High Court of Judicature at Bombay v. Shirishkumar Rangrao 
Patil, AIR 1997 SC 2631. 
77 Union of India v. R. Gandhi, President Madras Bar Association, (2010) 11 SC 1899; See also, Valente 
v. Queen, (1985) 2 SCR 673 (Canada). 
78 Supreme Court Advocates on Record Association v. Union of India, AIR 2016 SC 117. 
79 AIR 1987 SC 386. 

45 
involve any technical aspects requiring the assistance of experts, the Tribunals should 
normally have only the judicial members. But when the exercise of jurisdiction 
involves inquiry and decisions into technical or special aspects, the presence of 
Technical members would be useful and necessary. The indiscriminate appointment of 
technical members in all the Tribunals will have weakening and adverse effect on its 
working.80 
 
5.6. The Court in the case of L Chandra Kumar (Supra) observed that the numerous 
Tribunals with lack of uniformity in the matter of qualifications, appointments, tenure 
and service conditions is causing the major concern in effective working of the present 
Tribunal system, and therefore, it is desirable that all the Tribunals should be kept under 
a single nodal agency that will monitor the working of the Tribunals and will ensure 
the uniformity in the appointment system. 
 
5.7. Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Personnel, Public 
Grievances, Law and Justice, in its 17th Report on Administrative Tribunals 
(Amendment) Bill, 2006, referred to the decision given in L. Chandra Kumar (Supra), 
and observed: 
 
 
‘until a wholly independent agency for the administration of all 
such Tribunals can be set-up, it is desirable that all such 
Tribunals should be, as far as possible, under a single nodal 
Ministry which will be in a position to oversee the working of 
these Tribunals. For a number of reasons that Ministry should 
appropriately be the Ministry of Law……’   
 
Therefore, it is appropriate that in order to ensure uniformity in all the affairs of the 
Tribunals, the Central Government may consider bestowing the function of monitoring 
the working of the Tribunal to a single nodal agency, preferably under the Ministry of 
Law and Justice. 
 
 
B. Qualifications and Appointment  
                                                 
80 Madras Bar Association v. Union of India, AIR 2015 SC 1571. 

46 
 
5.8. Section 6 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 prescribes the 
qualifications. As per this section, a person shall not be qualified as Chairman unless 
he is or has been, a Judge of a High Court. The Chairman and every other Member of 
the Central Administrative Tribunal are appointed after consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India by the President. The Chairman and every other Member of the 
Administrative Tribunals for a State or of Joint Administrative Tribunal are appointed 
by the President after consultation with the Governor of the concerned State. Whereas, 
according to the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2012, the qualifying 
criteria has been laid down as: 
 
‘To make Judges of the Supreme Court eligible for appointment 
as Chairman, in the Central Administrative Tribunal, the State 
Administrative Tribunal and any Joint Administrative Tribunal 
and to bring uniformity in appointment of the Chairman and 
other Members of these Tribunals, following amendments are 
proposed to be made in the Act, namely: (a) to amend sub-
section (1) of section 6 of the Act so as to provide that a person 
shall not be qualified for the appointment as Chairman unless he 
is, or has been, a judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice 
of the High Court; (b) to substitute sub-sections (3) to (5) of 
section 6 of the Act with new sub-sections so as to provide for 
consultation by the President with the Chief Justice of India and 
the Governor of the respective States, in the case of State 
Administrative Tribunal and Joint Administrative Tribunals in 
addition to consultation by the President with the Chief Justice 
of India in the case of appointment of Chairman and every other 
Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal…’ 
 
5.9 One of the Constitutional requirement as outlined by the Supreme Court in 
numerous decisions is that persons qualified in law, having judicial training and 
adequate experience should be appointed to these Tribunals was to dispense effective 
justice. Since the Tribunals are entrusted with the duty of adjudicating the cases 
involving legal questions and nuances of law, adherence to principles of natural justice 
will enhance the public confidence in their working. The Judicial Member should be a 
person possessing a degree in law, having a judicially trained mind and experience in 
performing judicial functions. The objective of having uniformity in the appointment 
system can be achieved if the appointments are made to the respective posts as 
indicated below: 
i. A person is or has been a Supreme Court Judge or Chief Justice of 
the High Court as Chairman.  

47 
ii. A person who has been a judge of the High Court as Vice Chairman. 
iii. A person who has been a High Court judge or an Advocate who is 
eligible to be appointed as a Judge of High Court as Judicial Member. 
 
 5.10 If the jurisdiction of a High Court was transferred to a Tribunal, the members 
of the newly constituted Tribunal should possess the qualifications akin to the judges 
of the High Court. Similarly, in case if the jurisdiction and the functions transferred 
were exercised or performed by District Judges, the Members appointed to the Tribunal 
should possess equivalent qualifications and commensurate the stature of District 
Judges. The Supreme Court- a five judge bench in the case of Madras Bar Association 
v. Union of India, 81  considered various important questions. The two important 
questions considered by the court were:  
 
1. Whether the transfer of adjudicatory functions vested in the superior 
court (i.e, high court) to an alternative court/tribunal (NTT in the instant 
case) violates recognized constitutional conventions? 
 
2. Whether while transferring jurisdiction to a newly created 
court/tribunal, it is essential to maintain the standards and the stature of 
the court replaced? 
 
5.11 The first question was answered in negative and the second one in affirmative. 
The court held that the enactment of a legislation to vest adjudicatory functions earlier 
vested in a superior court with an alternative court/tribunal does not per se violate any 
constitutional provision. But then, the court emphatically stated that, “[T]he ‘basic 
structure’ of the Constitution will stand violated if while enacting legislation pertaining 
to transfer of judicial power, Parliament does not ensure that the newly created 
court/tribunal conforms with the salient characteristics and standards of the court 
sought to be substituted.” The court made it clear that whenever legislation is enacted 
to transfer adjudicatory functions it shall be ensured: 
 
1. All conventions/customs/practices of the court sought to be replaced 
have to be incorporated in the court/tribunal created. 
                                                 
81 (2014) 10 SCC 1. 

48 
2. The Members of a court/tribunal to which adjudicatory functions are 
transferred must be manned by judges/members whose stature and 
qualifications are commensurate to the court from which the 
adjudicatory functions have been transferred. 
 
5.12 The court referring to its earlier decision in sub-para VII of para 15 observed as 
under: 
 
‘….tribunals vested with judicial power should possess the same 
independence, security and capacity, as the courts which the 
tribunals are mandated to substitute. The Members of the 
tribunals discharging judicial functions could only be drawn 
from sources possessed of expertise in law, and competent to 
discharge judicial functions. Technical Members can be 
appointed to tribunals where technical expertise is essential for 
disposal of matters, and not otherwise. ….where the 
adjudicatory process transferred to tribunals, did not involve 
any specialized skill, knowledge or expertise, a provision for 
appointment of Technical Members (in addition to, or in 
substitution of Judicial Members) would constitute a clear case 
of delusion and encroachment upon the independence of the 
judiciary, and the “rule of law”. The stature of the members, 
who would constitute the tribunal, would depend on the 
jurisdiction which was being transferred to the tribunal.’ 
[Emphasis added] 
 
5.13 The Court further observed that, ‘Technical Members can be appointed to 
tribunals where technical expertise is essential for disposal of matters, and not 
otherwise.’   
 
5.14 For the post of Technical Member/Expert Member, the Commission is of the 
view that an appointment to this post should comprise of person of proven ability, 
integrity and standing having special knowledge and professional experience or 
expertise of not less than fifteen years in the particular field, i.e., the field to which the 
Tribunal relates.  Technical Member / Expert Member should be appointed only where 
the Tribunals are intended to serve an area which requires specialised knowledge or 
expertise or professional experience and the exercise of jurisdiction involves 
consideration of, and decisions into, technical or special aspects.  

49 
 
5.15 Administrative Members, if required, should be such persons who have held 
the post of the Secretary to the Government of India or any other equivalent post under 
the Central or State Government, carrying the scale of pay of a Secretary to the 
Government of India,  for two years or an Additional Secretary to the Government of 
India or any other equivalent post under the Central or State Government, carrying the 
scale of pay of an Additional Secretary to the Government of India, having an 
experience of such post for three years.  
 
5.16 The Commission is of the view that a Selection Board / Committee, headed by 
the Chief Justice of India or a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court, as his nominee and 
comprising two nominees of the Central Government not below the rank of Secretary 
to the Government of India, shall be constituted  for appointment of Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and Judicial members of the Tribunal.  For selection of Administrative 
Member, Accountant Member, Technical Member, Expert Member or Revenue 
Member, there shall be Selection Committee headed by the nominee of the Central 
Government, to be appointed in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.  
 
5.17 On scrutiny of the various legislations that provide framework for constitution 
of various Tribunals, it may be stated that most of them deprive the High Court of such 
jurisdiction and bestows it upon the Tribunal in specific areas.   However, the 
provisions relating to qualifications of persons to be appointed as 
chairpersons/members to these tribunals, manner of appointment, duration of 
appointment, etc., do not conform to the standards laid down in Madras Bar 
Association (supra) and various other decisions. Furthermore, no provisions for 
protecting/safeguarding their independence are found in these enactments. On the 
contrary, some of the provisions, like vesting of administrative control, contained in 
these legislations make the tribunal subservient to the executive, whose dispute they 
are deciding. 
 
5.18 As a rule of prudence, the Committee constituted for the selection of chairperson/ 
members of the tribunal shall not be headed by the Secretary to the Government of 

50 
India, for the reason the Central Government is a party to every litigation before such 
tribunal.  
 
C. Reappointment 
 
5.19 Question of reappointment is one of the important aspects having a direct 
bearing on the independence and fairness in the working of the institution. It goes 
without saying that any provision for reappointment would itself have the effect of 
undermining the independence of the chairperson/member. One may be inclined to 
decide matters in a manner that would ensure their reappointment. Keeping this in 
view, matters relating to appointment and extension of tenure must be shielded from 
intervention of the execution.  
 
D. Vacancy 
 
5.20  In order to avoid any prolonged vacancy in any of the posts, the process of 
appointment should start well in advance in order to ensure that the vacancy is filled 
up without any avoidable delay, as the general experience is that the working of the 
Tribunals is affected because of the non-filling up of the vacancies in time.  Therefore, 
the process of selection should be initiated as early as possible, preferably within six 
months prior to the occurrence of a vacancy. 
 
E. Tenure and Service Conditions  
 
5.21  At present, there is no uniformity in the retirement age of the members of a 
Tribunal which shows that there is an imperative need to fix the uniform age of 
retirement of such members. The Commission in its 232nd Report on ‘Retirement Age 
of Chairpersons and Members of Tribunals – Need for Uniformity’, while taking note 
of the fact that there is no uniformity in the age of retirement, observed: 
 
‘If the Judges or Chief Justices of the High Courts, who retire at 
the age of 62 years, wish to take up assignment in Tribunals… 
after their retirement, their work-period in Tribunals may be 2-
3 years. Obviously, when Judges of the Supreme Court are 
appointed in any Tribunal, their retirement age must at the least 

51 
be 70 years, their date of retirement as a Supreme Court Judge 
being 65 years. 
….there should also be no difference in the retirement ages for 
Chairpersons and Members, who come from the judicial stream 
i.e. High Courts or the Supreme Court, and it should uniformly 
be 70 years. A distinction may be made insofar as Members are 
concerned form another perspective. Members in Tribunals have 
two streams - judicial and administrative. The retirement age 
from the government, of those who join the administrative 
stream is 60 years and the term of 5 years as a Member of 
Tribunal may be sufficient in their case. However, no distinction 
can be made in the retirement age of the Members whether 
coming from judicial stream or administrative stream. 
Irrespective of the stream, the retirement age needs to be 
uniformly fixed.’ 
 
5.22 The Commission is of the opinion that uniformity in the service conditions of 
the Chairman and other Members of the Tribunals is one of the most significant 
requirements to ensure smooth working of the system.  The Chairman should hold 
office for a period of three years or till he attains the age of seventy years, whoever is 
earlier.  Whereas, Vice-Chairman and members should hold the office for a period of 
three years or till they attain the age of sixty seven years whichever is earlier.  It will 
be appropriate to have uniformity in the service conditions of the Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and other members of the Tribunal to ensure smooth working of the system.  
 
5.23 It would be appropriate to have the terms and conditions of service, other 
allowances and benefits of the Chairman be such as are admissible to a Central 
Government Officer holding posts carrying the pay of Rs.2,50,000/-, as revised from 
time to time.  The terms and conditions of service, other allowances and benefits of a 
Member of a Tribunal shall be such as are admissible to a Central Government officer 
holding posts carrying the pay of Rs.2,25,000/-, as revised from time to time.  The 
terms and conditions of service, other allowances and benefits of Presiding Officer / 
Member of a Tribunal (to which the jurisdiction and functions exercised or performed 
by the District Judges are transferred) shall be such as are admissible to a Central 
Government officer drawing the corresponding pay of a District Judge. 
5.24      In view of the provisions of section 6(2)(b) of the Central Administrative 
Tribunal Act, 1985, an advocate, who is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court, can 
be appointed as a judicial member. His tenure would be five years and can be 

52 
reappointed for another term, i.e., for a further period of five years and no more.  In 
case he is appointed at the age of 40 years, he would cease to be a judicial member at 
the age of 45 years and if the term is renewed, at the age of 50. Thereafter, it would be 
difficult for such member to rebuild his practice after working maximum for 10 years 
in the Tribunal.  It discourages a person having good practice to join such Tribunal.  It 
is desirable that, initially, an advocate be appointed for a period of two years as an ad 
hoc member and later be confirmed after assessing his performance and suitability, and 
he may be allowed to continue till he reaches the age of superannuation. In the 
alternative, the initial appointment should be for a reasonably long tenure and may also 
be subject to renewal, in suitable cases.  
 
5.25 The procedure for removal of the Chairman and Members provided in statutes 
under which the Tribunal has been established are given in Annexure II.  It is settled 
legal proposition that in view of the provisions of section 16 of the General Clause Act, 
1897, the expression, ‘appointment’ includes termination of or removal from service 
also82. 
 
5.26        In Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, under the provisions of the Income Tax 
Act, 1961 an advocate is appointed as a member and he continues to hold the office till 
he reaches the age of superannuation. The relevant provisions stand amended by the 
Act of 2017 whereby section 252-A is inserted. Under this provision all the terms of 
appointments and service conditions are to be laid down by the Central Government as 
provided under Section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017. The Central Government has 
notified the ‘Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal and other Authorities (Qualifications, 
Experience and other Conditions of Service of Members), Rules 2017’. By the 
aforesaid arrangement not only the status of the Tribunal is downgraded but also the 
eligibility criteria for the post of the Chairman as well as the Administrative members 
are reduced. The validity thereof has been challenged in the case of Central 
Administrative Tribunal (Principal Bench) Bar Association through its President v. 
                                                 
82 See: Pradyat Kumar Bose v. The Hon'ble The Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court, AIR 1956 SC 
285; Chief Justice of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. v. L.V.A. Dixitulu and Ors. AIR 1979 SC 193; The 
Manager, Government Branch Press and Anr. v. D.B. Belliappa, AIR 1979 SC 429; and State of 
Tamil Nadu and Ors. v. M.N. Sundararajan AIR 1980 SC 2084 
 

53 
Union of India,83 and the Supreme Court has issued show cause notice to the Union of 
India and other respondents vide order dated 21 August 2017. In the matter of salary 
and allowances, 84 Pension, Gratuity and Provident Fund 85 with other benefits like 
house rent allowance, transport allowance and other terms and conditions shall be 
uniform as far as practical and possible for all the members of the Tribunals.  
            
 
 
 
 
                    
  
                                                 
83 W.P. No. 640 of 2017.  
84 The Finance Act, 2017, s. 11, Salary and allowances. 
85 Id., s. 12, Pension, Gratuity and Provident Fund.  

54 
CHAPTER – VI 
POWER OF JUDICIAL REVIEW UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 
 
6.1.        Power of judicial review has consistently been held to be a basic feature of 
the Constitution. Basic features forming core structure of the Constitution cannot be 
affected otherwise, even the Constitutional amendments would be liable to be struck 
down.  The Constitution confers on the judiciary the power of judicial review which is 
exclusive in nature. Under the constitution, it is the responsibility of judiciary, to 
interpret the Constitution and the laws made thereunder. Therefore, defining the 
contours of constitution of the Tribunals and the judicial control over them is necessary 
before undertaking any exercise of enacting a law.  
 
6.2.     The term ‘quasi-judicial’ is commonly used to describe certain kinds of 
powers exercised by ministers or government departments but subject to a degree of 
judicial control on the manner of their exercise by way of judicial review. It is applied 
to powers which can be exercised only when certain facts have been found to exist, and 
it indicates that these facts must be found in conformity with a code of rules called 
‘natural justice’. According to Sir Ivor Jennings, “the term ‘quasi-judicial’ appears to 
regard it as one of a number of pseudo-analytical expressions derived from false 
premises as to the separation of powers.”86 
 
6.3.     In His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru v. State of Kerala,87 
the Supreme Court held that, in order to establish that a constitutional provision is an 
essential feature it must be shown that the same is fundamental and binds the amending 
powers of the Parliament.  The judicial review is a part of the basic structure of the 
Constitution and its curtailment in any manner would amount to violation of the basic 
structure of the Constitution.   
 
6.4.     In Indira Nehru Gandhi vs. Raj Narayan,88 the Supreme Court struck down 
clause (4) of Article 329-A which was inserted by Constitution (Thirty-ninth 
                                                 
86 Wade, H.W.R., “Quasi-Judicial and its Background” 2 CLJ 216 (1949). 
87 AIR 1973SC 1461. 
88 AIR 1975 SC 1590. 

55 
Amendment) Act, 1975 to validate the election with retrospective effect on the ground 
that “it violated the free and fair elections which was an essential postulate of 
democracy forming part of basic structure of the Constitution.” 
 
6.5.     In Minerva Mills Ltd. v. Union of India,89 it was held that amendment of a 
single Article may have the potential to destroy the basic structure of the Constitution 
depending upon the nature and the context of the abrogation of that Article, if the 
purpose sought to be achieved by such Article constitutes the quintessential of the basic 
structure of the Constitution. The Court reiterated the importance of power of judicial 
review by observing: 
 
‘….judicial review is a vital principle of our 
Constitution and it cannot be   abrogated without 
affecting the basic structure of the Constitution. If by a 
Constitutional amendment, the power of judicial review 
is taken away and it is provided that the validity of any 
law made by the Legislature shall not be liable to be 
called in question on any ground, even if it is outside the 
legislative competence of the legislature or is violative of 
any fundamental rights, it would be nothing short of sub- 
version of the Constitution, for it would make a mockery 
of the distribution of legislative powers between the 
Union and the States and render the fundamental rights 
meaningless and futile.’ 
 
6.6.    In I.R. Coelho v. State of Tamil Nadu,90 the petitioner had challenged the 
various Central and State laws put in the Ninth Schedule. The nine-Judge Bench 
held that “validity of any law shall be open to challenge on the ground that it destroys 
or damages the basic structure of Constitution”.  The Court further held: 
 ‘equality, rule of law, judicial review and separation of 
powers, form parts of the basic structure of the 
Constitution. Each of these concepts are intimately 
connected. There can be no rule of law, if there is no 
equality before the law. These would be meaningless if 
the violation was not subject to judicial review. All these 
would be redundant if the legislative, executive and 
judicial powers are vested in one organ. Therefore, the 
                                                 
89 AIR 1980 SC 1789; See also Kuldip Nayar v. Union of India AIR 2006 SC 3127; and M. Nagaraj 
Waman Rao v. Union of India, (1981) 2 SCC 362.  
90 AIR 2007 SC 861. 

56 
duty to decide whether the limits have been transgressed 
has been placed on the judiciary.’ 
 
6.7 In Madras Bar Association Case (Supra) the five-Judge Bench held:  
 
‘…The “basic structure” of the Constitution will stand 
violated if while enacting legislation pertaining to 
transfer of judicial power, Parliament does not ensure 
that the newly created court/tribunal conforms with the 
salient characteristics and standards of the court sought 
to be substituted.’ 
 
6.8 In Supreme Court Advocates on Record Association v. Union of India,91 the 
Court held that, “clause (d) of Article 124-A(1) which provides for the inclusion of two 
“eminent persons” as Members of the National Judicial Appointments Commission 
Act, 2014 was ultra vires the Constitution, for a variety of reasons. The same has also 
been held as violative of the “basic structure” of the Constitution. 
 
6.9 The principle of separation of powers as enshrined in Article 50 of the 
Constitution has to be seen in the light of control over such Tribunals by the judiciary 
and the power of adjudication by the High Court or Supreme Court in the exercise of 
their writ jurisdiction and the power of superintendence over Tribunals by the High 
Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. For instance, for a specific State 
subject under List II can be an adjudicatory Tribunal created by the State. Thus, the 
Parliament cannot create a Tribunal for a subject matter which is exclusively within 
List II. And for adjudicating a dispute arising from the said subject matter, it is only 
the State Legislature who can create a Tribunal.   
 
6.10 In S. P. Sampath Kumar Case (Supra), the Constitutional validity of the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 was challenged on the ground of exclusion of 
power of judicial review, of the Supreme Court under Article 32 and the High Courts 
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution. Section 6 of the Act, which enumerated 
the qualifications of a Chairman, Vice Chairman, judicial members and administrative 
                                                 
91 AIR 2016 SC 117. 

57 
members, on the basis of the composition and mode of appointment was also 
challenged. The Court held that section 6(c) was liable to be struck down on the ground 
that the officers of Secretary level cannot be the members of the Tribunal performing 
judicial functions. However, the Court held that section 28 which excluded the 
jurisdiction of the High Courts under Articles 226/227 was not unconstitutional. It was 
also ruled that this section does not totally bar the judicial review.  
 
6.11 The Court further held that the Administrative Tribunals under the 1985 Act are 
substitutes to the High Courts and deal with all service matters involving Articles 14, 
15 and 16, and advised to change the qualifications of Chairman of the Tribunal. As a 
result, the Act was amended in 1987. The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 
1987 section 6(1)(c) of the said Act was quashed and section 6(7) providing for 
appointment of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and members of the Tribunal in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India was substituted. 
 
6.12 The Supreme Court again examined the scope of judicial review in Tata 
Cellular v. Union of India,92 wherein a tender awarded by a public authority for 
carrying out certain work was under challenge. The Court held that: 
 
‘Judicial quest in administrative matters has been to find 
the right balance between the administrative discretion 
to decide matters whether contractual or political in 
nature or issues of social policy; thus they are not 
essentially justifiable but need to remedy any unfairness. 
Such an unfairness is set right by judicial review.’ 
 
6.13 In Sampath Kumar case (Supra), it was also observed that, if the Administrative 
Tribunal is to be an equally effective and efficacious substitution for the High Court, 
there must be a permanent or a Circuit Bench of the Administrative Tribunal at every 
place where there is a seat of the High Court. In J.B. Chopra v. Union of India,93 the 
Court relying on the same decision held that the Central Administrative Tribunal 
constituted under the Act has the authority and the jurisdiction to strike down a rule 
                                                 
92 (1994) 6 SCC 651. 
93 AIR 1987 SC 357. 

58 
framed by the President of India under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution 
being violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution. The Court observed: 
 
‘the Administrative Tribunal being a substitute of the 
High Court had the necessary jurisdiction, power and 
authority to adjudicate upon all disputes relating to 
service matters including the power to deal with all 
questions pertaining to the constitutional validity or 
otherwise of such laws as offending Articles 14 and 16(1) 
of the Constitution.’ 
 
6.14 In M.B. Majumdar v. Union of India,94 the Court relied upon the decision in 
Sampath Kumar (Supra), wherein it was held that the Tribunals under the Act had been 
equated with the High Courts only to the extent that the former were to act as substitutes 
for the latter in adjudicating service matters; therefore, parity cannot be sought for all 
other purposes and held that equation of the Tribunal with the High Court  was only 
for the purpose of adjudication of disputes relating  to service matters  and not in respect 
of their service conditions.  
 
6.15 In R. K. Jain v. Union of India,95 the Supreme Court expressed it anguish over 
the ineffectiveness of administrative tribunals in exercising high power of judicial 
review and emphasised on the need to take remedial steps to make them capable of 
dispensing effective, inexpensive and satisfactory justice. The court also considered 
whether the Tribunals could be an effective substitute of the High Courts with reference 
to the powers of the High Courts under Article 226 and 227,  referred and relied upon 
it’s earlier decisions in the cases of M. B. Majumder (Supra) and J.B. Chopra (Supra) 
and held that the Tribunals are not the effective substitutes of the High Courts. 
 
6.16 In the event, the Tribunals assume wrong jurisdiction or proceed on erroneous 
assumptions of law or facts or, where an action can be assailed on malice in law and/or 
fact, it would not be appropriate to read an ouster of judicial review by the High Court 
or the Supreme Court. Such an interpretation would not only amount to encroaching 
upon the power of superintendence by the higher judiciary conferred by the 
                                                 
94 AIR 1990 SC 2263. 
95 AIR 1993 SC1769. 

59 
Constitution, but also tempering with the basic structure of the Constitution of India. 
The higher Courts have been conferred the power of judicial review of legislative 
action, judicial decision and administrative action. 
 
6.17 In L. Chandra Kumar Case (Supra) the constitutional validity of Articles 323-
A(2)(d), 323-B(3)(d) and the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 was challenged. One 
of the most important aspect which fell for consideration was whether the Tribunals 
constituted under Part XIV- A of the Constitution of India can be effective substitutes 
of the High Courts vis-à-vis the power of judicial review. The issues before the Court 
were: 
 
(1) Whether the power conferred upon Parliament or the 
Stale Legislatures, as the case may be, by Sub-clause (d) 
of Clause (2) of Article 323A or by Sub-clause (d) of 
Clause (3) of Article 323B of the Constitution, totally 
exclude the jurisdiction of 'all courts', except that of the 
Supreme Court under Article 136, in respect of disputes 
and complaints referred to in Clause (1) of Article 323A 
or with regard to all or any of the matters specified in 
Clause (2) of Article 323B, runs counter to the power of 
judicial review conferred on the High Courts under 
Articles 226/227 and on the Supreme Court under Article 
32 of the Constitution? 
(2) Whether the Tribunals, constituted either under 
Article 323A or under Article 323B of the Constitution, 
possess the competence to test the constitutional validity 
of a statutory provision/rule? 
(3) Whether these Tribunals, as they are functioning at 
present, can be said to be effective substitutes for the 
High Courts in discharging the power of judicial review? 
If not, what are the changes required to make them 
conform to their founding objectives?  
   
    It was held: 
‘…the power of judicial review over legislative action 
vested in the High Courts under Articles 226 and in this 
Court under Article 32 of the Constitution is an integral 
and essential feature of the Constitution, constituting part 
of its basic structure. Ordinarily, therefore, the power of 
High Courts and the Supreme Court to test the 

60 
constitutional validity of legislations can never be ousted 
or excluded. 
….the power vested in the High Courts to exercise judicial 
superintendence over the decisions of all Courts and 
Tribunals within their respective jurisdictions is also part 
of the basic structure of the Constitution. This is because 
a situation where the High Courts are divested of all other 
judicial functions apart from that of constitutional 
interpretation, is equally to be avoided.’ 
It is important to note that the court held the power of judicial review of the High Courts 
and the Supreme Court cannot be ousted or excluded ordinarily. The use of the word 
‘ordinarily’ gives an impression that in exceptional cases or special circumstances, 
ousting or excluding the jurisdiction of these courts may be justified. Reading the 
judgment holistically, it becomes clear that the independence of the alternative 
courts/tribunals to which such jurisdiction is transferred is protected in the same manner 
and to the same extent to which the independence of the superior courts is protected 
under the constitution.   
 
6.18 The Court further held that Clause 2(d) of Article 323-A and Clause 3(d) of 
Article 323-B, to the extent they exclude the jurisdiction of the High Courts and the 
Supreme Court under Articles 226/227 and 32 of the Constitution, are unconstitutional. 
Section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 excluded the power of judicial 
review exercised by the High Courts in service matters under Articles 226 and 227; but 
it did not exclude the judicial review entirely in as much as the jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution was kept intact. The Court held 
that section 28 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and the “exclusion of 
jurisdiction” clauses in all other legislations enacted under the aegis of Articles 323-A 
and 323-B would, to the extent they exclude the jurisdiction of the High-Courts (under 
Articles 226 and 227) and the Supreme Court (under Article 32) would be ultra vires 
of the Constitution.   
6.19 It was also held that there was no Constitutional prohibition against 
Administrative Tribunals in performing a supplemental as opposed to a substitutional 
role; i.e., in exercising their powers, such Tribunals cannot act as substitutes for High 
Courts and the Supreme Court. The decisions of these Tribunals created under Articles 
323-A and 323-B of the Constitution of India will be subject to scrutiny before a 

61 
Division Bench of the High Court within whose jurisdiction, the concerned Tribunal is 
located.  
 
6.20 Administrative Tribunals under Article 323-A could examine all the disputes 
pertaining to service conditions, including the constitutional validity of any Statute or 
rules except that of the Act under which that Tribunal is established. For challenging 
the constitutional validity of such an Act, one will have to approach the concerned High 
Court. Against an Administrative Tribunal’s decision, a writ would lie to a High Court 
having jurisdiction over it and against such decision an appeal would lie to the Supreme 
Court under Article 136. 
 
6.21 In The State of Maharashtra v. Labour Law Practitioners,96 the Court applied 
the tests laid down in Bharat Bank’s Case (Supra) wherein it had been held that the 
Industrial Tribunal is a Civil Court exercising civil jurisdiction. The test laid down in 
the matter was based on an English case of Cooper v. Wilson,97 which prescribed the 
following parameters:  
 
i. the presentation of their case by the parties;  
ii. ascertainment of facts by means of evidence adduced by the parties 
often with the assistance of argument;  
iii. if the dispute relates to a question of law, submission of legal 
arguments by the parties; and  
iv. by decision which disposes of the whole matter by findings on fact 
and application of law to facts so found. 
 
6.22 The Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 
provides for setting up of a Tribunal and an appellate Tribunal. The Constitutional 
validity of this Act was challenged in Union of India v. Delhi Bar Association,98 
wherein the Supreme Court held: 
‘It has to be borne in mind that the decision of the 
Appellate Tribunal is not final, in the sense that the same 
                                                 
96 AIR 1998 SC 1233. 
97 [1937] 2 K.B. 309. 
98 AIR 2002 SC 1479. 

62 
can be subjected to judicial review by the High Court 
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.’ 
 
6.23 In Union of India v. R Gandhi,99 the Constitutional validity of Chapters 1B and 
1C of the Companies Act, 1956 under which National Company Law Tribunal 
(‘NCLT’) and National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (‘NCLAT’) are constituted. 
The Court upheld the Constitutional validity observing:  
‘A legislature can enact a law transferring the 
jurisdiction exercised by courts in regard to any specified 
subject (other than those which are vested in courts by 
express provisions of the Constitution) to any tribunal.’ 
 
6.24 In Raja Ram Pal v. Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha,100 a Constitutional bench of 
five judges considered the question of judicial review in relation to the exercise of 
Parliamentary provisions. The Court summarised the principles relating to the same 
and laid down amongst other things: 
‘An ouster clause attaching finality to a determination 
does ordinarily oust the power of the court to review the 
decision but not on grounds of lack of jurisdiction or it 
being a nullity for some reason such as gross illegality, 
irrationality, violation of constitutional mandate, mala 
fides, non-compliance with rules of natural justice and 
perversity.’ 
 
6.25 In the case of Mohammed Ansari v. Union of India,101 the order of the High 
Court holding that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction in case of non-grant of non-
functional financial upgradation to the appellant was under scrutiny. The Tribunal had 
held that it had the jurisdiction. The Supreme Court considered whether after coming 
into force of Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007, the Armed Forces Tribunals (AFT) 
could deal with the controversy or the High Court would still have jurisdiction under 
Article 226 of the Constitution. It was held that the AFT shall have the jurisdiction to 
hear appeals only against courts martial verdicts, qua GREF personnel. But, if the 
                                                 
99 (2010) 11 SCC 1. 
100 (2007) 3 SCC 184. 
101  (2017) 3 SCC 740. 

63 
punishment is imposed on GREF personnel in departmental proceedings held under the 
CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965, the same cannot be agitated before the AFT. 
 
6.26 Under Article 136(2) r/w Article 227(4) of the Constitution, the AFT is kept 
outside the purview of judicial review by the higher judiciary by virtue of sections 30 
and 31 of Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007. In Union of India v. Major General Shri 
Kant Sharma,102 the Court while interpreting sections 30 and 31 held that the High 
Courts have no power to intervene in proceedings arising under the AFT Act, 2007. 
However, in the case of Union of India, v. Thomas Vaidyan M,103 the Supreme Court 
doubted the correctness of the aforesaid judgment and observed:  
 
‘The observations of this Court are being read as 
debarring the High Courts from exercising jurisdiction 
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, contrary to 
law laid down by this Court in the case of L Chandra 
Kumar v. Union of India (1997) 3 SCC 261. Prima facie, 
we are of the view that the decision of this Court in Union 
of India & Ors. v. Major General Shri Kant Sharma & 
Anr. (Supra) may call for a revisit.  It would be 
appropriate that this aspect considered by a Three-Judge 
Bench.  Since this question arises in a number of cases, 
the matter involves some urgency.’   
 
6.27 In view of the provisions of section 3(o) of the Act, 2007, the AFT has 
jurisdiction to entertain service matters in respect of persons subject to the Army Act, 
1950, the Air Force Act, 1950 and the Navy Act, 1957.  However, it does not have 
jurisdiction in respect of the following matters: 
 
(i) Orders issued under section 18 of the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) 
sub-section (1) of section 15 of the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) and 
section 18 of the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950); and 
(ii) transfers and postings including the change of place or unit on posting 
whether individually or as a part of unit, formation or ship in relation 
to the persons subject to the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) , the Navy 
Act, 1957 (62 of 1957) and the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950); 
(iii) leave of any kind; 
(iv) summary court martial except where the punishment is of dismissal 
or imprisonment for more than three months. 
                                                 
102 (2015) 6 SCC 773. 
103 Civil Appeal No. 5327/2015, order dated 16.11.2015. 

64 
 
 
6.28 Thus, it is clear that the judicial review among many other important aspect of 
the basic structure of the Constitution is indispensable and while creating any other 
mode of adjudication of disputes, the judicial review cannot be compromised with. 

65 
CHAPTER - VII 
APPEALS TO HIGH COURTS AND THE SUPREME COURT 
 
7.1 The establishment of Tribunals is oriented towards the promotion of social 
goals which aims at dispensing collective justice to a large segment of the general 
public with the expertise in Administrative Law/principles. It is therefore imperative 
that a provision for judicial review of decisions of the Tribunal is there to determine 
whether the Tribunal met the minimum standards of rationality. 104  The Law 
Commission of India in its 162nd Report identified the need for a fair balance between 
the interests of State and the interests of individuals. It was observed that Courts can 
interfere with the jurisdiction of a Tribunal to the extent permitted by ‘science of 
administrative law’ because the paramount concern of Administrative Law is to protect 
the citizen from abuse of official power. 
 
7.2 It is a settled legal proposition that the higher judiciary alone has the function 
of determining authoritatively the meaning of statutory enactment and to lay down the 
frontiers of jurisprudence of any body or Tribunal constituted under the Act. A Tribunal 
has to function under the Statute, whereas the higher judiciary is a Constitutional 
authority, which is entrusted not only with the task of interpreting the laws and the 
Constitution, but also to exercise supervisory control over the Tribunals. This position 
is contemplated under the Constitution and also pronounced by the Court in order to 
preserve the independence of judiciary while discharging sovereign functions of 
dispensing justice. By creating Tribunals, this position cannot be diluted by a law made 
by the Parliament or State Legislatures.  
 
7.3 The judicial hierarchy of Indian Legal System is distinct as compared to that 
under the American and the Canadian Constitution. The American Constitution confers 
all powers on the State except the specified subjects which are exclusively meant for 
the Federal Government. However, under the Canadian Constitution, only specified 
subjects and powers are given to the constituent states and all residuary powers are left 
with the Federal Government 
                                                 
104 Leelakrishan, P., “Reviewing Decisions of Administrative Tribunal: Paternalistic approach of the 
Indian Supreme Court and need for Institutional Reforms” 54:1 JILI 25 (2012). 

66 
 
7.4 In common law countries, the administrative adjudication operates under the 
judicial supervision unlike the French System which has established Counseil d’Etat. 
In India and various other common law countries, the judicial review of decisions is 
allowed on a few legal grounds like denial of principles of natural justice, failure to 
observe prescribed procedure, want or abuse of jurisdiction, error of law, ultra vires 
decision etc.105 Indian Administrative Law has adopted the second control mechanism 
i.e., judicial review of administrative agencies. In the United Kingdom, the Tribunal 
system is divided into two tiers with ‘first tier Tribunal’ and the appellate ‘upper 
Tribunal’. Appeal from the upper tribunal is heard by the court of appeal and further 
appeal goes to the Supreme Court of United Kingdom. The purpose of this system is to 
guarantee the independence of judiciary, that is why the Tribunals are considered as 
‘machinery of adjudication’ rather than the ‘machinery of administration.’106 
 
7.5 Franks’ Report strongly emphasised the review of Tribunal decisions by the 
Courts on the point of law by the certiorari proceedings or by appeal. The judicial 
review has to be limited i.e., only on the points of law and not of facts except when 
there is a complete absence of evidence.107 The Report also recommended that except 
in cases where the Tribunal of first instance is exceptionally strong, there must be a 
general right of appeal on fact, law and merits to an appellate Tribunal. In addition, 
there should be a right of appeal to the Courts on a point of law.108 
 
7.6 In common law, 109 every Tribunal with a limited jurisdiction is subject to 
control by the High Court on various grounds like when Tribunal exceeds its 
jurisdiction, acts contrary to the principles of natural justice, fails to perform statutory 
duty, fails to exercise its jurisdiction or commits an error of law.110 In the Supreme 
                                                 
105 Supra note 5 at p. 525. 
106 Supra note 82 at 21; See also The Constitutional Reform Act, 2005 (UK), s. 3.  
107 Judicial Review available at: 
 http://14.139.60.114:8080/jspui/bitstream/123456789/663/8/Judicial%20Review.pdf (last visited on 
15-08-2017).  
108 Gupta, Balram K., “Administrative Tribunals and Judicial Review: A Comment on Forty-second 
Amendment” JSPUI 419, Franks Report has been implemented by the Tribunals and Inquiries Act, 1958 
(now Act of 1971). 
109 Tribunals and Inquiries Act, 1958 (now Act of 1971). 
110 Supra note 85 at 420. 

67 
Courts of other jurisdictions, the cases decided by them are few and are of 
Constitutional and national importance.  In those jurisdictions, the subordinate Courts 
decide the cases finally to avoid overloading of the Supreme Courts.  The Supreme 
Courts of other jurisdictions such as the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, 
Australia and South Africa sit either en banc, i.e., of its full strength, or in large benches 
of five or more judges considering the importance of the case.111 
 
7.7 The Supreme Court, as the Apex Court in the country, was meant to deal with 
important issues like Constitutional questions, questions of law of general importance 
or where grave injustice had been done. If the Supreme Court goes on entertaining all 
and sundry kinds of cases, it will be flooded and there will be huge backlog obstructing 
it to deal with the cases, for which it was really meant. After all, the Supreme Court 
has limited time at its disposal and it cannot be expected to hear every kind of 
dispute.112 
 
7.8 In S.G. Chemical and Dyes Trading Employees Union v. S.G. Chemicals and 
Dyes Trading Ltd.,113 it was observed: 
 
‘Today, when the dockets of this Court are over- crowded, 
may almost choked, with the flood, or rather the 
avalanche, of work pouring into the Court, threatening to 
sweep away the present system of administration of 
justice itself, the Court should be extremely vigilant in 
exercising its discretion under Article 136.. 
 
7.9 Justice K.K. Mathew, referred to the opinion of Justice Frankfurter, in his 
article,114 observing:  
 
‘The function of the Supreme Court, according to Justice 
Frankfurter, was to expound and stabilize principles of 
law, to pass upon constitutional and other important 
                                                 
111  Andhrayujina, T.R., “Restoring the Supreme Court’s exclusivity” available at: 
http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/Restoring-the-Supreme-Court%E2%80%99s-
exclusivity/article11557294.ece. (last visited 10-08-2017). 
112 Mathai @ Joby v. George, (2010) 4 SCC 358. 
113 (1986) 2 SCC 624. 
114 An eminent Judge of the Court, (1982) 3 SCC (Jour) 1. 

68 
questions of law for the public benefit and to preserve 
uniformity of decision among the intermediate courts of 
appeal.’ 
 
7.10  Mr. K.K. Venugopal, in one of his lectures, pointed out:115 
 
‘ ….an alarming state of affairs has developed in this 
Court because this Court has gradually converted itself 
into a mere Court of Appeal which has sought to correct 
every error which it finds in the judgments of the High 
Courts of the country as well as the vast number of 
tribunals. This Court has strayed from its original 
character as a Constitutional Court and the Apex Court 
of the country. If the Apex Court seeks to deal with all 
kinds of cases, it necessarily has to accumulate vast 
arrears over a period of time which it will be impossible 
to clear in any foreseeable future. This is a self-inflicted 
injury, which is the cause of the malaise which has 
gradually eroded the confidence of the litigants in the 
Apex Court of the country, mainly because of its failure to 
hear and dispose of cases within a reasonable period of 
time. It is a great tragedy to find that cases which have 
been listed for hearing years back are yet to be heard.’  
 
7.11  A question cannot be said to be of public importance unless it is important 
throughout the State and not a single geographical area. 116 The matters of public 
importance may mean matters relating to Governmental action or inactions which 
arouse something in the nature of a nationwide crisis of confidence.117 It may include 
indiscriminate dumping of municipal waste, noise and solid waste pollution, protection 
of wildlife etc. The conduct of an individual may assume such a dangerous proportion 
and may so prejudicially affect or threaten to affect the public well-being as to make 
such conduct a definite matter of public importance.118 When it is alleged that a 
Minister has acquired vast wealth for himself, his relations and friends, by abuse of his 
official position, there can be no question that the matter is of public importance. It is 
of public importance that public men failing in their duty should be called upon to face 
                                                 
115 R.K. Jain Memorial Lecture delivered on 30.01.2010. 
116 Cantero, Raoul G., “Certifying Questions to the Florida Supreme Court: What’s So Important?” FBJ 
40 (2002). 
117 Segal, Zeev, “The Power to Probe into Matters of Vital Public Importance”, 58 TLR 941 (1984). 
118 Ram Krishan Dalmia v. Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar, AIR 1958 SC 538. 

69 
the consequences. It is certainly a matter of importance to the public that lapses on the 
part of Ministers should be exposed. The cleanliness of public life in which the people 
should be vitally interested, must be a matter of public importance. The people are 
entitled to know whether they have entrusted their affairs to an unworthy man. 
Allegations may very well raise questions of great public importance.119 
 
7.12 The Supreme Court, through its appellate jurisdiction supervises the 
functioning of administrative bodies, and can impose discipline over these bodies for 
the progress of Administrative Law and promotion of the Rule of Law in India.120 The 
purpose of conferring supervisory jurisdiction and power of judicial review on the 
Constitutional Courts is to keep the Tribunals within their legal binds/authority.121  In 
fact, the powers of the High Courts under Article 227 are revisional in nature, while 
jurisdiction under Article 226 is considered as an exercise of original jurisdiction122.   
 
7.13 When a Statute gives a right of appeal from Tribunal to a Court of law, it is 
ordinarily confined to on a point of law but questions of law must be distinguished 
from questions of fact.123 On every question involving legal interpretation which arises 
only after the establishment of primary facts, an appeal on a point of law should be 
available.124 An Appeal is a continuity of suit proceedings, and a right to enter into a 
superior Court. It is re-hearing of a case while judicially examining the case and 
reviewing/revising the decision of the subordinate court.125 The Supreme Court does 
not usually entertain appeals against an order of a Tribunal unless appellant has 
exhausted the alternative remedies provided by the relevant law.126  
 
                                                 
119 State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad, AIR 1967 SC 122. 
120 Supra note 13 at 1989. 
121 Nagendra Nath Bora v. Commissioner of Hills Division, AIR 1958 SC 398; and State of Punjab v. 
Navjot Sandhu, (2003) 6 SCC 641. 
122 Surya Deo Rai v. Ram Chander Rai, AIR 2003 SC 3044. 
123 Supra note 4 at 794.  
124 Id. at 795. 
125 Nagendra Nath Dey v. Suresh Chandra Dey, AIR 1932 P.C. 165; State of Kerala v. K.M. Charia 
Abdulla, AIR 1965 SC 1585; Lakshmiratan  Engineering Works v. Asst. Commissioner, AIR 1968 SC 
488; Shankar Ramachandra Abhyankar v. Krishnaji Dattatraya Bapat, AIR 1970 SC 1; Amarjit Kaur v. 
Pritam Singh, AIR 1974 SC 2068 (5); Hasmat Rai v. Raghunath Prasad, AIR 1981 SC 1711; Ramankutty 
Guptan v. Avara, AIR 1994 SC 1699; and Tirupati Balaji Developers (P) Ltd. v. State of Bihar, (2004) 
5 SCC 1. 
126 Jain, M.P., Indian Constitutional Law Lexis Nexis Butterworths Wadhwa Nagpur, 2010 at p. 264. 

70 
7.14 A right of appeal is considered to be a universal requirement for the effective 
enjoyment of right to life and liberty as one of the core principle of jurisprudence. This 
is in foundation of the set-up of Courts in hierarchical order. As men are fallible, so are 
the judges and mistake if any is committed while passing a judgment the same is 
required to be rectified. Based on that, the litigant party must have a right to go in an 
Appeal.  This issue was dealt with elaborately by a five-Judge Bench of the Supreme 
Court in Sita Ram v. State of U. P.,127 wherein it was observed: 
 
‘A single right of appeal is more or less a universal 
requirement of the guarantee of life and liberty rooted in 
the conception that men are fallible, that Judges are men 
and that making assurance doubly sure, --- a full-scale re-
examination of the facts and the law is made an integral 
part or fundamental fairness or procedure. 
…….. 
Where, the subject-matter is less momentous, where two 
courts have already assessed the evidence and given 
reasoned decisions, pragmatism and humanism 
legitimate, in appropriate cases, the passing of judgment 
at the third tier without giving reasons where the 
conclusion is one of affirmance. Natural justice cannot be 
fixed on a rigid frame and fundamental fairness is not 
unresponsive to circumstances.’ 
 
7.15 The Supreme Court, In Re: Sanjiv Dutta, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting,128 held: 
‘None is free from errors, and the judiciary does not claim 
infallibility. It is truly said that a judge who has not 
committed a mistake is yet to be born. Our legal system in 
fact acknowledges the fallibility of the courts and 
provides for both internal and external checks to correct 
the errors. The law, the jurisprudence and the precedents, 
the open public hearings, reasoned judgments, appeals, 
revisions, references and reviews constitute the internal 
checks while objective critiques, debates and discussions 
of judgments outside the courts, and legislative 
correctives provide the external checks. Together, they go 
a long way to ensure judicial accountability. The law thus 
provides procedure to correct judicial errors. Abuses, 
attribution of motives, vituperative terrorism and 
                                                 
127 AIR 1979 SC 745. 
128 (1995) 3 SCC 619; See also State of West Bengal v. Shivananda Pathak, AIR 1998 SC 2050.  

71 
defiance are no methods to correct the errors of the 
courts.’   
7.16 It was in this view that in Hotel Balaji v. State of Andhra Pradesh,129 the 
Supreme Court held: 
 
‘…..To perpetuate an error is no heroism. To rectify it is the 
compulsion of the judicial conscience.’  
 
7.17 In Nagendra Nath Dey v. Suresh Chandra Dey,130 a five-judge bench of the 
Privy Council held that, ‘an appeal is an application by a party to an appellate Court 
asking it to set aside or revise a decision of a subordinate Court.’ Similarly, a five-judge 
bench of the Madras High Court in Chappan v. Moidin Kutti,131 held, inter alia, that 
appeal is ‘the removal of a cause or a suit from an inferior to a superior Judge or Court 
for re-examination or review.’ According to Wharton’s Law Lexicon such removal of 
a cause or suit is for the purpose of testing the soundness of the decision of the inferior 
Court. In consonance with this particular meaning of appeal, ‘appellate jurisdiction’ 
means ‘the power of a superior Court to review the decision of an inferior Court.’132 
 
7.18 A Tribunal created under a Statute is not empowered to examine the 
Constitutional validity of a law under which it is created because this function is 
entrusted to the High Courts and the Supreme Court. In the event of conflict between 
the State(s) and the Parliament with regard to the power to enact a law on a subject 
which otherwise falls within the domain of the State Legislature, the High Courts and 
the Supreme Court alone can go into the question of validity of such law.   
 
7.19 In State of Tamil Nadu v. State of Karnataka,133 the Supreme Court held that it 
holds the jurisdiction to decide the parameters of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal which 
depends upon an interpretation of the Constitution or the Statute as the power of the 
Courts to sit in judgment over the merits of the decisions of the Tribunals is excluded. 
                                                 
129 AIR 1993 SC 1048. 
130 AIR 1932 P.C. 165. 
131 (1899) 22 ILR Mad. 68. 
132 Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States, s. 1761. 
133 (1991) Supp 1 SCC 240. 

72 
 
7.20 In Waryam Singh v. Amarnath,134 it was held that the power of superintendence 
of High Court under Article 227 of the constitution is not only confined to the 
administrative superintendence but it also includes within its ambit the power of 
judicial review. The High Court can call for the records from the Tribunal and can 
quash the complaint to prevent the abuse of the process of law to ensure that the 
administration of justice remains clean and pure. 135  In Shalini Shyam Shetty v. 
Rajendra Shankar Patil,136 the Supreme Court explained the scope of jurisdiction of 
the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution observing that the High Court can 
interfere only to keep the Tribunals and Courts sub-ordinate to it, ‘within the bounds 
of their authority’. In order to ensure that law is followed by such Tribunals and Courts 
by exercising jurisdiction which is vested in them and by not declining to exercise the 
jurisdiction which is vested in them. The main object of this Article is to keep strict 
administrative and judicial control by the High Court on the administration of justice 
within its territory. The object of superintendence, both administrative and judicial, is 
to maintain efficiency, smooth and orderly functioning of the entire machinery of 
justice in such a way as it does not bring it into any disrepute. 
 
7.21 A writ of certiorari does not lie against decision of the Tribunal as it involves 
consideration of merits of the case regarding the existence and non-existence of the 
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, legality or illegality of decision and manifest error of law 
or an error on the face of record in exercise of its jurisdictional power.137  
 
7.22 Where a statutory right to file an appeal has been provided for, the High Court 
is not to entertain a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution.  In cases where an 
appeal has not been provided, the remedy available to the aggrieved person is to file a 
revision before the High Court under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
but where filing a revision before the High Court has been expressly barred, a petition 
under Article 227 of the Constitution would lie.138  
                                                 
134 AIR 1954 SC 215. 
135 Pepsi Food Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate, AIR 1998 SC 128.  
136 (2010) 8 SCC 329; See also Girish Kumar Suneja v. Central Bureau of Investigation, 2017(5) 
Supreme 466. 
137 Supra note 5 at p. 537. 
138 Nagendra Nath v. Commission of Hills Division, AIR 1958 SC 398. 

73 
 
7.23 To facilitate quick assessment of different nature of statutory provisions dealing 
with appeals in the matters of Tribunals at different forums have been examined by the 
Commission and accordingly, Annexure III gives details of Tribunals from where 
Appeal lies to the High Court and Annexure IV details about the Tribunal from where 
Appeal lies to the Supreme Court.  
 
7.24 In T K Rangarajan v. Government of Tamil Nadu,139 the Supreme Court dealt 
with the case of police personnel of the State of Tamil Nadu who had gone on strike 
and the State of Tamil Nadu, after bringing a subordinate legislation, terminated their 
services.  The State Police personnel approached the High Court challenging the order 
of their termination and the issue arose as to whether the said petition was maintainable 
when the remedy before the Administrative Tribunal was available.  The Supreme 
Court concurred with the law laid down by the larger bench in L. Chandrakumar’s 
Case (Supra), but considering the special facts and circumstances, came to the 
conclusion that remedy before the Tribunal could not have been equally efficacious 
observing: 
 
‘However, in a case like this, if thousands of employees 
are directed to approach the Administrative Tribunal, the 
Tribunal would not be in a position to render justice to 
the cause. Hence, as stated earlier because of very 
exceptional circumstance that arose in the present case, 
there was no justifiable reason for the High Court not to 
entertain the petitions on the ground of alternative 
remedy provided under the statute.’ 
 
7.25 The Supreme Court had also taken note of the Malimath Committee Report 
(1989) wherein it has been observed: 
         
‘Functioning of Tribunals 
8.63 Several tribunals are functioning in the country. Not 
all of them, however, have inspired confidence in the 
public mind. The reasons are not far to seek. The foremost 
is the lack of competence, objectivity and judicial 
approach. The next is their constitution, the power and 
                                                 
139 AIR 2003 SC 3032. 

74 
method of appointment of personnel thereto, the interior 
status and the casual method of working. The last is their 
actual composition; men of calibre are not willing to be 
appointed as presiding officers in view of the uncertainty 
of tenure, unsatisfactory conditions of service, executive 
subordination in matters of administration and political 
interference in judicial functioning. For these and other 
reasons, the quality of justice is stated to have suffered 
and the cause of expedition is not found to have been 
served by the establishment of such tribunals. 
8.64 Even the experiment of setting up of the 
Administrative Tribunals under the Administrative 
Tribunals Act. 1985, has not been widely welcomed. Its 
members have been selected from all kinds of services 
including the Indian Police Service. The decision of the 
State Administrative Tribunals is not appealable except 
under Article 136 of the Constitution. On account of the 
heavy cost and remoteness of the forum, there is virtual 
negation of the right of appeal. This has led to denial of 
justice in many cases and consequential dissatisfaction. 
There appears to be a move in sonic of the States where 
they have been established for their abolition.’ 
 
7.26 The word ‘Tribunal’ used in Article 136 assumes greater significance, in view 
of the fact that the Supreme Court may grant special leave to appeal from the decisions 
of Court or Tribunal in the territory of India. However, the word ‘Tribunal’ is used in 
contradistinction to ‘Courts’.140 By virtue of Article 136, the Supreme Court, being the 
final Court of appeal can control adjudicatory bodies by hearing appeals from their 
decisions and pronouncements. The essence of vesting this jurisdiction with the 
Supreme Court over matters decided by the Tribunals lies in the possibility of Tribunals 
being debased into arbitrary bodies.141  
 
7.27 A Tribunal would be outside the ambit of Article 136 if it is not vested with any 
part of the judicial functions of the State but discharges purely administrative or 
executive duties.142 In Dev Singh v. Registrar, Punjab & Haryana High Court,143 it 
was held that the expression ‘Tribunal’ used in Article 136 did not mean same thing as 
‘Court’, but included in its ambit all adjudicating bodies provided they were constituted 
                                                 
140  Supra note 103 at 256. 
141 Id. at 257.  
142 Jaswant Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Lakshmichand, AIR 1963 SC 677. 
143 AIR 1987 SC 1629. 

75 
by the State and were invested with the ‘judicial’ as distinguished from purely 
administrative or executive functions. Article 136 is a residuary provision which 
enables the Supreme Court to interfere with the judgment or order of any Court or 
Tribunal in India in its discretion.144 
 
7.28 Article 136 of the Constitution of India provides that the Supreme Court may 
in its discretion, grant the special leave to an appeal, from any judgment, decree, 
sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court in the territory of 
India. It is equitable in nature. Article 136 does not confer the right of appeal on any 
party, but it confers a discretionary power on the Supreme Court to interfere in suitable 
cases. Article 136 was legislatively intended to be exercised with adherence to the 
settled judicial principle well established by precedents in our jurisprudence, thus it 
was intended to be corrective jurisdiction that vests discretion in the Supreme Court to 
settle the law clearly. Article 136 begins with a non-obstante clause and thus has 
overriding effect. It confers residuary powers unfettered by any statute or other 
provisions of Chapter IV of Part V of the constitution.145  The discretionary power 
under Article 136 should be exercised sparingly, the Court does not normally 
appreciate the evidence by itself and go into questions of credibility of witnesses;146 
however the power can be exercised to interfere in cases of manifest injustice or where 
grave miscarriage of justice has resulted from illegality or misapprehension or mistake 
in reading evidence or from ignoring, excluding or illegally admitting material 
evidence147 to avoid grave injustice148 and conclusions that are perverse.149  In U. Sree 
v. U. Srinivas,150 the Court observed “If the findings were not based on perverse 
reasoning or not recorded in ignorance of material evidence or in exclusion of 
pertaining materials, interference with the same under Article 136 of the Constitution 
of India would not be permissible”. The discretionary power under Article 136 is not 
                                                 
144 N. Suriyakala v. A. Mohan Doss, (2007) 9 SCC 196. 
145  State of Punjab v. Rafiq Masih, AIR 2015 SC 696; and N.A.L. Layout Residents Association v. 
Bangalore Development Authority and Ors, 2017 (6) Supreme 331. 
146 Alamelu v. State, AIR 2011 SC 715. 
147 The General Manager, Telephones, Ahmedabad v. V.G. Desai, AIR 1996 SC 2062; and Mohd. Khalil 
Chisti v. State of Rajasthan, (2013) 2 SCC 541. 
148 Sham Sunder v. Puran, AIR 1991 SC 8.  
149 Radha Mohan Singh @ Lal Saheb v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 2006 SC 951. 
150 (2013) 2 SCC 1585; See also, Ajay Arjun Singh v. Sharadendu Tiwari, AIR 2016 SC 1417; and BCCI 
v. Cricket Association of Bihar, AIR 2015 SC 3194. 

76 
normally exercised unless the demand of justice requires interference151 or when the 
High Court has taken a view that is reasonably possible152 or when the exercise is likely 
to be a futile exercise.153 A concurrent finding of fact does not call for interference in 
an appeal under Article 136 in the absence of any valid ground for interference.154 
Further in criminal cases the Supreme Court would be justified to interfere when the 
High Court completely misdirected itself in reversing the order of conviction passed 
by the Sessions Court.155 Interference is permissible in a case where question involved 
of interpretation of the Constitution or constitutional validity of the State or Central 
legislation or where there is an error outrageous as no reasonable person would 
countenance156 or where the conclusion arrived by the court below is such as to shake 
the conscience.157  
 
7.29 The Supreme Court explained the scope of Article 136 of the Constitution in 
Dhakeswari Cotton Mills v. Commissioner of Income-tax, West Bengal,158 observing: 
 
‘It is not possible to define with any precision the 
limitations on the exercise of the discretionary 
jurisdiction vested in this Court by the constitutional 
provision made in Article 136. The limitations, whatever 
they be, are implicit in the nature and character of the 
power itself. It being an exceptional and overriding 
power, naturally it has to be exercised sparingly and with 
caution and only in special and extraordinary situations. 
... It is, however, plain that when the Court reaches the 
conclusion that a person has been dealt with arbitrarily 
or that a court or tribunal within the territory of India has 
not given a fair deal to a litigant, then no technical 
hurdles of any kind like the finality of finding of facts or 
otherwise can stand in the way of the exercise of this 
power because the whole intent and purpose of this 
Article is that it is the duty of the Court to see that injustice 
is not perpetuated or perpetrated by decisions of courts 
and tribunals because certain laws have made the 
                                                 
151 Siemens Ltd. v. Siemens Employees Union, AIR 2010 SC 175. 
152 Manoj H. Mishra v. Union of India, (2013) 6 SCC 313. 
153 Rajaram Prasad Yadav v. State of Bihar, (2013) 14 SCC 461; and Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Ltd. v R.C. Vaidya, (2014) 2 SCC 657. 
154 Janak Dulari Devi v. Kapildeo Rai, AIR 2011 SC 2521. 
155 Gauri Shankar Sharma v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1990 SC 709. 
156 V. Vasanthakumar v. H.C. Bhatia, (2016) 7 SCC 687. 
157 Mahesh Chander v. State of Delhi, AIR 1991 SC 1108. 
158 AIR 1955 SC 65. 

77 
decisions of these courts or tribunals final and 
conclusive.’ 
 
7.30 While interpreting the provisions of the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 – 
an Act enacted under Article 262 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court in State of 
Karnataka v. State of Tamil Nadu,159 held that neither section 11 which excludes the 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in respect of water disputes referred to the Tribunal, 
nor section 6 of Act, 1956 which provides that the award of the Tribunal shall be treated 
and  executed as a decree of the Supreme Court, do not take away the jurisdiction of 
Supreme Court, to deal with the issues relating to the water disputes. What the Act 
precludes is the hearing of complaint/grievance at the initial/original stage. 
     
 
 
                     
  
                                                 
159 (2017) 3 SCC 362; See also Nabam Rabia and Bamag Felix v. Deputy Speaker, Arunachal Pradesh 
Legislative Assembly, (2016) 8 SCC 1.  

78 
CHAPTER – VIII 
     BYPASSING THE JURISDICTION OF HIGH COURTS 
 
8.1       Access to justice is a fundamental right of the citizens as discussed and 
explained herein after. The questions arise as to whether bypassing the jurisdiction of 
the High Courts violates the right of access to justice or the principle of Federalism, 
which is a basic feature of the Constitution. The framers of the Constitution deemed it 
proper to adopt the Federal structure in the judicial hierarchy also. While the Supreme 
Court is the Apex Court of the Country, the High Courts are the Highest Courts in the 
States. In the Constitutional scheme, the High Court is not stricto-senso subordinate to 
the Supreme Court. They are assigned a broad Constitutional role with extensive 
Constitutional responsibilities. Their power to issue writs is wider than the Supreme 
Court. Besides, the power of judicial review is also vested in them. 
 
8.2      The rudimentary authority of the High Courts to examine the 
constitutional validity of any Legislative Act is well acknowledged by various judicial 
pronouncements. An ordinary man can approach the High Court challenging any 
legislation be it central or State on the ground that it is arbitrary, irrational, 
unreasonable or violative of the fundamental rights or otherwise and therefore liable to 
be struck down. 
 
8.3      With the filing of large number of cases, there is huge pendency in the 
subordinate Courts and in the High Courts giving rise to a general public perception 
that the Court proceedings are time-consuming and expensive, more so at the High 
Court level. Whereas, the Tribunal adjudicate disputes quickly and in a cost-effective 
manner, creating a favourable atmosphere for the establishment of Tribunals. This lead 
to the amendment of the Constitution and insertion of Articles 323-A and 323-B 
providing for the establishment of Tribunals by Parliament and/or State. 
 
8.4       The Central Administrative Tribunals are established under Article 323-
A(2)(d) of the Constitution. Jurisdiction of all Courts including the power of 
superintendence of High Court except that of the Supreme Court under Article 136 is 

79 
excluded. In Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha,160 the 
Court held that the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution 
is limited to holding the judicial or quasi-judicial tribunals or administrative bodies 
exercising the quasi-judicial powers within the leading strings or legality and to see 
that they do not exceed their statutory jurisdiction and correctly administer the law laid 
down by the statute under which they act. So long as the hierarchy of officers and 
appellate authorities created by the Statute function within their ambit the manner in 
which they do so can be no ground for interference.  
 
8.5      In S. M. Pattanaik v. Secretary to Government of India,161 it was held that 
all the disputes and complaints relating to service matters either with respect to 
recruitment or condition of service fall within the ambit of the Administrative Tribunals 
and the jurisdiction of High Court in respect of these matters stands excluded by virtue 
of Section 28 of the Act, 1985 
 
8.6      In J.B. Chopra v. Union of India,162 it was held that the Administrative 
Tribunal being a substitute of the High Court had the necessary jurisdiction, power and 
authority to adjudicate upon all disputes relating to service matters including the power 
to deal with all question pertaining to the constitutional validity or otherwise of such 
laws as offending Article 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution. In H.N. Patro v. Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting,163 it was reiterated that the provisions contained in 
the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 bars the jurisdiction of the High Court and the 
High Court should be careful to satisfy itself that it had jurisdiction to deal with the 
matter and make an order nullifying the direction of the Tribunal.  
 
8.7      The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 excluded the jurisdiction of the 
High Courts. It abolished the appellate and supervisory jurisdiction of High Courts and 
provided for direct appeal to the Supreme Court. In S.P. Sampath Kumar Case (Supra) 
the Court held that ‘the Tribunal should be a real substitute of the High Court not only 
in form and de jure, but in content and de facto. As was pointed out in Minerva Mills, 
                                                 
160 AIR 1980 SC 1896. 
161 ILR 1986 KAR 3954. 
162 AIR 1987 SC 357. 
163 1993 1 SCC (Supp) 550. 

80 
the alternative arrangement has to be effective and efficient as also capable of 
upholding the constitutional limitations…. and it must be a worthy successor of the 
High Court in all respects.’ The Court, while deciding Sampath Kumar Case (Supra), 
relied upon the decision in Minerva Mills Case (Supra) wherein it was observed that: 
 
 ‘..it would be within the competence of Parliament to 
amend the Constitution so as to substitute in place of the 
High Court, another alternative institutional mechanism 
or arrangement for judicial review, provided it is no less 
efficacious than the High Court. Then, instead of the High 
Court, it would be another institutional mechanism or 
authority which would be exercising the power of judicial 
review with a view to enforcing the constitutional 
limitations and maintaining the rule of law.’  
 
8.8      The Supreme Court applied the theory of ‘effective alternative 
mechanism’ and held that though judicial review is a basic feature of the constitution, 
the vesting of the power of judicial review in an alternative institutional mechanism, 
after taking it away from the High Courts, would not do violence to the basic structure 
so long as it was ensured that the alternative mechanism was an effective and real 
substitute for the High Court. 
 
8.9      The High Courts’ power of superintendence over all Courts and Tribunals 
within their jurisdictions flows from Article 227 of the Constitution. The power 
conferred on the High Courts to issue prerogative writs for enforcement of the rights 
conferred by Part III and for any other purpose is wide enough not only to enforce the 
fundamental rights, but also the legal rights. This power of the High Courts, coupled 
with the power of superintendence has been defined in Article 226(4), which is not in 
derogation of the power conferred under Article 32(2) of the Constitution to issue 
similar writs and runs parallel to the said provision. 
 
8.10 The power to issue prerogative writs is exclusive and cannot be conferred on 
any Tribunal unless the Constitution is amended.  The Tribunal created under a Statute 
cannot be conferred the power of judicial review which is in the nature of sovereign 
function conferred on judiciary. Therefore, in order to strengthen democracy and allow 
it to grow so as to instill confidence and faith in the people, there has to be a judicial 

81 
mechanism as has been envisioned by the constitutional framers, to act as a check 
against legislative and executive excesses.  This lies in the root of assigning the role of 
superintendence by the High Court over a Tribunal. 
 
8.11 The Supreme Court in the case of M.B. Majumdar v. Union of India,164 
rejected the contention that the Tribunals were the equals of the High Courts in respect 
of their service conditions. The Court clarified that in Sampath Kumar's case (supra), 
the Tribunals under the Act had been equated with High Courts only to the extent that 
the former were to act as substitutes for the latter in adjudicating service matters; the 
Tribunals could not, therefore, seek parity for all purposes.  
 
8.12 The question whether the Tribunals can be said to be effective substitutes for 
the High Courts in discharging the power of judicial review again came up for 
consideration in L Chandra Kumar v. Union of India (supra). The Court held that the 
power vested in the High Courts to exercise judicial superintendence over the decisions 
of all Courts and Tribunals within their respective jurisdictions is also part of the basic 
structure of the Constitution.  It was observed: 
 
‘The constitutional safeguards which ensure the 
independence of the Judges of the superior judiciary are 
not available to the Judges of the subordinate judiciary or 
to those who man Tribunals created by ordinary 
legislations. Consequently, Judges of the latter category 
can never be considered full and effective substitutes for 
the superior judiciary in discharging the function of 
constitutional interpretation. We, therefore, hold that the 
power of judicial review over legislative action vested in 
the High Courts under Articles 226 and in this Court 
under Article 32 of the Constitution is an integral and 
essential feature of the Constitution, constituting part of 
its basic structure. Ordinarily, therefore, the power of 
High Courts and the Supreme Court to test the 
constitutional validity of legislations can never be ousted 
or excluded. 
If the power under Article 32 of the Constitution, which 
has been described as the “heart” and “soul” of the 
Constitution, can be additionally conferred upon “any 
other court”, there is no reason why the same situation 
cannot subsist in respect of the jurisdiction conferred 
                                                 
164 AIR (1990) SC 2263. 

82 
upon the High Courts under Article 226 of the 
Constitution. So long as the jurisdiction of the High 
Courts under Articles 226/227 and that of this Court 
under Article 32 is retained, there is no reason why the 
power to test the validity of legislations against the 
provisions of the Constitution cannot be conferred upon 
Administrative Tribunals created under the Act or upon 
Tribunals created under Article 323B of the Constitution. 
It is to be remembered that, apart from the authorisation 
that flows from Articles 323A and 323B, both Parliament 
and the State Legislatures possess legislative competence 
to effect changes in the original jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court and the High Courts.’ 
 
8.13 The Commission in its 79th Report titled as Delay and Arrears in High 
Courts and Other Appellate Courts expressed its concern over the situation with regard 
to arrears in relation to various proceedings filed and pending in the High Courts. It 
was observed that the growing needs of the society demands speedy justice and it is in 
the interest of State and its citizens, that the disputes should be decided as early as 
possible. The Commission did consider the recommendations of various committees 
on the question of delay, and also took note of its 58th Report on ‘Structure and 
Jurisdiction of the Higher Judiciary’ wherein it was observed that there is an 
imperative need to reduce arrears in the higher courts. 
 
8.14 The Law Commission of India, in its 162nd Report recommended for 
providing an appeal to the High Court, necessarily to be heard by a Division Bench. In 
the alternative the Commission recommended for the constitution of National 
Appellate Administrative Tribunal headed by a former Chief Justice of High Court or 
a former Judge of the Supreme Court. The Commission also recommended that the 
other members shall be either retired judges of the Supreme Court or retired Chief 
Justices of the High Courts. It was further observed that the remedy provided against 
the decision of administrative Tribunal by way of judicial review by the High Court 
and under Article 136 by way of an appeal to the Supreme Court is time consuming as 
well as expensive.  
 
8.15 Similarly, in its 215th Report, the Commission recommended for the 
reconsideration of L Chandrakumar Case (Supra) by a larger bench of the Supreme 

83 
Court and suggested for the suitable amendments to provide for the appellate tribunal. 
It was observed that the High Court being the highest Court of the State there is a need 
for proliferating appellate and wide original jurisdiction which should be controlled or 
curtailed without impairing the quality of justice. On analysis of the provisions of the 
Constitution of India and the observations made in the case of L Chandra Kumar 
(Supra) the Commission opined that “the appellate tribunal would in practical terms 
have a status higher than that of the High Court but lower than the Supreme Court.” 
 
8.16 In Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan v. Subash Sharma,165 it was held that in 
order to challenge the decision of tribunal, complainants cannot directly go to the 
Supreme Court nor they can bypass the High Court. The High Court has supervisory 
powers over the administrative tribunals. But the situation leads to increasing the 
burden of High Court on one hand and helps reducing apex court’s dockets in service 
matters and facilitates a remedy at close quarters without huge expenses.  
 
8.17 The legislative intent to exclude the jurisdiction of High Courts along with 
all the Civil Courts from adjudicating disputes or entertaining any complaints’ in 
service matters is explicit from relevant provisions of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 
1985 including Section 28.166 As a rule of prudence, a right of appeal is a creation of 
Statute and it cannot be claimed as a matter of right. The right to appeal has to exist 
within the Constitutional framework. It cannot be created by acquiescence of the parties 
or by the order of the Court.  It is neither a natural nor an inherent right attached to the 
litigant being a substantive, statutory right.167  Jurisdiction cannot be conferred by mere 
acceptance, acquiescence, consent or by any other means as it can be conferred only 
by the legislature as conferring jurisdiction upon a Court or Authority, is a legislative 
function.168 The right of appeal can be circumscribed by conditions.169 
 
                                                 
165 (2002) 4 SCC 145. 
166  Supra note 5 at p. 532. 
167 United Commercial Bank Ltd. v. Their Workmen, AIR 1951 SC 230; Kondiba Dagdu Kodam v. 
Savitribai Sopan Gujar, AIR 1999 SC 2213; and U P Power  Corporation Ltd. v. Virenddra Lal, (2013) 
10 SCC 39. 
168 Union of India v. Deoki Nandan Aggarwal, AIR 1992 SC 96. 
169 Vijay Prakash D. Mehta & Jawahar D Mehta v. Collector of Customs (Preventive) Bombay, AIR 
1988 SC 2010. 

84 
8.18 Bypassing the High Court or debarring it from entertaining a dispute 
involving the question of constitutional validity of any law would be directly hitting 
the basic structure. It would amount to denying a Constitutional remedy to the 
aggrieved party. The power of judicial review vested in the High Courts assumes 
greater significance when the matters involving State as one of the litigant are large in 
number. 
 
8.19 The High Courts have unquestionable power of superintendence and control 
over the Tribunals under the Constitution. However, the overriding effect in Articles 
323-A and 323-B under Part IXV-A cannot in any case denude the High Court of its 
power of superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution. ‘The exclusion of 
jurisdiction of all the Courts except the Supreme Court’ cannot be construed to mean 
that, the power of judicial review vested in the High Court is also excluded.  
 
8.20 In L. Chandra Kumar (Supra), the Supreme Court declared clause 2(d) of 
Article 323A and clause 3(d) of Article 323B, which excluded the jurisdiction of the 
High Courts under Articles 226, 227 and of the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the 
Constitution as unconstitutional.  The Court explicitly observed:  
 
“99… Section 28 of the Act and the "exclusion of 
jurisdiction" clauses in all other legislations enacted 
under the aegis of Articles 323A and 323B would, to the 
same extent, be unconstitutional. The jurisdiction 
conferred upon the High Courts under Articles 226/227 
and upon the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the 
Constitution is part of the inviolable basic structure of our 
Constitution. While this jurisdiction cannot be ousted, 
other courts and Tribunals may perform a supplemental 
role in discharging the powers conferred by Articles 
226/227 and 32 of the Constitution. The Tribunals created 
under Article 323A and Article 323B of the Constitution 
are possessed of the competence to test the constitutional 
validity of statutory provisions and rules. All decisions of 
these Tribunals will, however, be subject to scrutiny 
before a Division Bench of the High Court within whose 
jurisdiction the concerned Tribunal falls.”… 
 

85 
8.21 The Commission is of the view that in order to achieve the goal for which 
the Tribunals have been established i.e., to reduce the burden of Courts, it is desirable 
that only in those cases where the Statute establishing the Tribunal does not have a 
provision for the establishment of an Appellate Tribunal for hearing an appeal from the 
decision of said Tribunal, the High Court may be allowed to be approached by way of 
an Appeal against the decision of a Tribunal.  Every order emanating from the Tribunal 
or its Appellate Forum, wherever it exists, attains finality.  Any such order may be 
challenged by the aggrieved party before the Division Bench of the High Court having 
territorial jurisdiction over the Tribunal or its Appellate Forum. 
  
8.22 For the effective working of this idea, it will be necessary that the Appellate 
Tribunals established must act judiciously and that such Appellate Tribunals should be 
constituted at par with the High Courts and the members appointed in these Tribunals 
should possess the qualifications equivalent to that of the High Court Judges.  
 
8.23 If appeals against the decision of Appellate Tribunals are brought before the 
concerned High Courts in a routine manner, then the entire purpose of establishing 
Tribunals will get frustrated. Therefore, the Commission is of the view that the 
aggrieved party against the decision of such Appellate Tribunal should be able to 
approach the Supreme Court on the grounds of Public or National importance and not 
before any other authority. The Appellate Tribunals established under various Acts 
where an appeal lies against an order of the Tribunal constituted under the concerned 
Act are set out in Annexure-V. 
  

86 
CHAPTER - IX 
EXCLUSION OF JURISDICTION OF ALL COURTS BY AN ALTERNATIVE 
MECHANISM AND ACCESS TO JUSTICE 
 
9.1       Access to justice in our Constitution is placed on a higher pedestal of 
fundamental rights. Access to Justice is synonymous with Access to Courts.  It is inbuilt 
under Article 14 of the Constitution which guarantees equality before law and equal 
protection of laws.170 With a view to increase the access to justice for an individual at 
grassroots level, Tribunals have emerged to adjudicate in a time bound manner.171 The 
right to justice is an integral and inherent part of the basic structure of the Constitution. 
According to Cappelletti, “Effective access to justice can thus be seen as the most basic 
requirement - the most basic human right of a system purports to guarantee legal 
rights.”172  
 
9.2 While interpreting the provisions of section 340(1) of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898, the Supreme Court, in Tara Singh v. State of Punjab,173 and Janardan 
Reddy v. State of Hyderabad,174  recognized the right of the accused to have legal aid 
but did not record that the trial stood vitiated for want of the same, in the facts of those 
cases.  In Bashira v. State of UP,175 the Supreme Court held that conviction of the 
accused under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, for murder was void on the 
ground that the sufficient time was not granted to the amicus curiae to prepare the 
defence.  
 
9.3  It was in view of the above judgments that section 304 was added in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The Supreme Court in subsequent cases has 
consistently held that non availability of counsel to the accused or counsels’ 
ineffectiveness in conducting a trial may in a particular case amount to denial of right 
                                                 
170 Justice A.K. Ganguly’s speech on Access to Justice on the eve of Golden Jubilee of ILI (1956-2006). 
171 Krishnan, Jayanth K., Kavadi, Shirish N.  & Others, “Grappling at the Grassroots: Access to Justice 
in India’s Lower Tier” 27 HHRJ 156 (2014). 
172 M. Cappelletti, Access to Justice 672 (1976). 
173 AIR 1951 SC 441 
174 AIR 1951 SC 217 
175 AIR 1968 SC 1313 

87 
of access to justice. In view of the provisions of section 304 Cr. PC and Article 22(1) 
of the Constitution, the legal aid must be provided in a substantial and meaningful 
manner.176 The law requires the Court to inform the accused of his right to obtain free 
legal aid. 
 
9.4      By Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) Act, 1976, Article 39-A was 
introduced as  a part of “Directive Principles of State Policy”, and as a consequence the 
Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 was enacted to ensure that opportunities for 
securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of any disability on his part. 
The right to Access to Justice flows from Articles 21 and 22(1) of the Constitution.177 
 
9.5     The actual meaning of Access to Justice on the ground level is succinctly 
described in a Report on ‘Access to Justice 2016’ the relevant part of which provides 
that, “Access to justice is meaningful when each citizen has a ready access to court and 
this will be possible only if the number of courts is increased. As a starting point it is 
necessary that a court of first instance is available to each citizen within a radius of 50 
kilometres from his residence or within a maximum traveling time of half a day.” 
178Access to justice should not be understood to be, reaching out in geographical terms 
only. In Bhavabhai Bhadabhai Maru v. Dhandhuka Nagar Panchayat,179 the Court 
held that effective access to judicial process is a dynamic realism of the Rule of Law, 
observing: 
 
“Access to justice, Civil Criminal and other, must be 
democratised, humanised and the doors of all be kept ajar 
for the citizenry, without the janitors of legal justice 
blocking the way and hampering the entry, initially and 
at higher levels, using various constraints.” 
                                                 
176 Madhav Hayawadanrao Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra,  AIR 1978 SC 1548; Hussainara Khatoon 
v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar, AIR 1979 SC 1369; Mohd Hussain @ Julfikar Ali v. The State (Govt. 
of NCT) Delhi, (2012) 9 SCC 408; and Ashok Debbarama @ Achak Debbarama v. State of Tripura, 
(2014) 4 SCC 747.  
177 Rajoo @ Ramakant v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2012) 8 SCC 553; and Mohd. Kasab @ Aboo 
Mujahid v. State of Maharashtra, (2012) 9 SCC 1.   
178  Report on Subordinate Courts of India: A Report on access to justice 2016, available at: 
http://ecourts.gov.in/sites/default/files/A%20Report%20on%20access%20to%20justice%202016.pdf  
(last visited on 14-08-2017). 
179 (1991) 2 GLR 1339. 

88 
 
9.6 The Supreme Court has consistently held that access to justice is not only a 
fundamental right but it is as well a human right and a valuable right. 180  The 
Constitutional remedies are always available to a litigant even if no other remedy is 
provided under the Statute as it would violate the philosophy enshrined in legal maxim 
‘ubi jus ibi remedium’(wherever there is a right, there is a remedy) meaning thereby, a 
person cannot be rendered remedy less.181  
 
9.7      The Access to justice has been recognised as a human right under Articles 8 
and 10 of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, 1948. The relevant provisions 
reads as under:  
 
‘Article 8: “Everyone has the right to an effective remedy 
by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the 
fundamental rights granted him by the constitution or by 
law. 
 
Article 10: “Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair 
and public hearing by an independent and impartial 
tribunal, in the determination of his rights and obligations 
and of any criminal charge against him.’ 
 
 
9.8    The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 
provides in Article 2(3) as under: 
‘Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes: 
(a) To ensure that any person whose rights or freedoms 
as herein recognized are violated shall have an effective 
remedy, notwithstanding that the violation has been 
committed by persons acting in an official capacity; 
(b) To ensure that any person claiming such a remedy 
shall have his right thereto determined by competent 
judicial, administrative or legislative authorities, or by 
any other competent authority provided for by the legal 
                                                 
180 Tamil Nadu Merchantile Shareholders Welfare Association v. S. C. Sekar, (2009) 2 SCC 784; and 
Life Insurance Corporation of India v. R Suresh, (2008) 11 SCC 319.  
181 Raemshwar Lal v. Municipal Council Tonk, (1996) 6 SCC 100; and Laxmi Devi v. State of Bihar, 
AIR 2015 SC 2710. 

89 
system of the State, and to develop the possibilities of 
judicial remedy; 
(c) To ensure that the competent authorities shall enforce 
such remedies when granted.’ 
 
9.9 In Anita Kushwaha v. Pushap Sudan, 182 the Court declared, ‘Access to 
Justice’ is implicit in Articles 14 and 21, observing: 
 
‘Access to justice is and has been recognised as a part 
and parcel of right to life in India and in all civilized 
societies around the globe. The right is so basic and 
inalienable that no system of governance can possibly 
ignore its significance, leave alone afford to deny the 
same to its citizens ... the development of fundamental 
principles of common law by judicial pronouncements of 
the Courts over centuries past have all contributed to the 
acceptance of access to justice as a basic and inalienable 
human right which all civilized societies and systems 
recognise and enforce.’ 
 
9.10     Emphasising on access to justice, the Supreme Court in Hussainara 
Khatoon v. Home Secretary, State Of Bihar,183 held that free legal aid to a person 
suffering from economic and social disabilities is an essential prerequisite of fair, 
reasonable and just procedure under Article 21. In Municipal Council Ratlam v. 
Vardhichand,184 the Court held: 
‘Social justice is due to the people and, therefore, the 
people must be able to trigger off the jurisdiction vested 
for their benefit in any public functionary like a 
Magistrate under Section 133 Cr.P.C. In the exercise of 
such power, the judiciary must be informed by the 
broader principle of access to justice necessitated by the 
conditions of developing countries and obligated by 
Article 38 of the Constitution. This brings Indian public 
law, in its processual branch, in line with the statement of 
Prof. Kojima: "the urgent need is to focus on the ordinary 
man-one might say the little man..." ‘Access to Justice’ by 
Cappelletti and B. Garth summarises the new change 
thus:  
                                                 
182 AIR 2016 SC 3506. 
183 AIR 1979 SC 1369. 
184 (1980) 4 SCC 162. 

90 
 
The recognition of this urgent need reflects a fundamental 
change in the concept of "procedural justice".... The new 
attitude to procedural justice reflects what Professor 
Adolf Hamburger has called "a radical change in the 
hierarchy of values served by civil procedure"; the 
paramount concern is increasingly with "social justice," 
i.e., with finding procedures which are conducive to the 
pursuit and protection of the rights of ordinary people. 
While the implications of this change are dramatic-for 
instance, insofar as the role of the adjudicator is 
concerned-it is worth emphasizing at the outset that the 
core values of the more traditional procedural justice 
must be retained. "Access to justice" must encompass 
both forms of procedural justice.’   
 
9.11     In Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. v. ESSAR Power Ltd.,185 the Supreme 
Court held that “[D]irect appeals to this Court has the result of denial of access to the 
High Court. Such tribunals thus become substitute for High Courts without manner of 
appointment to such Tribunals being the same as the manner of appointment of High 
Court judges.”  
 
9.12      As a general rule, the statutory remedy should be exhausted before 
approaching the Writ Court.  However, the writ court may entertain a petition if 
substantial injustice has ensued or is likely to ensue or there has been a breach of 
fundamental principle of justice.  The existence of an equally efficacious, adequate and 
suitable legal remedy is a point of consideration in the matter of granting writs.  Under 
the rule of self-imposed restraint, the writ court may refuse to entertain a petition if it 
is satisfied that parties must be relegated to the court of appeal or revision or asked to 
set right mere errors of law which do not occasion injustice in a broad and general 
sense, unless the order is totally erroneous or raises issues of jurisdiction or of 
infringement of fundamental right of the petitioner.186  In State of Himachal Pradesh 
v. Raja Mahendra Pal,187 the Apex court held that the court is not debarred “from 
                                                 
185 (2016) 9 SCC 103. 
186 K S Rashid & Son v. Income Tax Investigation Commission, AIR 1954 SC 207; See also, Sangram 
Singh v. Election Tribunal, Kotah, AIR 1955 SC 425; Union of India v. T R Varma, AIR 1957 SC 882; 
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohammed Nooh, AIR 1958 SC 86; and Thansingh  Nathmal v. Superintendent 
of Taxes, AIR 1964 SC 1419.  
187 AIR 1999 SC 1786. 

91 
granting the appropriate relief to a citizen in peculiar and special facts notwithstanding 
the existence of alternative efficacious remedy.  The existence of special circumstances 
are required to be noticed before issuance of the direction by the High Court while 
invoking the jurisdiction under the said Article.” 
 
9.13 In Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.,188 the Supreme Court 
held that the rule of exclusion of writ jurisdiction by availability of alternative remedy 
is a rule of discretion and not one of compulsion. The Court must consider the pros and 
cons of the case and then may interfere if it comes to the conclusion that the writ seeks 
enforcement of any of the fundamental rights; where there is failure of principle of 
natural justice or where the orders or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction or the 
vires of an Act is challenged or the order is totally erroneous or of infringement of 
fundamental rights of the petitioner.189 
  
9.14 The litigant having a grievance of civil nature has a right to institute a suit in 
the court of competent jurisdiction unless its cognizance is barred expressly or 
impliedly (section 9, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908). However, such power of ousting 
the jurisdiction cannot be exercised by an executive order. A Statute may have an 
express provision specifically excluding the jurisdiction of the Civil Court in respect 
of matters which otherwise are within its jurisdiction. Implied ouster would be where 
even without any express provision the jurisdiction of the Civil Court has been barred.  
However, presumption would be raised in favour of the jurisdiction of the Civil Court.  
A provision of law deciding the jurisdiction of the Civil Court must be strictly 
construed.  The onus lies on the party, seeking to oust the jurisdiction, to establish the 
same.  The Court has to consider and construe the ouster of the jurisdiction of the Civil 
Court having regard to the scheme of the Act as well as the object it seeks to achieve.  
Where a particular Act creates a right and also provides a forum for enforcement of 
such right and bars the jurisdiction of the Civil Court, the ouster is to be upheld. The 
Court cannot readily infer exclusion of jurisdiction of the Civil Court as it is an 
                                                 
188 AIR 2003 SC 2120; See also, Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai, AIR 
1999 SC 22. 
189 Champalal Binani v. Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal, AIR 1970 SC 645. 

92 
exception to the general rule .190 In Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation v. Bal 
Mukund Bairwa,191 it was held by the  Supreme Court that even when the jurisdiction 
of the Civil Court is expressly barred, it cannot be readily inferred that Civil Court has 
no jurisdiction. Such ouster of jurisdiction must be established. Also even when the 
jurisdiction is expressly excluded, ‘civil court can exercise its jurisdiction in respect of 
some matters particularly when the statutory authority or Tribunal acts without 
jurisdiction’. A list of the Acts in which the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts is 
excluded/barred is annexed as Annexure-VI. 
 
9.15 When a person wants to enforce a right, he has a choice to either approach 
under the Act or the Civil Court. In Premier Automobiles Ltd v. Kamlekar Shanta Ram 
Wadke of Bombay,192 it was observed that: 
‘…….But where the industrial dispute is for the purpose 
of enforcing any right, obligation or liability under the 
general law or the common law and not a right, 
obligation or liability created under the Act, then 
alternative forums are there giving an election to the 
suitor to choose his remedy of either moving the 
machinery under the Act or to approach the Civil Court.’ 
 
9.16 From the aforementioned discussion it is clear that the ouster of jurisdiction 
cannot be presumed, and in case of ambiguity the interpretation that maintains the 
jurisdiction must be preferred. The Apex Court in Dhulabhai v. State of M.P.193 
enunciated certain principles for exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Court on certain 
grounds inter alia: 
 
                                                 
190 Firm and Illuri Subbayya Chetty v. State of Andhre Pradesh, AIR 1964 SC 322; See also, Sri Vedagiri 
Lakshmi Narasimha Swami Temple v. Induru Pattabhai Rani Reddi, AIR 1967 SC 781;  Dewaji v. 
Ganpatlal, AIR 1969 SC 560;   Smt. Ganga Bai v. Vijay Kumar, AIR 1974 SC 1126;  Prakash Narain 
Sharma v. Burmah Shell Coop. Housing Society Ltd, AIR 2002 SC 3062;  Ramesh Chand Ardawatiya v. 
Anil Panjwani, AIR 2003 SC 2508; Church of North India v. Lavajibhai Ratanjibhai, AIR 2005 SC 
2544;  Abdul Gafur v. State of Uttrakhand AIR 2009 SC 413; Ramesh Gobindram (dead) through L.Rs. 
v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf, AIR 2010 SC 2897; Bhanwar Lal v. Rajasthan Board of Muslim Wakf, 
(2014) 16 SCC 51; and Gujarat Maritime Board v. G.C. Pandya, (2015) 12 SCC 403. 
191 (2009) 4 SCC 299. 
192 AIR 1975 S.C. 2238. 
193 AIR 1969 SC 78. 

93 
1. If the Statute provides adequate remedy and the remedies available in a 
special Tribunal are at par with the remedies normally available in a Civil 
Court. 
2. The Civil Court may exercise its jurisdiction in case the Tribunal fails to 
comply with provisions of an Act or ‘fundamental principles of judicial 
procedure’. Even in case where the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is expressly 
barred by the Statute, inadequacy of remedies in the scheme of the concerned 
Act will be a ground to sustain the jurisdiction of the Civil Court. 
3. In cases where the exclusion of jurisdiction appears to be implied, the scheme 
of the Act should be analysed to determine the adequacy of the remedies and 
also whether the Act provides that all rights and liabilities arising out of it 
shall be determined by the Tribunal constituted under the concerned Act.  
9.17 The Commission is of the view that whenever there is exclusion of 
jurisdiction of Courts, an equally effective alternative mechanism must be provided 
at grassroots level in order to ensure access to justice to the litigants. The Tribunals 
must have benches in different parts of the country so that people of every 
geographical area may have easy access to justice.  There should be National 
Tribunals with Regional sittings and State-wise sittings to reduce the burden of 
Courts and to attain the objectives for which they have been established..  
 
 
  

94 
CHAPTER – X 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
10.1 One of the compelling reasons for establishing the Tribunals had been 
pendency of large number of cases and delay in disposal of cases in the Courts. As 
a remedy thereof, quasi-judicial institutions in the name of Administrative Tribunals 
were established so as to work as an independent and specialised Forum. The 
Tribunals would provide speedy justice in cost-effective manner. The judicial 
functions discharged by the Tribunals can be distinguished from purely 
administrative or executive functions in view of the doctrine of ‘separation of 
powers’ which forms part of the basic structure of the Constitution. The 
Administrative Tribunals Act of 1985, was enacted to give effect to the Swaran 
Singh Committee Report (1976) which provided that against the order of the 
Tribunal, a party may approach the Supreme Court under Article 136 and excluded 
the jurisdiction of the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution. 
The Choksi Committee (1977) expressed the desirability of constituting Special Tax 
Benches in High Courts to deal with the large number of pending Tax cases.  
 
10.2 The Law Commission of India persistently suggested that the power of judicial 
review of the High Courts against a judgment of the Tribunal is not only time 
consuming, but also expensive and there is always a possibility of various High Courts 
interpreting the same statutory provision differently. In 215th Report (2008), the 
Commission made an unwarranted remark that the power of judicial review of High 
Court cannot be as inviolable as that of the Supreme Court.  No reason or explanation 
has been given in support of such observation and no foundation has been laid for 
making such remark. In fact, neither any Court nor the Legislature has ever expressed 
such opinion.  Such observations are admittedly contrary to the law laid down by the 
seven Judge Bench in L.Chandra Kumar (Supra). 
 
10.3 The Supreme Court in earlier judicial pronouncements had held that the 
Tribunals are substitutes of the High Courts. Therefore, the manner of appointment, 
eligibility, tenure and other protections and privileges of persons manning such 
Tribunals must be the same as that of the High Court judges. Such persons must have 

95 
the complete independence as required under the ‘principle of Independence of 
Judiciary’ which is a basic feature of the Constitution. It must be further noted that, 
since reappointment has a strong bearing on the independence of the institution, it 
should be kept out of the influence of the executive. Therefore to ensure independence, 
reappointment must be the exception and not the rule. 
 
10.4 On the other hand, in some other cases, the Supreme Court concluded that the 
Tribunals can neither be alternative nor substitutes of the High Courts. A person 
manning the Tribunal cannot claim parity or privileges at par with the High Court 
judges. However, a seven judge Bench in L Chandra Kumar (Supra) in crystal clear 
words held that the Tribunals are supplemental to High Courts and not their substitutes.  
 
10.5 The selection of the members should be done in an impartial manner. Therefore, 
the selection committee must not be headed by a Secretary to the Government of India 
who is always a party to every litigation before the Tribunal. Re-appointment of 
Members except in case of Members appointed from the Bar is unwarranted as it 
compromises with the independence of judiciary. More so, the involvement of 
Government agencies in selection making process should be minimal for the reason 
that Government is litigant in every case. 
 
10.6 The Power of judicial review conferred on the High Courts is same as that of 
the Supreme Court which is a basic feature of the Constitution and tinkered with only 
by amending of the Constitution. The Government may put in place a mechanism which 
takes care of all matters regarding appointment of persons manning the Tribunals and 
in providing their service conditions. The jurisdiction of High Court should not 
generally be bypassed merely by making a provision to approach the Supreme Court 
against an order of a Tribunal under Article 136 for the reason that the said Article does 
not provide for an appeal but confers discretion on the Supreme Court to grant leave or 
not. The Special Leave Petitions are considered on certain fixed parameters laid down 
by the Supreme Court from time to time. More so, providing for approaching the 
Supreme Court directly  and excluding the jurisdiction of High Court, tantamount to 
violation of the fundamental right of the citizens of access to justice.  
 

96 
10.7 The Commission while discussing the appointment criteria, took note of the fact 
that the present system does not have uniformity in the qualifications, tenure and service 
conditions of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other members and it is thereby felt that a 
change in system is needed because lack of uniformity is causing a major concern in 
the effective working of present Tribunal system. 
 
10.8 In Tribunals, the Technical Members should be appointed only and only when 
service/advice of an expert on technical or special aspect is required. The Tribunal 
should be manned by persons qualified in law, having judicial training and adequate 
experience with proven ability and integrity.  
 
Recommendations 
 
 
10.9  The pendency of cases in some of the Tribunals is suggestive of the fact that the 
object of setting up Tribunals is not achieved. The figures officially available as 
explained in Chapter 3 do not represent a satisfactory situation. In light of the detailed 
discussions held in the Commission and dealt with in the foregoing Chapters, the 
Commission makes the following recommendations, for the consideration of the 
Central Government namely: 
 
A. In case of transfer of jurisdiction of High Court to a Tribunal, the members of 
the newly constituted Tribunal should possess the qualifications akin to the 
judges of the High Court. Similarly, in cases where the jurisdiction and the 
functions transferred were exercised or performed by District Judges, the 
Members appointed to the Tribunal should possess equivalent qualifications 
required for appointment as District Judges.  
 
B. There shall be uniformity in the appointment, tenure and service conditions 
for the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members appointed in the Tribunals.  
While making the appointments to the Tribunal, independence shall be 
maintained. 
 

97 
C. There shall be constituted a Selection Board/Committee for the appointment 
of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Judicial Members of the Tribunal, which 
shall be headed by the Chief Justice of India or a sitting judge of the Supreme 
Court as his nominee and two nominees of the Central Government not below 
the rank of Secretary to the Government of India to be nominated by the 
Government. For the selection of Administrative Member, Accountant 
Member, Technical Member, Expert Member or Revenue Member, there shall 
be a Selection Committee headed by the nominee of the Central Government, 
to be appointed in consultation with the Chief Justice of India. 
 
D.  The Chairman of the Tribunals should generally be the former judge of the 
Supreme Court or the former Chief Justice of a High Court and Judicial 
Members should be the former judges of the High Court or persons qualified 
to be appointed as a Judge of the High Court.  
 
 Administrative Members, if required, should be such persons who have 
held the post of Secretary to the Government of India or any other equivalent 
post under the Central Government or a State Government, carrying the scale 
of pay of a Secretary to the Government of India, for at least two years; OR 
held a post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, or any other 
equivalent post under the Central or State Government, carrying the scale of 
pay of an Additional Secretary to the Government of India, at least for a period 
of three years. 
 Expert Member/Technical Member/Accountant Member should be a 
person of ability, integrity and standing, and having special knowledge of and 
professional experience of not less than fifteen years, in the relevant domain.  
(can be increased according to the nature of the Tribunal).The appointment of 
Technical/Expert members in addition to the judicial members be made only 
where the Tribunals are intended to serve an area which requires specialised 
knowledge or expertise or professional experience and the exercise of 
jurisdiction involves consideration of, and decisions into, technical or special 
aspects.  
 

98 
E. While making the appointments to the Tribunal, it must be ensured that the 
Independence in working is maintained.  The terms and conditions of service, 
other allowances and benefits of the Chairman shall be such as are admissible 
to a Central Government officer holding posts carrying the pay of 
Rs.2,50,000/-, as revised from time to time.  
 
 The terms and conditions of service, other allowances and benefits of a 
Member of a Tribunal shall be such as are admissible to a Central Government 
officer holding posts carrying the pay of Rs.2,25,000/-, as revised from time 
to time. 
 
 The terms and conditions of service, other allowances and benefits of 
Presiding Officer/Member of a Tribunal (to which the jurisdiction and 
functions exercised or performed by the District Judges are transferred) shall 
be such as are admissible to a Central Government officer drawing the 
corresponding pay of a District Judge. 
   
F. Vacancy arising in the Tribunal should be filled up as early as possible by 
initiating the procedure well in time, as early as possible, preferably within 
six months prior to the occurrence of vacancy. 
 
G. The Chairman should hold office for a period of three years or till he attains 
the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier. Whereas Vice-Chairman and 
Members should hold the office for a period of three years or till they attain 
the age of sixty seven years whichever is earlier. It will be appropriate to have 
uniformity in the service conditions of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and 
other Members of the Tribunals to ensure smooth working of the system.   
 
H. Every order emanating from the Tribunal or its Appellate Forum, wherever it 
exists, attains finality.  Any such order may be challenged by the party 
aggrieved before the Division Bench of the High Court having territorial 
jurisdiction over the Tribunal or its Appellate Forum.  
 
I. The provisions of Section 3(o) of the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 
excludes certain matters from the jurisdiction of the Armed Forces Tribunal 

99 
(AFT) and the parties aggrieved in those matters can approach the High Court 
under writ jurisdiction. The Act excludes the jurisdiction of the High Court 
under Article 227(4) but not under Article 226. In matters, where AFT has 
jurisdiction, parties must have a right to approach the High Court under 
Article 226 for the reason that a remedy under Article 136 is not by way of 
statutory appeal.  The issue is pending for consideration before the larger 
Bench of the Supreme Court.194  
 
J. The Tribunals must have benches in different parts of the country so that 
people of every geographical area may have easy Access to Justice. Ideally, 
the benches of the Tribunals should be located at all places where the High 
Courts situate. In the event of exclusion of jurisdiction of all courts, it is 
essential to provide for an equally effective alternative mechanism even at 
grass root level. This could be ensured by providing State- level sittings 
looking to the quantum of work of a particular Tribunal. Once that is done, 
the access to justice will stand ensured. 
 
10.10. The Law Commission of India considers it appropriate that in order to ensure 
uniformity in all the affairs of the Tribunals, the Central Government may consider 
bestowing the function of monitoring the working of the Tribunals to a single nodal 
agency, under the aegis of the Ministry of Law and Justice.  
 
10.11  The concerns raised by the Supreme Court and referred to the Commission for 
examination, as set out in para 1.22 are addressed by detailed discussions in the relevant 
chapters. 
(i) The subject matter in question no. 1 has been discussed threadbare with analysis 
of it’s various aspects in Chapter - V; and on careful consideration of all relevant 
material the same is taken care of by the Recommendations A to G. The 
Commission is of the considered view that if these recommendations are 
implemented the rule of law will stand strengthened.  
(ii) As regards question no. 2 and its varied facets, a discussion may be found in 
Chapter No. VII and is answered by Recommendation H. The Commission has 
no doubt that if this recommendation is made operational, the Supreme Court 
will be able to play it’s ‘constitutional role’ and will have sufficient time to 
                                                 
194 Union of India, v. Thomas Vaidyan M, Civil Appeal No. 5327/2015, order dated 16.11.2015. 

100 
attend to the question of law, substantial constitutional issues of national or 
public importance and will be able to render decisions within reasonable time. 
(iii) The subject matter contained in question no. 3 is discussed in Chapter No. VIII. 
Recommendation I addresses it stating that if Benches of the Tribunals are 
located at the places where the High Courts situate, the right to access to justice 
will not have any adverse impact. 
(iv) To answer the question next raised, ‘whether it is desirable to exclude 
jurisdiction of all courts without there being equally effective alternative 
mechanism for access to justice’, the Commission, after comprehensive 
discussion in Chapter No. IX, addressed the same by way of Recommendation 
J, saying that it is always desirable to have an equally effective alternative 
mechanism before tinkering with the jurisdiction of any court by way of 
exclusion of the same. 
10.12 The Commission is given to understand that, so far as incidental or connected 
matters are concerned, such matters are pending consideration before the Supreme 
Court and, therefore, it may not be appropriate to deal with these matters at this stage.  
 
The Commission recommends accordingly. 
 
  


101 
Annexure - I 
Tribunals Merged under the Finance Act, 2017 
S.No. Merger if Tribunals -  with 
details of cases pending at the 
time of merger 
Tribunals / Board Merged 
With 
1. The Employees Provident Fund 
Appellate Tribunal (EPFAT) 
(M/o L&E) ;  
Cases pending - NA 
The Industrial Tribunal 
2. The Copyright Board 
(DIPP) ;  
Cases pending – NA 
The Intel lectual Property 
Appellate Board 
3. The Railway Rates Tribunal (RRT) 
(M/o Railway);  
Cases pending – 21 
The Railway Claims Tribunal 
4. The Appellate Tribunal for Foreign 
Exchange (ATFE) 
(D/o LA) ;  
Cases pending -926  
The Appellate Tribunal 
5. The Natio nal Highways Tribunal 
(NHT) 
(MoRT&H) ;  
Cases pending – 7 
The Airport Appellate Tribunal 
(AAT) 
6(A). The Cyber Appellate Tribunal 
(MeITY) ;  
Cases pending – 102 
The Telecom Disputes Settlement 
and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) 
6(B) The Airports Economic Reg ulatory 
Authority Appellate Tribunal 
(AERAAT) 
(M/o CA) ;  
Cases pending – 15 
The Telecom Disputes Settlement 
and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) 
7 The Competition Appellate Tribunal 
(COMPAT) 
(M/o Corporate Affairs) ;  
Cases pending - 62 
The National Company Appellate 
Tribunal (NCLAT) 
 
 
  

102 
Annexure – II 
 
Removal Provisions relating to Tribunals 
 
Rule 7 of the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal and other Authorities Rules, 2017 provides 
for removal of Members of the Tribunal.  Such removal provisions are not new and 
existed earlier in Acts/Rules in respect of several Tribunals.  Some of such provisions 
which existed earlier are listed below: 
 
Name of the Tribunal Text of removal provisions (cite the 
Rules/Section where it is mentioned) 
1. Central Administrative 
tribunal u nder the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 
1985 
 The Chairman or any other Member shall not be 
removed from his office except by an order made by 
the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour 
or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the 
Supreme C ourt in which such Chairman or other 
Member had been informed of the charges against 
him and given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in respect of those charges. 
 
[Sub-section (2) of Section 9 of the Administrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985] 
2. Railway Claims Tribunal 
under the Railway Claims 
Tribunal Act, 1987 
The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or any other 
Member shall not be removed from his office except 
by an order made by the President on the ground of 
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry 
made by  a Judge of the Supreme Court in which 
such Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member 
had been informed of the charges against him and 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
respect of those charges. 
 
[Sub-section (2) of section 8 of the Railway Claims 
Tribunal Act, 1987] 
3. Securities Appellate 
Tribunal under the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India 
Act, 1992 
The Presiding Officer or any other Member of a 
Securities Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed 
from his office except by an order by the C entral 
Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour 
or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the 
Supreme Court, in which the Presiding Officer or 
any other Member concerned has been informed of 
the charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of these 
charges. 
 
[Sub-section (2) of section 15Q of the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992] 
 
The Central Government shall remove a member 
from office if he - (a) is, or at any time has been, 

103 
adjudicated as insolvent; (b) is of unsound mind and 
stands so declared by a competent court; (c) has 
been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, involves a moral 
turpitude; [(d) ...] (e) has, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, s o abused his position as to 
render his continuation in office detrimental to the 
public interest: 
 Provided that no member shall be removed under 
this clause unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
 
[Section 6 of the Securities and Exchange Board of 
India Act, 1992] 
 
4. Debt Recovery Tribunal 
under the Recovery of Debts 
Due to Banks and Financial 
Institutions Act, 1993 
The Presiding Officer of a Tribunal shall not be 
removed from his office except by an order made by 
the Central Government on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity after inquiry made by a 
Judge of a High Court in which the Presiding Officer 
of a Tribunal has been informed of the charges 
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in respect of these charges. 
 
[Sub-section (2) of section 15 of the Recovery of 
Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 
1993.] 
 
5. Debt Recovery Appellate 
Tribunal under the Recovery 
of Debts Due to Banks and 
Financial Institutions Act, 
1993 
The Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal shall not 
be removed from his office except by an order made 
by the Central Government on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity after inquiry in the case 
of the Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal, made 
by a  Judge of the Supreme Court, in which the 
Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal has been 
informed of the charges against him and given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of 
these charges. 
 
[Sub-section (2) of section 15 of the Recovery of 
Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 
1993.] 
 
6. Airport Appellate Tribunal 
under  the Airports Authority 
of India Act, 1994 
The Chairperson of the Tribunal shall not be 
removed from his office except by an order made by 
the Central Government on the ground of proved 
misbehavior or incapacity after an inquiry made by 
a Judge of the Supreme Court in which such 
Chairperson had been informed of the charges 

104 
against him and given reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in respect of those charges 
 
[Sub-section (2) of section 28J of  the Airports 
Authority of India Act, 1994] 
7. Telecom Disputes 
Settlement and Appellate 
Tribunal under the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India 
Act, 1997 
(1) The Central Government may remove from 
office, the Chairperson or any Member of the 
Appellate Tribunal, who – 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or (c) has become physically or mentally 
incapable of acting as the Chairperson or a Member; 
or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the 
Chairperson or a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office prejudicial to t he public 
interest.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -
section (1), the Chairperson or a Member of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed from his 
office on the ground specified in clause (d) or clause 
(e) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court on 
a reference being made to it in this behalf by the 
Central Government, has, on an enquiry, held by it 
in accordance with such procedure as it may specify 
in this behalf, reported that the Chairperson or a 
Member ought on such ground or groun ds to be 
removed.  
 
[Sub-section (1) and (2) of section 14G of the 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997] 
8. Appellate Board under the 
Trade Marks Act, 1999 
The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or any other 
Member shall not be removed from his office except 
by an order made by the President of India on the 
ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after 
an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in 
which the Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other 
Member had been informed of the charges against 
him and given  a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in respect of those charges. 
 
[Sub-section (2) of section 89 of the Trade Marks 
Act, 1999] 
9. National Company Law 
Appellate Tribunal under the 
Companies Act, 2013  
(1) The Central Government may, after consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India, remove from office 
the President, Chairperson or any Member, who—  
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  

105 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or (c) has become physically or mentally 
incapable of acting as such President, the 
Chairperson, or Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such 
President, the Chairperson or Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest:  
Provided that the President, the Chairperson or the 
Member shall not be removed on any of the grounds 
specified in clauses (b) to (e) without givin g him a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -
section (1), the President, the Chairperson or the 
Member shall not be removed from his office except 
by an order made by the Central Government on the 
ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after 
an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court 
nominated by the Chief Justice of India on a 
reference made to him by the Central Government 
in which such President, the Chairperson or Member 
had been informed of th e charges against him and 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(3) The Central Government may, with the 
concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, suspend 
from office, the President, the Chairperson or 
Member in respect of whom reference has bee n 
made to the Judge of the Supreme Court under sub-
section (2) until the Central Government has passed 
orders on receipt of the report of the Judge of the 
Supreme Court on such reference.  
(4) The Central Government shall, after consultation 
with the Supreme Court, make rules to regulate the 
procedure for the inquiry on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity referred to in subsection 
(2). 
 
[Section 417 of  the Companies  Act, 2013] 
10. National Consumer 
Disputes Redressal 
Commission under the 
Consumer Protection Rules, 
1987 
(l) The Central Government may remove from 
office, the President or any member, who,-  
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or (c) has become physically or mentally 
incapable of acting as the President or the member; 
or  

106 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the 
President or a member; or  
(e) has so abu sed his position as to render his 
continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest;or 
 (f) remain absent in three consecutive sittings 
except for reasons beyond his control.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -rule 
(1), the President or any member shall not be 
removed from his office on the grounds specified in 
S[clauses (d), (e) and (f)] of that sub -rule except on 
an inquiry held by Central Government in 
accordance with such procedure as it may specify in 
this behalf and finds the President or a member to be 
guilty of such ground. 
 
[Rule 13 of  the Consumer Protection Rules, 1987] 
11.  Appellate Tribunal 
for Electricity under the 
Electricity Act, 2003 
The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal or a 
Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall not b e 
removed from his office except by an order by the 
Central Government on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by 
a judge of the Supreme Court as the Central 56 
Government may appoint for this purpose in which 
the Chairpers on or a Member of the Appellate 
Tribunal concerned has been informed of the 
charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of such 
charges. 
 
[Sub-section (2) of section 117 of the Electricity 
Act, 2003] 
12.   Armed Forces 
Tribunal under the Armed 
Forces Tribunal Act, 2007  
The Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed 
from his office except by an order made by the 
President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after an inquiry made by a sitting Judge 
of the Supreme Court in which such Chairperson or 
other Member had been informed of the charges 
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in respect of those charges. 
 
[Sub-section (2) of section 9 of the Armed Forces 
Tribunal Act, 2007] 
13.  National Green 
Tribunal under the National 
Green Tribunal Act, 2010 
(1) The Central Government may, in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India, remove from office 
of the Chairperson or Judicial Member of the 
Tribunal, who, — (a) has been adjudged an 
insolvent; or  

107 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; or (c) has become physically or mentally 
incapable; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or Judicial Member shall not be 
removed from his office except by an order made by 
the Central Government after an inquiry made by a 
Judge of the Supreme Court in which such 
Chairperson or Judicial Member has been informed 
of the charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of those 
charges.  
(3) The Central Government ma y suspend from 
office the Chairperson or Judicial Member in respect 
of whom a reference of conducting an inquiry has 
been made to the Judge of the Supreme Court under 
7 sub -section (2), until the Central Government 
passes an order on receipt of the report of inquiry 
made by the Judge of the Supreme Court on such 
reference.  
(4) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate 
the procedure for inquiry referred to in sub -section 
(2).  
(5) The Expert Member may be removed from his 
office by an order of the Central Government on the 
grounds specified in sub -section (1) and in 
accordance with the procedure as may be notified by 
the Central Government: Provided that the Expert 
Member shall not be removed unless he has been 
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
 
[Section 10 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 
2010] 
   

108 
 
Annexure -III 
 
 
Tribunals from where appeal lies to the High Court 
 
The Income Tax Act, 
1961 
(43 of 1961) 
Income Tax Appellate 
Tribunal 
Established u/s 252(1) 
Appeal to the High Court 
u/s 260A(1) 
 
The Customs Act, 1962 
(52 of 1962) 
Amended vide Finance 
Act 2003 
Customs, Excise and Service 
Tax Appellate Tribunal 
Constituted u/ s 129(1) 
Appeal to the High Court 
u/s 130(1) 
 
The Income Tax Act, 
1961 
(43 of 1961) 
Income tax Settlement 
Commission 
Constituted u/s 245B 
Appeal to High Court u/s 
260A 
 The Prevention of Money 
laundering Act, 2002 (15 
of 2003) 
Appellate Tribunal 
Established u/s 25 
Appeal to High Court u/s 
42 
 
The Benami Transactions 
(Prohibition) Amendment 
Act, 2016 (43 of 2016) 
Appellate Tribunal 
Constituted u/s 30 
Appeal to High Court u/s 
49(1) 
 
The Benami Transactions 
(Prohibition) Amendment 
Act, 2016 (43 of 2016) 
The Appellate Tribunal 
Established u/s 30 
Appeal to High Court u/s 
49 
 
 
  

109 
Annexure - IV 
Tribunals from where appeal lies to the Supreme Court 
S. No. Name of Act Name of 
Tribunal/Authority 
Section under which 
Appeal lies with the 
Supreme Court 
1  The National Green 
Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 
of 2010) 
National Green Tribunal 
Established u/s 3 u/s 22 
2  The Securities and 
Exchange Board of India 
Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) 
Securities Appellate 
Tribunal 
Established u/s 15K(1) 
u/s 15Z 
3  The Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986 (68 
of 1986) 
National Consumer Dispute 
Redressal Commission 
Established u/s 9 
u/s 23 
4  The Armed Forces 
Tribunal Act, 2007 (55 
of 2007) 
Armed Forces Tribunal 
Established u/s 4 u/s 30 
5  The Electricity Act, 
2003 
(36 of 2003) 
Appellate Tribunal for 
Electricity 
Established u/s 110 
u/s 125 
6  The Income Tax Act, 
1961 
(43 of 1961) 
Income Tax  
Settlement Commission 
constituted u/s 245B 
u/s 261 
7  
The Airports Economic 
Regulatory Authority of 
India Act, 2008 (27 of 
2008) 
Airports Economic 
Regulatory Authority 
Appellate Tribunal 
(AERAAT) is now merged 
with Telecom Disputes 
Settlement Appellate 
Tribunal (TDSAT) 
 
u/s 31 
8  The Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
(31 of 2016) 
National Company Law 
Appellate Tribunal 
Established u/s 410 
u/s 62(1) 
9  The Electricity Act, 
2003 
(36 of 2003) 
Central Electricity  
Authority 
Established u/s 70 
u/s 125 
 

110 
 
Annexure - V 
Tribunals from where appeal lies to the Appellate Tribunals / Authorities 
S. No. Name of Act Name of Tribunal/Authority Section under which 
Appeal lies 
1  
The Recovery of 
Debts Due to Banks 
and Financial 
Institutions Act, 1993 
(51 of 1993) 
Debts Recovery Tribunal 
Established u/s 3 
Appeal u/s 20 to Debts 
Recovery Appellate 
Tribunal 
2  The Income Tax Act, 
1961 
(43 of 1961) 
Income tax Settlement 
Commission 
Established u/s 245B(1) 
Appeal to the Appellate 
Tribunal u/s 253 
3  The Companies Act, 
2013 
(18 of 2013) 
National Company Law 
Tribunal 
Established u/s 408 
Appeal to the National 
Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal u/s 421 
4  
The Airports 
Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India 
Act, 2008 (27 of 
2008) 
The Airports Economic 
Regulatory Authority 
Established u/s 3 
Appeal to TDSAT u/s 17 
(AERAAT since merged 
with TDSAT) 
5  
The Telecom 
Regulatory Authority 
of India Act, 1997 (24 
of 1997) 
The Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India 
Established u/s 3 
Appeal to Telecom Disputes 
Settlement and Appellate 
Tribunal u/s 14 
6  The Competition Act, 
2002 (12 of 2003) 
Competition Commission of 
India 
Established u/s 7 
Appeal to National 
Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal (NCLAT) u/s 53A 
(Competition Appellate 
Tribunal since merged with 
NCLAT) 
 
7  
The Securities and 
Exchange Board of 
India Act, 1992 (15 of 
1992) 
The Securities and Exchange 
Board of India 
Established u/s 3 
Appeal to the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal u/s 15T 
8  The Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 
2016 (31 of 2016) 
Insolvency And Bankruptcy 
Board of India 
Established u/s188(1) 
Appeal to National 
Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal u/s 202 

111 
9  The Cinematograph 
Act, 1952 (37 of 1952) 
Board of Film Certification 
Established u/s 3 
Film Certification Appellate 
Tribunal 
u/s 5C 
10  The Electricity Act, 
2003 
(36 of 2003) 
Central Electricity  Authority 
Established u/s 70 
Appeal to Appellate 
Tribunal for Electricity u/s 
110 & 111 
11  The Prevention of 
Money laundering Act, 
2002 (15 of 2003) 
Adjudicating Authority 
Established u/s 6 
Appeal to Appellate 
Tribunal u/s 26 
12  The Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 (44 
of 1958) 
Court of Survey 
Established u/s383(1 &3) 
No further appeal 
(but Reference to scientific 
persons by Central Govt. u/s 
387) 
13  The Cinematograph 
Act, 1952 (37 of 1952) 
The Film Certification 
Appellate Tribunal 
Established u/s 5D 
No further appeal 
(but Revision Power with 
Central Govt. u/s 6) 
14  The Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority 
Act, 2005 (24 of 2005) 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority 
Established u/s 4 No further appeal 
15  The Press Council Act 
1978 
(37 of 1978) 
Press Council of India 
Established u/s 4 No further appeal 
16  
The Recovery of Debts 
Due to Banks and 
Financial Institutions 
Act, 1993 (51 of 1993) 
Debts Recovery Appellate 
Tribunal 
Established u/s 8(1) 
No further appeal 
17  The Administrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985 
(13 of 1985) 
Central Administrative 
Tribunal 
Established u/s 4(1) 
No further appeal 
18  The Central Sales Tax 
Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) 
The Central Sales Tax 
Appellate Authority/Tribunal 
Established u/s 19 
No further appeal 
 
 
  

112 
Annexure - VI 
The Acts Which Precludes the Jurisdiction of Civil Courts 
Sr. No. Name of Act 
Exclusion of 
Jurisdiction of 
Civil Court 
1. 
The Control of National Highways (Land and 
Traffic) Act, 2002 
(13 of 2003) 
Section 15 
2. The Airport Authority of India Act, 1994 
(55 of 1994) Section 28K(5) 
3. Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 
(24 of 1997) Sections 15 & 27 
4. The Armed Forces Tribunal Act 2007 
(55 of 2007) Section 33 
5. 
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial 
Institutions Act, 1993 
(51 of 1993) 
Section 18 
6. 
The Securitisation and Reconstruction of 
Financial Assests and Enforcement of Security 
Interest Act, 2002 
(54 of 2002) 
Section 34 
7. Income Tax Act, 1961 
(43 of 1961) Section 293 
8. The Trade Marks Act, 1999 
(47 of 1999) Section 93 
9. 
The Geographical Indications of Goods 
(Registration and Protection) Act, 1999 
(48 of 1999) 
Section 32 
10. 
The Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 
1992 
(15 of 1992) 
Sections 15Y & 
20A 
11. The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 
(59 of 1988) 
Sections 94 & 
175 

113 
12. The Competition Act, 2002 
(12 of 2003) Section 61 
13. Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987 
(54 of 1987) Section 15 
14. 
The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange 
Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 
(13 of 1976) 
Section 14 
15. The Railways Act, 1989 
(24 of 1989) Section 43 
16. The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 
(42 OF 1999) Section 34 
17. 
The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of 
India Act, 2008 
(27 of 2008) 
Sections 28 and 
44 
18. The Information Technology Act, 2000 
(21 of 2000) Section 61 
19. Companies Act, 2013 
(18 of 2013) Section 430 
20. The Electricity Act, 2003 
(36 of 2003) Section 145 
21. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
(31 of 2016) 
Sections 63, 180, 
231 
22. The Prevention of Money laundering Act, 2002 
(15 of 2003) 
Sections 41 and 
67 
23. The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 
(45 of 1988) Section 45 
24. The National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 
(19 of 2010) Section 29 

114 
25. 
The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) 
Act, 2016 
(16 of 2016) 
Exclusion of 
jurisdiction u/s 79 
26. The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 
(19 of 1976) Section 25 
 
 
 