 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
Report No.273 
 
Implementation of ‘United Nations Convention against Torture and 
other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment’ 
through Legislation 
 
 
 
October, 2017 
  


ii 
 
  


iii 
 
Report No. 273 
Implementation of ‘United Nations Convention against Torture and 
other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment’ 
through Legislation 
 
Table of Contents 
Chapters Title Pages 
I Introduction 1-8 
II International Scenario 9-27 
III Examination of iss ues relating to Torture by 
various Commissions 
28-33 
IV Constitutional and Statutory Provisions 34-40 
V Judicial Response to Torture in India 41-55 
VI Compensation for Custodial Torture / Death 56-63 
VII Recommendations 64-66 
Annexure: Prevention of Torture Bill 2017 67-75 

CHAPTER – I 
 
Introduction 
 
A. Background 
 
1.1  The history of torture throughout the ages reveal s1 that torture 
was employed by various communities either in their religious rites or its 
code of punishment.  Torture is a form of crudity and a barbarity which 
appals modern civilisation.  The tormenting of those captured in war was 
looked upon and accepted as inevitable.  Often such captives were 
sacrificed to the gods. Ordeals of fire, water, poison, the balance, and 
boiling oil, were employed in the trial of accused persons. References are 
made to the use of anundal by officials of the Southern Indian provinces 
in the collection of land revenue. One of the most popular methods 
known as thoodasavary which is known as beating up now -a- days, was 
used by tax collectors and others for inducing the payment of dues and 
debts, as well as for eliciting confessions and securing evidence in 
criminal cases. Subjects were forced to drink milk mixed with salt, till 
they were brought to death’s d oor by diarrhoea.   People were forced to 
accept death by suffocation in a small cell where a large number of 
persons, several times than its capacity to accommodate where put and 
forced to torment by intolerable thirst, lack of fresh air and ruinous 
odour of the cell. 
 
1.2 Depriving a person from sleep impairs the normal functioning and 
performance of individual which amounts to mental and physical torture 
as it has a very wide range of negative effects.2 
                                                           
1 Goerge Ryley Scott, “The History of Torture Throughout the Ages”, 1940 (T. Werner Laurie Ltd., 
London) 
2 In Re: Ramlila Maidan Incident, 2012 (5) SCC 1 

2 
 
 
1.3 The "Trial and Torture to Elicit Confession” is discussed in detail in 
Kautilya's Arthashastra3. The relevant part thereof reads as under: 
 
There are in vogue four kinds of torture (karma): -- Six 
punishments (shatdandáh), seven kinds of whipping (kasa), 
two kinds of suspension from above (upari nibandhau), and 
water-tube (udakanáliká cha). As to persons who have 
committed  grave offences, the form of torture will be nine 
kinds of blows with a cane:--12 beats  on each of the 
thighs; 28 beats with a stick of the tree (naktamála); 32 beats 
on each  palm of the hands and on each sole of the feet; two 
on the knuckles, the hands being  joined so as to appear like 
a scorpion; two kinds of suspensions, face downwards 
(ullambanechale); burning one of the joints of a finger after the 
accused has been  made to drink rice gruel; heating his body for 
a day after he has been made to drink oil; causing him to lie on 
coarse green grass for a night in winter. These are the 18 kinds 
of torture. …... Each day a fresh kind of the torture may be 
employed. 
 
 Those whose guilt is  believed to be true shall be 
subjected to torture (áptadosham karma kárayet). But not 
women who are carrying or who have not passed a month after 
delivery. Torture of women shall be half of the prescribed 
standard.  
 
1.4 There is a necessity to protect th e society from the hands of 
criminals which has been emphasised by Manu and the law givers of this 
age.4 
  
1.5 Under the old  Greek and Roman laws , it was  specified tha t only 
slaves could be tortured  but later on, the torture of free -men in cases of 
treason was also made allowed . In AD 240 , the right to torture slaves 
                                                           
3 Translated into English by R Shamasastry; Chapter VIII, Book IV; Available at:  
https://ia802703.us.archive.org/13/items/Arthasastra_English_Translation/ Arthashastra_of_Chanakya_ -
_English.pdf;  last viewed on 23 August 2017. 
4 Khandekar, Indrajit, Pawar, Vishwajeet & Ors, “Torture Leading to Suicide: A case Report” 31(2) JIAFM 
152. 

3 
 
was abolished under the Roman law . In the Middle Ages, torture was 
included in the proceedings of the Catholic Church in the ‘Spanish 
Inquisition’, which employed it to obtain confessions.5  
 
1.6 History reveals that various known warriors and emperors were 
subjected to torture such as thumbscrews after they had lost the 
battles.6 
 
1.7 During the Mohammeden era, the Shariat Law, ‘ an eye for an eye', 
was made applicable.  The basic principles of Muslim criminal 
jurisprudence are still followed in many Islamic countries. Legislation of 
some Islamic Countries provides for certain brutal physical punishments 
eg. Public whipping, executing by lynching, or amputation of limbs.  The 
British Raj was, by no means, less notorious in committing torture  on 
persons in police custody.  Men, women and children were beaten and 
tortured to make confessions to crimes which they had never committed.  
Same had been the fate of political workers if they did not provide  the 
desired reply.  
 
1.8 In D.K. Basu v. State of West Bengal 7  the Supreme Court observed 
that: “Torture has not been defined in the Constitution or in other penal 
laws. 'Torture' of a human being by another human being is essentially 
an instrument to im pose the will of the 'strong' over the 'weak' by 
suffering. The word torture today has become synonymous with the 
darker side of the human civilisation”.  The Court quoted the definition of 
torture by Adriana P. Bartow as under: 
 
                                                           
5 Curtice, Martin, “Article 3 of the Human Rights Act 1988: implications for clinical practice” 14 APT 389 
(2008). 
6 http://listovative.com/top-10-historys-worst-torture-methods/ 
7 AIR 1997 SC 610 

4 
 
“Torture is a wound in the  soul so painful that sometimes 
you can almost touch it, but it is also such intangible that 
there is no way to heal it. Torture is anguish squeezing in 
your chest, cold as ice and heavy as a stone paralyzing as 
sleep and dark as the abyss. Torture is desp air and fear and 
rage and hate. It is a desire to kill and destroy including 
yourself.” 
 
1.9 In Elizabethan times ‘torture warrants’ were legally issued 8 . 
Examination by torture was last used in England in 1640 9. ‘Judicial 
torture’ was abolished by the Treason Act 1709 which is considered to be 
the first formal abolition of torture in any European state. 
 
1.10  Alfred McCoy, i n a review of the history of secret torture and 
torture training by the US Cen tral Intelligence Agency (CIA), describes 
how CIA-funded experiments on psychiatric patients and prisoners in the 
1950s developed into ‘no -touch torture’ which is based primarily on 
sensory deprivation10.  
 
B. Reference to the Commission 
 
1.11 India signed the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment [adopted by General 
Assembly of the UN on 10 th December, 1984 (Resolution No.39/46)] 
(known as the UN Convention against Torture, in short "CAT") on 
October 14, 1997 however, so far it has not been ratified. India has 
expressed its reservations against certain provisions contained in the 
Convention, such as Inquiry by the CAT (Art. 20); State complaints 
(Art.21) and individual complaints (Art.22). 
 
                                                           
8 John H. Langbein: Torture and the Law of Proof, 1977, University of Chicago Press  
9 see A and others (Appellants) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]: para. 412 
10 Alfred McCoy: A Question of Torture: CIA Interrogation, from the Cold War to the War on Terror (New 
York 2006) University of Wisconsin – Madison News 

5 
 
(i) Observation of certain organisations. 
 
1.12 The International Commis sion of Jurists , and other organisations 
have urged India to adopt the reforms suggested by the Convention. The 
Universal Periodic Review is an interactive process carried out after every 
four years. Under this framework, the Human Rights Record of UN 
member States is reviewed. India has also been requested  to ratify the 
Torture Convention by some State parties during the Universal Periodic 
Review of Human Rights. 
 
1.13 The Working  Group on Human Rights in India  has called for  
intervention by the Government against torture. 
 
(ii) Government's stand 
 
1.14 The Central Government initially took the stand that under the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 torture is a punishable offence.  Later on, it was 
decided to go for standalone legislation and the Prevention of Tortur e 
Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok Sabha to give effect to the 
provisions of the Convention. The Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 
May 6, 2010. Rajya Sabha referred the Bill to a Select Committee which 
had proposed amendments to the Bill to make it more compliant with the 
torture Convention. However, the Bill lapsed with dissolution of the 15th 
Lok Sabha. India ’s is not agreeable  to repeal the Armed Forces (Special 
Powers) Act, 1958 (AFSPA). 
 
1.15 In a Civil Writ Petition11 filed by Dr. Ashwani Kumar, the petitioner 
submitted before the Supreme Court that  “India faces problems in 
extradition of criminals from foreign countries because of this (having no 
                                                           
11 W.P. (Civil) No. 738 of 2016; In September 2016, the Supreme Court had issued notice to the Central 
Government on the PIL. 

6 
 
law against torture). It’s in our own national interest to have such a law ”. 
The petitioner sought directions to the government to have a legal 
framework and proper guidelines in terms of the CAT to prevent torture, 
cruelty, inhuman or degrading treatment to jail inmates.  
 
1.16 In 2012 the U.N. Special Rapporteur presented his Report on 
Death Penalty and Prohibition of Torture in the United Nations General 
Assembly. The report noted that while death penalty is not violative of 
the prohibition of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, 
certain aspects related to it such as certain methods of execution and the 
incident of being on a death row may be covered under this convention. 
However, it must be noted that such a view on Torture and death penalty 
is applicable to only those countries which carry out under the guise of 
lawful sanctions, barbaric execution (e.g. death by stoning) which clearly 
have traits of torture. 
 
1.17 Human rights concerns for death penalty and torture are often 
cited as grounds for refusing extradition requests. Countries that have 
abolished death penalty often need diplomatic assurances that rights of 
the person to be extradited shall not be breached. If it appears that death 
penalty may be given, or there are grounds for believing that if the person 
is extradited he may be tortured or subjected to cruel, inhuman and 
degrading treatment or denied any of the rights guaranteed to him by 
various international law instruments such as ICCPR and UNDHR. It 
would hardly be conducive to the object of the convention when a State 
party surrenders a suspect or fugitive knowingly to another State party 
where he will be in real danger of being subjected to torture, it would run 
contrary to the spirit and intention of the Convention itself, to expose a 
person to the real risk of torture or cruel, inhuman and degrading 
treatment. It has also been held that as such prolonged duration of a 

7 
 
death row inmate and the “… ever present and mounting anguish of 
awaiting execution of death penalty…”12 would amount to torture.  
 
1.18 Section 34C of The [Indian] Extradition Act, 1962 reads as under: 
 
“Provision of life imprisonment for death penalty:- 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, where a fugitive criminal, who has 
committed an extradition offence punishable with death in 
India, is surrendered or returned by a foreign State on the 
request of the Central Government and the laws of that foreign 
State do not provide for a death penalty for such an offence, 
such fugitive criminal shall be liable for punishment of 
imprisonment for life only for that offence.” 
 
1.19 The prohibition of torture is a part of customary international law 
and is a part of jus cogens.  Inclusion of extradition prohibitions in the 
Torture Convention enjoins more States to ensure accountability 
worldwide for acts of torture. The Convention has not created an 
international crime which had not previously existed but provided an 
international system under which the torturer - international criminal , 
could find no safe haven.13 
 
1.20 In Shatrughan Chauhan  v. Union of India ,14 the Supreme Court 
while discussing the scope of torture in the execution of death sentence 
observed: 
 
‘…..undue, inordinate and unreasonable delay in execution of 
death sentence does certainly attribute to torture which 
indeed is in violation of Article 21 and thereby entails as the 
ground for commutation of sentence. However, the nature of 
                                                           
12 In Soering v. UK, Application (07/07/1989), the European Court of Human Rights held that extraditing a 
person from UK to Virginia- a state in US that imposes death penalty, would violate Article 3 of the 
Torture Convention.  
13 Bartle and the Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis and Others, Ex Parte Pinochet; R v. Evans and 
Another and the Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis and Others, Ex Parte Pinochet, R v. [1999] 
UKHL 17 (24th March, 1999). 
14  (2014) 3 SCC 1. 

8 
 
delay i.e. whether it is undue or unreasonable must be 
appreciated based on the facts of individual cases and no 
exhaustive guidelines can be framed in this regard.’ 
 
1.21 The Court, in response to the Solicitor General’s statement that the 
Law Commission of India was examining the issue, observed: “ So many 
matters are pending before the Law Commission. It should be taken up as 
a matter which requires extreme urgency.”  
 
1.22 Accordingly, the Central Government vide its letter dated 8th July,  
2017 asked the Law Commission to examine the issue of ratification of 
UN Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment and submit a report on the matter. 
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER - II 
International Scenario 
 
A. Human Rights Instruments 
 
2.1 The right to freedom from torture is enshrined in number of 
human rights instruments which provide for protection of all individuals 
from being intentionally subjected to severe physical or psychological 
distress by, or with the approval or acquiescence of, government agents 
acting for a specific purpose, such as to obtain information. The 
prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment is 
enshrined in the following regional and universal human rights 
instruments:15 
 
(i) Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 (Art. 5) 
(ii) American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, 
1948 (Art. 27) 
(iii) European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights 
and Fundamental Freedoms, 1950 (Art. 3) 
(iv) United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of 
Refugees, 1951 
(v) United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment 
of Prisoners, 1955 (Art. 31)  
(vi) Draft Principles on Freedom from Arbitrary Arrest, 
Detention and Exile (1963). 
(vii) International Convention on the Elimination of All forms of 
Racial Discrimination, 1965 ( ICERD) 
(viii) International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
1966 (Arts. 4, 7 and 10) 
(ix) American Convention on Human Rights, 1969 (Art. 5) 
(x) Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from being 
subjected to Torture and other Cruel Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment (1975).  
(xi) Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights (1976)  
(xii) Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials (1979) 
articles 2-3 & 5-6. 
                                                           
15 International Justice Resource Centre [ I J R C] 

10 
 
(xiii) Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women 1979( CEDAW) 
(xiv) African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, 1981 (Art. 
5) 
(xv) Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or 
Degrading  Treatment or Punishment (CAT),1984 
(xvi) UN Declaration on Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of 
Crime and abuse of Power 1985  
(xvii) Inter-American Convention To Prevent and Punish Torture, 
1985 
(xviii) European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment, 1987 
(xix) Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1989 (Art. 37) 
(xx) European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and 
other Cruel, Inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment, 1989 
(xxi) Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, 1990 (Arts. 
19-20) 
(xxii) Charter of Paris for a New Europe, 1990 
(xxiii) Convention on the Protection of the Rights of Migrant 
Workers and Members of their Families, 1990 (Art. 10) 
(xxiv) International Convention on the protection of the Rights of 
All persons against Enforced Disappearance 1992 (CPAED).  
(xxv) Arab Charter on Human Rights, 1994 (Arts 8) 
 
2.2   Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights states that: 
'No one shall be s ubjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading 
treatment or punishment'. There are no exceptions or limitations on this 
right. This provision usually applies not only to torture but also cases of 
severe violence in police custody and poor conditions in det ention. It is 
an absolute right and in no circumstances to torture someone will ever 
be justifiable.  
 
2.3 The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 
1966 (ICCPR) - a multilateral treaty - is a key international human rights 
treaty, providin g a range of protections for civil and political rights. 
The ICCPR, together with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 
1948 and the International Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural 
Rights, are considered as the International Bill of Human Right s. By way 

11 
 
of Geneva Conventions  there is  a series of treaties on the treatment of 
civilians, prisoners of war (POWs) and soldiers who are otherwise 
rendered hors de combat, or incapable of fighting and to protect wounded 
and sick soldiers during wartime.16 
 
2.4 One of the most universally recognised human rights, the 
prohibition on torture has attained the status of jus cogens or 
peremptory norm of general international law, also giving rise to the 
obligation erga omnes (owed to and by all States) to take action against 
those who torture.  As such, the prohibition may be enforced against a 
State even if it has not ratified any of the relevant treaties, and the 
prohibition is not subject to derogation, even in times of war or 
emergency. Jus cogens are international norms considered so 
fundamental that no deviation from them is permitted. The jus 
cogens (peremptory norms), flow from Article 53 of the Vienna 
Convention on the Law of Treaties, which has deep impact on national 
and customary law17.  
  
B. Convention against Torture (CAT) 
 
2.5 The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT) is an international  human 
rights treaty, under the aegis of the United Nations that aims to prevent 
torture and oth er acts of cruel, inhuman, or  degrading treatment or 
punishment around the world. “The Convention puts victims at the heart 
of its normative mechanism, partly by combating the impunity enjoyed 
by the perpetrators of such acts in authorising the arrest of a lleged 
                                                           
16 Geneva Conventions, available at: https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/geneva_conventions (visited on 26 -
10-2017). 
17 Wet, Erika, de, “The Prohibition o f Torture as an international norm of jus cogens and its implications 
for national and customary law” 15 EJIL 97-121 (2004). 
 

12 
 
torturers on the sole ground of their presence in the territory under a 
State Party’s jurisdiction and also by  defining the widespread and 
systematic use of torture as a crime against humanity .”…… “ The 
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture established the Sub-
Committee on the Prevention of Torture (SPT), whose task is to carry out 
inspection visits, in conjunction with national prevention agencies, to all 
places of detention in the State Parties to the Protocol. The Protocol 
requires State Parties to set up a visiting body or bodies for the 
prevention of torture and abuse (known as the national preventive 
mechanism) within one year after the coming into effect of the 
Convention for the State Party concerned.”18 The right to freedom from 
torture includes the following rights and obligations:19 
 
(1)    the right of individuals to be protected by the State from torture by 
its agents; 
(2)    the State’s duty to prosecute torturers; and, 
(3)    the right of individuals not to be returned or extradited to another 
State where they may have the risk of being tortured. 
 
 
(i) Obligation of States 
 
2.6 The States which are party to this Convention are required to take 
the following steps: 
 
 Take actions to prevent  torture by criminalising such acts  by 
enacting domestic laws and regulations and to make provisions 
to respect human rights of the alleged victim and the accused. 
 The torture should be outlawed and ‘higher orders’ or exceptional 
circumstances’ should not be permitted to be used as an excuse 
for committing torture. 
                                                           
18 Enforced disappearance, Torture and arbitrary detention, available at: 
http://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/french-foreign-policy/human-rights/enforced-disappearance-torture-and-
arbitrary-detention/ (visited on 26-10-2017). 
19 Torture, available at: http://www.ijrcenter.org/thematic-research-guides/torture/ (visited on 26-10-2017). 

13 
 
 (ii) Jurisdiction 
 
2.7 The concept of universal jurisdiction  shall be applicable to decide  
the question of jurisdiction which shall not be based only on territory or 
the offender’s nationality but also over the acts of torture committed 
outside the territory of the States  even by persons who are not their 
nationals. This principle is already  accepted in conventions against 
hijacking of aircraft and other terrorist activities which was accepted and 
is mentioned under Article 5(2) of the Convention.20 
 
(iii) A State Party’s Undertakings 
 
2.8 Most of the provisions of the CAT deal with the obligations of the 
State parties. These obligations may be summarised as follows:21 
 
 
  
(i)   Each State party shall take effective legislative, administrativ e, 
judicial or other measures to prevent acts of torture. The 
prohibition against torture shall be absolute and shall be upheld 
also in a state of war and in other exceptional circumstances 
(Article 2); 
  (ii)  No State party may expel or extradite a person to a State where 
there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in 
danger of being subjected to torture (Article 3); 
  (iii) Each State party shall ensure that acts of torture are serious 
criminal offences within its legal system (Article 4); 
  (iv) Each State party shall, on certain conditions, take a person 
suspected of the offence of torture into custody and make a 
preliminary inquiry into the facts (Article 6); 
  (v)  Each State party shall either extradite a person suspected of 
the offence of torture or submit the case to its own authorities for 
prosecution (Article 7); 
(vi) Each State party shall ensure that education and information 
regarding the prohibition against torture are fully included in the 
                                                           
20 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman o r Degrading Treatment or Punishment, available 
at: http://legal.un.org/avl/ha/catcidtp/catcidtp.html (visited on 26-10-2017).  
21 Ibid. 

14 
 
training of law enforcement pers onnel, civil or military, medical 
personnel, public officials (Article 10); 
  (vii) Each State party shall ensure that its authorities make 
investigations when there is reasonable ground to believe that an 
act of torture has been committed (Article 12); 
  (viii) Each State party shall ensure that an individual who alleges 
that he has been subjected to torture will have his case examined 
by the competent authorities (Article 13); 
  (ix) Each State party shall ensure to victims of torture an 
enforceable right to fair and adequate compensation (Article 14). 
 
  
(iv) Documenting Torture and Cruel Treatment 
 
2.9 The Manual on the Effective Investigation and Documentation of 
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment (Istanbul Protocol) contains standard accepted in general 
for identifying victims of torture, and for documenting and reporting the 
abuse. 
 
(v) Enforcement 
 
2.10 The prohibition on torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment 
or punishment is implemented in the U.N. system through the human 
rights treaty bodies, including the Human Rights Committee, 
the Committee Against Torture and the Sub-committee on the Prevention 
of Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or 
Punishment. The Committee against Torture (Committee) is a body of 
human rights experts that monitors implementation of the Convention by 
State parties. The Committee is one of eight UN -linked h uman rights 
treaty bodies. All S tate parties are obliged under the Convention to 
submit regular  reports to the Committee on how rights are being 
implemented.  The Committee against Torture has also set up a working 

15 
 
group for the examination of individual communications received under 
Article 22 of the CAT. The working group examines the admissibility and 
merits of the communications and makes recommendations to the 
Committee.22  
 
2.11 In addition, the UN Human Rights Council by special 
procedures may investigate and report on allegations of torture. For 
example, the Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman 
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, is authorised to examine 
questions related to torture in all United Nations Member States.  It may 
be through urgent appeals, country visits, and reporting. 
 
2.12 Enforcement can be ensured through individual complaints’ 
mechanisms to regional human rights tribunals, including the European 
Court of Human Rights, the Inter-American Court of Human 
Rights, Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, African 
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, and the African Court of 
Human and Peoples’ Rights. 
 
C. International Humanitarian Law 
 
2.13 The infliction of torture is a “grave breach” of core international 
humanitarian law under the Geneva Conventions23 (in particular Article 
3), which are designed to limit the effects of armed conflict. Under the 
Geneva Conventions, States are obliged to enact a legislation necessary 
to provide effective penal sanctions against persons committing, or 
ordering to be committed such acts and are obligated to search for 
persons alleged to have committed, or to have ordered to commit such 
grave breaches and [to] bring such persons, regardless of their 
                                                           
22 Supra note 20. 
23 Third Convention  relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, Geneva, 12 August, 1949  

16 
 
nationality before its own courts, if these persons are not extradited to 
another State Party. The conventions protect both civilians and military 
personnel from torture.  The International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC) has produced an information kit on National Enforcement of 
International Humanitarian Law. 
 
D. International Criminal Law 
 
2.14 Torture may also constitute a “crime against humanity” or “war 
crime” under international criminal law, such as is specified in the Rome 
Statute of the International Criminal Court (Arts. 7 and 8). Thus, 
infliction of torture can be investigated and prosecuted by the 
International Criminal Court, subject to its jurisdictional limits. 
 
2.15 The prohibition on torture also requires governments to take 
measures to prevent and punish torture and many States have 
criminalised torture in their national law. The Geneva Conventions and 
Convention against Torture obligate States to extradite or 
prosecute, those who are responsible for torture. Governments may 
exercise universal jurisdiction to prosecute those responsible for torture, 
and Member States of the International Criminal Court have an 
obligation to co-operate with the court in the investigation and 
prosecution of crimes, including torture, falling under their respective 
jurisdiction. In times of armed conflict, the International Committee of 
the Red Cross, monitors the compliance of international humanitarian 
law.24 
 
2.16 The principle of non-refoulement prohibits rendering victims of 
persecution to their persecutor, and applies to States in the context of 
                                                           
24 Supra note 19. 

17 
 
their extradition and immigration policies. This obligation was first 
enshrined in Article 33 of the United Nations Convention Relating to the 
Status of Refugees 1951 which provides that “No Contracting State shall 
expel or return (‘refouler’) a refugee in any manner whatsoever to 
territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of 
his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or 
political opinion”. This duty is reiterated in Article 3 of CAT. For example, 
in the United States, asylum eligibility is established by showing that the 
applicant has suffered or has a “well-founded fear” that he or she will 
suffer “persecution.”25 Persecution includes activities those do not fall 
within the relatively narrow definition of torture. 
 
2.18 Even if an individual is not eligible for asylum, the State may not 
remove him or her to a country where he or she would face a real risk of 
torture. 
 
E. Implementation of CAT in various Countries 
 
(i) United Kingdom 
 
2.19 The common law prohibited torture, but, the Privy Council 
continued to issue torture warrants until Felton’s case in 1628  and such 
practice was formally abolished only in 1640 at the time of Long 
Parliament. In Scotland, torture was prohibited by section 5 of the 
Treason Act 1708. 26 
 
2.20 Section 134 of Criminal Justice Act , 1988 makes it an offence for 
any public official to ‘intentionally inflict severe pain or suffering on 
                                                           
25  Code of Federal Regulations: Aliens and Nationality, U.S. General Services Administration, National 
Archives and Records Service, Office of the Federal Register, 2009 at p. 178  
26 Torture in UK Law, available at: https://justice.org.uk/torture-uk-law/ (visited on 26-10-2017). 

18 
 
another in the performance … of his official duties’. This provision was 
introduced to honour the UK’s commitments under the 1984 Convention 
(CAT).27 
 
2.21 Under international law, torture is not only prohibited under such 
instruments as Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights 
(ECHR) and the Torture Convention, but it has become recognised as jus 
cogens, a peremp tory norm of international law that binds all states 
whether they have signed instruments such as the Torture Convention or 
not28. The prohibition against torture under Article 3 ECHR is also one of 
the few rights that cannot be derogated from in a state of  emergency 
under Article 15. 
 
2.22 The UK G overnment maintain ed that it would never return 
someone to a country where they face a risk of torture . The Human 
Rights Act 1998 is regularly relied upon in extradition and deportation 
cases to challenge the gove rnment’s assessment of whether a risk of ill -
treatment exists.29  
 
(ii) United States of America 
 
2.23 In 1992 the United States became a party to the ICCPR, some 
provisions of which may be considered to have wider application than 
those of the CAT. The ini tial report of the United States under the 
Covenant, which provides general information related to compliance 
                                                           
27 Ibid. 
28 See: Prosecutor v Furundzija [1998] ICTY 3, 10 December 1998, paragraphs 147-157 
29 See: Saifi v. Brixton Prison, [2001] 4 All ER 168. 

19 
 
with and implementation of obligations under the Covenant, was 
submitted to the Human Rights Committee in July 1994.30  
 
2.24 Torture is prohibited  throughout the United States. It is 
categorically denounced as a matter of policy and as a tool of State 
authority. Every act constituting torture under the Convention 
constitutes a criminal offence under the law of the United States. No 
official of the G overnment, federal, state or local, civilian or military, is 
authorised to commit or to instruct anyone else to commit torture. Nor 
may any official condone or tolerate torture in any form. No exceptional 
circumstances may be invoked as a justification of torture. United States 
law contains no provision permitting otherwise prohibited acts of torture 
or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment to be 
employed on grounds of exigent circumstances (for example, during a 
“state of public emergency”) or on orders from a superior officer or public 
authority, and the protective mechanisms of an independent judiciary 
are not subject to suspension.31   
 
2.25 In 1994 the United States Congress enacted important 
legislation which authorises the Attorney -General to institute civil law  
suits to obtain remedies for patterns or practices of misconduct by law 
enforcement agencies and agencies responsible for the incarceration of 
juveniles. The Department of Justice is actively enforcing this statute, 
as well a s older laws that permit criminal prosecution of law 
enforcement and correctional officers who wilfully deprive individuals of 
their constitutional rights, and statutes that enable the Department of 
                                                           
30 United Nations Convention Against Torture, and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Tr eatment or 
Punishment, available at : https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/100296.pdf  (visited on 26 -10-
2017). 
31 Ibid. 

20 
 
Justice to obtain civil relief for abusive conditions in state prisons and 
local jails.32 
2.26 The United States Administration came under widespread criticism 
against detention of alleged leaders and members of suspected terrorist 
organizations in the Guantanamo Bay detention camp  located 
within Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in the year 2001, post 9/11 terrorist 
attack. There were allegations of violation of human rights.  The Supreme 
Court of the United States had consistently held that the detainees of 
Guantanamo had a statutory right to petition the federal courts  for 
habeas corpus review and that the courts had jurisdiction to hear those 
detainees’ petitions.33    
2.27 In the Periodic Report of the United States of America to the United 
Nations Committee Against Torture (Third, Fourth, and Fifth Reports) 34 
submitted on 12 August 2013, the US Government quoted its former 
President Bush as saying in 2006 that “a small number of suspected 
terrorist leaders and operatives captured during the war [were] held and 
questioned outside the United States, in a separate program operated by 
the Central Intelligence Agency. ”  The Report further said “ he then 
announced that 14 individuals were being transferred from Central 
Intelligence Agency (CIA) custody to DoD custody at Guantanamo .”   
However, the Report negated existence of ‘any secret detention facilities’.  
 (iii) Russian Federation 
 
2.28 The Russian Federation is a party to the CAT, and to the ICCPR 
and its first Optional Protocol.  Both these treaties prohibit the use of 
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 
                                                           
32 Ibid. 
33 Vide: Rasul v. Bush, 542 U.S. 466 (2004); Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U.S. 507 (2004);  Hamdan v. 
Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006);  Boumediene v. Bush,  553 U.S. 723 (2008) 
34 Available at https://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/213055.htm [Last Accessed on 20 October 2017]  

21 
 
Article 21 (2) of the Russian Constitution, 1993 provides that "no one 
shall be subjected to torture, violence or other cruel or degrading 
treatment or punishment. No one may be subjected to medical, scientific 
or other experiments without voluntary consent". 
 
2.29 The Russian Federation ratified the ECHR in May 1998. In 2002 
the Court found violations of the right to life (Art. 2), of the right to fair 
trial (Art. 6), of the prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading 
treatment (Art. 3), of the right to liberty and security of the person (Art.5), 
of the right to respect for private and family life, home and 
correspondence (Art. 8), of the freedom of expression (Art. 10), of the 
right to effective remedy (Art. 13), and of the obligation to cooperate with 
the Court (art. 38).35   
 
2.30 In January 2003, the European Court admitted the applications 
concerning human rights violations in Chechnya. The applicants alleged 
that the Russian military violated their rights in the course of military 
operations in Chechnya in 1999 -2000. In 2005, the Court in few cases 36 
found that the Russian Federation had violated Articles 2 (right to life), 3 
(prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment), and Article 
13 (right to an effective remedy) of the European Convention on Human 
Rights and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the Convention (protection of 
property).  
 
2.31 Judgments in cases 37 from Chechnya and other North Caucasus 
Republics, brought by Russian Justice Initiative and others, have since 
contributed to clarifying important issues such as what constitutes 
                                                           
35 Burdov v. Russia, ECHR, IHRL 181 (ECHR 2009). 
36 Khashiyev and Akayeva v. Russia , 57942/00; 57945/00,  Council of Europe: European Court of Human 
Rights, 19 December 2002, available at: http://www.refworld.org/cases,ECHR,3e4bce247.html . 
37 See also, Kalashnikov v. Russia, 47095/99, Council of Europe: European Court of Human Rights, 15 July 
2002, available at: http://www.refworld.org/cases, ECHR,416bb0d44.html;  
 

22 
 
inhuman treatment of relatives, under what circumstances it is possible 
to hold that a disappearance is a violation of the right to life, and the 
obligations of a respondent state when it co mes to cooperating with the 
Court. 
 
 (iv) China 
 
2.32 China ratified the CAT in 1988. Since its ratification, the 
Committee has had four reviews and is currently in its fifth review cycle . 
The Committee against Torture  - the international panel of experts that 
assesses State compliance under the CAT, last reviewed China in 2008. 
Since then, the government has made a series of reforms to its criminal 
justice system after domestic press exposed cases of severe torture of 
criminal suspects leading to wrongful convictions, deaths, and a public 
outcry.38 
 
(v)  France 
 
2.33 France is committed to combat torture and other cruel, inhuman 
or degrading treatment or punishment. France has ratified the CAT. 
France has also signed the Optional Protocol to the Convention a gainst 
Torture. It has accordingly set up its national preventive mechanism in 
the form of a fully independent Controller -General for Places of 
Deprivation of Liberty, responsible for ensuring that the fundamental 
rights of detainees are respected.39  
 
                                                           
38 China: Tell the Truth on Torture at UN Review, available at: 
https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/11/11/china-tell-truth-torture-un-review (visited on 26-10-2017). 
39 France and the Fight against enforced disappearance, torture and arbitrary detention, available at: 
https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/en/french-foreign-policy/human-rights/enforced-disappearance-torture-
and-arbitrary-detention/article/france-and-the-fight-against (visited on 26-10-2017). 

23 
 
2.34 France is also a party to the European Convention for the 
Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment 
or Punishment and its protocols. The Convention establishes a European 
Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) responsibl e, in the same 
way as the SPT, for visiting and inspecting places of detention.40 
 
F.  Pronouncements by  various international adjudicatory 
forums.   
 
2.35 The activities prohibited by various regional and international 
treaties under relevant provisions came up for consideration of 
international adjudicatory forums while dealing with the torture and 
inhuman treatment.  
 
(i) Defining Cruel Treatment and Torture 
  
 2.36 The European Court has emphasised that an applicant must meet 
certain standard to establish a claim under Article 3 of the Convention:  
“Ill-treatment must attain a minimum level of severity if it is to fall within 
the scope of Article 3 of the Convention. The assessment of this 
minimum level of severity is relative; it depends on overall circumstances 
of the case, such as the duration of the treatment, its physical and 
mental effects and, in some cases, the sex, age and health of the victim. 
In considering whether a treatment is ‘degrading’ within the meaning of 
Art. 3, the Court will have regard to its object whether it is to humiliate 
and debase the person concerned and as far as the consequences are 
concerned, whether it adversely affected his or her personality in a 
manner incompatible with Article 3. It may be noted that the absence of 
such a purpose does not conclusively rule out a finding of a violation. 
                                                           
40 Ibid. 

24 
 
Furthermore, the suffering and humiliation must in any event go beyond 
the inevitable element of suffering or humiliation connected with a given 
form of legitimate treatment or punishment.41  
 
 2.37 In Ireland v. United Kingdom 42, the European Court of Human 
Rights laid down factors to be taken into account in determining the 
severity of treatment like the age, sex, and state of health of the victim. 
The Court also examined certain methods of interrogation, none of which 
were found to cause acute physical injury, finding that forcing detainees 
to remain in stress positions for a long period of time, subjecting them to 
noise and depriving them of food, water and sleep amounted to ill-
treatment, but refused to hold that the treatment amounted to torture. 
The case stresses the applicability of the prohibition, even in cases 
involving terrorism and public danger. The reluctance demonstrated 
in this case, to find that ill-treatment amounts to torture based on the 
level of severity, has been eroded by subsequent case law that can be 
read to lower the threshold under the European Convention for finding 
that torture has occurred43. 
 
 2.38 In judging whether an applicant has suffered torture, rather than 
less severe forms of ill-treatment, the degree of ill-treatment used will 
help the court determine the intent with which such a treatment was 
meted out. Subjecting detainees to unnecessary physical 
force diminishes human dignity and is a violation of the European 
Convention of Human Rights44.  
 
                                                           
41 Wainwright v. United Kingdom,  Application no. 12350/04 (2007) 44 E.H.R.R. 40. 
42 Application No. 5320/71 (1978).  See also: Labita v. Italy, Application No. 26772/95, Judgment of 6 
April 2000, Selmouni v. France, Application No. 25803/94, Judgment of 28 July 1999 and Chahal v. The 
United Kingdom, Application No. 22414/93, Judgment of 15 November 1996). 
43 See Askoy v. Turkey, 1996-VI Eur. Ct. H.R. 2260, Aydin v. Turkey, 1997-V Eur. Ct. H.R. 1866, 1873-74, 
1891, and Selmouni v. France, Application No. 25803/94, Judgment of 28 July 1999 (each finding that the 
treatment endured by the applicants amounted to torture). 
44 Selmouni v. France, Application No. 25803/94, Judgment of 28 July 1999. 

25 
 
 (ii)  Psychological Suffering 
 
 2.39 Various human rights bodies have acknowledged that no physical 
element is necessary to establish torture or inhuman treatment. The 
European Court of Human Rights found that a suspected criminal could 
not be extradited to the United States because of the psychological 
harm he would suffer if he were to be sentenced to death and held on 
death row.45  
 
2.40 Actions aimed at humiliating individuals or causing psychological 
suffering may constitute torture or inhuman treatment, and also violate 
the right to human dignity.46  
  
 2.41 In Cantoral-Benavides v. Peru47, the Inter-American Commission 
found that ‘according to international standards for protection, torture 
can be inflicted not only via physical violence, but also through acts that 
produce severe physical, psychological or moral suffering to the victim.’ 
In that case, the Court found that the aggressive acts suffered by the 
victim could be classified as physical and psychological torture, and that 
the acts were planned specifically for the purpose of wearing the victim 
down and to obtain incriminating evidence from him.  
  
 2.42 In several cases, it had been found that there had been violation of 
rights of the relatives of victims of disappearance in the form of the 
anguish caused to their family members. The State’s failure to properly 
                                                           
45 Soering v. The United Kingdom, Application No. 25803/94, Judgment of 28 July 1999. For other cases 
involving the inflicting of mental, but not physical violence, see V. v. The United Kingdom, Application 
No. 24888/94, Judgment of 16 December 1999 and X and Y v. The Netherlands, Application No. 
8978/80, Judgment of 26 March 1985. 
46 See Malawi African Association and Others v. Mauritania, African Commission on Human and Peoples’ 
Rights, Comm. Nos. 54/91, 61/91, 98/93, 164/97 à 196/97 and 210/98 (2000). 
47 (1/A Court H.R. Judgment of August 18, 2000, Ser. C No. 69. (2000) IACHR6.  See also Maritza 
Urrutia v. Guatemala, Judgment of November 27, 2003, Inter-Am. Ct. H.R., (Ser. C) No. 103 (2003), 
finding that the victim suffered physical violence amounting to torture, and mental violence constituting 
cruel and inhuman treatment. 

26 
 
investigate and punish the wrongdoers for the disappearances or 
murders had further added to their suffering.48  
 
(iii) Corporal Punishment 
 
2.43 Corporal punishment is a cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment 
or punishment that violates the prohibition of torture. The Human Rights 
Committee has held that corporal punishment is prohibited by Article 7 
of the Covenant 49.  The African Commission has ruled that corporal 
punishment violates human right to dignity.50  
 
 (iv) Treatment of Prisoners and Detainees 
 
2.44 In Antti Vuolanne v. Finland 51 , the Human Rights Committee 
examined a case involving the solitary confinement of a Finnish 
infantryman. The Committee held that for punishment to be degrading, 
the humiliation or debasement involved must exceed a particular level 
and must, in any event, entail other elements beyond the act of 
deprivation of liberty. In determining the severity of the alleged 
maltreatment, the court should consider all the circumstances of the 
case at hand, including the duration and manner of treatment, its 
physical and mental effects and the sex, age and state of health of the 
victim.   
 
                                                           
48 See: Quinteros v. Uruguay, Human Rights Committee Communication No. 107/1981, Views of 21 July 
1983; Case of the ‘Street Children’ (Villagran-Morales) et al. v. Guatemala, Inter-Am. Ct H.R., 19 
November 1999; Laureano v. Peru, Communication No. 540/1993, Views of 25 March 1996; Kurt v. 
Turkey, Appl. No. 15/1997/799/1002, Judgment of 25 May 1998. In Çakici v. Turkey, Application No. 
23657/94, Judgment of 8 July 1999, paragraphs 98-99). 
49 Osbourne v. Jamaica, Communication No. 759/1997, U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/68/D/759/1997 (2000). 
50 Curtis Francis Doebbler v. Sudan, African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, Comm. No. 
236/2000 (2003). 
51 Communication No. 265/1987, U.N. Doc. Supp. No. 40 (A/44/40) at 311 (1989). 

27 
 
2.45 In contrast, the Human Rights Committee found, in Polay Campos 
v. Peru52, that displaying the victim publicly in a case and isolating him 
for 23 hours a day in a small cell with only 10 minutes of sunlight a day 
violated Arts. 7 and 10 of the ICCPR.  
 
2.46 In International Pen & Others v. Nigeria53, the African Commission 
on Human and Peoples’ Rights held that where the State had detained 
individuals sentenced to death in leg irons and handcuffs and had 
denied access to attorneys and necessary medicines, is violative of Article 
5 of the African Charter. 
 
2.47 The European Court of Human Rights has also developed case-
law on presumptions regarding ill-treatment inflicted by State actors. For 
example, it has stated that “[W]here an individual is taken into custody 
in good health but is found to be injured by the time of release, it is 
incumbent on the State to provide a plausible explanation of how those 
injuries were caused and to produce evidence casting doubt on the 
victim’s allegations, particularly if those allegations were corroborated by 
medical reports, failing which a clear issue arises under Art.3 of the 
Convention.”54  
  
2.48 Interrogation of suspects of terrorist activities between 1971 and 
1975 in Northern Ireland in volving a combination of five particular 
techniques – wall-standing, hooding, subjection to white noise, 
deprivation of sleep and deprivation of food and drink has been held by 
the European Court of Human Rights an inhuman and degrading 
treatment and pract ice of torture which violated Article 3. The court 
                                                           
52  Communication No. 577/1994 (1997). See also Loayza Tamayo Case, Reparations, Judgment of 
November 27, 1998, Inter-Am. Ct. H.R. (Ser. C) No. 42 (1998) (finding similar treatment violated the 
applicants’ rights under the American Convention). 
53 Comm. Nos. 137/94, 139/94, 154/96 and 161/97 (1998). 
54 Yavuz v. Turkey Application no. 32577/02, Judgment of 29 September 2008. 

28 
 
described ‘degrading’ as ‘involving treatment such as to arouse feelings of 
fear, anguish and inferiority capable of humiliating or debasing the victim 
and possibly breaking their physical or moral resista nce’ 55. The Court 
said that inhuman or degrading treatment must ‘ go beyond that 
inevitable element of suffering or humiliation connected with a given form 
of legitimate treatment or punishment ’ to be deemed a violation of Article 
3.56 
 
2.49 The ‘ill-treatment must attain a minimum level of severity’ to fall 
within the scope of Article 3 and that such assessment of this minimum 
is relative and depends on ‘all circumstances of the case’ 57 . In 
considering the issue of whether a punishment or treatment is 
‘degrading’ within the meaning of Article 3, the Court noted that it would 
also have to take into account whether its object ‘is to humiliate and 
debase the person concerned and whether, as far as the consequences 
are concerned, it adversely affected his or her p ersonality in a manner 
incompatible with Article 3.’58  
 
2.50 In order to avoid violation of Article 3, the authorities are under an 
obligation to protect the health of persons deprived of liberty by providing 
requisite medical care during detention 59. In th e case of mentally ill 
persons, the assessment of whether the treatment concerned is 
incompatible with Article 3 has to take into consideration ‘their 
vulnerability and their inability, in some cases, to complain coherently or 
at all about how they are being affected by any particular treatment.’60  
 
                                                           
55 Ireland v. The United Kingdom [1978]2 EHRR 25 
56 Kudla v. Poland, (2000) Application No.30210/96, 26th October 2000. 
57 Ibid 
58 Keenan v. UK, (2001) 33 EHRR 913. 
59  Hurtado v. Switzerland (1994) Application No.1754/90, 28th January; See also: Khudobin v. Russia, 
application no. 59696/00), 26th October, 2006; and Pretty v. UK, (2002) 35 EHRR 1 
60 See Herczegfalvy  v. Austria[1992]; Aerts v. Belgium [1998]. 

29 
 
2.51 Denying adequate medical treatment and force feeding while on 
hunger strike and not producing the relevant documents in respect of his 
medical treatment has been held to be violative of Article 361.  
 
2.52 The Commission has gone through in detail the scenario prevailing 
across the world with regard to various international conventions on 
torture.  The Commission has noted that though I ndia has signed the 
Convention a gainst Torture, it is yet to be ratified.  Not ratifying the 
Convention may lead to difficulties in cases  involving extradition, as the 
foreign courts may refuse extradition or may impose limitations, in the 
absence of anti -torture law in line with the Convention,  while granting 
extradition62.   
                                                           
61 Nevmerzhitsky v. Ukraine  (2005) Application No.54825/00, 5th April 
62 See Saifi v. Brixton Prison & Anor, Supra Note 29 

30 
 
Chapter III 
Examination of issues relating to Torture by various Commissions 
  
3.1 Torture is “is not merely physical, there may be mental torture and 
psychological torture calculated to create fright and submission to the 
demands or commands.”63 
 
3.2 The Wor ld Medical Association, in its Tokyo Declaration, 1975, 
defined "torture" as "the deliberate, systematic or wanton infliction of 
physical or mental suffering by one or more persons, acting alone or on 
the orders of any authority to force another person to yield information, 
to make a confession or for any other reason."64 
 
3.3 In Mehmood Nayyar Azam v. State of Chhattisgarh, 65 the Court 
referred to the dictionary meaning of ‘harassment’ while dealing with 
harassment in custody observed:  
“In P. Ramanatha Aiya r’s Law Lexicon, Second Edition, the 
term “harass” has been defined, thus: - 
“Harass. “injure” and “injury” are words having numerous and 
comprehensive popular meanings, as well as having a legal 
import. A line may be drawn between these words and the 
word “harass” excluding the latter from being comprehended 
within the word “injure” or “injury”. The synonyms of “harass” 
are: To weary, tire, perplex, distress tease, vex, molest, 
trouble, disturb. They all have relation to mental annoyance, 
and a troubling o f the spirit.” The term “harassment” in its 
connotative expanse includes torment and vexation. The term 
“torture” also engulfs the concept of torment. The word 
“torture” in its denotative concept includes mental and 
psychological harassment. The accused in  custody can be put 
                                                           
63 Arvinder Singh Bagga v. State of U.P, AIR 1995 SC 117 
64 See: Speech by Dr. Justice A S Anand, former Chief Justice of India, in VIIIth International Symposium 
on Torture, (1999) 7 SCC 10 (J). 
65 AIR 2012 SC 2573 

31 
 
under tremendous psychological pressure by cruel, inhuman 
and degrading treatment.”   
 
A. National Commission to Review the working of the 
Constitution  
 
3.4 The National Commission to Review the Working of the 
Constitution (2002) set up by the Law Ministry specifically recommended 
for ‘prohibition of torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment’ as one of the additions to the fundamental rights chapter as 
Article 21(2) on the basis of the dicta laid down in various Supre me 
Court judgments in recognition of torture in our constitutional 
jurisprudence.  
 
3.5 In the relevant portion of the Commission’s Report it is stated:- 
 
“3.9 Rights against torture and inhuman, degrading and cruel 
treatment and punishment. 
3.9 Rights aga inst torture and inhuman, degrading and cruel 
treatment and punishment grossly violate human dignity. The 
Supreme Court has implied a right against torture, etc. by way of 
interpretation of Article 21 which deals with Right to life and 
Liberty. The Univers al Declaration of Human Right 1948 and the 
ICCPR prohibit such acts in Art. 5 and 7  respectively. 
It is therefore, recommended that the existing Art.21 may be 
numbered as Clause (1) thereof and a new clause should be 
inserted thereafter on the following lines- 
“(2) No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment or punishment.” 
 
B. Reports of the Law Commission of India 
 
(i) 113th Report (1985): Injuries In Police Custody  
 
3.6 In the  113th Report  the Law Commission recommended th e 
amendment to the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 , by inserting section 114B 

32 
 
providing that in case of custodial injuries, if there is evidence, the court 
may presume that injury was caused by the police having the custody of 
that person during that period. Onu s to prove contrary is on the police 
authorities. Law requires for adoption of a realistic approach rather than 
narrow technical approach in cases of custodial  crimes. The amendment 
proposed by the Commission reads as under:   
 
“114-B. (1) In a prosecution  (of a police officer) for an offence 
constituted by an act alleged to have caused bodily injury to a 
person, if there is evidence that the injury was caused during a 
period when that person was in the custody of the police, the court 
may presume that the injury was caused by the police officer 
having custody of that person during that period.  
(2) The court, in deciding whether or not it should draw a 
presumption under sub -section (1), shall have regard to all the 
relevant circumstances including, in particular,  
(a) the period of custody,  
(b) any statement made by the victim as to how the injuries were 
received, being a statement admissible in evidence,  
(c) the evidence of any medical practitioner who might have 
examined the victim, and  
(d) evidence of any magistrate who might have recorded the 
victim’s statement or attempted to record it.” 
 
(ii) 152nd Report (1994): Custodial Crimes 
 
3.7 The Commission dealt with the issues of arrest and abuse of 
authority by the officials and making reference to all Constit utional and 
statutory provisions including Articles 20, 21 and 22 which are bound to 
be observed mandatorily as they deal with the life and liberty of persons. 
It also took into consideration the provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860 particularly secti ons 166 & 167 (disobeying directions of law by 
public officers), 220 (confining a person for corrupt and malicious 
reasons), 330 & 331 (illegal restraint and causing harm to body) sections 
340-348 (wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement), sections 376 (2) 
(aggravated form of rape committed by police officers etc.) , 376B to 376D 

33 
 
(Custodial sexual offences) and sections 503 and 506 (criminal 
intimidation). The Commission also considered the provisions of Cr.PC, 
particularly section 41 (arrest), section 49  (restraints), section 50 
(grounds of arrest), section 53 (medical examination of the accused), 
section 54 (medical examination at the request of the arrested person), 
sections 56 -58 (action after arrest), sections 75 -76 (arrest under 
warrant), section 154  (information in cognizable cases), section 163 
(provision of inducements) section 164 (confession before magistrate), 
section 313 (examination of the accused in court), section 357 
(compensation).   
 
3.8 The Commission also considered the various provisio ns of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, e.g., sections 24 -27. The main 
recommendation of the Commission included amendment of IPC by 
inserting new provision for punishing the violation of section 160, Cr.PC.  
It also recommended amendment of Cr.PC by adding t he provision 
section 41(1A) for recording the reasons for arrest and to add section 50A 
to inform the relatives etc.  With regard to Indian Evidence Act, the 
Commission reiterated adding n ew provision, i.e. section 114B as 
recommended in the 113th Report. 
 
(iii) 177th Report of the Law Commission (2001) titled “Law 
Relating to Arrest” 
 
3.9 The Law Commission of India, in its 177 th Report (suggested that 
amendments should be brought in Cr.PC by inserting section 55A which 
may read as under: 
“Health and Safety of t he Arrested Persons : It shall be the 
duty of the person having the custody of an accused to take 
reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused.” 

34 
 
(iv) 185th Report of the Law Commission (2003) : Review of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
 
3.10 In the 185 th Report, the Commission pointed out that a reference 
was in fact made by the Supreme Court to the 113
th 
Report of the Law 
Commission in State of MP v. Shyam Sunder Trivedi66.  It was pointed out 
that in cases of custodial death or police torture, it is dif ficult to expect 
direct ocular evidence of the complicity of the police. Bound as they are 
by the ties of brotherhood, often police personnel would not come 
forward to give evidence and more often than not, police officers could – 
as happened in that case – feign total ignorance about the matter. Courts 
should not, in such cases, show an exaggerated adherence to the 
principle of proof beyond reasonable doubt. There will hardly be any 
evidence available to the prosecution to implicate the police. The Court 
called deaths in police custody as the “worst kind of crimes in civilized 
society, governed by rule of law. Men in ‘khaki’ are not above the law.” 
Section 330, 331 of the Penal Code make it punishable for persons who 
cause hurt for the purpose of extorting the confession by making the 
offence punishable with sentence up  to 10 years of imprisonment but 
convictions, in such cases, are fewer because of the difficulties in proving 
evidence. The Court observed:  
 
“Disturbed by this situation, the Law Commission i n its 113th 
Report recommended amendments to the Indian Evidence Act so 
as to provide that in the prosecution of a police officer for an 
alleged offence of having caused bodily injuries to a person while in 
police custody, if there is evidence that the inj ury was caused 
during the period when the person was in the police custody, the 
Court may presume that the injury was caused by the police officer 
having the custody of that person during that period unless the 
police officer proves to the contrary. The onus to prove the contrary 
must be discharged by the police official concerned."  
 
                                                           
66 1995(4) SCC 262 

35 
 
3.11 The Court further observed:  
 
 “Keeping in view the dehumanising aspect of the crime, the 
flagrant violation of the fundamental rights of the victim of the 
crime and the growing rise in the crimes of this type, where only a 
few come to light and others don’t, we hope that the Government 
and legislature would give serious thought to the recommendation 
of the Law Commission and bring about appropriate changes in 
the law….”  
    
(v) 268th Report (2017): Amendments to Code of Criminal 
Procedure 1973: Provisions Relating to Bail. 
 
3.12 In its 268 th Report, the Commission recommended insertion of 
section 41(1A) and amendment to 41B, Cr.  PC requiring the police officer 
to intimate the rights of the person arrested, for bail and liberalising the 
process of bail.  
 
C. Fourth Report of National Police Commission (1980) 
 
3.13 The National Police Commission, in its Fourth Report (1980) took 
note of the fact that custodial torture had been prev alent and admitted 
that torture on a person in police custody was the most dehumanising.  
The police did not have a good image in the estimation of the public.  
Police practice torture in order to achieve quick results by short cut 
methods. Causing hurt is  a punishable offence under sections 330 -331 
Indian Penal Code, 1860, but the atrocities were committed within the 
four walls of the police stations and thus, no evidence could be available 
and as a result thereof the conviction in torture by police cases has been 
a rare phenomenon.  It was difficult to find as to who was the offender.  
3.14 Thus, it may be seen that over the period of time, various 
Commissions, in their reports have consistently recommended to have 

36 
 
adequate provisions in our statutes to pr otect the rights of individuals to 
life and liberty as enshrined in our Constitution. The Commission is 
fortified in its conclusions and recommendations from the above 
analysis. 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
Constitutional / Statutory Provisions  
A. Constitutional Provisions 
4.1 Article 20(3) provides that a person accused of any offence shall 
not be compelled to become a witness against himself.  The accused has 
a right to maintain silence and not to disclose his defence before the 
trial.67 Test results of polygraph and brain finger printing tests have been 
held to be testimonial compulsions and thus have been held to be barred 
by Article 20(3) . 68 Moreover recoveries under section 27 of the India 
Evidence Act, 1872 are not permitted to be procured through torture.69 
4.2 Article 21 provides that nobody can be deprived of his life and 
liberty without following the procedure prescribed by law.  The Supreme 
Court has consistently held that custodial torture violates right to life 
enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution.  It is settled legal proposition 
that Article 21 may also supplement various requirements laid down in 
Article 20.70 
4.3 In Sunil Batra  v. Delhi Administration, 71 the Supreme Court in 
crystal clear words held that “fundamental rights do not flee the person as 
he enters the prison although they may suffer shrinkage necessitated by 
incarceration.”  
4.4 Article 22  (1) & (2)  provide for protection against arrest and 
detention in certain cases. It prohibits detention of any person in custody 
                                                           
67 Yogendra Kumar Jaiswal & Ors. v. State of Bihar & Ors., AIR 2016 SC 1474 
68 Smt. Selvi v. State of Karnataka , AIR 2010 SC 1974. See also Raja Narainlalbansilal v. Maneck Phiroz 
Mistry, AIR 1961 SC 29; and Charoria v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1968 SC 938 
69 See: State of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu Oghad , AIR 1961 SC 1808; and Smt. Selv i & Ors. v. State of 
Karnataka, AIR 2010 SC 1974 
70 Sampat Prakash v. State of J&K  AIR 1969 SC 1153; and Kamla Kanhaihalal Kushalani v. State of 
Maharashtra, AIR 1981 SC 814 
71 AIR 1978 SC 1675; See also Sunil Batra (II)  v. Delhi Administration , AIR 1980 SC 1579; and In Re: 
Inhuman Conditions in 1382 Prisons, AIR 2016 SCC 993.  

38 
 
without being informed the g rounds for his arrest nor he shall be denied 
the right to consult and to be defended by a legal practitioner of his 
choice.  “Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be 
produced before the nearest judicial magistrate within a period of twenty-
four hours of such arrest…….and no such person shall be detained in 
custody beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate.” 
4.5 Similarly, a criminal trial which may result in depriving a person of 
not only personal liberty but also hi s right to life has to be unbiased and 
without any prejudice for or against the accused .72  It has also been held 
that a punishment which is too cruel or torturous is unconstitutional.73 
4.6 Informing about grounds of arrest is mandatory under Article 22 
(1)74  Right to consult and to be defended by legal practitioner of his 
choice is also mandatory.75 More so, production of the accused before the 
nearest magistrate is a mandatory constitutional requirement.76  
B. Statutory Provisions 
(i) Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
4.7 Section 24 provides that any confession obtained by inducement, 
threat or promise from an accused or made in  order to avoid any evil of 
temporal nature would not be relevant in criminal proceedings.   A 
confession made by an accused is rendered irrel evant in a criminal trial, 
if in the opinion of the court, it has been caused by inducement, threat 
or promise with reference to the charge against the accused.  
                                                           
72 Nahar Singh Yadav v. Union of India, AIR 2011 SC 1549 
73 Inderjit v. State of Uttar Pradesh AIR 1979 SC 1867 
74 A K Gopalan v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 27; and Hansmukh v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1981 SC 28.  
75 A K Gopalan, supra, and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Shobharam AIR 1966 SC 1910 
76 State of Uttar Pradesh v. Abdul Samad, AIR 1962 SC 1506 

39 
 
4.8 Section 25 of the Act provides that a confession al statement of an 
accused to police offic er is not admissible in evidence and cannot be 
brought on record by prosecution to obtain conviction 77.  In Aghnu 
Nagesia v. State of Bihar 78, the Supreme Court held that “ if the first 
information report is given by the accused to a police officer and amount s 
to a confessional statement, proof of the confession is prohibited by section 
25.” 
4.9 Sections 26 provides that confession by an accused while in police 
custody could not be proved against him.  In fact, statement made in 
police custody remains unreliab le unless it is subjected to cross 
examination or judicial scrutiny.79 
4.10 Section 27 provides as to how much of information received from 
an accused may be proved.  For the application of section 27, the 
statement of the accused is required to be split in to its components and 
the admissible part of it is to be separated. Only those portions which 
were immediate cause of discovery would be admissible in evidence .80  In 
Kathi Kalu Oghad81, the Supreme Court held that: 
Compulsion is not however inherent in the receipt of 
information from an accused person in the custody of a 
police officer. There may be cases where an accused in 
custody is compelled to give the information later on sought 
to be proved under section 27. These will be other cases 
where the accused  gives the information without any 
compulsion. Where the accused is compelled to give 
information it will be an infringement of Article 20(3); but 
there is no such infringement where he gives the information 
without any compulsion. Therefore, compulsion no t being 
inherent or implicit in the fact of the information having 
been received from a person in custody, the contention that 
                                                           
77 Ram Singh v. Central Bureau of Narcotics, AIR 2011 SC 2490 
78 AIR 1966 SC 119 
79 Smt. Selvi v. State of Karnataka (Supra note 54) 
80 Mohmed Inayatullah v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1976 SC 480 
81 Supra Note 54 

40 
 
section 27 necessarily infringes Article 20(3) cannot be 
accepted. 
4.11 Section 132 provides that witness is not excused from ans wering 
the question on the ground that answer will criminate him.  However, the 
proviso therefor reads as under: 
“Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be 
compelled to give, shall subject him to any arrest or 
prosecution, or be proved against  him in any criminal 
proceeding, except a prosecution for giving false evidence by 
such answer.” 
4.12 In R Dinesh Kumar v. State & Ors.82, the Supreme Court explained 
the scope of the proviso observing that the proviso to section 132 of the 
Evidence Act is a necessary corollary to the principle enshrined under 
Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India which confers a fundamental 
right that “no person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a 
witness against himself”. Though such a fundamental right is available 
only to a person who is accused of an offence, the proviso to section 132 
of the Evidence Act creates a statutory immunity in favour of a witness 
who in the process of giving evidence in any suit or in any civil or 
criminal proceeding makes a statement which criminates himself which 
deserves the most liberal construction.  Without such an immunity, a 
witness who is giving evidence before the court to enable the court to 
reach a just conclusion (and thus assisting the process of law) would be 
in a worse position than an accused in a criminal case.  Therefore, no 
prosecution can be launched against the maker of a statement falling 
within the sweep of Section 132 of the Evidence Act on the basis of the 
“answer” given by a person deposing as a “witness” before a court. 
 
 
 
                                                           
82 AIR 2015 SC 1816 

41 
 
(ii) Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
4.13 Sections 46 (3) and 49 protect the person to be arrested and the 
detenu under police custody , who are not accused of an offence 
punishable with death or imprisonment for life . The detenu  cannot be 
subjected to more restraint than is necessary to prevent his escape.  
4.14 Sections 50 and 56 are in conformity and consonance with Article 
22 of the Constitution. A person arrested is to be informed of the 
grounds of arrest and right to bail.  More  so, he is to be produced before 
the Magistrate within the stipulated time.  
4.15 Sections 51(2) and 100(3) provide that if a women is to be searched 
by a police officer in connection with a crime, the search shall be made 
by another woman with strict rega rd to decency.  The women accused 
must be interrogated at her residence.   
4.16 Section 54 of the Code extends safeguard against  any infliction of 
custodial torture and violence by providing for examination of arrested 
person by medical officer. Section 57  requires the police to produce the 
suspect / accused before the nearest magistrate within 24 hours of 
arrest.  It corresponds to Article 22(2) of the Constitution. 
4.17 Sections 132 and 197(1) grant immunity to public servants from 
prosecution, if the pub lic servant is accused of any offence alleged to 
have been committed by him while discharging his official duties.   
4.18 Section 160 (1) provides “No male person under the age of 15 years 
or woman shall be required to attend at any place other than in whi ch 
such male person or woman resides.” 

42 
 
4.19 Sections 162, 163(1) and 315 disallow (i) forced confession and (ii) 
testimony, as inadmissible in the court of law and protect the accused 
against such confession.  
4.20 Sections 167 put an obligation to bring t he accused person before 
the court to safeguard their rights and interest.  
4.21 Section 176 provides for compulsory magisterial inquiry on the 
death of the accused in police custody.   
4.22 Section 357A provides for framing of the victim compensation 
scheme by every State Government in co -ordination with the Central 
Government. 
4.23 Section 357B provides for awarding compensation in addition to 
fine under section 326A or section 376D. 
4.24 Section 357C provides for treatment of victims  of rape  by all 
hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central Government, 
State Government, local bodies or by any other persons. 
4.25 Section 358 provides for compensation to persons groundlessly 
arrested.  
(iii) Indian Police Act, 1860 
4.26 Sections 7 and 29 provi de for dismissal and other penalties to  
police officers who are negligent in discharge of their duties or unfit to 
perform the same. 
(iv) Indian Penal Code, 1860 
4.27 Sections 330, 331, 342 and 348 have, purposely been designed to 
deter police officers who  are empowered to arrest a person and to 

43 
 
interrogate him during investigation of an offence resorting to third 
degree methods, which may amount to torture83. 
4.28 Section 376(1)(b) provides for graver penalty in case of custodial 
rape committed by police officers. 
4.29 Section 376C provides penalty for sexual intercourse by a person 
in authority. 
(v)  Armed Forces Special Powers Act, 1983  
4.30 Section 6 of the Act creates the concept of sovereign immunity as it 
protects the security forces against alleged crimes. 
4.31 The existing provisions under various statutes referred to 
hereinabove, convince the Commission to recommend that there is a 
necessity to amend section 357B to include a provision regarding payment of 
compensation in case of torture as well, in addition to payment of fine as 
provided under section 326A or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code , 1860. 
Similarly, the Commission is of the opinion that it shall be the responsibility of 
the State to explain the injuries sustained by a person while in custody, and 
therefore, recommends amendment to the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, by 
inserting section 114B  on the lines of the Bill, viz., The Indian Evidence 
(Amendment) Bill, 2016, (Bill No.LXVII of 2016), as introduced in Rajya Sabha 
on 10 March 2017. 
 
  
                                                           
83 State of Madhya Pradesh v. Shaym Sunder Trivedi, (1995) 4 SCC 260 

44 
 
Chapter - V 
Judicial Response to Custodial Deaths & Violence 
5.1 The issues of fake encounters; illegal, unjustified and 
unwarranted arrests without any valid ground; eliciting confession 
from innocent persons for offences which they have never committed, 
by way of custodial violence; etc., have always been subject matters of 
consideration by the Indian courts. 
 
A. Custody means 
 
5.2 The term “custody” has not been defined in any statute. Its 
dictionary meanings include:  “Safe -keeping, protection, charge, care, 
guardianship, confinement, imprisonment, durance of person, 
guardianship, the act or duty of guarding and preserving, control of a 
thing or person.”84 
5.3 In Black’s Law Dictionary , 85 the expressio n “custody” has been 
explained to be the term very elastic and may mean actual imprisonment 
or physical detention and does not necessarily mean actual physical 
detention in jail or prison but rather is synonymous with restraint of 
liberty.  
5.4 In Niranjan Singh  v. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote ,86 the Supreme 
Court while dealing with the meaning of ‘custody’ within the purview of 
Section 439 Cr.P.C. observed: 
….When he is in duress either because he is held by the 
investigating agency or other police or allied authority or is 
under the control of the court having be en remanded by 
judicial order, or having offered himself to the court's 
                                                           
84 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary and Webster's Third International Dictionary 
85 Henry Campbell Black, M.A. (Sixth Edn.). 
86 AIR 1980 SC 785; See also Sunita Devi v. State of Bihar, AIR 2005 SC 498. 

45 
 
jurisdiction and submitted to its orders by physical presence. 
No lexical dexterity nor precedential profusion is needed to 
come to the realistic conclusion that he who is under the 
control of the court or is in the physical hold of an officer with 
coercive power is in custody ….. This word is of elastic 
semantics but its core meaning is that the law has taken 
control of the person. The equivocatory quibblings and hide -
and-seek niceties  sometimes heard in court that the police 
have taken a man into informal custody but not arrested him, 
have detained him for interrogation but not taken him into 
formal custody and other like terminological dubieties are 
unfair evasions of the straightforwardness of the law. 
5.5 The meaning of the term ‘custody’ has to be understood with 
reference to the context in which it is used. 87’ 
5.6 The Bombay High Court, explained the distinction between arrest 
and custody in Harbans Singh v. State,88 observing:  
‘Arrest is a mode of formally taking a person in police custody, 
but a person may be in the custody of the police in other 
ways. What amounts to arrest is laid down by the legislature 
in express terms in S. 46, Cr.P.C., whereas the words 'in 
custody' which ar e to be found in certain sections of the 
Evidence Act only denote surveillance or restriction on the 
movement of the person concerned, which may be complete, 
as, for instance, in the case of an arrested person, or may be 
partial. The concept of being in cu stody cannot therefore be 
equated with the concept of a formal arrest and there is 
difference between the two. Where, after the statements 
recorded by the Customs Authorities, due to the night -fall, the 
accused are put up before a Magistrate only next morn ing, it 
cannot be said that the accused were arrested and as such 
any statement made by them cannot be said to be in violation 
of Section 24 of the Evidence Act..... 
 
5.7 In Directorate of  Enforcement v Deepak Mahajan ,89 the Supreme 
Court while differentiating between ‘custody’ and ‘arrest’ observed: 
                                                           
87 Roshan Beevi v. Joint Secy., Govt. of T.N., 1984 (15) ELT 289 (Mad.). 
88 AIR 1970 Bom79; see also: State of Punjab v. Ajaib Singh,  AIR 1953 SC 10 

46 
 
‘…..in every arrest, there is custody but not vice -versa and 
that both the words 'custody' and 'arrest' are not synonymous 
terms. Though 'custody' may amount to an arrest in certain 
circumstances but not under a ll circumstances. If these two 
terms are interpreted as synonymous, it is nothing but an 
ultra legalist interpretation which if under all circumstances 
accepted and adopted, would lead to a startling anomaly 
resulting in serious consequences, vide Roshan Beevi (supra).’ 
 
5.8 Thus, in view of the above, the term custody is to be 
understood in the contextual reference and depending upon the 
facts and circumstances of a case it may mean that law has taken 
control of the person.  It may also mean surveillance o r restriction 
on the movement of a person.  Custody and arrest are not always 
synonymous.  
 
B. Judicial Response  
 
5.9 In the year 1961, t he Allahabad High Court had an occasion to 
make the following remarks, in a case pertaining to police behaviour: 
 
That there is not a single lawless group in the whole of 
the country whose record of crime comes anywhere near 
the record of that organised unit which is known as the 
Indian Police Force.'  
...Where every fish, barring perhaps a few stinks, it is idle 
to pick out one or two and say that it stinks. 
 
 
5.10 The State of Uttar Pradesh filed an appeal before the Apex Court 
for expunging these remarks, and the appeal was allowed.90 
  
                                                                                                                                                                             
89 AIR 1994 SC 1775; see also: Nirmaljeet Kaur v. State of M.P. (2004) 7 SCC 558. 
90 State of U.P. v. Mohd. Naim, AIR 1964 SC 703 

47 
 
5.11 In People's Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India & Anr.91, the 
Court observed: 
 
“Undoubtedly, this Court has been entertaining petition 
after petition involving the allegations of fake encounters 
and rapes by police personnel of States and in a large 
number of cases transferred the investigation itself to 
other agencies and particularly the CBI.” 
 
5.12 In Francis Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, U.T. of Delhi 92 , the 
Supreme Court observed: 
“……..any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment would be offensive to human dignity and constitute 
an inroad into this right to live and it would, on this view, be 
prohibited by Article 21 unless it is in accordance with 
procedure prescribed by law, but no law which authorises and 
no procedure which leads to such torture or cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment can ever stand th e test of reasonableness 
and non-arbitrariness: it would plainly be unconstitutional and 
void as being violative of Articles 14 and 21.” 
5.13 The Supreme Court, in Charan Lal Sahu  v. Union of India 93 , 
interpreted Articles 21, 48A and 51A(g) of the Constitution, observing: 
“In the context of our national dimensions of human rights, 
right to life, liberty, pollution free air and water is guaranteed 
by the Constitution under Articles 21, 48A and 51 A(g), it is 
the duty of the State to take effective steps to pro tect the 
guaranteed constitutional rights.”  
5.14 In Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab 94, the Supreme Court observed 
as under: 
“…… the recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal 
and inalienable rights of the citizens is the foundation of 
                                                           
91 AIR 2005 SC 2419; (See also: Dilip K. Basu v. State of W.B. & Ors . AIR 1997 SC 3017 an d N.C. 
Dhoundial v. Union of India  & Ors.  AIR 2004 SC 127;  Rubabbuddin Sheikh v. State of Gujarat & Ors . 
AIR 2010 SC 3175; Jaywant P. Sankpal  v. Suman Gholap & Ors ., (2010) 11 SCC 208; and Narmada Bai 
v. State of Gujarat & Ors., (2011) 5 SCC 79). 
92 AIR 1981 SC 746 
93 AIR 1990 SC 1480 
94  (1994) 3 SCC 569 

48 
 
freedom, justice and peace in the world. If the human rights 
are outraged, then the court should set its face against such 
violation of human rights by exercising its majestic judicial 
authority.” 
 
5.15 Police atrocities in India had always been a subject matter of 
controversy and debate.  This has been discussed in detail in Prithipal 
Singh etc. v. State of Punjab and Anr. etc. 95 In view of the provisions of 
Article 21 of the Constitution, any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment is inhibited. Tort ure is not permissible whether it 
occurs during investigation, interrogation or otherwise. It cannot be 
gainsaid that freedom of an individual must yield to the security of the 
State. Latin maxim salus populi est suprema lex - the safety of the people 
is supreme law; and salus reipublicae suprema lex - safety of the State is 
supreme law, co-exist.  
 
5.16 The right to life has rightly been characterised as "'supreme' 
and 'basic'; it includes both so-called negative and positive obligations 
for the State". The neg ative obligation means the overall prohibition 
on arbitrary deprivation of life. In this context, positive obligation 
requires that State has an overriding obligation to protect the right to 
life of every person within its territorial jurisdiction. The obl igation 
requires the State to take administrative and all other measures in 
order to protect life and investigate all suspicious deaths. 
 
5.17 The State must protect victims of torture and ill -treatment. The 
problems of acute stress as well as a post -traumatic stress disorder 
and many other psychological consequences must be understood in 
correct perspective. Therefore, the State must ensure prohibition of 
torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment to any person, 
                                                           
95 (2012)1SCC10. 

49 
 
particularly at the hands of any State agency/police force. 
 
5.18 Tolerance of police atrocities, amounts to acceptance of 
systematic subversion and erosion of the rule of law. Therefore, illegal 
regime has to be glossed over with impunity, considering the cases of 
grave magnitude. 
  
5.19 In Gauri  Shanker  Sharma  etc.  v.  State  of  U.P.96, the Supreme 
Court held: 
 
 
“...it is generally difficult in cases of deaths in police custody 
to secure  evidence against the policemen responsible for 
resorting to third degree methods since they are in charge of 
police station records which they do not find difficult to 
manipulate as in this case. ...The offence is of a serious 
nature aggravated by the fact that it was  committed by a 
person who is supposed to protect the citizens and not 
misuse his uniform and authori ty to brutally assault them 
while in his custody. Death in police custody must be 
seriously viewed for otherwise we will help take a stride in 
the direction of police raj. It must be curbed with a heavy 
hand. The punishment should be such as would deter 
others from indulging in such behaviour. There can be no 
room for leniency.” 
 
 
5.20 In Munshi Singh Gautam v. State of M.P.97, the Supreme Court held 
that peculiar type of cases must be looked at from a prism different from 
that used for ordinary criminal cas es for the reason that in a case where 
the person is alleged to have died in police custody, it is difficult to get 
any kind of evidence. The Court observed: 
 
“Rarely in cases of police torture or custodial death, direct 
ocular evidence is available of the  complicity of the police 
personnel, who alone can only explain the circumstances 
in which a person in their custody had died. Bound as they 
are by the ties of brotherhood, it is not unknown that 
police personnel prefer to remain silent and more often 
than not even pervert the truth to save their 
                                                           
96 AIR 1990 SC 709 
97 AIR 2005 SC 402 

50 
 
colleagues.....The exaggerated adherence to and insistence 
upon the establishment of  proof beyond every reasonable 
doubt by the prosecution, at times even when the 
prosecuting agencies are themselves fixed in the d ock, 
ignoring the ground realities, the fact situation and the 
peculiar circumstances of a given case, often results in 
miscarriage of justice and makes the justice -delivery 
system suspect and vulnerable. In the ultimate analysis 
society suffers and a criminal gets encouraged... The courts 
must not lose sight of the fact that death in police custody 
is perhaps one of the worst kinds of crime in a civilised 
society governed by the rule of law and poses a serious 
threat to an orderly civilised society. Tortur e in custody 
flouts the basic rights of the citizens recognised by the 
Indian Constitution and is an affront to human dignity. 
Police excesses and the maltreatment of 
detainees/undertrial prisoners or suspects tarnishes the 
image of any civilised nation an d encourages the men in 
"khaki" to consider themselves to be above the law and 
sometimes even to become a law unto themselves. Unless 
stern measures are taken to check the malady of the very 
fence eating the crop, the foundations of the criminal 
justice-delivery system would be shaken and civilisation 
itself would risk the consequence of heading towards total 
decay resulting in anarchy and authoritarianism 
reminiscent of barbarism. The courts must, therefore, deal 
with such cases in a realistic manner and w ith the 
sensitivity which they deserve, otherwise the common man 
may tend to gradually lose faith in the efficacy of the 
system of the judiciary itself, which if it happens, will be a 
sad day, for anyone to reckon with.” 
 
  
5.21 The Supreme Court in  Mehmood Nayyar Azam  v. State of 
Chhattisgarh98 dealt with a case of a social activist, who agitated the 
issue of exploitation of people belonging to poor and margi nalised 
sections of the society and worked to create awareness about the same, 
was falsely roped in criminal cases, arrested and humiliated. While in 
police custody, he was abused and physically assaulted. The Court held 
that any form of  torture  or cruel, inhuman or degrading 
treatment would fall within the ambit of Articles 20 & 21 of the 
Constitution, whether it occurs during investigation, interrogation or 
otherwise. The term “harassment” in its connotative expanse includes 
torment and vexation. The Court held: 
                                                           
98 AIR 2012 SC 2573 

51 
 
 
“If the functionaries of the Government become law -
breakers, it is bound to breed contemp t for law and would 
encourage lawlessness and every man would have the 
tendency to become law unto himself thereby leading to 
anarchy.... The right to life of a citizen cannot be put in 
abeyance on his arrest.”  
 
5.22 In D.K Basu v. State of W.B 99 after per using several reports on 
custodial violence Supreme Court held that, “Custodial violence 
including torture and  death in lock ups strikes a blow at the rule of law 
which demands that the powers of executive should not only be derived 
from law but also that the same should be limited by law.”  
 
5.23 The Court issued certain guidelines to be followed in the cases of 
arrest and detention including that the police personnel carrying out the 
arrest and investigation must carry visible identity card showing his 
designation, etc., and his designation should also be recorded in the 
register; arresting officer shall prepare the memo of arrest at the time of 
arrest which should be attested by a witness preferably the family 
member of the arrestee and it shall also be count er-signed by the 
arrestee and it would show the time and date for arrest; arrestee during 
the period of interrogation shall be entitled to have one friend or his 
relative with him unless the attesting witness of his arrest is his 
relative/friend; time, pla ce of arrest and venue of custody of an arrestee 
must be notified by the police and legal aid organisations should be 
informed immediately; arrestee must be informed of his right to have 
someone informed of his arrest immediately after the arrest; entry should 
be made in the diary disclosing the place of detention and particulars of 
the police officials having his custody; arrestee, where he so requests be 
examined medically at the time of his arrest in case having major or 
minor injuries and the arrestee s hould be subjected to medical 
                                                           
99 AIR1997 SC 3017 

52 
 
examination within 48 hours of his detention; copies of Memo of arrest 
and all other documents be sent to the illaqa magistrates; arrestee may 
be permitted to meet his lawyer during interrogation and aforesaid 
information regarding arrest and custody shall be communicated to the 
police control room and shall also be displayed on a conspicuous notice 
board. 
 
5.24  The Court further observed : 
 
“failure to comply with the requirements hereinabove 
mentioned shall apart from rendering t he concerned official 
liable for departmental action, also render him liable to be 
punished for contempt of court and proceedings for 
contempt of court may be instituted in any high Court of 
the country having territorial jurisdiction over the matter.”  
 
5.26 These two requ irements flow from Articles 21 and  22 (1) of the 
Constitution and require strict adherence.  
 
5.26 In Rama Murthy  v. State of Karnataka , 100  the Supreme Court 
identified various issues facing prisons which required reforms and it 
included torture and ill-treatment.  
 
5.27 The Apex Court in the case of  Sube Singh v. State of 
Haryana 101  has taken note of custodial violence and third degree 
methods used by police during interrogation and  has discussed in detail 
the re asons behind such practice and has also suggested preventive 
measures as to how such violence can be tackled. The Court observed: 
 
“The expectation of quick results in high -profile or heinous 
crimes builds enormous pressure on the police to somehow 
‘catch’ the ‘offender’. The need to have q uick results tempts 
them to resort to third degree methods. They also tend to 
                                                           
100  AIR 1997 SC 1739. 
101 AIR 2006 SC 1117 

53 
 
arrest “someone” in a hurry on the basis of incomplete 
investigation, just to ease the pressure. ………The three 
wings of the Government should encourage, insist and 
ensure thorough  scientific investigation under proper legal 
procedures, followed by prompt and efficient prosecution.”  
 
5.28 The Court also issued certain directions for providing training 
reorientation courses for the change of mindset and the attitude of the 
police pe rsonnel, providing for supervision by superiors to prevent 
custodial violence, strict adherence to the directions issued by the court 
earlier in the case of D.K. Basu  (supra) and for investigation by 
independent agencies on the complaints for custodial vio lence by police 
personnel. 
  
5.29 In Raghubir Singh v. State of Haryana 102 , where the violence 
employed by the police to extract a confession resulted in death of a 
person suspected of theft, the court observed that  “We are deeply 
disturbed by the diabolical  recurrence of police torture resulting in terrible 
scare in the minds of common citizens that their lives and liberty are under 
a new peril when the guardians of law gore human rights to death. ”  The 
Court further observed that vulnerability of human righ ts assumes a 
traumatic, torturous poignancy, the violent violence is perpetrated by the 
police arm of the State whose function is to protect the citizen and not to 
commit gruesome offences against them. 
 
5.30 In State of U.P.  v. Ram Sagar Yadav ,103 the Supre me Court dealt 
with a case where the policemen murdered one Brijlal who not only 
refused to pay bribe of Rs.100 in a trivial matter of cattle trespass but 
also complained about demand of bribe to senior police officers. The 
Court observed that “Police officers alone and none else can give evidence 
as regards the circumstances in which a person in their custody comes to 
                                                           
102 AIR 1980 SC 1087 
103 AIR  1985 SC 416 

54 
 
receive injuries while in their custody ….. The result is that persons on 
whom atrocities are perpetrated by the police in the sanctum sanct orum of 
the police station are left without any evidence to prove who the offenders 
are.” The Court recommended that the “ law as to the burden of proof in 
such cases may be re -examined by the legislature so that handmaids of 
law and order do not use their authority and opportunities for oppressing 
the innocent citizens who look to them for protection.”   
 
5.31  The Supreme Court in the case of Prakash Kadam v. Ramprasad 
Vishwanath Gupta 104 , expressed its displeasure o n fake 
encounters.  Some police officers  and staff were engaged by private 
persons to kill their opponent. If the police personnel act as contract 
killers, there could be very strong apprehension in the mind of the 
witnesses about their own safety  that the police may kill the important 
witnesses or their relatives or  give threats to them at the time of trial of 
the case to save themselves. The protectors have become the predators. 
As the Bible says “ If the salt has lost its savour, wherewith shall it be 
salted?”, or  as it was said in ancient Rom e, “Who will guard the 
Praetorian guards?” The Court observed that in cases where a fake 
encounter is proved against  policemen in a trial, they must be given 
death sentence, treating it as the rarest of rare cases.   The policemen 
were warned that they will no t be excused for committing murder in the 
name of ‘encounter’ on the pretext that they were carrying out the orders 
of their superior officers or  politicians, however high. In the Nuremburg 
trials the Nazi war criminals took the plea that ‘orders are orde rs’, 
nevertheless they were hanged. If a policeman is given an illegal order by 
any superior to do a fake ‘encounter’, it is his duty to refuse to carry out 
such illegal order, otherwise he will be charged for murder, and  if found 
guilty sentenced to death.  
                                                           
104 (2011) 6 SCC 189 

55 
 
5.32 In Mehboob Batcha v. State,105 respondents policemen wrongfully 
confined one Nandagopal in police custody on suspicion of thef t from 
30.5.1992 till 2.6.1992 and beat him to death with lathis, and  also gang 
raped his wife Padmini in a barbaric manner . The accused also confined 
several other persons (who were witnesses) and beat them in the police 
station with lathis. The graphic description of the barbaric conduct of the 
accused in this case shocked the conscience of the Court and it observed 
that Pol icemen must learn how to behave as public servants in a 
democratic country, and not as oppressors of the people. 
 
5.33 In The State of Andhra Pradesh  v. N. Venu gopal,106 the Supreme 
Court held that there is no provision that authorise the police officers to 
torture the suspects during investigation/Trial or conviction. The Court 
held: 
 
‘The Court has to remember in this connection that an act is 
not “under” a provision of law merely because the point of 
time at which it is done coincides with the point of tim e 
when some act in the exercise of the powers granted by the 
provision or in performance of the duty imposed by it. To be 
able to say that an act is done “under” a provision of law, 
one must discover the existence of a reasonable relationship 
between the provisions and the act. In the absence of such a 
relation the act cannot be said to be done “under” the 
particular provision of law. 
The High Court fell into the error of thinking that whatever a 
police officer does to a person suspected of a crime at a tim e 
when the officer is engaged in investigating that crime 
should be held to be done in the discharge of his official duty 
to investigate and as such under the provisions of the law 
that imposed this duty on him. This view is wholly 
unwarranted in law.’ 
 
                                                           
105 (2011) 7 SCC 45 
106  AIR 1964 SC 33. 

56 
 
5.34 In Haricharan v. State of M.P, 107 Supreme Court reiterated that 
“life or personal liberty in Article 21 includes right to live with human 
dignity. Therefore, it also includes within itself guarantee against the 
torture and assault by the States or its functionaries.” The State 
mechanism must not be used for inflicting torture on people.  
 
5.35 In Nandini Satpathy v. P.L Dani  & Anr. 108, the Court held that not 
only physical threats or violence but psychological torture, atmospheric 
pressure, environmental coe rcion, tiring interrogation by police are 
violation of law. 
  
5.36 In Khatri & Ors v. State of Bihar (Bhagalpur Blinding case)109, which 
was an example of cruel and inhuman treatment to the prisoners which 
are ins ulting the spirit of Constitution and human v alues as well as 
Article 21. Supreme Court in this case dealt with the blinding of under -
trial prisoners by the police by piercing their eyeballs with needle and 
pouring acid in them. This case sh ows the pattern of torture and its 
implicit endorsement by the State. 
 
5.37 While commenting upon the aforesaid case, it has been observed 
that: “ Formidable problem in an alleged case of police torture is to 
establish the guilt of the perpetrators of violence.”110 This could be due to 
the situation where offenders are hand-in-glove with the local police and 
the absence of neutral witness.  
 
                                                           
107 (2011) 4 SCC 159 
108 AIR 1978 SC 1025 
109 AIR 1981 SC 928 
110 India’s Response against the act of Torture, available at: 
https://indialawyers.wordpress.com/2010/07/22/india%E2%80%99s-response-against-the-act-of-torture/ 
(visited on 26-10-2017). 

57 
 
5.38 In Bhagwan Singh & Anr . v. State Of Punjab 111 a case of death in 
police custody the Supreme Court observed that the interrogation does 
not mean inflicting injuries. “ Torturing a pers on and using third degree 
methods are of medieval nature and they are barbaric and contrary to law. 
The police would be accomplishing behind their closed doors precisely 
what the demands of our legal order forbid.” 
 
5.39 In Dagdu & Ors . v. State of Maharas htra112,  the Supreme Court 
observed: 
 
“If the custodians of law themselves indulge in committing 
crimes then no member of the society is safe and secure. If 
police officers who have to provide security and protection to 
the citizens indulge in such methods they are creating a 
sense of insecurity in the minds of the citizens. It is more 
heinous than a game-keeper becoming a poacher.” 
 
5.40 In Ram Lila Maidan Incident v. Home Secy, Union of India ,113  the 
Supreme Court held: 
“Article 355 of the Constitution prov ides that the 
Government of every State would act in accordance with the 
provisions of the Constitution. The primary task of the State 
is to provide security to all citizens without violating human 
dignity. Powers conferred upon the statutory authorities 
have to be, perforce, admitted. Nonetheless, the very essence 
of constitutionalist is also that no organ of the State may 
arrogate to itself powers beyond what is specified in the 
Constitution…..Therefore, every act which offends or impairs 
human dignity ta ntamounts to deprivation pro tanto of his 
right to live and the State action must be in accordance with 
reasonable, fair and just procedure established by law which 
stands the test of other fundamental rights.” 
 
                                                           
111 AIR 1992 SC 1689 
112  AIR 1977 SC 1579 
113 (2012) 5 SCC 1 

58 
 
5.41 In CBI v. Kishore Singh 114, a person was arrested without any 
compliant by constable Kishore Singh suspecting illicit relationship with 
one Smt. Gaj Kanwar, his relative. He was not only physically assaulted 
but his penis was chopped off with a sharp edged weapon. The Supreme 
Court while dealing with the appeal of the CBI against the order of 
reduction of sentence by the High Court and against acquittal of one 
accused observed that in a police station, there will be no witness except 
the policemen and the victim, since the police station is not a public 
place. The Court further observed: 
 
“In our opinion, the policemen who commit criminal acts 
deserve harsher punishment than other persons who 
commit such acts, because it is the duty of the policeman 
to protect the people and not break the law thems elves. If 
the protector becomes the predator society will cease to 
exist”  
 
5.42 In S. Nambi Narayan an v. Siby Mathews  & Ors. 115, the Supreme 
Court entertained a case in which a scientist of high repute had been 
taken into police custody without any justifyi ng cause. The Court 
observed that non -interference in such a case would give the police a 
long rope to take anyone into custody without a ny reason. Though the 
Investigating Officer has reached the age of superannuation, he was 
directed to be prosecuted. Si milar view was reiterated for inaction by the 
investigating agency in Murad Abdul Mulani v. Salma Babu Shaikh & 
Ors.116  
 
5.43 In Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra117, the Supreme Court laid 
down guidelines regarding arrest in general, and arrest of women i n 
particular. The Court directed that  four or five police lock -up should be 
                                                           
114 (2011) 6 SCC 369 
115 (2015) 14 SCC 664 
116 (2015) 14 SCC 543 
117 AIR 1983 SC 378 

59 
 
reserved for female suspects and they should be kept away from the male 
suspects and be guarded by female constables; interrogation of females 
should be carried out only in the pre sence of female police 
officers/constables; the District Judge would make surprise visits to 
police lock ups periodically with a view to providing the arrested persons 
an opportunity to air their grievances and ascertaining what are the 
conditions in the p olice lock ups and whether the requisite facilities are 
being provided and the provisions of law are being observed and the 
directions given by us are being carried out and the magistrate before 
whom an arrested person is produced shall enquire from the ar rested 
person whether he has any complaint of torture or mal -treatment in 
police custody and inform him that he has right under Section 54 of the 
CrPC 1973 to be medically examined.  
 
5.44 Therefore, it could be seen from the aforesaid judicial 
pronouncements that torture by a public servant or its implicit 
endorsement by the State have always been condemned by the Courts.  
Torture has been a contentious issue having a direct bearing on the right 
to life and liberty of an individual. The Commission is of th e opinion that 
such heinous acts must be curbed through strong legislation providing 
stringent punishment, which will act as a deterrent.   
  
5.45 Further, the Commissi on is of the view  that there has to be some 
effective mechanism to protect the interests  of the victims of torture, the 
complainants and the witnesses against ill-treatment, threats or physical 
and mental violence.  
 
 
  

60 
 
Chapter - VI 
Compensation for Custodial Torture / Death 
6.1 The doctrine of sovereign immunity – a concept of common law 
principle consistently followed in British jurisprudence in last several 
centuries that ‘King commits no wrong’ and, therefore, it was not 
possible to hold him guilty of personal negligence / misconduct, nor he 
could be held responsible for the negligence or misconduct of his 
servants.  The doctrine evolved on the principle of sovereignty that a 
State cannot be sued in its own court.118   
6.2 In P & O. Steam Navigation Co.  v. Secretary of State  for India -in-
Council119, the legal position as was explained:- 
"If a tortious act is committed by a public servant and it gives 
rise to a claim for damages, the question to ask is: was the 
tortious act committed by the public servant in discharge of 
statutory functions which are referable to, and ultimately 
based on, the del egation of the sovereign powers of the State 
of such public servant? If the answer is in the affirmative, the 
action for damages for loss caused by such tortious act will 
not lie. On the other hand, if the tortious act has been 
committed by a public servant in discharge of duties assigned 
to him not by virtue of the delegation of any sovereign power, 
an action for damages would lie. The act of the public servant 
committed by him during the course of his employment is, in 
this category of cases, an act of a servant who might have 
been employed by a private individual for the same purpose." 
6.3  The Law Commission of India, in its first Report (1956) titled 
“Liability of the State in Tort” observed that at the time of framing the 
Constitution the question as t o what extent, if any, the Union and the 
States should be made liable for the tortious acts of their servants or 
agents was left for future legislation. Thus, in the changed circumstances 
                                                           
118  Doctrine of Sovereign Immunity, available at:  http://www.neerajaarora.com/doctrine-of-sovereign-
immunity/ (visited on 26-10-2017). 
119 (1869) 5 Bom HCR App A-1 

61 
 
/ conditions, the country should also formulate suitable legislation .  The 
old distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign functions should no 
longer be involved to determine the liability of the State and therefore, 
State should be subjected to the general law liability for injuries caused 
to the citizens and also in case if the State employees commit wrong in 
discharge of their duties.   
6.4 In State of Rajasthan v. Vidyavati120, the claim for damages by the 
dependents of the person who died in an accident caused by the 
negligence of the driver of the Collector of Udaip ur was allowed by the 
Rajasthan High Court and the Supreme Court, rejecting the plea of 
sovereign immunity of the State, holding it liable for the tortious act of 
the driver like any other employer. 
6.5 However, in Kasturi Lal v. State of U.P. 121, the Supreme Court took 
a contrary view and the plea of sovereign immunity was upheld. In that  
case, a partner of the Kasturil al Raliaram Jain, a firm of jewellers of 
Amritsar was taken into custody by police in Meerut on the suspicion of 
possessing stolen property.  He stood released but the gold jewellery 
taken from him was not returned . The head constable in charge of the 
malkhana not only misappropriated the same but fled away to Pakistan. 
The firm claimed the recovery of ornaments or in the alternative for 
compensation. The Apex Court rejected the claim on the ground that the 
act was committed by the employees during the course of their 
employment which was in the characteristic of a sovereign power.  
6.6 In Rudal Shah v. State of Bihar 122, the Supreme Court taking a 
completely opposite stand, rejected the plea of sovereign immunity and 
                                                           
120 AIR 1952 SC 933 
121 AIR 1965 SC 1039 
122 AIR 1983 SC 1086 

62 
 
awarded the compensation , as the petitioner had been illegally detained 
in jail for over fourteen years, after his acquittal in full-dress trial.   
6.7 In State of Andhra Pradesh  v. Challa Ramakrishna Reddy 123, the 
Supreme Court affirmed the view taken by the Andhra Pradesh High 
Court that where the fundamental right of the citizen is violated, the plea 
of sovereign immunity would not be available.  The Court ruled:  
“The maxim that King  can do no wrong or that the Crown is 
not answerable in tort has no place in Indian jurisprudence 
where the power vests, not in the Crown, but in the people 
who elect their representatives to run the Government, which 
has to act in accordance with the prov isions of the 
Constitution and would be answerable to the people for any 
violation thereof.” 
6.8 In Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa & Ors. 124, the Supreme Court 
said:  
…….in a civil action but by way of compensation under the 
public law jurisdiction for t he wrong done, due to breach of 
public duty by the State of not protecting the fundamental 
right to life of the citizen. To repair the wrong done and give 
judicial redress for legal injury is a compulsion of judicial 
conscience. 
6.9 The UN General Assembly recognised the right of victims of crimes 
to receive compensation by passing a resolution titled “Declaration of 
Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, 
1985.” The relevant part thereof reads:  
11. Where public officials or ot her agents acting in an 
official or quasi - official capacity have violated national 
criminal laws, the victims should receive restitution from 
the State whose officials or agents were responsible for the 
harm inflicted. In cases where the Government under 
                                                           
123 AIR 2000 SC 2083 
124 AIR 1993 SC 1960 

63 
 
whose authority the victimizing act or omission occurred 
is no longer in existence, the State or Government 
successor in title should provide restitution to the victims.  
6.10 The UN General Assembly passed a resolution titled "Basic 
Principles and Guideli nes on the Right to a Remedy and 
Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International 
Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of International 
Humanitarian Law, 2005" which deals with the rights of victims 
of international crimes and human rights vi olations. The 
relevant part dealing with compensation reads: 
13. Compensation shall be provided for any economically 
Assessable damage resulting from violations of human 
rights or international humanitarian law, such as: 
(a) Physical or mental harm, includ ing pain, suffering and 
emotional distress; 
(b) Lost opportunities including education; 
(c) Material damages and loss of earnings, including loss of 
earning potential; 
(d) Harm to reputation or dignity; 
(e) Costs required for legal or expert assistance, me dicines 
and medical services." 
 
6.11 The Law Commission of India in its 41st Report (1969) titled 
‘Criminal Procedure Code, 1898’, discussed  Section 545  of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure of 1898 extensively and suggested: 
"46.12. Under Clause (b) of Sub -section (1) of  Section 545, 
the Court may direct "in the payment to any person of 
compensation for any loss or injury caused by the offence 
when substantial compensation is, in the opinion of the 
Court, recoverable by such person in a Civil Court." 
6.12 The 154th Law Commission Report (1996) on  the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 devoted an entire chapter to 'Victimology' in which the 

64 
 
growing emphasis on victim's rights in criminal trials was discussed 
extensively as under125: 
"1. Increasingly the attention of  criminologists, penologists 
and reformers of criminal justice system has been directed to 
victimology, control of victimization and protection of victims 
of crimes. Crimes often entail substantive harms to people 
and not merely symbolic harm to the social  order. 
Consequently the needs and rights of victims of crime should 
receive priority attention in the total response to crime. One 
recognized method of protection of victims is compensation to 
victims of crime. The needs of victims and their family are 
extensive and varied…. 
…..9.1 The principles of victimology has foundations in 
Indian constitutional jurisprudence. The provision on 
Fundamental Rights (Part III) and Directive Principles of State 
Policy (Part IV) form the bulwark for a new social order in 
which social and economic justice would blossom in the 
national life of the country (Article 38).  Article 41  mandates 
inter alia that the State shall make effective provisions for 
"securing the right to public assistance in cases of 
disablement and in other  cases of undeserved want." So 
also Article 51A makes it a fundamental duty of every Indian 
citizen, inter alia 'to have compassion for living creatures' and 
to 'develop humanism'. If emphatically interpreted and 
imaginatively expanded these provisions can  form the 
constitutional underpinnings for victimology.” 
6.13 At the time of accession to International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, 1966 (ICCPR) on 10 April 1979, India made a reservation 
to Article 9(5) - the provision on compensation stating that the Indian 
legal system does not recognise a right to compensation for victims of 
unlawful arrest or detention.  
6.14 In D.K. Basu  case 126  the Supreme Court held that since 
compensation was being directed by the courts to be paid by the State 
holding it  vicariously liable for the illegal acts of its officials the 
                                                           
125 See also: Suresh & Anr. v. State of Haryana , (2015) 2 SCC 227 
126 Supra 

65 
 
reservation to clause 9(5) of ICCPR by the Government of India had lost 
its relevance.  Thus a n enforceable right to compensation in case of 
"torture" including "mental torture" inflicted by the State or its agencies 
is now a part of the public law regime in India. 
6.15 In Ram Lakhan Singh  v. State of U.P 127, the Supreme Court dealt 
with a case under Article 32 of the constitution for compensation for loss 
of professional career, reputation, great m ental agony, heavy financial 
loss and defamation  - Illegal detention by respondent authorities after 
implicating petitioner, an Indian Forest Service officer in false vigilance 
cases at instance of the then Chief Minister of respondent State 
dishonouring the High Court Orders. 
6.16 The High Court had recorded the finding that the petitioner had 
illegally be en detained by the authorities after implicating him in false 
vigilance cases. It was a clear cut case of abuse of legal process. H e and 
his family members ha d to suffer a great mental agony and heavy 
financial loss besides being defamed in the society. The Supreme Court 
awarded him the compensation of Rs.10 lakhs observing: 
“12. In such a scenario, until and unless we maintain a 
fine balance between prosecutin g a guilty officer and 
protecting an innocent officer from vexatious, frivolous 
and mala fide prosecution, it would be very difficult for the 
public servant to discharge his duties in free and fair 
manner. The efficiency of a public servant demands that 
he should be free to perform his official duties fearlessly 
and without any favour. The dire necessity is to fill in the 
existing gap by protecting the honest officers while making 
the corrupt officers realize that they are not above law. The 
protection to an honest public servant is required not only 
in his interest but in the larger interest of society. This 
Court time and again extended assurance to the honest 
and sincere officers to perform their duty in a free and fair 
manner towards achieving a better society.” 
                                                           
127 (2015) 16 SCC 715 

66 
 
 
6.17 The Supreme Court, exercising its power under Article 32 and High 
Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution have awarded damages to 
the petitioners for the injuries suffered both on account of the tortious 
act of servants of the State and also on the ground that the State is liable 
to pay compensation for the violation of Fundamental Rights  of the 
victims.  A survey of the decided cases would reveal that the Court s in 
their judicial activist role adopted two ways to redress the victims of 
abuse of power by the public servants as palliative to the victims by way 
of right of compensation and to penalise the State for negligence of its 
servants.128 
 
6.18 The Supreme Court in the case of custodial torture while 
exercising jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution,  in Smt. 
Shakila Abdul Gafar Khan  v. Vasant Raghunath Dhoble ,129  directed the 
State Government to pay compensation of Rs.1,00,000/ - to the mother 
and children of the deceased. It was observed: 
‘This amount of compensation shall be as a palliative measure 
and does not preclude the affected person(s) from bringing a 
suit to recover appropriate damages from the State 
Government and its erring officials if such a remedy is 
available in law.’ 
6.19 While deciding the aforesaid case, the Court referred to a Queen’s 
Bench judgment in Jennison v. Backer,130 wherein it was observed: 
                                                           
128 Vide: State of Rajasthan v. Vidyawati, AIR 1962 SC 993; Basava Kaum D. Patil v. State of Mysore, 
AIR 1977 SC 1749; Veena Sethi v. State of Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 339; Bhim Singh v. State of J & K, 1983 
Supp. SCC 564; Sebastian M. Hongrav v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 571; Bhim Singh v. State of J&K, 
AIR 1986 SC 494; Saheli v. Commissioner of Police, A IR 1990 SC 513; Sube Singh v. State of Haryana & 
Ors., AIR 2006 SC 1117; and Dr. Mahmood Nayyar Azami v. State of Chattisgarh & Ors., AIR 2012 SC 
2573. 
129  AIR 2003 SC 4567. 
130  1972 (1) All E.R. 1006. 

67 
 
‘The law should not be seen to sit limbly, while those who 
defy it go free and, those who seek its protection lose hope.’ 
6.20 In Dr. Rini Johar  v. State of Madhya Pradesh 131 the Court held 
that arrest in violation of due procedure seriously jeopardise s the dignity 
of the person arrested and the law does not countenance abuse of power 
which causes pain and trauma. The court , after considering the facts , 
awarded a compensation of five lakh rupees. 
6.21 In State of Maharashtra  v. Christian Community Welfare Council of 
India 132 , the Supreme Court held that “ the question whether such 
compensation paid by the State can be recovered from the officers 
concerned will depend on the fact whether the alleged misdeeds by the 
officer concerned is committed in the course of the discharge of his lawful 
duties, beyond or in excess of the same which will have to be determined 
in a proper enquiry”. 
6.22 The Compensation has to be determined by the Court b y taking 
into consideration various aspects like the nature of injury caused; 
manner in which the injury is caused; the purpose for which the injury 
was inflicted; the extent to which the victim has suffered due to such 
injury.  The Court may also take int o consideration the nature of torture 
which could be physical, mental and psychological.  The Court will have 
to keep in mind the amount required by the victim for the follow up 
treatment of the injuries suffered and the amount which may be required 
for re habilitation of the victim to come out from the agony of torture.  
While undertaking this exercise of determining the compensation, the 
Court will have to keep in sight the socio -economic background of the 
victim which will be a determining factor while re aching to an amount of 
just and adequate compensation. 
                                                           
131 AIR 2016 SC 2679 
132 AIR 2004 SC 7 

68 
 
6.23 Thus it is evident that the Courts have rejected the plea of 
sovereign immunity, which contradicts the essence of law of torts. The 
law of torts  provides that liability follows negligence and the individuals 
and the States are responsible for the negligence of their agents / 
employees acting in the course of their employment.  Since the 
negligence / torture which are unlawful and opposed to Article 21 of the 
Constitution, and since the statutory co ncept of sovereign immunity 
cannot overri de the constitutional mandate, the claim for violation of 
fundamental rights by the statutory authorities or their agents is not 
acceptable.  Such authorities, therefore, cannot claim sovereign 
immunity. 
  

69 
 
Chapter – VII 
Recommendations 
7.1 While deciding on as to what amounts to torture  by a public 
servant, the Commission has suggested definition of ‘torture’ wide 
enough to include inflicting injury, either intentionally or involuntarily, 
or even an attempt to cause such an injury, which will include physical, 
mental or psychological injury.  Based on the analysis of various aspects 
of torture, the Commission has prepared a draft Bill titled “The 
Prevention of Torture Bill, 2017”, which is annexed to this Report.  On 
the basis of the conclusions drawn from the foregoing chapters, the 
Commission makes the following recommendations:  
 
(i) Ratification of Convention against Torture 
 
7.2 In order to tide over the difficulties faced by the Country in getting 
criminals extradited, in the absence of an anti-torture law; and to secure 
an individual’s right to life and liberty,  the Commission recommends 
consideration of the Convention Against Torture for ratification and in 
the event, the Central Government decides to ratify the  Convention, then 
the Bill placed at Annexure may be considered.  
 
(ii) Amendment to Existing Statutes 
 
7.3 The Commission has analysed the existing legal provisions in 
Chapter IV.  The Commission has come to the conclusion that the 
Criminal Procedure Code , 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
require amendments to accommodate provisions regarding compensation 
and burden of proof, respectively.  
a. Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 
7.4 The Commission recommends amendment to section 357B to 
incorporate payment of compensation, in addition to payment of fine , as 

70 
 
provided under section 326A or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code , 
1860. 
b.  Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
7.5 The Commission endorses the recommendation made by the Law 
Commission of India vide its Report No.113, and, as reiterated in Report 
No.152, that the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 requires insertion of section 
114B.  This will ensure that in case a person in police custody sustains 
injuries, it is presumed that those injuries have been inflicted by the  
police, and the burden of proof shall lie on the authority concerned to 
explain such injury. 
(iii) Punishment for acts of torture 
7.6 In order to curb the menace of torture and to have a deterrent 
effect on acts of torture, the Commission recommends strin gent 
punishment to the perpetrators of such acts.  The draft Bill annexed to 
this Report provides for punishment extending up to life imprisonment 
and fine. 
(iv) Compensation to Victims 
7.7 The Courts will decide upon a justiciable compensation after 
taking into account various facets of an individual case, such as nature, 
purpose, extent and manner of injury, including mental agony caused to 
the victim. The Courts will bear in mind the socio -economic background 
of the victim and will ensure that the compen sation so decided will 
suffice the victim to bear the expenses on medical treatment and 
rehabilitation.  
 
 

71 
 
(v) Protection of Victims, Complainants and Witnesses 
7.8 The Commission recommends that an effective mechanism must 
be put in place in order to prot ect the victims of torture, the 
complainants and the witnesses against possible threats, violence or ill 
treatment. 
 
 (vi)  Sovereign Immunity 
7.9 Going by the law of torts, which states ‘liability follows negligence’ 
the Commission is of the opinion that the State should own the 
responsibility for the injuries caused by it s agents  on citizens , and 
principle of sovereign immunity cannot override the rights assured by the 
Constitution. While dealing with the plea of sovereign immunity, the 
Courts will have to bear in mind that it is the citizens who are entitled for 
fundamental rights, and not the agents of the State.   
7.10 In light of the aforesaid discussions, the Central Government may 
take a decision on the issue of ratification of the Convention, and in  case 
it is decided to go for ratification, then, the Prevention of Torture Bill, 
2017 appended to the Report may be considered. 
The Commission recommends accordingly. 
  


72 
 
  
Annexure 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE PREVENTION OF TORTURE BILL, 2017 
 
A 
BILL 
 
to provide for punishment for torture, other cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment inflicted by public 
servants or any person with the consent or 
acquiescence of any public servant ; to protect the 
interest of the victims, complainants and witnesses 
from all kinds of ill-treatment and to compensate 
the victim suitably , and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto;. 
 
 WHEREAS clause (3) o f article 20, article 21 
and clauses (1) and (2) of article 22 of the 
Constitution and other existing laws provide for 
protection of persons from torture, other cruel, 
inhuman and degrading treatment; 
 
 AND WHEREAS India has signed the 
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or  Degrading Treatment or Punishment 
[adopted by General Assembly of the UN on 10 th 
December, 1984 (Resolution No.39/46)] (known as 
the UN Convention against Torture) on October 14, 
1997: 
 
 AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to 
provide for effective implementation of the 
Convention; 
 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -
eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: 
 

73 
 
 
 CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
   
 1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of 
Torture Act, 2017. 
 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as 
the Central Government may, by notifica tion 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.   
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 
1860. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,- 
(a) any reference in this Act to any enactment or 
any provision thereof shall in any area in 
which such en actment or provision is not in 
force be construed as a reference to the 
corresponding law or the relevant provision 
of the corresponding law, if any, in force in 
that area; 
 
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules 
made under this Act; and 
 
(c) words and expressions used in this Act shall 
have the same meanings respectively 
assigned to them in the Indian Penal Code. 
 
 
Definitions. 
 CHAPTER II  
 TORTURE AND PUNISHMENT  
   
 3. Whoever, being a public servant or being 
abetted by such servant or with the consent or 
acquiescence of the public servant,-   
 
(a) intentionally inflicts on a person, or 
(b) voluntarily causes to inflict on a person,-  
 
What amounts to torture. 
 (i) grievous hurt ; or  
 (ii) danger to life, limb or health ; or  
 (iii)severe or prolonge d pain or suffering, 
whether physical or mental, caused to such 
person by cruel, inhuman and degrading 
treatment; or 
(iv) death, 
 
 

74 
 
 for such purposes as obtaining from him or a 
third person information or a confession, 
punishing him for an act he or a thi rd person 
has committed or is suspected of having 
committed, or intimidate s or coerce s him or a 
third person, 
 
 
 commits the offence of torture: 
 
 
 Provided that nothing contained in this section 
shall apply to any pain or suffering arising from 
or cause d by, inherent in or incidental to any 
act committed in accordance with the procedure 
established by law: 
 
 
 Provided further that where torture in custody 
of a public servant is proved, the burden of 
proving that the torture was not intentionally 
caused or, abetted by or was not with the 
consent or acquiescence of such public servant, 
shall shift to the public servant. 
 
 
 
 
45 of 
1860. 
Explanation I.-  For the purposes of this section, 
“public servant” shall, without prejudice to 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 also 
include any person acting in his official capacity 
under the Central Government or the State 
Government. 
 
Explanation II. - It is hereby clarified that the 
expression ‘torture’ shall include any intentional 
act resulting in concealment  or covering up of 
the offence committed under this section. 
 
Explanation III. - A mere mental agony or 
tension arising due to coercion shall not 
constitute the offence of torture.   
 
 
 
 4. (1) Where the public servant referred to in 
section 3 or any perso n abetted by or with the 
consent or acquiescence of such public servant, 
tortures or attempts to torture any person, for 
the purpose of extorting from him or from any 
other person interested in him, any confession 
or any information which may lead to the 
detection of an offence, such public servant or 
person shall be punishable with imprisonment 
of either description  for a term which may 
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to 
Punishment for torture. 

75 
 
fine.   
 
 (2) Where death of any person is cause d due to 
torture, the person committing the offence shall 
be punishable with death or imprisonment for 
life and shall also be liable to fine. 
 
 
 (3) The fine imposed under this section shall be 
just and reasonable to meet the medical 
expenses and rehabilitation of the victim. 
 
 
 (4) Any fine imposed under this section shall be 
paid to the victim. 
 
(5) In addition to the fine imposed under sub -
section (3), the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, shall pay such 
adequate compensation including interim 
compensation for the rehabilitation of the 
victim, as may be determined by the court, and 
in case of erring public servant the 
compensation so paid shall be recoverable from 
such public servant, after holding an enquiry. 
 
   
  
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 MISCELLANEOUS 
 
 
 5. (1)   Every offence under this Act shall be 
tried by the Court of Sessions. 
 
(2)  For the purpose of providing speedy trial, 
the Court of Sessions shall, as expeditiously as 
possible, on a day to day basis , make an 
endeavour to conclude the trial within a period 
of one year from the date of cognizance of the 
offence. 
Cognizance of offences 
and trial. 
   
 
2 of 1974. 
 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no court 
shall take cogniz ance of an offence under this 
Act unless the complaint is made within a 
period of six months from the date on which the 
offence is alleged to have been committed: 
 
Provided that the court may on sufficient 
grounds being shown, condone the delay in 
filing t he complaint beyond the said period of 
six months. 
Cognizance of Offences. 

76 
 
   
   
 (2) Where the victim of torture is disabled for 
reasons of health, financial incapacity or 
otherwise he may cause a complaint to be filed 
by a duly authorised representative. 
 
 
 (3) Every complaint under this Act shall be 
registered by the police in accordance with law. 
 
 
 (4) A complaint against torture shall be 
investigated by such officer not below the rank 
of Deputy Superintendent of P olice or the 
corresponding rank i n any investigative agency 
as would ensure independent investigation  
under the supervision of the Superintendent of 
Police. 
 
 
 (5) The investigation shall be completed within a 
period of three months from the date of making 
of the complaint. 
 
   
 7. (1)  No court shall take cognizance of an 
offence punishable under this Act, alleged to 
have been committed by a public servant while 
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of 
his official duty. except with the previous 
sanction of- 
Previous sanction 
necessary for 
prosecution. 
   
 (a) in the case of a person, who is employed in 
connection with the affairs of the Union and 
is not removable from his office save by or 
with the sanction of the Central 
Government, of that Government by an 
officer in the rank of Secretary to the 
Government of India; 
 
 (b) in the case of  a person, who is employed in 
connection with the affairs of  a State and is 
not removable from his office save by or with 
the sanction of the Government, of that 
Government by an officer in the rank of 
Secretary to the State Government: 
 
 (c) in the case of any other person, the 
authority competent to remove him from his 
office: 
 
   
 Provided that the decision regarding the grant of 
sanction to prosecute the offending public 
servant shall be taken not later than three 
months from the date of application therefore, 
 

77 
 
failing which the sanction to prosecute shall be 
deemed to have been granted: 
   
 Provided further that the sanction for 
prosecution shall not be refused by the 
Government or the competent authority, as the 
case may be, except for reasons to be recorded 
in writing. 
 
   
 (2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the 
Government or the competent authority, as the 
case may be, under this section may prefer an 
appeal to the High Court within ninety days 
from the date of the decision in such form and 
manner and accompanied by such fee s as may 
be prescribed. 
 
   
 (3) The High Court shall endeavour to dispose of 
the appeal as early as possible, preferably 
within a period of one year  from the da te of its 
filing. 
 
   
 8. For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that the fact that any act constituting 
an offence under this Act  was committed - 
Presumptions. 
 (a) at a time when there was a State of war, 
threat of war or where a proclamation  of 
emergency was in operation; or 
 
 (b) on an order of a superior officer or public 
authority,  
 
  
shall not be a defence to such offence. 
 
   
 9. (1) It shall be the duty and responsibility of 
the State Government to make arrangements for 
the protection of victims of torture, 
complainants and witnesses against all kinds of 
ill-treatment, violence, threats of violence, or 
physical harm or mental trauma  or the 
recurrence of torture. 
 
Protection of victims, 
complainants and 
witnesses. 
 (2) The protection under sub-section (1) shall be 
provided from the time of submission of the 
complaint to the conclusion of the trial and 
thereafter till such time as the State 
Government is reasonably satisfied that such 
protection is no longer required.  
  
 
 (3) The protec tion under sub -section (1) shall 
include necessary provision for providing 
 

78 
 
physical security to the victims, complainants 
and witnesses. 
 
 (4) The State Government shall inform the 
concerned Court about the protection provided 
to any victim, complainant or witness under 
this section and the court shall periodically 
review the need of protection being offered to 
the complainants, victims and witnesses under 
this section and pass appropriate orders in this 
behalf. 
 
 
 (5) The State shall ensure proper medic al 
examination of every person remanded to 
custody in jail and the report of such medical 
examination shall be transmitted to the 
concerned trial court. 
 
 
 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
 
 
 
 
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything  contained in 
sub-section (3) of s ection 378 of th e Code  of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, an appeal shall lie to 
the High Court against an order of the Court of 
Sessions granting or refusing bail.  
 
(2)  Nothing in section 438 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply in relation 
to any case involvi ng the arrest of any public 
servant on an accusation of having committed 
an offence under this Act. 
 
 
Provisions relating to 
bail. 
   
 11. The provisions of this Act shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the  time being in 
force and, in case of any inconsistency, the 
provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect 
on the provisions of any such law to the extent 
of the inconsistency. 
Act not in derogation of 
any other law. 
   
 12. (1) The Central Governme nt may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
Power to make rules. 
   
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules 
may provide for all or any of the fo llowing 
matters, namely:- 
 
 (a) steps required for prevention of cases of 
torture: 
 
 (b) involvement of civil society and steps for 
ensuring  civil treatment to prisoners 
 

79 
 
consistent with their human rights: 
 (c) manner of training of law enforcement 
personnel, civil or military or medical 
personnel,  public officials and other persons 
who may be involved in the custody, 
interrogation or treatment of any individual 
subject to any form of arrest, detention or 
imprisonment: 
 
 (d) Monitoring of police custody;  
 (e) Impartial and prompt investigation 
procedures; 
 
 (f) The form and manner in which an appeal 
maybe preferred and the fee which shall 
accompany such memorandums of appeal 
under sub-section (2) of section 7; 
 
 (g) Assistance, where necessary, in  filing 
complaints of torture; 
 
 (h) Procedure relating to payment of 
compensation to victims; 
 
 (i) any other matter in respect of which rules 
is required to be made under this Act. 
 
 (3) Every rule made under this section shall be 
laid, as soon as may  be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case ma y be; so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.  
 
 
   
 CHAPTER IV  
 AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF 
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
 
   
2 of 1974. 12.  In the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
for section 357B, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-  
 
Substitution of new 
section for section 357B. 
 
 
45 of 
“357B. - The compensation payable by the State 
Government under section 357A and sub -
section (5) of section 4 of the Prevention of 
Compensation to be in 
addition to fine under 
section 326A or section 

80 
 
1860. Torture Act, 2017, shall be in addition to the 
payment of fine to the victim under section 
326A or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code 
or under sub-section (4) of section 4 of the said 
Act. 
376D of Indian Penal 
Code or under section 4 
of the Prevention of 
Torture Act, 2017. 
  
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, 
the expression “victim” shall be construed as 
defined in clause (wa) of section 2.”. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV  
AMENDMENTS TO  
THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872 
 
 
 
1 of 1872. 
 
13. In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, after 
section 114A, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:  
 
 
Insertion of new section 
114B. 
  
“114-B. (1) In a prosecution of a police officer for 
an offence constituted by an act alleged to have 
caused death or bodily injury to a person, if 
there is evidence that the death or injury was 
caused during a period when that person was in 
the custody of the police, the court may 
presume that the death or injury was caused by 
the police officer having custody of that person 
during that period.  
(2) The court, in deciding whether or not it 
should draw a presumption under sub -section 
(1), shall have regard to all the relevant 
circumstances including, in particular,  
(a) the period of custody,  
(b) any statement made by the victim as to how 
the injuries were received, being a 
statement admissible in evidence,  
(c) the evidence of any medical practitioner who 
might have examined the victim, and  
(d) evidence of any magistrate who might have 
recorded the victim’s statement or attempted to 
record it.” 
 
 
 
Shift of burden of proof. 
 