   
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
Report No. 275 
 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK: BCCI vis-à-vis RIGHT TO 
INFORMATION ACT, 2005 
 
 
 
 
April, 2018


 
i 
 
 


 
ii 
 
 


 
iii 
 
Report No. 275 
 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK: BCCI vis-à-vis RIGHT TO 
INFORMATION ACT, 2005 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapters Title Pages 
I Background 1-23 
A. A Brief History of Cricket in India 1 
B. History of BCCI 3 
C. Evolution of the Right to Information 
(RTI) in India 
5 
(a) Right to Information Laws in 
States 
9 
1) Tamil Nadu  9 
2) Goa 10 
3) Madhya Pradesh 12 
4) Rajasthan 13 
5) Karnataka 14 
6) Maharashtra 15 
7) Delhi 16 
8) Uttar Pradesh 17 
9) Jammu & Kashmir 17 
10) Assam 18 
(b) RTI Movement – social and 
national milieu 
19 
II Reference to Commission and Reports 
of Various Committees 
24-30 
A. NCRWC Report, 2002 24 
B. 179th Report of the Law Commission 
of India, 2001 
26 
C. Report of the Pranab Mukherjee 
Committee, 2001 
26 
D. Report of the Working Group for 
Drafting of the National Sports 
Development Bill 2013 
27 
E. Lodha Committee Report, 2016 
 
28 

 
iv 
 
III Concept of State under Article 12 of the 
Constitution of India - Analysis of the 
term ‘Other authorities’ 
 
31-36 
IV RTI – Human Rights Perspective 37-55 
a. Right to Information as a Human 
Right 
38 
- Constitutional position 40 
b. Application to Private Entities 44 
(i) State Responsibility 45 
(ii) Duties of Private Bodies 46 
c. Human Rights and Sports 
 
48 
V Perusal of the terms “Public Authority” 
and “Public Functions” and 
“Substantially financed” 
56-82 
1. Public Authority 56 
a. National Perspective 56 
b. International Perspective 58 
c. Interpretation of the word 
‘includes’ 
61 
d. Interpretation of the word 
‘control’ 
64 
2. Public Functions 67 
a. National Perspective 67 
b. International Perspective 70 
3. Substantially Financed 
 
71 
VI Analysis of the Legal Status of BCCI
  
83-96 
- Whether BCCI sho uld be 
‘State’ within the meaning of 
Article 12? 
85 
- Minority view in the Zee 
Telefilms case 
86 
- BCCI – Performing ‘Public 
Functions’? 
91 
- BCCI – a National Sports 
Federation? 
93 
- BCCI – ‘Substantially 
Financed’ by the Government? 
94 

 
v 
 
VII Conclusions and Recommendations 
 
97-100 
 List of Cases 
 
101-107 
 List of Abbreviations 
 
108-110 
Annexures I.   MoA of BCCI 111 
 II. Reply of Hon’ble Minister of Youth 
Affairs and Sports  to unstarred 
question 2097 in the Lok Sabha 
117 
 III. Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, 
Department of Sports’ letter number 
F.No.36-2/2010-SP-II, dated March 
30, 2010 ‘Declaring National Sports 
Federations as Public Authority’ 
120 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
BACKGROUND 
 
A. A Brief History of Cricket in India 
1.1 As per the records, the game of c ricket was first played in 
India as early as in1721. The first club, i.e., the Calcutta Cricket 
Club, was established in 1792, on the site where Eden Gardens 
now stands, although its membership was restricted to 
Europeans only. Five years later, Bombay hosted the first match, 
wherein Indians commenced playing the game. At the end of the 
18th centu ry the Parsees took on the Eton Ramblers Cricket 
Club, and later in 1848, they formed the Orient Club.1 
 
1.2 In 1889 an amateur English team travelled to India. They  
played almost exclusively European teams, and their one defeat 
came against the Parsees. In 1892 , they returned and suffered 
two defeats in twenty games, again at the hands of  the Parsees. 
In January 1893, a  touring team led by Lord Hawke played 
against an All-India team, but the reality was that it was almost 
entirely made up of Europeans.2 
 
1.3 Maharaja Ranjit Singhji popularly known as Maharaja Jam 
Saheb (‘Ranji’) ruled, from 1907 to 1933, an Indian Princely state, 
the State of Nawanagar  in the Halar region  (presently Gujarat), 
located on the southern shores of the Gulf of Kutch. His success 
in the game in England inspired other fellow princes in India and 
consequently, they sent for coaches from England and spent huge 
                                                 
1Available at:  http://www.espncricinfo.com/india/content/story/261616.html (last vis ited on 
01-12-2017). 
2Available at: https://www.britannica.com/sports/cricket-sport (last visited on 01-12-2017). 

 
2 
 
sums to ensure that they could boast of the best facilities. In 
1907, the Hindus joined the Europeans and Parsees to make it a 
triangular competition and in 1912 , the Mohammedans also 
started to participate. An All-India side toured England in 1911, 
under the captaincy of Maharaja of Patiala ; and, by the late 
1920s, the performance of this side against an MCC XI  
(Marylebone Cricket Club)  led by Arthur Gilligan , led the ICC  
(International Cricket Council)  to believe that the All-India side 
might be ready to make a Test match debut.3 
 
1.4 One major hu rdle in this regard was the absence of a 
central governing body regulating the game  in India. This led to 
the creation of the BCCI in 1928. Thereafter, India made its first 
Test match debut in 1932 at Lord’s  under the captaincy of C.K. 
Nayudu. Ranji couldn’t play for India, as in his time India didn’t 
have a Test team. He had also dissuaded his nephew Duleep from 
playing for India . Many Indians had commented acerbically on 
Duleep’s preference for England over India. Nawab  Pataudi 
Senior at that time was pla ying for England and had scored a 
century against Australia. He showed his willingness to play for 
India which received an overwhelming support . On October 29, 
1934, Nawab Pataudi was voted Captain of the Indian team to 
tour England in 1936.4 
 
1.5 India registered its first Test victory against England  in 
1951-52, in  Madras. Subsequently, in 1983, at Lord’s C ricket 
Ground, India won its first Cricket World Cup (limited overs), and 
repeated the World Cup victory years later, in 2011 at Wankhede 
Stadium, Mumbai . In the Twenty20 format, India won the 
inaugural Twenty20 Cricket World Championship in 2007 , 
                                                 
3Ibid. 
4Mihir Bose, The Magic of Indian Cricket  149, 152 (Routledge – Taylor and Francis Group, 
New York, 2006). 

 
3 
 
followed by the ICC Champions Trophy  in 2013. By the end of 
twentieth century, India was ranked among the top-most cricket 
playing nations of the world , and contin ues to hold its place at 
the helm.  
 
B. History of BCCI 
 
1.6 The process of creation of BCCI started with two members 
of the Calcutta Cricket Club being  permitted by the Imperial 
Cricket Conference to attend the ICC meeting at Lord’s on 31st of 
May and 28th of July 1926. The permission was initially granted 
upon a condition that an administrative body for the control of 
cricket in India would soon be formed.5 
 
1.7 After the directive was issued by the ICC, a number of 
cricket bodies in India started interacting and di scussing about 
the formation of a central cricket body in India. All the c ricket 
associations of India agreed on the idea of a central 
administrative organization for the control of Cricket in India for 
improvement of the sport in the country.6 
 
1.8 On November 27, 1927, a group of 45 people representing 
various cricket associations located in different parts of India got 
together at the Rosh anara Club in Delhi to take some concrete 
initiatives towards the formation of such an association. A Board 
of Cricket Control was deemed essential to ensure the following:7 
• Arrange and control inter-territorial, foreign and 
other cricket matches. 
                                                 
5Available at: http://www.cci.gov.in/sites/default/files/612010_0.pdf (last visited on 06 -01-
2018). 
6Ibid. 
7Ibid. 

 
4 
 
• Make arrangements incidental to visits of teams 
to India, and to manage and control all -India 
representatives playing within and outside 
India. 
• If necessary, to control and arrange all or any 
inter-territorial disputes. 
• To settle disputes or differences between 
Associations affiliated to the Board and appeals 
referred to it by any such Associations. 
• To adopt if desirable, all rules or amendments 
passed by the Marylebone Cricket Club. 
 
1.9 Subsequently, in December of 1927, in a meeting at the 
Bombay Gymkhana, a unanimous decision was taken to form a 
'Provisional' Board of Control to represent cricket in India. The 
plan was for this 'Provisional' Board to cease to function as soon 
as the eight territorial cricket associations were created; and, that 
the r epresentatives of the eight associations would then come 
together to constitute the Board. 
 
1.10 However, by late 1928, only six ass ociations - Southern 
Punjab Cricket Association, Cricket Association of Bengal, Assam 
Cricket Association, Madras Cricket Association and Northern 
India Cricket Association - had been formed.8 
 
1.11 The Provisional Board then met in Mumbai in December 
1928, during the Quadrangular tournament to discuss the next 
course of action. It was at this meeting that the decision to form 
a proper board for control of cricket in India was taken , and 
subsequently, BCCI was established. Five months later after its 
                                                 
8Ibid. 

 
5 
 
establishment, BCCI was admitted by the ICC as a ‘Full Member’ 
representing India.9 
 
1.12 BCCI is registered as a society under the Tamil Nadu 
Societies Registration Act, 1975. It is headquartered in Mumbai, 
and is the central governing body regulating the game of cricket  
in India, inter alia selecting the national team for international 
cricket tournaments, as is done by other National Sports 
Federations for their respective sports. 
 
C. Evolution of the Right to Information (RTI)in India 
1.13 James Madison , the late American  President, once 
remarked, 
A popular Government, without popular information 
or the means for obtaining it, is but a Prologue to 
Farce or Tragedy or perhaps both. Knowledge will 
for ever govern ignorance and a people who meant 
to be their own governors must arm themselves with 
the power knowledge gives.  
 
1.14 This quote demonstrates exactly how crucial it is for the 
populace to be armed with tool of knowledge if they desire to be 
self-governed. The Supreme  Court gave recognition to the 
citizen’s right to inform ation as part of the right to freedom of 
speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution 
of India. This in-turn meant that right to information was subject 
to reasonable restrictions enunciated in Article 19(2) of the 
Constitution viz sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of 
the State, friendly relations with Foreign States, public order, 
decency or morality, contempt of court, defamation or incitement 
                                                 
9Available at: http://www.bcci.tv/about/2017/history (last visited on 05 -12-2017); Findings of 
the Director General, reported in Sh. Surinder Singh Barmi  v. Board for Control of Cricket in 
India (BCCI), Case No.61/2010, decided by the Competition Commission of India , on 08-02-
2013, available at: supra note 6. 

 
6 
 
to an offence.  The Constitutional jurisprudence that led to the 
recognition of this right, is traced to the following catena of cases. 
 
1.15 In the case of Bennet Coleman& Co. v. Union of India,10 the 
Apex Court remarked: 
 
It is indisputable that by freedom of the press meant 
the right of all citizens to speak, publish and express 
their views’ and ‘freedom of speech and expression’ 
includes within its compass the right of all citizens 
to read and be informed. 
 
1.16 In the case of State of Uttar Pradesh v. Raj Narain & Ors.,11 
the respondent had asked for the documents pertaining to the 
security arrangements and the expenses incurred on the then 
Prime Minister. The Supreme Court while maintain ing a fine 
balance between public security and public interest observed that 
while there are strong arguments for the former, the Executive 
cannot be given exclusive power to determine what matters may 
prejudice the latter. Once considerations of national security are 
concluded there are few matters that cannot be safely made 
publicly available. Justice K.K. Mathew, observed: 
In a government of responsibility like ours, where all 
the agents of the public must be responsible for their 
conduct, there can be but few secrets. The people of 
this country have a right to know every public act, 
everything that is done in a public way, by their 
public functionaries… 
 
1.17 In the case of S.P. Gupta  v. Union of India ,12 Justice 
Bhagwati, observed that an open Government directly emanates 
from the right to know which is implicit in the right of free speech 
and expression. Therefore, the disclosure of information in regard 
                                                 
10 AIR 1973 SC 106. 
11 AIR 1975 SC 865. 
12 AIR 1982 SC 149. 

 
7 
 
to the functioning of the Government must be the rule and 
secrecy an exception.  
 
1.18 In the case of Secretary, Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, Government of India & Ors. v. Cricket Association of 
Bengal & Ors.,13 the Apex Court held that: 
 
The freedom of speech and expression includes the 
right to acquire information and to disseminate it. 
Freedom of speech and expression is necessary for 
self-fulfilment. It enables people to contribute to 
debate on social and moral issues. It is the best way 
to find a trues t model of anything, since it is only 
through it that the widest possible range of ideas 
can circulate. It is the only vehicle of political 
discourse so essential to democracy....the right to 
freedom of speech and expression also includes the 
right to educate, to inform and to entertain and also 
the right to be educated, informed and 
entertained…True democracy cannot exist unless all 
citizens have a right to participate in the affairs of 
the polity of the country. The right to participate in 
the affairs of the country is meaningless unless the 
citizens are well informed  on all sides of the 
issues…One sided information, disinformation, 
misinformation and non -information all equally 
create an uninformed citizenry which makes 
democracy a farce when medium of in formation is 
monopolised either by a partisan central authority 
or by private individuals or oligarchic 
organisations… 
 
1.19 In the case of Dinesh Trivedi, MP & Ors. v. Union of India & 
Ors.,14 while dealing with the Vohra Committee Report  on the 
criminalisation of politics and of the nexus among criminals, 
politicians and bureaucrats in India , the Supreme Court 
observed: 
 
                                                 
13 AIR 1995 SC 1236. 
14 (1997) 4 SCC 306. 

 
8 
 
In modern Constitutional democracies, it is 
axiomatic that citizens have a right to know about 
the affairs of the Government which, having bee n 
elected by them, seeks to formulate sound policies 
of governance aimed at their welfare. However, like 
all other rights, even this right has recognized 
limitations; it is, by no means, absolute. 
 
1.20 The Court further stated that, though it is not advisable to 
make public the basis on which certain conclusions are arrived 
at in that report, the conclusion so reached, should be examined 
by a new body of institution. The Court added that, i t is now 
recognised that while a public servant may be subject to a duty  
of confidentiality, this duty does not extend to remaining silent 
regarding corruption of other public servants. Society is entitled 
to know and public interest is better served if corruption or 
maladministration is exposed.15 
 
1.21 In the case of People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) & Anr. 
v. Union of India ,16 while dealing with the right to information 
provided under section 33A of the Repr esentation of the People 
Act, 1951, the Supreme Court held that right to information is a 
fundamental right and that t his right, vested in a voter/citizen, 
is adequately safeguarded under the aforementioned provision of 
the said Act. 
 
1.22 In the case of People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) & Anr. 
v. Union of India,17 the Supreme Court made an observation that 
keeping with  the spirit of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, 1948 (UDHR), the Preamble of the Constitution embodies 
a solemn resolve of its people to secure, inter alia, to its citizens, 
liberty of thought and expression; The Court further observed:  
 
                                                 
15Ibid. 
16AIR 2003 SC 2363. 
17 AIR 2004 SC 1442. 

 
9 
 
In purs uance of this supreme objective Article 
19(1)(a) guarantees to the citizens, the right to 
“freedom of speech and expression” as one of the 
fundamental rights listed in Part III of the 
Constitution. These rights have been advisedly set 
out in broad terms leaving scope for expansion and 
adaptation, through interpretation, to the changing 
needs and evolving notions of a free society. 
 
1.23 The Court added that right to information is a facet of 
“freedom of speech and expression” as contained in Article 
19(1)(a) and is thus indisputably a fundamental right. 
 
1.24 A reading of these cases, among others, makes it clear that 
right to information is indi sputably a corollary of freedom of  
speech and expression, and thereby a fundamental right 
guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution of India. Moreover, 
it is apparent that right to information has become an imperative 
in a democratic set-up such as that of India.  
 
(a) Right to Information Laws in States 
1.25 Prior to the ‘right to information ’ debate at the national  
stage, there were several States which had proactively enacted 
their respective ‘right to information’ laws. Some of these State-
made laws  have been repealed by the State Governments in 
favour of the Central Act, while others continue to co -exist with 
the Central RTI  Act, with supplemental rules regarding fees, 
appeals and other procedural requirements. Some of the 
prominent State made RTI laws are discussed below: 
 
1) Tamil Nadu 
1.26 Tamil Nadu was the first Indian State to enact its own right 
to information law in the form of Tamil Nadu Right to Information 
Act, 1997. Section 2(3) of the Act defines information as: 

 
10 
 
‘Information’ includes copy of any document relating 
to the affairs of the State or any  local or other 
authorities constituted under any [A]ct for the time 
being in force or a statutory authority or a company, 
corporation or a co -operative society or any 
organisation owned or controlled by the 
Government. 
 
1.27 It should be noted that this is an inclusive definition.  The 
definition makes no mention of ‘funding ’ provided by the 
Government, ‘substantial’ or otherwise. The Act does not provide 
for a judicial forum for hearing appeals and lays down that appeal 
can be made to the Government or such other authority as may 
be notified by the Government.18It contains twenty-one categories 
of information that are excluded from the purview of the Act , 
seriously dampening its effect. There is no provision providing for 
offences or penalty. The State Act runs concurrently with the 
Central Act. The State Government  has constituted a State 
Information Commission and prescribed Rules for accessing 
information under the RTI Act 2005. 
 
2) Goa 
1.28 Goa was the next State to have its own right to information 
legislation. The Goa Right to Information Act, 1997, in its long 
title emphasi ses the need for transparency in Governmental 
actions and to achieve this object, the consequent enablement of 
every citizen to get information from the Government.  
1.29 Under section 2(c) of this Act,  “information” has been 
defined to mean, 
 
any material or information relating to the affairs of 
the State or any local or other authorities constituted 
                                                 
18 Section 4. 

 
11 
 
under any enactment passed by the  Legislative 
Assembly of Goa for the time being in force or a 
Statutory Authority or a  Company, Corporation, 
Trust, Firm, Society or a Co-operative Society, or any 
Organisation funded or controlled by the 
Government or executing any public work or 
service on behalf of or as authorised by the 
Government.[emphasis added]. 
 
1.30 It should be noted that the Act does not use the word 
‘substantially’ before the word funded. Additionally, any entity 
executing public work or service on behalf of or on authorisation 
of the Government would be liable to provide information under 
the Act. The words ‘public work or service’ as well as ‘authorised 
by the Government’ are not defined and are consequently, open 
to interpretation. 
 
1.31 Section 2(d) defines the ‘Right to Information’ while section 
3 guarantees this right.19 Section 5 of this Act provides for a few 
categories of information excluded from the purv iew of right to 
information viz matters relating to sovereignty and integrity of 
India or security of State, trade and commercial secrets, personal 
information etc.  Reasons for denial of information are to be 
recorded in writing. Section 6 of the Act furth er provides that if 
any person is aggrieved by an order of the Competent Authority 
as to the refusal of any information, they can appeal to the 
Administrative Tribunal, constituted under the Goa 
Administrative Tribunal Act.  
 
1.32 This Act runs concurrently with the Central RTI Act. 
 
                                                 
19 Section 2(d) – “Right to Information means the Right to access to information and includes 
the inspection of works, documents, records, taking notes and extracts and obtaining certified 
copies of documents or records, or taking samples of material.” 
Section 3 - “Right to Information- Subject to the provisions of this Act, every citizen shall have 
right to obtain information from a Competent Authority.” 

 
12 
 
3) Madhya Pradesh 
 
1.33 The State passed the Right to Information Bill in March 
1998, but the Presidential assent was refused and so the Bill did 
not come into force. However, Executive Orders on the Right to 
Information are operational in nearly fifty departments.20 
 
1.34 While the Executive Orders  were operational , the State  
Assembly enacted the Madhya Pradesh Jankari Ki Swatantrata  
Adhiniyam, 2002  (The “MP Act”) , on January 24, 2003 ,which 
received the assent of the Governor and on January 31, 2 003 it 
was published in the Official Gazette. On passing of the Central 
Act, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 27 ,the State 
Government issued Madhya Pradesh Right to Information (Fees 
and Appeal) Rules, 2005.. 
 
1.35 Section 2(b) of the MP Act defines ‘public body’ to mean “(i) 
all offices of the State Government, (ii) all local authorities and 
statutory authorities constituted under any Act of the State 
Legislature for the time being in force and all Companies. 
Corporations and Cooperative Societies  in which not less than 
fifty one percent of the paid-up share capital is held by the State 
Government.” The definition enumerates eight exclusions as 
well.21It can be observed that the definition is exhaustive. 
 
1.36 Section 4 of the  MP Act lists seven categories of 
information, which are outside its scope. Section 6 provides that 
                                                 
20Available at: http://www.humanrightsinitiative.org/content/state-level-rti-madhya-pradesh 
(last visited on 21-12-2017) 
21 “(i) Offices of the Central Governor [sic – Government] situated in Madhya Pradesh, (ii) any 
establishment of the Armed forces or Central para Military forces in the state of Madhya 
Pradesh, (iii) corporations owned by the Central  Government, (iv) religious organisations, (v) 
the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha, (vi) the High Court of Madhya Pradesh and other Courts of 
Law including Tribunals, and other Organisations which have the Status of Courts and whose 
proceedings are deemed to be judicial proceedings, (vii) the Secretariat of the Governor of 
Madhya Pradesh, (viii) the office of the Lokayukt.” 

 
13 
 
the designated  officer may also reject a request for supply of 
information on seven additional grounds (information sought is 
too general in nature, is already available publicly, rela tes to 
‘secret’ or ‘confidential matters’, is vague etc.).  
 
1.37 Section 7 provides for procedures for an appeal to the State 
Government or an appellate authority appointed by the State 
Government. Section 8 provides that if the designated officer fails 
to supply the desired information when the appellate authority 
has directed him to do so, a penalty maybe imposed on him. 
 
4) Rajasthan 
1.38 The Legislative Assembly passed the Rajasthan Right to 
Information Act, 2000. The Act defines ‘public body’ in section 
2(iv) as: 
(a) offices of all local bodies and other authorities 
constituted under any  enactment of the 
Rajasthan State Legislature for the time being in 
force; or 
(b) any other statutory authority constituted by the 
State Government under any  law for the time 
being in force; or 
(c) a Government Company/ corporation 
incorporated under the Companies  Act 1956 
(Central Act No. 1 of 1956) in which not less than 
fifty-one percent of the paid -up share capital is 
held by the State Government or a  trust 
established by the State Gove rnment under any 
law for the time being  in force and controlled by 
it; or 
(d) a Society or a Co -operative Society or any 
other organisation established under any 
law for the time-being in force, by the State 
Government and directly controlled or 
funded by it[emphasis added]; or 
(e) any other body, which may be receiving 
substantial financial assistance from the 
State Government , as may be specified by 

 
14 
 
notification in the Official  Gazette for the 
purposes of this Act [emphasis added]; 
 
1.39 It should be noted here that this Act, even though predating 
the Central Act by five years, talks about the financial linkage of 
a body or entity with the Government. Meaning thereby, that if a 
body or entity is connected in such a manner, it would be deemed 
to be a public body. 
 
1.40 Section 5 of the Act provides for ten categories of 
information, which are not covered under  the ‘right’ to 
information guaranteed in section 3 of the Act.  Sections 6 and 7 
deal with appeals. Under these sections one internal appeal and 
one appeal to an independent body are provided for. 
 
1.41 Section 12-A of the Act deals with suo moto disclosure of 
the information by the State Government and public bodies as it 
may consider appropriate in public interest. 
 
1.42 Here too, the State Act runs concurrently with the Central 
Act. 
 
5) Karnataka 
 
1.43 Karnataka Right to Information Act, 2000 (now repealed) 
received the assent of the Governor on the December  10, 2000. 
Section 2(b) of this Act defined “information” to mean information 
relating to any matter in respect of the affairs of th e 
administration or decisions of a public authority. Section 4(2) of 
the Act contained eight sub-clauses dealing with exemptions from 
disclosable category of information . This Act also contain ed a 
penalty clause and provide d for an appeal to an independent  
tribunal.  

 
15 
 
 
1.44 This Act was repealed on October 17, 2005  by an 
Ordinance. The State Government is implementing the RTI Act 
2005. The Government has also issued the Karnataka Right to 
Information Rules 2005 modelled on the Central Government's 
Rules. 
 
6) Maharashtra 
 
1.45 The Maharashtra Right to Information Act, 2000 (repealed 
by Right to Information Ordinance, 2002) had only nine sections. 
Section 3(2) of the said Act provided for twenty-two categories of 
information not required to be disclosed  in line with the Tamil 
Nadu Act.22Section 2(3) of the Act defined ‘information’ to include 
“a copy of any document relating to the affairs of the State or any 
local or other authorities constituted under any Act for the time 
being in force or a statutory authority or a company, corporation 
or a co-operative society or any organization, owned or controlled 
by the Government.” 
 
1.46 It may be noted that no criterion for financial linkage, to 
determine the relationship between the State and private 
entities, was mentioned in the aforesaid definition. [emphasis 
added]This Act neither had any provisions for providing 
information proactively nor any penalties for withholding 
information.  
 
1.47 In 2002, the State Government passed Maharashtra Right 
to Information Act, 2002, after persistent eff orts of a campaign 
headed by social activist Shri Anna Hazare. However, after the 
coming into force of the Central RTI Act, the Government repealed 
                                                 
22 Section 3(2). 

 
16 
 
the Maharashtra Right to Information Act, 2002 , by the 
Maharashtra Right to Information (Repeal) Act, 2005. 
 
1.48 The Government then issued the Right to Information 
Rules, 2005 , in exercise of the powers conferred on the State 
Governments under section 27(2) of RTI Act 2005 , providing for 
the appeals procedure , payment of fees  along with other 
procedural details. 
 
7) Delhi 
 
1.49 In 1999 -2000, a Working Group suggested  for having a  
legislation along the lines of the Goa Act. 23Thereafter, t he 
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
passed the Delhi Right to Information Act in 2001. Section 2(4) of 
this Act defines ‘information’ to mean: 
 
“any material or information relating to the affairs of the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi except matters with 
respect to entries 1,2 and 18 of the State List and entries 
64, 65 and 66 of that list in so far as they relate to the 
said entries 1,2 and 18 embodied in the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution.” 
 
1.50 Section 2(7) defines ‘public authority’ as  
 
“any authority or body established or constituted (a) 
by or under the Constitution, (b) by any law made 
by the Govern ment and includes any other body 
owned, controlled or substantially financed by 
funds provided directly or indirectly by the 
Government[emphasis added].” 
 
                                                 
23Available at : http://www.humanrightsinitiative.org/content/state-level-rti-delhi (last visited 
on 06-01-2018). 

 
17 
 
1.51 Section 6 of the Act  contains standard exclusions from 
disclosable category of information and provides for a procedure 
for filing of appeals, under section 7. 
 
1.52 The Act runs concurrently with the Central RTI Act. 
 
8) Uttar Pradesh  
1.53 Uttar Pradesh Government  issued Executive Orders 
establishing a ‘Code of Practice on Access to Information’ on April 
3, 2000. However, after the passing of the Central RTI Act, the 
State Government started implementing the  Central Act. The 
State Government then issued the Uttar Pradesh Right to 
Information (Regulation of Fees and Costs) Rules, 2006, and the 
Uttar Pradesh State Information Commission (Appeal Procedure) 
Rules, 2006; but in 2016,both these rules were superseded and 
replaced by the Uttar Pradesh Right to Information  Rules, 2015.   
9) Jammu and Kashmir 
 
1.54 In Jammu and Kashmir, the Jammu and Kashmir Right to 
Information Act, 2003 (notified in the Government Gazette on 7 
January 2004), was replaced by the Jammu and Kashmir Right 
to Information Act, 2009 , which received the Governor’s assent 
on March 20, 2009. The State Government also published the 
Jammu and Kashmir Right t o Information Rules, 2009 on July 
20, 2009. 
 
1.55 Due to the special constitutional status of the State, the 
Central Act is not applicable here, however, the definitions of the 

 
18 
 
terms “information”24 and “public authority” 25 are akin to the 
Central Act. 
10) Assam 
1.56 The Assam Right to Information Act, 2001, received the 
assent of the Governor on May 1, 2002 and was notified on May 
7, 2002. The term ‘information’ is defined under section 2(c) of 
the Act to mean and include “information relating to any matter 
in respect of the affairs of the administration or decisions of  the 
State Government or a Public Authority.” However, the definition 
excludes “any such information the  publication of which has 
been prohibited by any law for the time being in force or by any  
notification issued by the State Government  from time to time 
under this Act.” 
1.57 Section 2(e) of the Act gives a detailed definition of “public 
authority”. It provides: 
Public Authority means and includes the officer of- 
 
(i) all local bodies and other aut horities constituted 
by the State Government under any law for the time 
being in force; or 
 
(ii) a Government Company or corporation  
incorporated under the Companies Act 1956 in  
which not less than fifty one percent of the paid  up 
share capital is held by the State  Government, or 
other State Government  undertakings, 
organizations or institutions  financed either wholly 
or partly and owned, or  controlled by the State 
Government or any other  company, corporation, 
undertaking or institution  in which the State 
Government stands guarantor in respect of any loan 
or financial advance  availed of by such company 
corporation, institution, organization or undertaking, 
as the case may be; or 
 
(iii) a co -operative society or any other society, a 
                                                 
24 Section 2(d). 
25 Section 2(f). 

 
19 
 
trust or any other organiz ation or institution  
established under any law for the time being in force 
by the State Government and directly  controlled or 
funded by it; or 
 
(iv) any body, authority, institution, organization, 
agency or instrumentally including the District Rural 
Development Agencies,  funded either wholly or 
partly by the State Government; and, 
 
(v) any other body, authority institution or  
organization receiving substantial financial  
assistance from the State Government as may be  
notified by the State Government from  time to time 
for the purposes of this Act; 
 
1.58 Certain exceptions to ‘Public Authority’ are also provided in 
the aforesaid definition.26The State Act runs concurrently with 
the Central Act, and soon after the passing of the Central Act, the 
State Government started implementing the latter as well . The 
State Government issued Assam Right to Information Fee Rules, 
2005 in the exercise of powers conferred by the Central Act. 
 
(b) RTI Movement – social and national milieu 
1.59 The beginning of RTI movement in India a t the grassroot 
level can be attributed to the persistent efforts of organisations 
such as Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan  (MKSS). Talking 
specifically about MKSS, formed in 1990, its vigorous efforts in 
the area of minimum wages, right to information in ru ral 
Rajasthan, and other forms of human rights related activities, 
mobilised the Government of Rajasthan to ultimately enact the 
                                                 
26 “(i) the offices of the Central Government; (ii) any establishment of the armed forces or 
central para-military forces; (iii) any body or corporation owned or controlled by the Central 
Government; (iv) the High Court of Assam and other [C]ourts of Law including the Tribunals 
and other organization which has the status of a Court whose proceedings are deemed to be the 
judicial proceedings; (v) the Secretariat of the Government of Assam; (vi) the Secretariat of the 
Assam Legislative Assembly and (vii) any office, body or authority as may be notified by the 
State Government.” 

 
20 
 
Rajasthan Right to Information Act, 1999 which came into force 
in June 2000.   
 
1.60 The burgeoning demand for right to information led by civil 
society organisations coupled with the demand for repeal of the 
Official Secrets Act, 1923, could not be ignored by the decision -
makers. Consequently, the first major draft legislation was 
circulated by the Press Council of India in 1996.  This draft 
legislation affirmed the right of every citizen to information from 
any public body, and that ‘public body’ included not only the 
State as defined under Article 12 of the Constitution but also all 
undertakings, non -statutory authorities, companies, 
corporations, societies, trust-firms or cooperative societies owned 
or controlled by private individuals and institutions whose 
activities affect the public interest, effectively bringing both, the 
corporate sector and the NGOs within the purview of the 
proposed legislation.27 
 
1.61 The Government of India, subsequently, constituted a 
Working Group on Right to Information and Promotion of Open 
and Transparent Government under the Chairmanship of Sri 
H.D. Shourie . The Working Group was asked to examine the 
feasibility and the need for having a full -fledged Right to 
Information Act or its introduction in a phased manner to meet 
the needs of open and responsive governance and also examine 
the framework of rules with reference to the Civil Services 
(Conduct) Rules and  Manual of Office Procedure. The Working 
Group submitted its report in May 1997 along with a draft 
Freedom of Information Bill. The draft Bill enabled the authorities 
to withhold such information, the disclosure of which would not 
subserve any public interest. It further narrowed the definition of 
                                                 
27Sudhir Naib, The Right to Information Act, 2005 – A Handbook 24-26 (Oxford University 
Press, New Delhi, 2011). 

 
21 
 
public authority by excluding private sector and those NGOs that 
were not substantially funded or controlled by the Government , 
watering down quite a few of the positive aspects of the draft 
circulated by the Press Council of India.28 After deliberations, the 
Freedom of Information Act, 2002 was passed by the Parliament, 
which received the assent of the President in 2003. However, 
since this Act was never notified in the Official Gazette, it could 
not be enforced. In retrospect, it was realised that this Act could 
not have fulfilled the aspirations of the public.  
 
1.62 The National Commission to Review the Working of the 
Constitution (NCRWC), under the Chairmanship of former Chief 
Justice of India, Justice M.N. Venkatchaliah, submitted its report 
dated 31st March 2002. It identified the right to information as a 
fundamental right, and also stated that the major assumption 
behind a new style of governance is the citizen’s access to 
information. The Report added that, much of the common man’s 
distress and helplessness could be traced to lack of his access to 
information and knowledge of the decision -making processes. It 
was further stated that the Government must assume a major 
responsibility and mobilise skills to ensure flow of information to 
the citizens. The traditional insistence on secrecy should be 
discarded. In fact, we should have an oath of transparency in 
place of an oath of secrecy. Administration should become 
transparent and participatory , minimising manipulativ e and 
dilatory tactics of the babudom, and most importantly putting a 
considerable check on graft and corruption.29 
 
1.63 The Common Minimum Programme  of the UPA 
Government promised to make a law on right to information that 
                                                 
28Id. at 26. 
29The Report of NCRWC, referred in J.N. Barowalia, Commentary on the Right to Information 
Act, 2005 8(Universal Law Publishing Co., New Delhi, 3rdedn., 2012). 

 
22 
 
would be  more progressive, participat ory and meaningful.  The 
Government set up a National Advisory Council which suggested 
significant amendments to the Freedom of Information Act which 
prompted the repeal of this Act and the drafting of the Right to 
Information Bill de novo. The RTI Bill was  tabled before the Lok 
Sabha on 23 rd December 2004 but was later on referred to the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. The final Report of the 
Standing Committee was tabled before the Lok Sabha on March 
21, 2005.30 The Bill was passed by both Houses of the Parliament 
in May 2005 and received assent of the President on 15 th June 
2005. The RTI Act came into force on 12th October 2005 with the 
issuance of notification and its publication in the Official Gazette. 
 
1.64 It has been aptly remarked that, law is a regulat or of 
human conduct. 31 However, no law can effectively serve its  
purpose unless it is accepted by the society and has an equally 
effective enforcement mechanism backing it up.  Acceptance by 
the society automatically follows when the conduct of the 
decision-makers themselves reflects integrity, transparency and 
accountability in actions affecting public interest.  
 
1.65 The onus of protecting this interest ultimately rests on the 
shoulders of the Government whose duty it is , to look after the 
welfare of the people. Where a society has chosen democracy over 
any other form of governance it is evident that the citizens want 
transparency in the conduct of those  who are in a position to 
affect their interests. Such citizens may at any given point in time 
call upon the stakeholders to be accountable for their actions and 
in that scenario the Government of those elected from among the 
citizenry itself has few options except to come up with a 
                                                 
30 Sri Suresh Pachouri, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions and Minister of State in the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs; Lok Sabha Debate on 
Right to Information Bill, 10th May 2005 at 351. 
31J.N. Barowalia, supra note 30 at 5. 

 
23 
 
mechanism to accommodate that demand.  It can be clearly 
observed from the perusal of the slew of Supreme Court decisions 
as well as from the genesis and evolution of the RTI Act, 2005, 
that the right of the populace to know and be informed has been 
considered to be a  sacrosanct right for the smooth working of 
democracy in India. 
  

 
24 
 
CHAPTER II 
REFERENCE TO COMMISSION AND REPORTS OF VARIOUS 
COMMITTEES 
2.1 The Supreme Court, in the Cricket Association of Bihar  
case, made reference to the Law Commission of India to examine 
the issue of bringing BCCI under the purview of the RTI Act, 2005 
and make pertinent recommendations to the Government. 
 
2.2 It is trite that the right to information has been considered 
as a sine qua non to the right to freedom of speech and expression 
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. There have 
been quite a f ew Commissions and Committees that have made 
valuable suggestions with regard to a better translation of this 
right within the framework of the Constitution itself as well as in 
independent statutes. 
 
2.3 In this regard, the Report of National Commission to Review 
the Working of the Constitution, 2002 (NCRWC) merits foremost 
attention. 
 
A. NCRWC Report, 200232 
2.4 Under Chapter 3 of this Report, certain amendments to 
fundamental rights were suggested.  
 
2.5 Regarding the definition of ‘State’ it was averred that –  
Fundamental rights guaranteed by the 
Constitution are, in the absence of specific 
constitutional provisions, mainly enforceable 
against ‘the State’. The definition of 'the State' in 
Article 12 being an ‘inclusive’ one, courts have 
ruled that where there is pervas ive or 
predominant governmental control or significant 
involve­ment in its activity, such bodies, entities 
                                                 
32Vide the Report of NCRWC under the Chairmanship of Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah, 31 -03-
2002. 

 
25 
 
and organizations fall within the definition of ‘the 
State’. 
It is recommended that in Article 12 of the 
Constitution, the following Explanation should be 
added: - 
Explanation – In this A rticle, the expression 
“other authorities” shall include any person in 
relation to such of its function s which are of a 
public nature. 
 
2.6 It was further recommended that Article 19(1)(a) must be 
amended to expressly incl ude the freedom of press and other 
media, the freedom to hold opinion and to seek, receive and 
impart information and ideas. It was also proposed to amend 
Article 19(2) adding a further restriction on disclosure of 
information received in confidence except  if required in public 
interest. 
 
2.7 NCRWC recommended that Articles 19(1)(a) and 19(2) be 
amended to read as follows: 
Art. 19(1) All citizens shall have the right - 
(a) to freedom of speech and expression which 
shall include the freedom of the press and other 
media, the freedom to hold opinions and to seek, 
receive and impart information and ideas. 
19(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall 
affect the operation of any existing law, or 
prevent the State from making any law, in so far 
as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on 
the exercise of the right conferred by the said 
sub-clause in the interests of the sovereignty 
and integrity of India, the security of the State, 
friendly relations with foreign States, public 
order, decency or morality, or in  relation to 
contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an 
offence, or preventing the disclo sure of 
information received in confidence except wh en 
required in public interest. 

 
26 
 
 
2.8 As can be observed, the NCRWC advised to include within 
the scope of other authorities – any person in relation to such of 
its functions which are of a public nature, thus expanding the 
ambit of application of Article 19(1)(a) , and simultaneously 
making the right to information enforceable against such bodies 
whose functions are in the nature of public functions.  
 
B. 179th Report of the Law Commission of India, 200133 
 
2.9 Chapter IV of this Report dealt with aspects related to right 
to information as included within the scope of right to freedom of 
speech and expression. The Report discussed several cases which 
reaffirmed that the right to information is a fundamental right 
under the Constitution. 
 
2.10 It should be noted that the timing of submission of this 
Report coincided with the time when the re was mobilisation of 
thought and resources regarding the Freedom of Information Bill, 
2000. 
 
C. Report of the Pranab Mukherjee Committee, 2001 
 
2.11 A Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, 
known as the Pranab Mukherjee Committee, 2001 , was 
appointed to review and examine the Freedom of Information Bill, 
2000. 
 
2.12 The Committee heard the representatives of 
Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), Dr.Madhav  
                                                 
33 Under the chairmanship of Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy, submitted on 14-12-2001. 

 
27 
 
Godbole, former Union Home Secretary, Shri A.G. Noorani, 
Senior Advocate and Prof.  Manubhai Shah, Managing Trustee, 
Consumer Education and Research Society (CERS), in its meeting 
held on 24 January 2001 . On 8 February 2001, it heard the 
representatives of the Mazdoor  Kisan Shakti Sangathan and 
Justice P.B. Sawant, Chairman, Press Council of India. In 
addition to this, the Committee received written suggestions from 
Shri B.G. Deshmukh, former Cabinet Secretary. These 
individuals and organisations put forward several suggestions 
and amendments. The Committee forwarded the views of these 
experts/organisations to the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions for its comments. The Committee itself 
was of the view that many of these important suggestions were 
not covered in the Bill, and that the Government should consider 
and incorporate them to make the Bill more comprehensive.34 
 
D. Report o f the Working Group for Drafting of the 
National Sports Development Bill 2013 
 
2.13 To look into the issue of transparency and good governance 
in National Sports Federations (NSFs), Ministry of Sports 
established a working group under the chairmanship of Justice  
(Retd.) Mukul  Mudgal. The group also comprised of various 
sports administrators, legal experts, and eminent sportspersons 
like Abhinav  Bindra and former India hockey skipper Viren  
Rasquinha. The group prepared and submitted a draft bill titled 
the ‘National Sports Development Bill , 2013’ to the Ministry  in 
the July 2013.  
 
                                                 
34 Report of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, 
Seventy-Eighth Report on Freedom of Information Bill, 2000, presented before the Rajya Sabha 
on 25th July, 2001, laid on the table of the Lok Sabha on 25th July, 2001 , available 
at:http://164.100.47.5/rs/book2/reports/home_aff/78threport.htm (last visited on 04-01-2018). 

 
28 
 
2.14 This draft Bill made various suggestions including setting 
up of an Appellate Sports Tribunal and a Sports Election 
Commission; however, noteworthy from the context of this Report 
was the proposed Chapter IX ‘Applicability of Right to Information 
Act, 2005’; which inter alia provided for all the National Sports 
Federations to be deemed to be public authorities under section 
2(h) of RTI Act, 2005, requiring them to perform their duties and 
discharge their functions in terms of the said Act. 
 
E. Lodha Committee Report, 201635 
 
2.15 It is true that there exist measures to ensure a certain level 
of transparency and accountability in the functioning of societies 
in India, but then these measures have proved to be inadequate 
to effectively combat corruption and other irregularities that have 
made their way into the mode of operation of these societies . 
Taking this into consideration t he Supreme Court appointed a 
Committee comprising of Justice R.M.Lodha, former Chief 
Justice of India, Justice Ashok Bhan, Justice R.V.Raveendran, 
former Judge s of the Supreme Court . This Committee  was 
mandated inter alia  to examine and make suitable 
recommendations to the BCCI for reforms in its practices and 
procedures and n ecessary amendments in the Memorandum of 
Association and Rules & Regulations. 
 
2.16 The Committee prepared and distributed a questionnaire 
containing a hundred and thirty-five questions under eight 
different heads such as organisation, structure and leadership ; 
audit, accounts and finances ; oversight and transparency et c. 
The Committee also conducted over thirty-five days of sittings in 
                                                 
35 Report of the Supreme Court Committee on Reforms in Cricket  (also known as the ‘Lodha 
Committee Report’), available at: 
http://www.gujaratcricketassociation.com/file-manager/lodha/Lodha_Committee_Report.pdf 
(last visited on 08-12-2017). 

 
29 
 
Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai, Kolkata, Hyderabad and New Delhi 
interacting with seventy-four persons around India including 
Former Captains, International and First-Class Players, Coaches, 
Managers, Administrators, Journalists , Talent scouts, Authors, 
Lawyers, Club Owners, Selectors and also a former Chief Justice 
of a High Court . Additionally, the Committee e xtensively 
examined media reports, documentaries, other published 
material, draft legislation, books and articles, alongwith several 
“unsolicited (but always welcome) missives from cricket fans, 
local experts and administrators about how maladministration is 
rife in all parts of the country.” 
 
2.17 The Committee made the following key recommendations: 
 The Legislature must “seriously consider” bringing BCCI 
under the purview of the RTI Act. 
 There should be  a Steering Committee headed by former 
Home Secretary G.K. Pillai with former national cricketers, 
Mohinder Amarnath, Diana Eduljiand Anil Kumble  as 
members.  
 The term of an office bearer of BCCI shall not be of more 
than 3 years. 
 An office bearer can have a maximum of three terms in all. 
 No office bearer shall have consecutive terms. There shall 
be a cooling-off period at the end of each term. 
 There should be a separate governing body for the IPL. 
 Players and BCCI officials should disclose their assets to 
the Board as a measure to ensure they do not bet. 
 In the interest of democratic r epresentations of states, i t 
proposed ‘One State – One Member – One Vote’. Also, no 
proxy voting of individuals should be permitted. 
 No BCCI office -bearer should be Minister or government 
servant. 
 

 
30 
 
2.18 The Lodha Committee was aware that its recommendations 
would most likely invoke varied responses from stakeholders, but 
it believed that, with the Supreme Court of India feeling need to 
step-in to restore the game of cricket in India to its pristine glory, 
stern steps recommended by the Committee were inevitable. 
 
2.19 Thus, it can be seen that the issue s revolving around the 
right to information,  lack of transparency and accountability 
within various sectors of public importance, have been discussed 
time and again. The legal status of the bodies representing these 
sectors has been a moot question. Consequently, invoking the 
writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, in 
the matter concerning actions of these bodies  or inactions 
thereof, has become the order of the day.  
  

 
31 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
CONCEPT OF STATE UNDER ARTICLE 12 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION 
 
3.1 Article 12 of the Constitution of India over the decades, 
been the subject matter of great interpretational exercise. There 
have been many deliberations on the scope and extent of the term 
‘State’ defined in this Article. 
 
3.2 The Article reads as follows: 
In this [P]art, unless the context otherwise requires, 
‘the State’ includes the Government and the 
Parliament of India and the Government and the 
Legislature of each of the States and all local or other 
authorities within the territory of India or under the 
control of the Government of India. 
 
3.3 This definition was initially considered as exhaustive and 
limited to authorities stipulated under this Article and those that 
could be read ejusdem generis. Till the year 1967, the Courts had 
taken the view that even statutory bodies, Universities, Selection 
Committees for admissions to Government Colleges were not 
“other authorities” for the purpose of this Article.  
 
3.4 However, this position changed when a Constitution Bench 
of the Supreme Court in Rajasthan State Electricity Board, Jaipur 
v. Mohan Lal,36(Rajasthan State Electricity Board case) interpreted 
the term ‘other authorities’ to include all Constitutional and 
Statutory bodies on whom powers were conferred by law and it 
was held that it is not at all material that some of the powers 
                                                 
36 AIR 1967 SC 1857. 

 
32 
 
conferred were for the purpose of carrying on activities that were 
commercial in nature. 
 
3.5 Even after this new , expanded scope  of the term ‘other 
authorities’, in 1969, the Apex Court once again examin ing the 
said term, pronounced that a company incorporated under the 
Companies Act was outside the purview of ‘State’ as it was not 
formed statutorily and was not subject to discharge any statutory 
duty.37 
 
3.6 But then in 1975, a nother Constitution Bench of the  
Supreme Court, in the case of Sukhdev Singh  v. Bhagatram 
Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi ,38(Sukhdev Singh  case) when faced 
with the question of status of public corporations, such as, Oil 
&Natural Gas Commission (ONGC), the Industrial Finance 
Corporation(IFC) and the Life Insurance Corporation  of India 
(LIC), set up by  the statutes for commercial purposes , whether 
can be included in the term ‘other authorities’ within the meaning 
of Article 12.The Court answered the same in the affirmative, and 
made the following observations: 
The concept of State has undergone drastic changes 
in recent years. Today State cannot be conceived of 
simply as a coercive machinery wielding the 
thunderbolt of authority. It has to be viewed mainly 
as a service corporation…A State is an abst ract 
entity. It can only act through the instrumentality or 
agency of natural or juridical persons. Therefore, 
there is nothing strange in the notion of the state 
acting through a corporation and making it an 
agency or instrumentality of the State…The 
governing power wherever located must be subject 
to the fundamental Constitutional limitations. The 
need to subject the power centers to the control of 
Constitution require an expansion of the concept of 
State action…the ultimate question which is relevant 
for our purpose is whether such a corporation is an 
                                                 
37Praga Tools Corporation v. C.V. Imanual, AIR 1969 SC 1306. 
38 AIR 1975 SC 1331. 

 
33 
 
agency or instrumentality of the government for 
carrying on a business for the benefit of the public. 
In other words, the question is, for whose benefit 
was the corporation carrying on the business? 
 
3.7 A speci al mention is required to be made of the case of 
Sabhajit Tewary v. Union of India ,39(Sabhajit Tewary case), 
decided on the same day as the Sukhdev Singh case, where the 
Apex Court took a contrary view holding that the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial R esearch (CSIR) was not ‘other 
authority’ for the following reasons – (a) that it did not have a 
statutory character like ONGC, LIC or IFC but was merely a 
society incorporated in accordance with the provisions of 
Societies Registration Act; and (b) that the employees of CSIR did 
not enjoy the protection available to government servants as 
contemplated under Article 311 of the Constitution.  
 
3.8 Later in 1978, i n the case of Bangalore Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board  v. A. Rajappa ,40while dealing with the terms 
‘regal’ and ‘sovereign’ functions, the  Supreme Court held that 
such terms are used to define the term ‘governmental’ functions, 
despite the fact that there are difficulties that arise while giving 
such a meaning to the said terms, for the reason that the 
government has entered the field of industry. Th us, only such 
services should be excluded from the sphere of industry, by 
necessary implication, which are governed by separate rules and 
Constitutional provisions such as Articles 310 and 311.  
 
                                                 
39 AIR 1975 SC 1329. 
40 AIR 1978 SC 548. 

 
34 
 
3.9 Thereafter in the landmark decision of Ramana Dayaram 
Shetty v. International Airports Authority of India ,41(International 
Airports Authority case) the Supreme Court held as under: 
A corporation may be created in one of two ways. It 
may be either established by statute or incorporated 
under a law such as the Companies Act 1956 or the 
Societies Registration Act 1860. Where a 
Corporation is wholly controlled by Government not 
only in its policy making but also in carrying out the 
functions entrusted to it by the law establishing it or 
by the Charter of its incorporation, there can be no 
doubt that it would be an instrumentality or agency 
of Government. But ordinarily where a corporation 
is established by statute, it is autonomous in its 
working, subject only to a provision, often times 
made, that it shall be bound by any directions that 
may be issued from time to time by Government in 
respect of policy matter. So also a corporation 
incorporated under law is managed by a board of 
directors or committee of management in accordance 
with the provisions of the statute under which it 
is incorporated. When does such a corporation 
become an instrumentality or agency of 
Government? Is the holding of the entire share 
capital of the Corporation by Government enough or 
is it necessary tha t in addition, there should be a 
certain amount of direct control exercised by 
Government and, if so, what should be the nature of 
such control? Should the functions which the 
corporation is charged to carry out possess any 
particular characteristic or feature, or is the 
nature or the functions immaterial? Now, one thing 
is clear that if the entire share capital of the 
corporation is held by Government, it would go a 
long way towards indicating that the corporation is 
an instrumentality or agency of Government. But, as 
is quite often the case, a corporation established by 
statute may have no shares or shareholders, in 
which case it would be a relevant factor to consider 
whether the administration is in the hands of a 
board of directors appointed by Government, though 
this consideration also may not be determinative, 
because even while the directors are appointed by 
Government, they may be completely free from 
governmental control in the discharge of their 
                                                 
41 AIR 1979 SC 1628. See also, K. Ramanathan v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1985 SC 660. 

 
35 
 
functions. What then are the tests to determine 
whether a corporation established by statute or 
incorporated under law is an instrumentality or 
agency of Government? It is not possible to 
formulate an all -inclusive or exhaustive test which 
would adequately answer this question 'there is no 
cut and dried formu la, which would provide the 
correct division of corporations into those which are 
instrumentalities or agencies of Government and 
those which are not. 
3.10 In the case of Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi,42 (Ajay 
Hasia case) where a Regional Engineering Col lege whose 
administration was carried on by a society registered under the 
Societies Act 1898, question arose as to whether it could fall 
under the definition of ‘State’ and thus be amenable to the writ 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32. I t was held 
by the Court that a society is not on the same footing as the 
Government of India or the Government of any State, so what 
remains to be seen is whether it would fall under the ambit of 
‘other authorities’.  The Court emphasised that the concept o f 
agency or instrumentality of the Government is not limited to a 
corporation created by a statute but is equally applicable to a 
company or a society and in each individual case it would have 
to be decided, on a consideration of relevant factors.  The Court 
laid down the relevant tests  to determine the existence of State 
agency or instrumentality,  relying on the International Airport 
Authority case, summarised as follows: 
 
1. If the entire share capital of the corporation is held by 
Government, it would go a long way towards indicating 
that the corporation is an instrumentality or agency of 
Government. 
2. Where the financial assistance of the State is so much 
as to meet almost entire expenditure  of the 
corporation, it would afford some indication of the 
corporation being  impregnated with  governmental 
character. 
                                                 
42 AIR 1981 SC 487. 

 
36 
 
3. Whether the corporation enjoys a monopoly status 
which is State conferred or State protected. 
4. Whether the State has  a ‘deep and pervasive’ control 
over it.  
5. If the functions of the entity are of public impor tance 
and closely related to governmental functions. 
6. If a department of Government itself is transferred to a 
corporation. 
 
3.11 The Court added that these tests were not conclusive or 
clinching but they were merely indicative indicia which have to 
be used with care and caution, while stressing the necessity of a 
wide meaning to be placed on the expression ‘other authorities’. 
 
3.12 In Pradeep Kumar Biswas  v. Indian Institute of Chemical 
Biology,43(Pradeep Kumar Biswas  case) the majority view had 
been that the tests l aid down in Ajay Hasia case were not rigid 
set of principles so that a body falling within one of them must be 
considered to be ‘State’. The question in each case would be 
whether on facts the body is financially, functionally, and 
administratively dominated by, or under the control of the 
Government. Additionally, such control must be pervasive. Mere 
regulatory control, whether statutory or otherwise is not 
sufficient. If these conditions are met, then a body can be called 
‘State’. In this case the decision rendered in Sabhajit Tewary case 
was overruled  and it was held by the majority that  CSIR was 
‘State’ within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution. 
  
                                                 
43 (2002) 5 SCC 111. See also, General Manager, Kisan  Sahkari Chini Mills Ltd., Sultanpur, 
Uttar Pradesh v. Satrughan Nishad, (2003) 8 SCC 639; Federal Bank Ltd.  v. Sagar Thomas, 
AIR 2003 SC 4325; G. Bassi Reddy  v. International Crops Research Institute , AIR 2003 SC 
1764. 

 
37 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RTI LAWS & SPORTS BODIES: HUMAN RIGHTS 
PERSPECTIVE 
 
4.1 Globally, sports have influenced different aspects of human 
life ranging from physical and mental well -being, professional 
employment, interpersonal relationship development, acting as a 
social bridge between diverse races and communities to even 
acting as an arrow in the quiver of statecr aft. The relation 
between human existence and sports is uniquely intricate ; and, 
what, therefore, inevitably ensues, is the interplay of sports with 
human rights. 
 
4.2 The dicta of human rights, being universal in its 
application, cannot be discounted by sport ing organisations. 
Restrictions on the free flow of information erodes the cardinal 
democratic values enshrined in the Constitution of India. Denial 
of information aids the abuse of power by select ed segments of 
the society by excluding the masses politica lly, socially and 
economically. The concept of human development is directly 
linked to human rights. A rights -based approach demands 
participation in governance and development, which guaranteed 
access to information can provide.44 
 
4.3 Sports bodies even thoug h traditionally autonomous, are 
gradually being brought into the fold of regulation due to the 
monopoly status of these bodies, their scale and intrinsic public 
nature of their functions. Rampant malpractices in these entities 
and related issues broadly de note the need for application of 
                                                 
44Available 
at:http://www.humanrightsinitiative.org/programs/ai/rti/india/articles/RTI%20as%20a%20Hu
man%20Right%20and%20Developments%20in%20India.pdf (last visited on 02-01-2018). 

 
38 
 
human rights law to these bodies. However, an impediment faced 
in this regard is the understanding of how human rights can be 
enforced against private bodies, including sports federations.   
 
4.4 This chapter would reflect on t his firstly by elucidating on 
right to information as a human right, secondly by examining the 
principles governing the  application of human rights law to 
private bodies, and thirdly by examining human rights in the 
context of sports.  
a. Right to Information as a Human Right 
 
4.5 The existence of a right to have access to government 
information is increasingly accepted around the world, both at 
the domestic and international levels. With countries such as 
Mexico and Paraguay designating the ‘right to information’ as the 
“human right of access to information”. At the domestic level, a 
right to information was seen to be finding its place in the 
Constitutional law of several nations, and since the early 1990s, 
there has been a huge upsurge in the number of States adopting 
Freedom of Information laws.45 
 
4.6 There is now widespread acceptance of the right to 
information being an essential part of free expression ; found in 
Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR), and the regional human rights treaties in Africa 
and the Americas.46 
 
                                                 
45Roger Vluegels, “Overview of all FOI Laws ”, Fringe Special (2011), available at : 
http://www.right2info.org/resources/publications/laws-1/ati-laws_fringe-special_roger-
vleugels_2011-oct (last visited on 02-01-2018). See also, Ackerman and Sandoval-Ballesteros, 
“The Global Explosion of Freedom of Information Laws” 58 Adm. L. Rev. 85(2006). 
46M. Mc Donagh, “The Right to Information in International Human Rights Law ” 13 (1)HR L 
Rev. (2013).  

 
39 
 
4.7 The right to information has been frequently endorsed by 
international human rights treaties, as coming within the scope 
of right to expression. Such bodies have, however, based their 
recognition of a right to  information on the enjoyment of other 
rights as well, i.e. the right to respect for private life; the right to 
a fair trial; the right to life; social and economic rights; and the 
right to take part in public affairs.47 
 
4.8 Right to freedom of expression has been relied upon as the 
umbrella right for the right to information . And, nearly all 
international human rights treaties emphasise on protecting this 
right.48 
 
4.9 The right to information is a basic right that buttresses 
good governance, democracy and the prac tical realisation of 
human rights. Good governance is not achieved simply by having 
efficient government or even a democratically elected government. 
Freedom of information and the assurance of widespread citizen 
participation in public affairs and an acti ve civil society are 
essential for the full realisation of democracy and to develop a 
culture of human rights and accountability. 49 The recognition of 
right to information is crucial for achieving these ends , hence 
there is a need for a guaranteed and legis lated right to 
information. Internationally, the legislations on access to 
information are known as ‘Freedom of Information laws’.  
 
4.10 This distinction may appear semantical, however, it is a 
                                                 
47Ibid. 
48 Article 19,ICCPR 1966; Article 13 , American Convention on Human Rights 1969; Article 
10, European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950; and Article 9 , 
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights 1981. 
49Report by the International Advisory Commission of CHRI , chaired by M Reynolds, titled 
Human Rights and Poverty Eradication: A Talisman for the Commonwealth , available at:  
https://goo.gl/1RSGWg (last visited on 08-01-2018). 

 
40 
 
crucial one and cannot be ignored. It must be kept in mind that 
the term ‘rights’ in general implies corresponding duties. The 
‘citizens’ right to information’ casts a duty on the Government to 
ensure that information sought for is provided. The term 
‘Freedom’, on the other hand,  does not convey a clear sense of 
duty on the Government to provide information to the public. 
 
- Constitutional Position 
 
4.11 While some countries recognise right to Information 
explicitly in their Constitutions, in others the judiciary has 
interpreted the Right to freedom of speech and expression to  
include the Right to Information. Though the ‘right to information’ 
has not been explicitly recognised in the Constitution  of India, 
the Apex Court has interpreted through several decisions that 
this right is a part of the ‘right to freedom of speech and 
expression’ under Article 19(1)(a). In addition, the Supreme Court 
of India has gone on to say that the ‘right to know’ is an integral 
part of the ‘right to life’ , and unless one has the ‘right to 
information’, the ‘right to life’ cannot be enjoyed 
meaningfully.[emphasis added]50 
 
4.12 The right to information under international law has its 
roots in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR) and in Article 19 of the ICCPR , where it is provided that 
everyone enjoys the “freedom to seek, receiv e and impart 
information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either 
orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any 
other media of his choice”. The UN Human Rights Committee  
(UNHRC) has provided a clear enunciation of what t he right 
involves, emphasizing that Article 19 “embraces a right of access 
                                                 
50See, Reliance Petrochemicals Ltd. v. Proprietors of Indian Express, AIR 1989 SC 190. 

 
41 
 
to information held by public bodies”. “Such information”, the 
Committee noted, “includes records held by a public body, 
regardless of the form in which the information is stored, i ts 
source and the date of production”.51 
 
4.13 From the early days of their mandate’, Special Rapporteurs, 
appointed by Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) , have 
elaborated on the right to information. In the second Report of 
the mandate, the Special Rapporteur  highlighted the “vitally 
important” roles served by the right to information.52 
 
4.14 In 1998, the Report of Special Rapporteur, submitted to the 
UN Commission on Human Rights underscored the importance 
of right to information as follows:53 
The right to seek and  receive information is not 
simply a converse of the right to freedom of opinion 
and expression but a freedom on its own…the right 
to seek, receive and impart information imposes a 
positive obligation on States to ensure access to 
information, particularly with regard to information 
held by the Government in all types of storage and 
retrieval systems… 
 
4.15 In 2013, the Report of Special Rapporteur, gave a full 
rationale for a robust right to information: 
…public authorities act as representatives of the public,  
fulfilling a public good; therefore, in principle, their 
decisions and actions should be transparent. A culture of 
                                                 
51General Comment No. 34 of the UNHRC, CCPR/C/GC/34, para. 18 , available at : 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/gc34.pdf (last visited on 21-12-2017). 
52Report of the Special Rapporteur, Mr.  Abid Hussain, pursuant to Commission on Human 
Rights resolution 1993/45 E/CN.4/1995/32, para. 135, available at: 
https://documents-dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G94/750/76/PDF/G9475076.pdf?OpenElement  (last visited on 
21-12-2017). 
53Chris Albin-Lackey, Human Rights Watch, Chop Fine: The Human Rights Impact of Local 
Government Corruption and Mismanagement in Rivers State, Nigeria available 
at:https://goo.gl/4W4mny (last visited on 01-04-2018). 

 
42 
 
secrecy is acceptable only in very exceptional cases, when 
confidentiality may be essential for the effectiveness of their 
work. There is co nsequently a strong public interest in the 
disclosure of some types of information. Moreover, access to 
certain types of information can affect the enjoyment by 
individuals of other rights. In such cases, information can be 
withheld only in very exceptional circumstances, if at all.54 
4.16 Access to information has become a standard element of 
several human rights treaties,55 and has been widely adopted in 
various international agreements pertaining to sustainable 
development, the environment, food and agriculture  and 
corruption, among other substantive areas.56 Freedom of opinion 
and freedom of expression are recognised as indispensable 
conditions for the full development of the person. They are 
essential for any society. 57 ICCPR designates the f reedom of 
expression as a necessary condition for the realization of the 
principles of transparency and accountability that are, in turn, 
essential for the promotion and protection of human rights.58 
 
4.17 Recognising the significance of right to freedom of 
information, Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16 of “Peace 
Justice and Strong Institutions”, links access to information to 
                                                 
54Report of Special Rapporteur on Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion 
and Expression, A/68/362, para. 20 , available at:https://undocs.org/A/68/362 (last visited on 
19-12-2017). 
55Report of Special Rapporteur on Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion 
and Expression, A/70/361, para. 6, available at: 
https://documents-dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N15/273/11/PDF/N1527311.pdf?OpenElement  (last visited on 
20-12-2017). 
56See, Report prepared by Article 19 (a British human rights organisation), titled “Open 
Development: Access to Information and the Sustainable Development Goals”, available at: 
https://www.article19.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Open-Development-Access-to-
Information-and-the-SDGs-2017.pdf at 6-9 (last visited on 21-12-2017). 
57See,U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/90/D/1173/2003 , C ommunication No. 1173/2003, Abdelhamid 
Benhadjand Ali Benhadj v. Algeria, available at: 
http://www.worldcourts.com/hrc/eng/decisions/2007.07.20_Benhadj_v_Algeria.htm  (last 
visited on 02 -01-2018); See also,  U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/64/D/628/1995 , Communication No. 
628/1995, Tae Hoon  Park v. Republic of Korea , available 
at:http://hrlibrary.umn.edu/undocs/session64/view628.htm (last visited on 02-01-2018). 
58 General Comment No. 34, ICCPR, supra note 52. 

 
43 
 
good governance, human rights and accountability; and calls on 
all Member States to adopt and implement public access to 
information laws and policies.59 
 
4.18 Human rights law also recognizes the connection between 
right to freedom of expression as contained in Article 19 of ICCPR 
and other rights. The right to information is also closely 
connected to Article 25 (1) of ICCPR, which grants every citizen 
the right and opportunity to “take part in the conduct of public 
affairs”. The Human Rights Committee has emphasized the 
importance of freedom of information to public participation 
“without censorship”.60 The Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights (OHCHR) reiterated and expanded this point inter 
alia in its 2015 Report on the Promotion, Protection and 
Implementation of the Right to Participate in Public Affairs in the 
context of the existing human rights law: best practices, 
experiences, challenges and way s to  overcome 
them.61Additionally, over a hundred countries have been 
identified as having Constitutional provisions which either 
specifically recognize the right to information or include it 
through case law as a fundamental aspect of freedom of 
expression.62 
 
4.19 It is in this complex information landscape, that the United 
Nations agreed in 2015 on a new comprehensive framework: the 
2030 Sustainable Development Agenda to end poverty, protect 
                                                 
59 General Assembly Resolution A/RES/70/1, paras. 16.6-16.10, available at: 
http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/generalassembly/docs/globalco
mpact/A_RES_70_1_E.pdf (last visited on 21-12-2017). 
60General Comment No. 25, a dopted by the Human Rights Committee  under Article 40, 
paragraph 4, of ICCPR, CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.7, para. 25, available at:https://goo.gl/2myYmt 
(last visited on 02-01-2018). 
61 A/HRC/30/26 
62See, Roy Peled and Yoram Rabin, “The Constitutional Right to Information”42 Columbia HR 
L Rev (2011). 

 
44 
 
the planet, and ensure prosperity for all. To achieve these aims, 
the Agenda outlines seventeen SDGs in areas including poverty, 
health, agriculture, gender equality, innovation, and youth 
employment, with specific targets for each Goal, and one hundred 
and sixty -nine targets in total. Within the SDGs framework, 
access to in formation and communication technologies 
underpins the achievement of the development goals. Eleven 
targets present access to information as a key tenet for achieving 
their aims. The Agenda differs dramatically from its predecessor, 
the Millennium Developm ent Goals, in that it takes a rights -
based approach to sustainable development. It acknowledges 
that sustainable development is multifaceted and all its 
constitutive components are interrelated. Therefore, to address 
development challenges, it requires addressing all types of rights; 
social, economic, cultural, political, civil, and informational.63 
 
b. Application to Private Entities 
 
4.20 Traditionally, the human rights jurisprudence developed 
with a view to provide rights for individuals and groups and 
imposing obligations on States. Human rights law foresees that 
individuals and entities not only have rights under its ambit but 
also duties. The ways in which private persons and entities are 
attributed duties and held responsible are by far not as straight 
forward or finely tuned as their enjoyment of rights under the 
human rights law.  
                                                 
63B Gigler, “Informational Capabilities: The Missing Link for the Impact of ICT on 
Development” (2011); D Souter, “ICTs, SDGs and economic, social and cultural right” (2016); 
A Esterhuysen, “Why focus on economic, social and cultural rights? Reflections on trends, 
achievements and challenges in building a gl obal movement working for human rights on the 
internet” (2011),cited in Maria Garrido and Michelle Fellows, “Access to information and the 
sustainable development goals” (2017),available at: 
https://da2i.ifla.org/sites/da2i.ifla.org/files/uploads/docs/da2i-2017-introduction.pdf (last 
visited on 03-01-2018). 

 
45 
 
 
i) State Responsibility  
4.21 Human rights law aims at strengthening the obligations of 
States with regard to the behaviour of private persons and 
entities. This can be highlighted through the jurisprudence of the 
UN Human Rights Committee64 (UNHRC) and the European 
Court of Human Rights (ECHR). In a significant augmentation of 
the efficacy of human rights protections, States have been held 
responsible by the ECHR for a breach of a positive obligation by 
failing to protect one private individual against interference by 
others.65 
 
4.22 The General Comment no. 31 on ICCPR published by the 
UNHRC emphasises this very State responsibility: 
…However, the positive obligations on States Parties to 
ensure C ovenant rights will only be fully discharged if 
individuals are protected by the State, not just against 
violations of Covenant rights by its agents, but also against 
acts committed by private persons or entities that would 
impair the enjoyment of Covenant rights in so far as they are 
amenable to application between private persons or 
entities...66 
 
4.23 The expansion of the scope of positive obligations of States 
has equipped the monitoring bodies and the courts with the 
important powers to demand that certain a ctions be taken by 
                                                 
64William Eduardo Delgado Páez  v. Colombia, Communication No. 195/1985, U.N. Doc. 
CCPR/C/39/D/195/1985 (1990); Franz Nahlik v. Austria, Communication No. 608/1995, U.N. 
Doc. CCPR/C/57/D/608/1995 (1996). 
65Costello-Roberts v. United Kingdom , 247-C Eur. Ct. H.R. (ser. A) (1993); Woś v. Poland, 
2005-IV Eur. Ct. H.R.; Storck v. Germany, 2005 -V Eur. Ct. H.R.; Sychev v. Ukraine, App. 
No.4773/02 (2005) (unreported) available at: http://www.echr.coe.int/echr/ (last visited on 21-
12-2017), cited in S. Palmer, “Public functions and private services: A gap in human rights 
protection” Intl Jrnl of Constl Law 585-604 (2008), available 
at:https://academic.oup.com/icon/article/6/3-4/585/654442(last visited on 03-01-2018).  
66 General Comment No. 31, Para. 8 , available at:https://goo.gl/ZsYVic(last visited on 03-01-
2018). 

 
46 
 
States, that by extension restrict the freedom of action of private 
persons and entities where rights of other persons or important 
public interest, even fundamental values are concerned.67 
 
4.24 This can be understood in the context of the ne ed to hold 
sports federations accountable even while these bodies claim to 
be autonomous, for the simple, yet a very important, reason that 
substantial public interest is at stake.  
 
ii) Duties of Private Bodies 
4.25 Human rights are rights possessed simply by virt ue of 
being a human. They are innate, intrinsic, inalienable and  sine 
qua non to integrity and dignity of a human person. Though they 
may be most effectively implemented through the domestic legal 
system, the system cannot be  said to be the source of these  
rights.68 Thus, mere State responsibility in ensuring human 
rights is an incomplete conception of human rights. For 
capturing the essence of the fundamental nature of these rights, 
their application to private entities is also essential.  
 
4.26 The African Charter on Human Rights and Peoples’ Rights 
states that “every individual shall have duties towards his family 
and society, the State and other legally recognised communities 
and the international community.”69 
 
4.27 The UN Guiding Principles on Business & Human Rig hts, 
                                                 
67Ineta Ziemele, “Human Rights Violations by Private Persons and Entities:  The Case-Law of 
International Human Rights Courts and Monitoring Bodies ”EUI Working 
Papers(2009)available at: 
http://cadmus.eui.eu/bitstream/handle/1814/11409/AEL_2009_08.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowe
d=y(last visited on 03-01-2018). 
68 Rosalyn Higgins, Problems and Process. International Law and How We Use It, 96 (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1994). 
69 Article 27, African Charter on Human Rights and Peoples’ Rights. 

 
47 
 
state that business should “respect” human rights, “avoid 
infringing on the human rights of others” and “address adverse 
human rights impacts with which they are involved. This 
responsibility “exists over and above compliance with national 
laws and regulations protecting human rights”70 
 
4.28 UN Guiding Principle 15 states that a company’s 
responsibility to respect human rights – whether involved 
through causing, contributing to, or being directly linked to an 
impact – should be met by having in place policies and processes, 
including:71 
1. A policy commitment to meet their responsibility to respect 
human rights;  
2. A human rights due diligence process to identify, prevent, 
mitigate and account for how they address their impacts 
on human rights; 
3. Processes to enable the remediation of any adverse human 
rights impacts they cause or to which they contribute. 
 
4.29 In the course of Parliamentary debate on the passage of the 
Human Rights Act of the United Kingdom, it was clear that 
private bodies delivering privati sed or subc ontracted public 
services were meant to be included within the scope of the Act 
through the “public function” concept.72 These private individuals 
and bodies are in a position to breach human rights guarantees 
and, therefore, should be subject to the same legal constraints as 
if they were a public entity exercising the power.73 
 
                                                 
70 UN Guiding Principle 11, available at: 
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf (last 
visited on 03-01-2018). 
71Id at 15-16. 
72314 Parl. Deb., H.C. (6th ser.) (1998) 409–410. Debate cited in S. Palmer,  
 note 65. 
73Catherine Donnelly, Delegation of Governmental power to private parties: A comparative 
perspective, 228 (Oxford University Press, 2007)cited in S. Palmer, supra note 65. 

 
48 
 
4.30 The Supreme Court in the case of Jeeja Ghosh & Anr. v. 
Union of India & Ors.,74 held that: 
Insofar as obligation to fulfil these rights are concerned, the 
same is not limited to the Go vernment or government 
agencies/State but even the private entities (which shall 
include private carriers as well) are fastened with such an 
obligation which they are supposed to carry out. We have 
also mentioned that in the year 2000, Respondent No. 2, i. e. 
DGCA (Directorate General Civil Aviation) had issued CAR 
(Civil Aviation Requirements) with regard to ‘carriage’ by 
persons with disabilities and/or persons with reduced 
mobility. 
 
4.31 It is not only the Government agencies which are obligated 
to respect these rights, but private bodies acting as Government 
agents or to which public functions are delegated or 
subcontracted should also be held accountable similarly.75 
 
c. Human Rights and Sports 
 
4.32 In the context of sporting events, following major risks of 
Human Rights violations have been identified :76 
● Violence and Discrimination 
● Human Trafficking 
● Forced Labour 
● Child Labour 
● Corruption 
 
4.33 The observance of human rights is dependent on a 
                                                 
74AIR 2016 SC 2393. 
75National Human Rights Commission(NHRC), Annual Report 2003-2004, at 9. 
76Mega-Sporting Even ts Platform for Human Rights, “ Human Rights Risk M itigation in the 
Sports Context” (Sporting Chance White Paper 2.3, Version 1, 2017), available at: 
https://www.ihrb.org/uploads/reports/MSE_Platform%2C_Human_Rights_Risk_Mitigation_i
n_the_Sports_Context%2C_Jan_2017.pdf (last visited on 19-12-2017). 

 
49 
 
democratic society. Human rights may be inherent, but for them 
to be enabled , people ought to be empowered with information 
and knowledge so that they can scrutinize the functioning of the 
authorities to check human rights violations. People need to be 
capable of participating in the governance of their community. 
This cannot be done in a meaningful manner unless the RTI law, 
as a tool, gives the entitlement and mechanism to obtain 
information. 
 
4.34 Institute for Human Rights and Business’s (IHRB) Report 
titled “Striving for Excellence: Mega Sporting Events and Human 
Rights” included a  series of recommendations for sports 
governing bodies and other key stakeholders involved in 
preparing and staging a Mega Sports Event. These 
recommendations are intended to support efforts made by sports 
governing bodies to ensure that human rights are m ore central 
to the way they do business in the years ahead.77 
 
4.35 The Report suggested for there to be  an explicit public 
commitment for observance of human rights  (as enshrined in 
UDHR)in the sports’ governing body’s constitution or codes of 
ethics. It further emphasised on the need for a strategy  to 
integrate a human rights-approach in line with the UN Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights (Guiding Principles) 
into the sports’ governing body’s relevant operating procedures ; 
for example: the candidate city/country bid requirements etc.  
 
-Corruption 
 
4.36 The word ‘corruption’ can be defined in myriad ways , 
ranging from ‘moral depravity’ to ‘misuse of public power’. In most 
                                                 
77 Institute for Human Rights and Busines s, “Sports Governing Bodies and Human Rights” 
(2014), available at: https://www.ihrb.org/megasportingevents/mse-resources (last visited on 
19-12-2017). 

 
50 
 
of the cases,  ‘corruption’ takes meaning from its manner of 
manifestation and depends on the context of its usage.  
 
4.37 Black’s Law Dictionary (8th edition) defines ‘corruption’ as, 
“Depravity, perversion, or taint; an impairment of integrity, 
virtue, or moral  principle; esp., the impairment of a public 
official's duties by bribery.” A seco nd definition of the word 
provided therein goes as, “The act of doing something with an 
intent to give some advantage inconsistent with official duty and 
the rights of others; a fiduciary's or official's use of a station or 
office to procure some benefit e ither personally or for someone 
else, contrary to the rights of others.” Another definition provides, 
“The word ‘corruption’ indicates impurity or debasement and 
when found in the criminal law  it means depravity or gross 
impropriety.”78 
 
4.38 The present context  requires ‘corruption’ to be viewed as 
an act or omission, inconsistent with the normal course of duty, 
done under the influence of external factors such as money, 
favours, coercion, undue influence etc. Corruption, in a civilised 
society is a malady, a ma lignant form of cancer, which, if left 
unchecked, erodes, inter alia, the moral as well as economic fibre 
of a nation. Corruption also has dire consequences on ‘human 
rights’ due to several direct and indirect effects. 
 
4.39 In the case of, Vineet Narain v. Union of India ,79 the 
Supreme Court, while stressing on the need for enhanced 
transparency, observed, 
The adverse impact of lack of probity in public life 
leading to a high degree of corruption is manifold. It 
also has adverse effect on foreign investment and 
                                                 
78Rollin M. Perkins & Ronald N. Boyce, Criminal Law 855 (Foundation Press, Mineola, New 
York, 3rdedn.,1982), referred in Black’s Law Dictionary (8thedn.) 
79 AIR 1998 SC 889. See also, State of Madhya Pradesh v. Shri Ram Singh, AIR 2000 SC 870. 

 
51 
 
funding from the International Monetary Fund and 
the World Bank who have warned that future aid 
to underdeveloped countries may be subject to the 
requisite steps being taken to eradicate corruption, 
which prevents international aid from reaching 
those for whom it is meant. Increasing corruption 
has led to investigative journalism which is of value 
to a free society. The need to highlight corruption in 
public life through the medium of public interest 
litigation invoking judicial review may be frequent 
in India but is not unknown in other countries. 
 
4.40 The Apex Court in the aforementioned case added that, “it 
cannot be doubted that there is a serious human rights aspect 
involved in a proceeding regarding corruption”, as the prevailing 
corruption in public life,  if allowed to continue unimpeded, will 
ultimately erode Indian polity. 
 
4.41 Likewise, in the case of State of Maharashtra, through CBI, 
Anti-Corruption Branch, Mumbai  v. Balakrishna Dattatrya 
Kumbhar,80 the Apex Court held that,  “Corruption is not only a 
punishable offence but also undermines human rights, indirectly 
violating them, and systematic corruption, is a human rights 
violation in itself, as it leads to systematic economic crimes.”  
 
4.42 The negative effect of corruption on human rights was 
further highlig hted by the Supreme Court in the case of, 
Subramanian Swamy v. Manmohan Singh & Anr.,81 wherein it was 
observed that, corruption, not only, poses severe danger to the 
concept of constitutional governance, but also to the Rule of Law, 
and the very foundation of democracy in India. The court added 
that it is undisputable that with the beginning of corruption, all 
rights are automatically extinguished and that the phenomena of 
corruption “devalues human rights, chokes development and 
                                                 
80(2012) 12 SCC 384 : (2013) 2 SCC (Cri) 784 : (2013) 2 SCC (L&S) 201 . 
81(2012) 3 SCC 64 : (2012) 1 SCC (Cri) 1041 : (2012) 2 SCC (L&S) 666. 

 
52 
 
undermines justice, liberty , equality, fraternity, which are the 
core values of Preambular vision”. In another case, Subramanian 
Swamy v. Director, Central Bureau of Investigation and Anr.,82 the 
Apex Court observed, that corruption is “an enemy of the nation”. 
 
4.43 The OHCHR has acknowl edged the close link between 
human rights violations and corruption, 83 stating that “There is 
an urgent need to increase synergy between inter -governmental 
efforts to implement the United Nations Convention against 
Corruption and international human rights conventions.”  
 
4.44 Corruption is a major hurdle in the process of economic 
development and in modernisation of a country. It undermines 
development by weakening the institutions on which economic 
growth depends. 84It is also suggested that corruption can be 
viewed as an additional tax on business transactions.85There is a 
consensus between majority of the published works that the 
correlation between corruption and GDP (Gross Domestic 
Product) is negative. 86 The World Bank and International 
Monetary Fund ( IMF) presume that corruption has significant 
negative effects on economic growth. Corruption undermines 
development by distorting the Rule of Law and weakening the 
                                                 
82 (2014) 8 SCC 682. 
83Available 
at:http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Development/GoodGovernance/Pages/AntiCorruption.asp
x (last visited on 19 -12-2017); See also, Mega-Sporting Events Platform for Human Rights, 
“Corruption and Human Rights i n the Sports Context” (Sporting Chance White Paper 1.3, 
2017), available 
at:https://www.ihrb.org/uploads/reports/MSE_Platform%2C_Corruption_and_Human_Rights
_in_the_Sports_Context%2C_Jan_2017.pdf (last visited on 19-12-2017). 
84 R. Klitgaard, Controlling Corruption(University of California Press , Berkeley, CA, 1988), 
cited inDanilo Lučić, Mladen  Radišić, et al., “Causality between corruption and the level of 
GDP”, available at: 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1331677X.2016.1169701  (last visited on  04-01-
2018). 
85 K.M. Murphy, A. Shleifer, et al.,“Why is Rent-Seeking So Costly to Growth?”AmrcnEcoRev. 
409–414(1993), cited in Danilo Lučić, MladenRadišić, et al., supra note 84. 
86Danilo Lučić, Mladen Radišić, et al., supra note 85. 

 
53 
 
institutional foundation on which economic growth depends. 87 
Corruption affects economic development by plummeting private 
investment and conceivably even by altering the composition of 
government expenditure, specifically by lowering the share  of 
spending on foundational/infrastructural heads such as 
education, among others.88 
 
4.45 If the relationship between the level of economic 
development measured by  GDP and perceived corruption levels 
across countries is examined, it can be generally observed that 
the relationship is negative, i.e., poor countries tend to be 
corrupt. On the other hand, upon examination of the relationship 
between perceived corruption levels and economic growth rate 
across countries, it is revealed that the growth rates vary more 
for countries with high -level corruption. 89That is to say, while 
many highly corrupt countries have low economic g rowth rates, 
there are also countries that have demonstrably achieved rapid 
economic growth under rampant governmental corruption. This 
suggests that some countries may achieve high economic growth 
regardless of high instances of corruption.90 
 
4.46 That being said, a report by the State Bank of India (SBI) , 
examining the co-relation between the corruption levels and GDP 
growth rate in India, indicates that between 2011 and 2016, as 
                                                 
87Available at: http://www1.worldbank.org/publicsector/anticorrupt/index.cfm (last visited on 
04-01-2018), cited in Danilo Lučić, Mladen Radišić, et al., supra note 85. 
88 P. Mauro, “Corruption and growth ” Qtly Jrnlof Eco 681–712(1995), cited in Danilo Lučić, 
Mladen Radišić, et al., supra note 85. 
89Danilo Lučić, Mladen Radišić, et al., supra note 85. 
90 This phenomenon is known as “greasing the wheel” effect where restrictive economic policies 
of governments are overcome tangentially by way of corruption, see, supra note 85. 
Specifically, in the case of Asian countries, it is referred to as the “Asian Paradox” wherein it is 
observed that several Asian economies have high levels of corruption as gauged by conventional 
indicators but at the same time they record high GDP growth. See g enerally, P. Bardhan, 
“Corruption and Development: A Review of Issues”35(3)Jrnl of Eco Lit (1997), cited inDanilo 
Lučić, MladenRadišić, et al., supra note 85; Also see, Issues Paper on Corruption and Economic 
Growth, available at: 
https://www.oecd.org/g20/topics/anti-corruption/Issue-Paper-Corruption-and-Economic-
Growth.pdf (last visited on 04-01-2018). 

 
54 
 
India’s rank in Transparency International's global corruption 
index improved from 96 to 79, its GDP growth rate improved by 
half a percentage point. The decrease in corruption level in India 
has translated into foreign fund inflows. The data shows that 
there has been a significant improvement in foreign investor 
confidence towards Ind ia with the  net FDI inflows to India 
increasing by 64% in the last six years, i.e. from $21.9 billion in 
the fiscal year 2012 to $35.9 billion in the fiscal year 2017.91 
 
4.47 The Supreme Court, In Re: Special Courts Bill ,92 aptly 
remarked that, “Corruption and r epression – cousins in such 
situation – hijack development process and in the long run 
lagging national progress means ebbing people’s confidence in 
constitutional means to social justice.” Thus, it would be 
appropriate to say that corruption in any form, if rampant in 
public or private sphere, obliterates without distinction, slowly 
but steadily. 
 
4.48 The duty of sports federations to uphold rights is not 
merely moral and abstract but rather practical and expedient. A 
legal obligation has been envisaged throug h the UN guiding 
principles on business and human rights. The international body, 
in emphasising on the significance of human rights, goes so far 
as to impose responsibility even on purely commercial private 
entities. Thus, bodies such as sports federations that are in 
fact performing public functions, come within this fold by 
implication. [emphasis added] 
 
4.49 The aforesaid  has also been recognized in Professor 
Ruggie’s Report on FIFA, published in April 2016, that adapts the 
                                                 
91Available at: 
 https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/lower-corruption-level-boosts-
gdp-growth-says-sbi-report/articleshow/61028872.cms (last visited on 04-01-2018). 
92 AIR 1979 SC 478. 

 
55 
 
UN Guiding Principles to FIFA’s op erations including the FIFA 
World Cup. Ruggie discusses briefly the corruption risks linked 
to FIFA and its events and their impact on human rights:  
Bribery and corruption is not only about giving and 
taking money for private gain that has been 
intended for broader social purposes. It may also 
enable the parties involved to evade legal and 
contractual requirements, including those 
protecting human rights. Lack of financial 
integrity, therefore, is a foundational source of 
human rights risks.93 
 
4.50 The sooner i t is realised that sports markets are public 
goods, the more self-evident will be the public interest in ensuring 
fair play in their governance. The mantra must be to promote 
what has the potential to deliver value to the market and limit 
that which doesn’t. Ultimately the role of sports governance must 
be to deliver value to the athlete, potential athlete, the fan, and 
the public in general. In all of these, are embedded the broader 
concept of national interest.94  
                                                 
93 John G. Ruggie, “For the Game. For the World . FIFA and  Human Rights ”, available 
at:https://www.hks.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/centers/mrcbg/programs/cri/files/Ruggie_hu
manrightsFIFA_reportApril2016.pdf (last visited on 03-01-2018). 
94Nandan Kamath, “The Way Forward for Sports Federations”, available at: 
http://www.sportstarlive.com/magazine/the-way-forward-for-sports-
federations/article19715238.ece (last visited on 03-01-2018). 

 
56 
 
CHAPTER V 
PERUSAL OF THE TERMS ‘PUBLIC AUTHORITY’, ‘PUBLIC 
FUNCTIONS’ AND ‘SUBSTANTIALLY FINANCED’ 
 
1.  PUBLIC AUTHORITY 
a. National Perspective 
 
5.1 To determine whether BCCI, under the existing legal 
framework, can be included within RTI Act, 2005, it is required 
to be ascertained whether BCCI can be t ermed as a ‘public 
authority’ within the meaning assigned to the term under section 
2(h) of the Act. 
 
5.2 Section 2(h) defines the term ‘public authority’ as: 
‘public authority’ means any authority or body or 
institution of self - government established or 
constituted— 
(a) by or under the Constitution; 
(b) by any other law made by Parliament; 
(c) by any other law made by State Legislature; 
(d) by notification issued or order made by the 
appropriate Government, and includes[emphasis 
added] any— 
 (i) body owned, controlled[emphasis added] 
or substantially financed; 
 (ii) non-Government organization 
substantially financed,  
directly or indirectly by funds provided by 
the appropriate Government;  [emphasis 
added] 
 

 
57 
 
5.3 A perusal of the above section establishes that a body  
‘owned, controlled or substantially financed ’, as well as a ‘non-
Government Organisation substantially financed’ directly or 
indirectly by appropriate Government, would be covered in the 
definition of ‘public authority’ under the RTI Act, 2005. 
 
5.4 In the ca se of LIC of India  v. Consumer Education and 
Research Centre ,95 the Supreme Court observed that “every 
action of public authority or any person acting in public interest 
or its acts[that]give rise to public element, should be guided by 
public interest”. 
 
5.5 In the case of M.P. Varghese  v. Mahatma Gandhi 
University,96 the Kerala High Court observed that the definition 
of ‘public authority’ has a much wider meaning than that of the 
term ‘State’ under Article 12 of the Constitution. The Court 
further observed that the definition of ‘State’ under Article 12 is 
primarily in relation to enforcement of fundamental rights 
through courts, whereas the RTI Act , 2005is for providing an 
effective legislative framework for “effectuating the right to 
information” as recognised under Article 19 of the Constitution. 
 
5.6 In the case of  Dhara Singh Girls High School through its 
Manager, Virendra Chaudhary v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.,97 
the Court held that “whenever there [is] even [an] iota of nexus 
regarding control [and] finance of public authority over the 
activity of private body or institution or an organisation” etc. the 
same would fall under the provisions of section 2(h) of  the RTI 
Act. 
                                                 
95AIR 1995 SC 1811. 
96AIR 2007 Ker 230. 
97AIR2008All92; See also Committee of Management, Azad Memorial Poorva  
Madhyamik Vidyalaya, Koloura v. State of Uttar Pradesh , AIR 2008 (NOC) 2641 
(All); Committee of Management, Ismail Girls National Inter-College, Meerut v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh, AIR 2009 All 236 

 
58 
 
 
5.7 The provisions of the RTI Act have to be interpreted in 
consonance and harmony with the objects and reasons  stated 
therein, giving them the broadest scope so as to ensure that any 
unscrupulous persons are not exempted under the Act, and are 
not able to hide any thing from the public , benefitting from 
concealing any illegal activities.98 
 
5.8 The meaning/ scope of the term “public authority” defined 
in section 2(h) of the Act, interpreted by several pronouncements 
of various forums, is sufficiently comprehensive for the current 
times. Accordingly, at this stage, the Commission does not see 
the need for a clarification to the statutory definition. That being 
said, while working on this Report, and examining the 
information laws of other jurisdictions, one may feel that there 
are comparatively more comprehensive definitions. 
 
b. International Perspective 
 
5.9 Internationally, the concept of ‘public  authorities/bodies’ 
can be understood with the help of the definition hereunder:99 
‘Public authorities ’ include all bodies within the 
executive, legislative, and judicial branches at all 
levels of government, constitu tional and statutory 
authorities, including security sector authorities; 
and non-state bodies that are owned or controlled 
by government or that serve as agents of the 
government. ‘Public authorities’ also include private 
or other entities that perform pub lic functions or 
services or operate with substantial public funds or 
benefits, but only in regard to the performance of 
                                                 
98Ibid 
99Global Principles on National Security and the Right to Information (“The Tshwane 
Principles”) ( 2013), available at: http://issat.dcaf.ch/download/22892/289132/Global%20 
Principles%20on%20National%20Security%20and%20the%20Right%20to%20Information%
20(Tshwane%20Principles)%20-%20June%202013.pdf (last visited on 20-12-2017). 

 
59 
 
those functions, provision of services, or use of 
public funds or benefits.  
 
5.10 On similar lines, the Human Rights Act, 1998 of the United 
Kingdom provides, ““Public Authority” includes…. any person 
certain of whose functions are functions of public nature.”100 
 
5.11 In the case of Finnigan v. New Zealand Rugby Football 
Union Inc.,101 the Court opined,  
[w]hile technically a private and voluntary sp orting 
association, the Rugby Union is in relation to this 
decision in a position of major national importance, 
for the reasons already outlined. In this particular 
case, therefore, we are not willing to apply to the 
question of standing the narrowest of c riteria that 
might be drawn from private law fields. In truth the 
case has some analogy with public law issues. This 
is not to be pressed too far. We are not holding that 
nor even discussing whether, the decision is the 
exercise of a statutory power - although that was 
argued. We are saying simply that it fa lls into a 
special area where, in the New Zealand context, a 
sharp boundary between public and private law 
cannot realistically be drawn. 
 
5.12 In South Africa, determination of what a ‘ public 
authority/power’ is, can be seen in the observations made by the 
Court in the case of Chirwa v. Transnet Limited and Ors.,102: 
Determining whether a power or function is ‘public’ 
is a notoriously difficult exercise. There is no simple 
definition or clear test to be applied.   Instead, it is a 
question that has to be answered with regard to all 
the relevant factors including: (a) the relationship of 
coercion or power that the actor has in its capacity 
as a public institution; (b) the impact of the decision 
on the public; (c)  the source of the power; and (d) 
                                                 
100 Section 6 (3)(b). 
101[1985] 2 NZLR 159. 
102[2007] ZACC 23. 

 
60 
 
whether there is a need for the decision to be 
exercised in the public interest. None of these factors 
will necessarily be determinative; instead, a court 
must exercise its discretion considering their relative 
weight in the context. 
 
5.13 Article 19, paragraph 2 of ICCPR embraces a right to access 
of information held by public bodies. Such information includes 
records held by a public body, regardless of the form in which the 
information is stored, its source and date of produc tion. 
Designation of such bodies may also include other entities when 
such entities are carrying out public functions.103 
 
5.14 The Law of the Republic of Armenia on Freedom of 
Information, 2003, Article 3 defines ‘Organisation of public 
importance’ as “private o rganizations that have monopoly or a 
leading role in the goods market, as well as those providing 
services to public in the sphere of  health, sport, [emphasis 
added] education, culture, social security, transport, 
communication and communal services. 
 
5.15 Under the UK Freedom of Information Act  2000 (FOI), the 
Secretary of State has the power to designate any person who 
appears to exercise functions of a public nature  as a public 
authority [emphasis added ].104In this manner , anybody , 
performing public functions o r functions of a public nature can 
be covered under the ambit of the FOI Act.105 
 
5.16 In Mexico, the General Act of Transparency and Access to 
Public Information referring to ‘right to information’ as the 
                                                 
103 General Comment No. 34 (ICCPR), Para. 18, supra note 44. 
104Section 5, Freedom of Information Act 2000. 
105 Virginia Hills, “When is it the Public’s Interest for Government Policy Documents to be 
Disclosed” 3 Convergence 186 (2007). 

 
61 
 
“human right of access to information” 106, lays down rather  
exhaustive criteria for inclusion of ‘individuals and legal entities 
who receive and use public resources and exercise act s of 
authority’. Article 81 thereof requires the concerned agency to 
take into account factors such as “if a governmental function 
is performed, the level of public funding, the level of 
regulation and government involvement, and whether the 
government participated in its creation”. [emphasis added] 
 
5.17 Thus, it may be noted that various countries have opted for 
an exhaustive definition, which even includes private bodies that 
either perform functions of public importance or are funded by 
their governments within the ambit of their respective Right to 
Information/ Freedom of Information Acts. 
 
c. Interpretation of the word ‘includes’: - 
 
5.18 In clause (d) of section 2(h)  of the RTI Act 2005  the term 
‘includes’ has been used. From an interpretational perspective, it 
is a truism that when the definition clause in any statute  uses 
the word “means”, what follows is intended to be exhaustive. It 
becomes a “hard-and-fast” definition and no meaning other than 
that which is put in the definition can be assigned to the same.107 
On the other hand , when the word “includes” is used in a 
definition, it appears that the Legislature did not intend to restrict 
the definition to the items already listed , rather it intended to 
make the definition enumerative , and not exhaustive. That is to 
say, a term defined with “include” will retain its ordinary meaning 
                                                 
106 Article 4  
107Lord Esher, M.R. in Gough v. Gough, [(1891) 2 QB 665 : 60 LJQB 726 : 65 LT 110] .See 
also,P. Kasilingam v. P.S.G. College of Technology  [1995 Supp (2) SCC 348 : AIR 1995 SC 
1395]. 

 
62 
 
but its scope would be extended to bring within it matters, which 
in its ordinary meaning may or may not comprise.108 
 
5.19 In the case of N.D.P. Namboodripad v. Union of India,109 the 
Apex Court, while interpreting the word ‘includes’, observed that 
it has different meanings in different contexts. The Court further 
said that i t was indeed true that generally the word ‘include’ is 
used in a definition clause, it is used as a word of enlargement, 
that is to make the definition extensive, not restrictive. The Court 
cited, Justice G.P. Singh’s treatise on interpretation,110where it is 
stated that that where a word defined is declared to ‘include’ such 
and such, the definition is prima facie extensive, but the word 
“include” when used while defining a word or expression, may 
also be construed as equivalent to “mean and include” in whic h 
event, it will afford an exhaustive explanation of the meaning 
which for the purposes of the Act must invariably be attached to 
the word or expression. 
 
5.20 In the case of Principal, M.D. Sanatan Dharam Girls College, 
Ambala City & Anr. v. State Information Commissioner, Haryana 
& Anr.,111 it was observed by the Punjab & Haryana High Court 
that the use of the word ‘includes’ in section 2(h)(d) of the RTI Act, 
indicated that the definition is illustrative and not exhaustive ; 
and, that such “definition it to be taken as prima facie extensive” 
The Court added that the object of the RTI Act is to promote 
transparency and accountability in the working of every ‘public 
authority’ and it was vital for democracy that the citizenry is 
informed and there is transparency o f information. Referring to 
                                                 
108Bharat Coop. Bank (Mumbai) Ltd. v. Coop. Bank Employees Union, (2007) 4 SCC 685. 
109 (2007) 4 SCC 502. See also, Regional Director v. High Land Coffee Works of P.F.X. Saldah, 
1991(3) SCC 617; C.I.T A.P. v. Taj Mahal Hotel, 1972 SC 168 (6); South Gujarat Roofing Tiles 
Manufactures Association v. State of Gujarat, (1977) SC 90; Ponds India Ltd. v. Commissioner 
of Trade Tax, 2008 (8) SCC 369. 
110 G.P. Singh, Principles of Statutory Interpretation (10th edn., 2006). 
111AIR 2008 P&H 101. 

 
63 
 
the long title/preamble of the Act, which inter alia emphasises on 
an “informed citizenry ” as vital to the functioning of the 
democracy in India, the Court further observed that the long title 
itself highlights the need for a li beral interpretation of the 
provisions of the Act. 
 
5.21 In the case of Tamil Nadu Road Development Company Ltd. 
v. Tamil Nadu Information Commission,112 (TNRDC case) the Court 
adopted a similar approach and noted that the term ‘includes’ 
entailed that certain wo rds occurring in its proximity should be 
accorded a liberal interpretation. Additionally, in light of the 
objective behind enactment and implementation of the Act, it was 
concluded that a broad and purposive interpretation must be 
given. The relevant extra cts from the judgment are reproduced 
below: 
If we look at the definition of Section 2(h), which has 
been extracted herein above, it is clear that the 
appellant company does not come under the 
provisions of Section 2(h)(a)(b)(c) or (d), but thereafter 
Section 2(h)(d) of the definition clause uses the word 
‘includes’. It is well known that when the word 
‘includes’ is used in an interpretation clause, it is 
used to enlarge the meaning of the words and 
phrases occurring in the body of the 
statute…Therefore, obv iously the definition of 
bodies referred to in Section 2(h)(d)(i) of the RTI Act 
would receive a liberal interpretation, and here the 
words which fall for interpretation are the words 
‘controlled or substantially financed directly or 
indirectly by funds pr ovided by the appropriate 
Government’…. The RTI Act is virtually enacted to 
give effect to citizen's right to know. Citizen's right to 
know has been construed by the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court as emanating from the citizen's right to 
freedom of speech and expre ssion, which is a 
fundamental right. So, a legislation, which has been 
enacted to give effect to right to know, which is one 
of the basic human rights in today's world, must 
receive a purposive and broad interpretation…. The 
                                                 
112(2008) 6 Mad LJ 737. 

 
64 
 
RTI Act has also provided a rem edy for facilitating 
the exercise of the right to information and the 
reason for the remedy is also indicated in the 
Preamble to the Act. So going by the direction in 
Heydon's Case, followed by the Supreme Court in 
Bengal Immunity (supra) such an Act must receive a 
purposive interpretation to further the purpose of the 
Act. So any interpretation which frustrates the 
purpose of RTI Act must be eschewed. Following the 
said well  known canon of construction, this Court 
interprets the expression “public authorit y” under 
Section 2(h)(d)(i) liberally, so that the authorities like 
the appellant who are controlled and substantially 
financed, directly or indirectly, by the government, 
come within the purview of the RTI Act. In coming to 
the conclusion, this Court remi nds itself of the 
Preamble to the RTI Act which necessitates a 
construction which will hopefully cleanse our 
democratic polity of the corrosive effect of corruption 
and infuse transparency in its activities. 
5.22 Thus, it is evident from the above discussion that the word 
‘includes’ in section 2(h)(d) of the RTI Act, has to be given an 
illustrative and enumerative meaning and has to be bestowed a 
liberal interpretation, in line with the Preamble to the Act. 
 
d. Interpretation of the word ‘control’ 
 
5.23 The word ‘control’, as a noun, has been defined in Black’s 
Law Dictionary (8th edition) as, “the direct or indirect power to 
direct the management and policies of a person or entity, whether 
through ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise; 
the power or authority to manage, direct, or oversee ”. As a verb, 
‘control’ has been defined as, “to exercise power or influence over’, 
‘to regulate or govern”. 
 
5.24 Merriam-Webster dictionary,113 defines ‘control’ in the 
noun form as, “the power to make decisions about how something 
                                                 
113 Online version. Available at: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/control (last 
visited on 28-12-2017). 

 
65 
 
is managed or done; the ability to direct the actions of someone 
or something; an action, method, or law that limits the amount 
or growth of something.” As a verb, ‘control’ is defined as, “to 
direct the behaviour of (a person or animal); to cause  (a person 
or animal) to do what you want; to have power over (something); 
to direct the actions or function of (something); to cause 
(something) to act or function in a certain way”. 
 
5.25 In the case of Prasar Bharati v. Amarjeet Singh,114 the Apex 
Court observ ed that, the expression ‘control’, although not 
defined, in the light of Article 235 of the Constitution of India, has 
been held to be conferring wide power upon the High Court. The 
Court referred to the case of Bank of New South Wales  v. 
Commonwealth,115 wherein it was stated that, “the word ‘control’ 
is an unfortunate word of such wide and ambiguous import that 
it has been taken to mean something weaker than ‘restraint’, 
something equivalent to ‘regulation’.” 
 
5.26 Since the word ‘control’ has not been defined in the RTI Act, 
there is uncertainty in its interpretation. Therefore, in order t o 
determine whether BCCI is a body ‘controlled’ by the 
Government, it is essential to first decipher the scope of this word 
within the ambit of the RTI Act.  
 
5.27 In the TNRDC case, the Court looked into ‘control’ over a 
company in terms of the control over its Board of Directors, 
concluding that where the composition of Board of Directors of a 
                                                 
114 (2007) 9 SCC 539. See also, State of West Bengal v. Nripendra Nath Bagchi, AIR 1966 SC 
447;Madan Mohan Choudhary  v. State of Bihar , (1999) 3 SCC 396 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 
700;Yoginath D. Bagde  v. State of Maharashtra , (1999) 7 SCC 739 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 
1385;High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan  v. Ramesh Chand Paliwal , (1998) 3 SCC 72 : 
1998 SCC (L&S) 786 : AIR 1998 SC 1079. 
115(1948) 76 CLR 1. 

 
66 
 
company was controlled by the appropriate government, the 
company was also ‘controlled’  by the appropriate Government.  
 
5.28 Similarly, in the case of Nagar Yuwak Shikshan Sanstha v. 
Maharashtra State Information Commission ,116 (Nagar Yuwak  
case)‘control’ was viewed by the Court as possession of control 
over management of the petitioners. 
 
5.29 In the c ase of Panjabrao Deshmukh Urban Co -operative 
Bank Ltd. (Dr.)  v. State Information Commissioner, Vidarb ha 
Region, Nagp ur,117 (Panjabrao case) the Bombay High Court 
examined the Article 12 test of ‘control’, and stated that the same 
would apply to public autho rities as well, meaning thereby that 
the control must be ‘deep and pervasive’. 
 
5.30 The Delhi High Court, however, took a different view. In the 
case of Indian Railway Welfare Organisation  v. D.M. 
Gautam,118the Court held that the Article 12 test of ‘deep and 
pervasive’ control would not be relevant in determining whether 
there was an absence or presence of control in the context of RTI 
Act. 
 
5.31 Taking the aforesaid view further, the Delhi High Court i n 
the case of Krishak Bharti Cooperative Ltd.  v. Ramesh Chander 
Bawa,119(Krishak Bharti case), observed that, it is apparent that 
in all the decisions concerning the word ‘State’ under Article 12 , 
the test evolved is that of ‘deep and pervasive’ control, whereas in 
the context of RTI Act, there are no such qualifying adjectives vis-
à-vis the word ‘controlled’. 
 
                                                 
116 AIR 2010 Bom 1. 
117 AIR 2009 Bom 75. 
118 (2010) 169 DLT 508. 
119 (2010) 118 DRJ 176. 

 
67 
 
5.32 Looking into this issue in the case of Thalappalam Service 
Coop. Bank Ltd. v. State of Kerala,120 (Thalappalam case),the Apex 
Court observed that the meaning of the expression ‘controlled’ , 
which figures in between th e words ‘body owned’ and 
‘substantially financed’ under section 2(h)(d) of the RTI Act, must 
connote the control of a substantial nature exercised by the 
appropriate Government. The Court further added that the 
control of the impugned body by the appropria te Government 
must not be merely supervisory or regulatory, rather it should be 
of such a degree which amounts to substantial control over the 
management and affairs of the body. 
 
5.33 The aforesaid guidance provided by the Apex Court in the 
Thalappalam case, i .e. that the ‘control’ must be ‘substantial’ , 
would be better understood in a following section of this Report, 
where the implications of the word ‘substantial’ are discussed in 
detail. At this point, s uffice it to say, that the word ‘control’ has 
to be ac corded a harmonious construction that is in sync with 
the object and purpose of the RTI Act. Thus, a construction that 
supports the foregoing should be embraced , while the one that 
defeats such purpose needs to be shunned. 
 
2. PUBLIC FUNCTIONS 
a. National Perspective 
 
5.34 It may be noted here that in Ajay Hasia case, the Supreme 
Court held that if a corporation is performing functions of public 
importance, closely related to governmental functions it may be 
categorised as an agency or instrumentality of the State.  As 
stated earlier, the understanding is that public functions are 
                                                 
120 (2013) 16 SCC 82. 

 
68 
 
those functions which hold importance for the public, affect the 
public in a significant way, and a body performing those 
functions can be viewed by the public as an extension or arm of 
the State. 
 
5.35 Black’s Law Dictionary  (8th edition), talks about ‘Public-
Function Doctrine’ as entailing that a private person’s actions 
constitute State action if the private person performs functions 
that are traditionally reserved for the State.  
 
5.36 The above-mentioned dictionary also talks about 
‘Governmental-Function Theory ’ or ‘Public-Function Rationale ’, 
as a principle by which private conduct is characterised as State 
action, especially, for due process and equal protection purposes, 
when a private party is exercising a public function. 
 
5.37 In the case of Binny Ltd. v. V. Sadasivan,121 the Supreme 
Court noted thatthere are private bodies a s well, which may be 
discharging public functions. The Court further said that i t is 
difficult to draw a line between ‘public functions’ and ‘private 
functions’ when they are being discharged by a purely private 
authority. “A body is performing a ‘public function’ when it seeks 
to achieve some collective benefit for the public or a section 
of the public and is accepted by the public or that section of 
the public as having authority to do so [emphasis added ]. 
Bodies therefore exercise public functions when they intervene or 
participate in social or economic affairs in the public 
interest…..Public functions need not be the exclusive domain of 
the State. Charities, self ‐regulatory organisations and other 
nominally private institutions (such as universities, the Stock 
Exchange, Lloyd’s of Lo ndon, churches) may in reality also 
                                                 
121(2005) 6 SCC 657. 

 
69 
 
perform some types of public function ….Non-governmental 
bodies such as these are just as capable of abusing their powers 
as is Government”.122 
 
5.38 In the case of G. Bas si Reddy  v. International Crops 
Research Instt. & Anr.,123 it was observed by the Supreme Court, 
that although it is not easy to define what a public function or 
public duty is, it can be reasonably said that such functions are 
akin to those performable by the State in its sovereign capacity. 
 
5.39 In the case of Andi Mukta Sadguru Shree Mukta Jeevandas 
Swami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav  Smarak Trust  v. 
V.R.Rudani,124the Apex Court observed: 
Article 226 confers wide powers on the High Courts to issue 
writs in the nature of prerogative writs. This is a striking 
departure from the English law. Under Article 226, writs can 
be issued to ‘any  person or authority’. The term ‘authority’ 
used in the context, must receive a liberal meaning unlike the 
term in Article 12 which is  relevant only for the purpose of 
enforcement of fundamental rights  under Article 32. Article 
226 confers power on the High Courts to  issue writs for 
enforcement of the fundamental rights as w ell as  non-
fundamental rights. The words ‘any person or authority’ used 
in Article 226 are, therefore, not to be confined only to 
statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State. They 
may cover any other person or body performing public duty. 
The form of the body  concerned is not very much 
relevant[emphasis added]. What is relevant is the nature  of 
the duty imposed on the body. The duty must be judged in the  
light of positive obligation owed by the person or authority to 
the affected party, no matt er by what means the duty is 
imposed. If a  positive obligation exists mandamus cannot be 
denied. 
 
 
                                                 
122 de Smith, Woolf & Jowell , Judicial Review of Administrative Action  (5th Edn.) referred in 
ibid. 
123 AIR 2003 SC 1764. 
124AIR 1989 SC 1607. 

 
70 
 
b. International Perspective 
 
5.40 Taking a look at foreign jurisdictions for a clearer 
understanding of the term ‘public function’ , we find that in the 
case of Poplar Housing and Regeneration Community Association 
Ltd v. Donoghue,125the then Chief Justice Lord Woolf proposed a 
liberal interpretation of the term ‘public function’. He proposed 
that in order to make an otherwise private act a public one, there 
must be “a feature or a combination of features which impose a 
public character or stamp on the act.” Such public characteristics 
may include statutory authority for the task carried out; the 
degree of control exercised by the public body over the exercise of 
the function; and how closely the acts in question are “enmeshed 
in the activities of the public body.” 
 
5.41 In the case of Aston Cantlow and Wilmcote with Billesley 
Parochial Church Council  v. Wallbank,126 the House of Lords 
recognised the significance of using a “public function” analysis. 
Lord Nicholls concluded that there could be “no single test of 
universal application” in relation to the definition of ‘public 
function’. It was, however, added that the relevant factors for the 
claimants included the extent to which  the function was being 
publicly funded, the exercise of statutory powers, there placing of 
Central Government or local authority in performing the function, 
or the rendering of a public service. 
 
5.42 Therefore, it can be inferred that, contrary to popular belief, 
the terms ‘public authority’ and ‘public function’ , can be 
effectively used in reference to private bodies, who by virtue of the 
                                                 
125[2002] Q.B. 48. 
126[2004] 1 A.C. 546. 

 
71 
 
nature of their functions, obtain a character typically assumed 
by the State. 
3. SUBSTANTIALLY FINANCED 
5.43 A reading of the section 2(h) of the RTI Act establishes that 
a body owned, controlled or ‘substantially financed’ as well as a 
non-Governmental Organisation ‘substantially financed’, directly 
or indirectly, by the appropriate Government, is a ‘public 
authority’, within the purview of the definition given in the said 
section. 
It, therefore, follows that if a body/entity is substantially financed 
by the appropriate Government, then even if it is not constituted 
under the Constitution of India or a Statute , and is a Non -
Governmental Organisation/private body, it will be well within 
the ambit of the RTI Act, 2005. 
5.44 To enrich this understanding , it is imperative to 
understand the meaning and scope of the term ‘substantially 
financed’. Since this term has not been defined by the Legislature 
in the RTI Act, other sources are required to be perused for 
according it a fruitful meaning. 
 
5.45 From an economic standpoint, talking about Public-Private 
Partnerships (PPPs) , the United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission in Asia and the Pacifi c (UNESCAP)  mentions that 
land acquisition done by the Government on behalf of the private 
entity as well as tax incentives, can be classified as Government 
support measures.127 
 
                                                 
127Available at: 
http://www.unescap.org/ttdw/ppp/ppp_primer/351_types_of_government_support_and_incent
ives.html (last visited on 26-12-2017). 

 
72 
 
5.46 Similarly, the World Bank while discussing Government 
support in financing PPPs, elucidates that the Government may 
decide to provide direct support for the project, for example 
through subsidies/grants, equity investment and/or 
debt[emphasis added]. Funded support involves the government 
committing financial support to a project, such as:128 
•direct support – in cash or in -kind (e.g. to 
defray construction costs, to procure land, to 
provide assets, to compensate for bid costs or 
to support major maintenance); 
•waiving fees, costs and other payments 
which would otherwise have to be paid by the 
project company to a public-sector entity (e.g. 
authorising tax holidays or a waiver of tax 
liability); 
•providing financing for the project in the form 
of loans (including mezzanine debt) or equity 
investment (or in the form of viability gap 
funding). 
 
5.47 In terms of waving fees  and payments  as an example of 
Government extending financial support, there are also instances 
of cricket association(s) within the bounds of a local body such 
as the Municipality, being extended the benefit of tax exemptions 
on otherwise leviable property taxes.   
 
5.48 In the case of Palser v. Grimling,129 while interpreting the 
provisions of Section 10(1) of the Rent and Mortgage Interest 
Restrictions Act, 1923, the House of Lords held that “substantial” 
is not the same as “not unsubstantial”, i.e., just enough to avoid 
the de minimis principle. The word “substantial” literally means 
solid, massive etc.  
                                                 
128Available at: http://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/financing/government-
support-subsidies#_ftn1 (last visited on 26-12-2017). 
129(1948) 1 All ER 1, 11 (HL). 

 
73 
 
 
5.49 Etymologically speaking, i n Black's Law Dictionar y (6th 
edition), the word “substantial” is defined as “of real worth and 
importance; of considerable value; valuable. Belonging to 
substance; actually existing; real: not seeming or imaginary; not 
illusive; solid; true; veritable. Something worthwhile as 
distinguished from something without value or merely nominal. 
Synonymous with mat erial.” The word “substantially” has been 
defined to mean “essentially; without material qualification; in 
the main; in substance; materially.”  
 
5.50 Interestingly, in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (5th 
edition), the word “substantial” means “of ample or considerable 
amount of size; sizeable, fairly large; having solid worth or value, 
of real significance; sold; weighty; important, worthwhile; of an 
act, measure etc. having force or effect, effective, thorough.” The 
word “substantially” has been defined to mean “in substance; as 
a substantial thing or being; essentially, intrinsically.”  
Therefore, it can be said that the word “substantial” is not 
synonymous with “dominant” or “majority”. It is closer to 
“material” or “important” or “of considerable value .” 
“Substantially” is closer to “essentially”. Both words can 
signify varying degrees depending on the context [emphasis 
added].130 
 
5.51 The Chairman, Press Council of India, Justice P.B. Sawant, 
former judge, Supreme Court of India , underscoring the 
importance of bringing private bodies within the purview of right 
to information, opined that:131 
                                                 
130 Meaning of the term ‘substantial’ as discussed in Krishak Bharticase. 
131Amulya Gopalakrishnan, “Information by right”, Frontline (2003) available 
at:http://www.frontline.in/static/html/fl2001/stories/200301170027100 00.htm (last visited on 
02-04-2018). 

 
74 
 
Private bodies, especially where their activities 
affect the fundamental rights of the public, must be 
required to disclose information. In times of far 
reaching privatisat ion, institutions such as 
electricity boards and banks cannot be left out of 
law’s scope. 
 
5.52 In the case of,  The Hindu Urban Cooperative Bank Ltd.  v. 
The State Information Commission & Ors.,132(The Hindu Urban 
Cooperative Bank  case), the Punjab & Haryana High Court 
observed that the word “substantial” has not been defined under 
RTI Act and has no limited or fixed meaning. For the purpose of 
legislation, it has to be construed in its ordinary and natural 
sense relatable to the aims, fundamental purpose and objec ts 
sought to be achieved to provide transparency to control 
corruption and to promote accountability under the RTI Act. 
 
5.53 In the Thalappalam case, the Apex Court observed that the 
expression “substantially financed” in Sections 2(h)(d)(i) and (ii) 
indicate the degree of financing, which must be actual, existing, 
positive and real to a substantial extent, not moderate, ordinary, 
tolerable etc. The Court further stated that: 
Merely providing subsidiaries, grants, exemptions, 
privileges etc., as such, cannot be  said to be 
providing funding to a substantial extent, unless the 
record shows that the funding was so substantial to 
the body which practically runs by such funding and 
but for such funding, it would struggle to exist. The 
State may also float many schemes generally for the 
betterment and welfare of the cooperative sector like 
deposit guarantee scheme, scheme of assistance 
from NABARD etc., but those facilities or assistance 
cannot be termed as ‘substantially financed’ by the 
State Government to bring the body within the fold 
of ‘public authority ’ Under Section 2(h)(d)(i) of the 
Act. But, there are instances, where private 
educational institutions getting ninety -five per cent 
                                                 
132ILR (2011) 2 P&H 64. 

 
75 
 
grant-in-aid from the appropriate government, may 
answer the definition of public authority under 
Section 2(h)(d)(i). 
 
5.54 It was  also observed that though the term ‘Non -
Government Organisations’ as such is not defined in the RTI Act, 
but over a period of time , it has acquired a meaning of its own 
and has to be seen in that context. If a Non-Government 
Organisation which though neither owned nor controlled by the 
State, receives substantial financing from the appropriate 
Government, it w ould also fall within the definition of ‘public 
authority’ under section 2(h)(d)(ii) of RTI Act. 
 
5.55 The Delh i High Court in  the case of  Indian Olympic 
Association v. Veerish Malik & Ors.,133 held that, 
…. what amounts to ‘substantial’ financing cannot be 
straight-jacketed into rigid formulae, of universal 
application. Of necessity, each case would have to be 
examined on its own facts. That the percentage of 
funding is not ‘majority’ financing, or that the body is an 
impermanent one, are not material.  
Equally, that the institution or organization is not 
controlled, and is autonomous  ….. is irrelevant; indeed, 
the concept of nongovernment organization means that it 
is independent of any manner of government control in 
its establishment, or management. That the organization 
does not perform or pre -dominantly performs ‘public’ 
duties, too, may not be material, as long as the object for 
funding is achieving a felt need of a section of the public, 
or to secure larger societal goals. To the extent of such 
funding, indeed, the organization may be a tool, or 
vehicle for the executive government ’s policy fulfilment 
plan. This  view, about coverage of the enactment, 
without any limitation, so long as there is public 
financing. 
5.56 In the case of Nagar Yuwak case, it was observed by the 
Bombay High Court that the  term ‘substantially financed’ ha s 
been repeatedly used by the Parliament with a view to eliminate, 
                                                 
133ILR (2010) 4 Del 1. 

 
76 
 
from the equation, such institutions which are financed directly 
or indirectly with a small or a little contribution of funds by the 
appropriate Government.  
 
5.57 In the case of  Population Services International  v. Rajesh 
Dhiman,134 the Delhi High Court , while deciding whether the 
petitioner organisation (PSI) would be ‘public authority’ within 
the RTI Act, observed that , “if taken on absolute terms, a 
contribution ranging between Rs. 11 to 16 crores by the 
Government from its corpus of public funds cannot be considered 
as insignificant”. Such a contribution would render PSI as being 
‘substantially financed’ by the Government. The Court further 
observed that, “…i f over 1 crore or over 10% of the revenue 
funding comes from Government, di rectly or indirectly, it would 
certainly qualify as substantial funding.” 
 
 
5.58 In the case of Visvesvaraya Technological University  v. 
Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax ,135 the Apex Court placed 
reliance on the judgment of the High Court of Karnataka in the 
case of CIT v. Indian Institute of Management ,136particularly on 
the view expressed that the expression “wholly or substantially 
financed by the Government” as appearing in section 10(23-C) of 
the Income Tax Act, 1961,  cannot be confined to annual grants 
and must include the value of the land made available by the 
Government. The Apex Court further referred to the observations 
of the Karnataka  High Court, which had  held that, apart from 
annual grants the value of the land made available, the 
investment by the  Government in the buildings and other 
infrastructure and the expenses incurred in running the 
                                                 
134 W.P.(C) 3422/2012: 2013 SCC OnLine Del 3659. 
135 (2016) 12 SCC 258. 
136 (2014) 226 TAXMAN 301 (Kar) 

 
77 
 
institution must all be taken together while deciding whether the 
institution is wholly or substantially financed by the Government. 
 
5.59 In the case of Krishak Bharti case, the Delhi High Court 
held that: 
It is important to note that the word ‘financed’ is 
qualified by the word ‘substantially’ indicating a 
degree of financing. Therefore, it is not enough for 
such bodies to merely be financed by the 
government. They must be ‘substantially financed’. 
In simple terms, it must be shown that the financing 
of the body by the government is not insubstantial. 
The word ‘substantial’ does not necessarily 
connote ‘majority’ financing. In an annual budget of 
Rs. 10 crores, a sum of Rs. 20 lakhs may not 
constitute a dominant or majority financing  but is 
certainly a substantial sum. An initial corpus of say 
Rs.10 lakhs for such an organization may be 
‘substantial’. It will depend on the facts and 
circumstances of a case. Merely beca use 
percentage-wise the financing does not constitute a 
majority of the total finances of that entity will not 
mean that the financing is not ‘substantial’. A 
reference may be made to two different meanings 
of the word ‘substantial’. 
 
5.60 Further, in  the case of CIT v. Parley Plastics Ltd. ,137the 
Bombay High Court held that the term “substantial” does not 
mean more than 50% and it can be 10% or 20%, depending on 
the other terms and conditions . If the legislature had any 
percentage more than 50% in mind, it would have been so 
provided for. 
 
5.61 In the case of CIT v. Desia Vidyashala Samiti Shimoga,138 
the Karnataka High Court, held that the Government grant to the 
extent of 34.33% amounts to substantial financing and 
                                                 
137322 ITR 63 (Bom.). 
138ITA No. 1133 of 2008, dated 02.08.2011. 

 
78 
 
consequently, exemption under section 10(23C)(iiiab) o f the 
Income Tax Act, 1961, is allowable. 
 
5.62 In the case of The Hindu Urban Cooperative Bank  case, it 
was held by the Punjab & Haryana High Court that, in the larger 
context of public interest, the funds which the Government deal 
with, are public funds. They  belong to the people. The Court 
added: 
In that eventuality, wherever public funds are 
provided, the word ‘substantially financed’ cannot 
possibly be interpreted in narrow and limited terms 
of mathematical, calculation and percentage (%). 
Wherever the publ ic funds are provided, the word 
‘substantial’ has to be construed in contradistinction 
to the word ‘trivial’ and where the funding is not 
trivial to be ignored as pittance, then to me, the same 
would amount to substantial funding coming from 
the public funds. Therefore, whatever benefit flows 
to the petitioner -institutions in the form of share 
capital contribution or subsidy, land or any other 
direct or indirect funding from different fiscal 
provisions for fee, duty, tax etc. as depicted 
hereinabove would amount to substantial finance by 
the funds provides directly or indirectly by the 
appropriate Government for the purpose of RTI Act 
in this behalf. 
 
5.63 In the case of Munish Kumar Seth  v. Public Information 
Officer,139 it was observed by the Punjab State Consume r 
Disputes Redressal Commission  (PSCDRC), that the words, 
“substantially financed, directly or indirectly by funds provided 
by appropriate Government” are wide enough to bring within its 
sweep not only direct fund outflow from State exchequer, but also 
indirect monetary benefit which may have been facilitated by 
Governmental action. The PSCDRC added that, the word 
“funds” occurring in sub-clause (d) of Section 2 (h) have to be 
                                                 
1392012(3)RCR(Civil)660. 

 
79 
 
interpreted to include not only a direct cash outflow from 
Government to non - Government organization, but also 
indirect “funds” such as a financial concession or benefit or 
subsidy or remission of what was otherwise due to 
Government under any law or levy . Going by the dictionary 
meaning of the word “fund”, it includes not only money 
received or collected but also money saved. [emphasis added] 
The 'Cambridge Dictionary online' defines the word fund as: a 
sum of money saved, collected or provided for a particular 
purpose; money needed or available to spend on something; a lot 
of something. Therefore, if a private organisation saves money by 
avoiding payment of what was otherwise due from it to 
Government under any law, rule or regulation, it would amount 
to a financial benefit to that organization. 
 
5.64 In the case of Mother Dairy Fruit and V egetable Private 
Limited v. Hatim Ali & Ors.,140the Delhi High Court held that it is 
relevant to note that the expression “substantially financed” is 
suffixed by the words “directly” or “indirectly”. Thus, the finances 
indirectly provided by an appropriate G overnment would also 
have to be considered while determining whether a body has been 
substantially financed by an appropriate Government. The test to 
be applied is whether funds provided by the Central Government, 
directly or indirectly, are of material or considerable value to the 
body in question. 
 
5.65 In the case of R.K. Jain & Ors. v. lndian Bank Association 
(lBA),141the CIC referred to its earlier observations made in the 
                                                 
140AIR 2015 Delhi 132. 
141Complaint Nos. CIC/MP/C/2015/000044 and CIC/SH/C/2016/000123. Decided On: 13 -11-
2017. 

 
80 
 
case of Shikha Singh v. Tuberculosis Association of India ,142 as 
follows: 
While considering the question of substantiality of 
finance, the aspect of public interest cannot be 
overlooked because the funds, which the 
Government deal with, are public funds. They 
belong to the people. In that eventuality, wherever 
public funds are provided, the word ‘substantially 
financed’ cannot possibly be interpreted in narrow 
and limited terms of mathematical, calculation 
and percentage). Wherever the public funds are 
provided, the word ‘substantial’ has to be 
construed in contradistinction to the word ‘trivial’ 
and where the funding is not trivial to be ignored 
as pittance, then to me, the same would amount to 
substantial funding coming from the public funds. 
Therefore, whatever benefit flows to the 
respondent organization in the form of any grant, 
donation, s ubsidy, land or any other direct or 
indirect funding would amount to substantial 
finance by the funds provided directly or indirectly 
by the appropriate Government for the purpose of 
RTI Act in this behalf. 
 
5.66 The CIC in this case held that 43% public sector resource, 
tax concessions, publicity funding, accommodation in twenty 
cities without rent makes the IBA totally dependent upon the 
Government and public-sector banks for survival and 
functioning.143 
 
5.67 In the case of Darbari v. PIO, Willington Gymkhana Club,144 
the CIC observed that the fact that the Gymkhana Club, Ooty was 
enjoying the exclusive possession of land worth thousands of 
rupees, admeasuring 67 acres in a prime area of tourist 
destination city of Udakamandalam for a trifling lease of Rs. 220 
                                                 
142File No: CIC/AD/C/2010/001271dated 29/1/2011. 
143R.K. Jain &Ors . v. lndian Bank Association (lBA) ,Complaint Nos. 
CIC/MP/C/2015/000044 and CIC/SH/C/2016/000123. Decided On: 13-11-2017 
144CIC/SH/A/2014/000684. Decided On: 04-12-2017. 

 
81 
 
per year, was enough to establish that the Gymkhana Club Ooty 
was directly and substantially funded by Government, and hence 
it had to be answerable and accountable for its activities. 
Consequently, the club was held to be a public body and public 
authority under section 2(h) of the RTI Act. 
 
5.68 In the case of National Stock Exchange of India Limited  v. 
Central Information Commission &Ors. ,145 the Delhi High Court 
observed that financing in terms of percentage vis-à-vis total 
budget is not important and it is not necessary that it should be 
‘majority’ financing. What amounts to “substantial financing” 
cannot be put in a straight -jacket formula of universal 
application and has to be adjudged on a case-to-case basis.  
 
5.69 On the same lines, in the case of Manju S. Kumar  v. 
Sanskriti School146, the CIC while reviewing the scope of the term 
‘substantial financing’, held that it is not necessary that the grant 
be “continuous or current”. 
 
 
5.70 In the case of Shri Subhash Chandra Aggarwal & Shri Anil 
Bairwal v. Indian National Congress/ All India Congress 
Committee & Ors.,147the CIC held that political parties such as 
INC/AICC, BJP, CPI(M), CPI, NCP and BSP have been 
substantially financed by the Central Government and  are, 
therefore, public authorities under section 2(h) of the RTI Act. The 
rationale of the Commission was that thirty per cent of their 
income that would have otherwise paid by way of income tax was 
been given up in their favour by the Central Government. The 
Commission added that it is undisputed  that this is substantial 
                                                 
145 (2010) 100 SCL 464 (Del). 
146 No. CIC/OK/C/2006/000129 
147 2013(3)RCR(Civil)400. 

 
82 
 
financing, though indirectly. In addition to this, the concessional 
allotment of land and buildings in prime locations in the national 
capital, State headquarters and/or District level, amounted to a 
considerable sum by way of direct and indirect financing. 
 
  

 
83 
 
CHAPTER VI 
ANALYSIS OF THE LEGAL STATUS OF BCCI 
6.1 In light of the discussion in the foregoing chapters, the legal 
status of BCCI may now be examined.  
 
6.2 The questions pertaining to the legal status of BCCI under 
Article 12 of the Constitution has arisen before the Delhi High 
Court in various cases viz Mohinder Amarnath & Ors. v. BCCI,148 
(Mohinder Amarnath case), Ajay Jadeja v. Union of India & Ors.,149 
(Ajay Jadeja case), and Rahul Mehra & Anr. v. Union of India,150 
(Rahul Mehra case).  
 
6.3 In Mohinder Amarnath case, BCCI was held not to be an 
instrumentality of State taking into consideration the contractual 
nature of the rights and duties. However, in the Ajay Jadeja case, 
the Court , dealing with the question of nature of the duties 
performed by BCCI and that of the  rights infringed, held that a 
writ under Article 226 is maintainable given the public nature of 
activities undertaken by BCCI. The Court referred to the 
judgment in the case of Air India Statutory Corporation &  Ors. v. 
United Labour Union &  Ors.,151 wherein the Supreme Court had 
emphasised on the public nature of the functions performed by a 
private body as necessary criterion for falling under Article 226. 
The Court also recognised that even if a matter arises from a 
contract purely under private law, a writ will lie if the contract 
gives rise to a public duty or if the act ion thereunder involves 
violation of fundamental rights.  
 
 
                                                 
148 CW.NO.632/89. Decided on 23-08-1989. 
149 (2002) 95 DLT 14. 
150 (2004) 78 DRJ 155 (DB). 
151 (1997) 9 SCC 377 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 1344. 

 
84 
 
6.4 In Rahul Mehra  case, it was clarified that due to the 
withdrawal of the writ petition by Ajay Jadeja, the order passed 
thereof a lso stood vacated.  However, it was affirmed that writ 
petition against BCCI is maintainable owing to the monopoly 
nature of the functions performed by BCCI in regulating and 
controlling the game of cricket. According to the Court the words 
“any person or authority” used in Article 226 may cover any other 
person or body performing public duty. 
 
6.5 Certain observations of the Apex Court, in the case of Board 
of Control for Cricket, India & Anr. v. Netaji Cricket Club & Ors.,152 
(Netaji Cricket Club case) pertinent to the current deliberation, are 
reproduced hereunder: 
The Board is a society registered under the Tamil 
Nadu Societies Registration Act. It enjoys a 
monopoly status as regard regulation of the 
sport of cricket [emphasis added ] in terms of its 
Memorandum o f Association and Articles of 
Association. It controls the sport of cricket and lays 
down the law therefor. It inter alia enjoys benefits 
by way of tax exemption and right to use 
stadia at nominal annual rent. It earns a huge 
revenue not only by selling ti ckets to the 
viewers but also selling right to exhibit films 
live on TV and broadcasting the same[emphasis 
added]. Ordinarily, its full members are the State 
Associations except, Association of Indian 
Universities, Railway Sports Control Board and 
Services Sports Control Board. As a member of 
ICC, it represents the country in the 
international fora. It exercises enormous 
public functions. It has the authority to select 
players, umpires and officials to represent the 
country in the international fora. It exe rcises 
total control over the players, umpires and 
other officers [emphasis added]. The Rules of the 
Board clearly demonstrate that without its 
recognition no competitive cricket can be hosted 
either within or outside the country. Its control 
over the sport  of competitive cricket is deep , 
                                                 
152AIR 2005 SC 592 : (2005) 4 SCC 741. Paras 80-82. 

 
85 
 
pervasive and complete[emphasis added]. In law, 
there cannot be any dispute that having regard to 
the enormity of power exercised by it, the Board is 
bound to follow the doctrine of ‘fairness’ and ‘good 
faith’ in all its ac tivities. Having regard to the fact 
that it has to fulfil the hopes and aspirations of 
millions, it has a duty to act reasonably. It cannot 
act arbitrarily, whimsically or capriciously. As the 
Board controls the profession of cricketers, its 
actions are re quired to be judged and viewed by 
higher standards…keeping in view the public good 
as also the welfare of the sport of cricket. It is, 
therefore, wholly undesirable that a body in -charge 
of controlling the sport of cricket should involve in 
litigations completely losing sight of the objectives of 
the society. 
 
Whether BCCI should be ‘State’ within the meaning of Article 
12? 
6.6 In the case of  Zee Telefilms Ltd.  v. Union of India ,153 (Zee 
Telefilms case) the issue that arose before a Constitution Bench 
of the Supr eme Court, was whether BCCI was ‘State’ within 
Article 12 and consequently could a writ petition under Article 32 
of the Constitution be maintainable against BCCI. The Court 
held: 
It would be clear that the facts established do not 
cumulatively show that t he Board is financially, 
functionally or administratively dominated by or is 
under the control of the Government. Thus, the little 
control that the Government may be said to have on 
the Board is not pervasive in nature. Such control is 
purely regulatory and nothing more. 
 
                                                 
153AIR 2005 SC 2677: (2005) 4 SCC 649.See also, A.C. Muthiah v. Board of Control for Cricket 
in India &Anr., (2011) 6 SCC 617. 

 
86 
 
6.7 Referring to the case of Chander Mohan Khanna v. National 
Council of Educational Research and Training ,154 and Som 
Prakash Rekhi v. Union of India,155 the Court stated: 
1. The Board is not created by a statute 
2. No part of share capital of the Boar d is held by 
the Government. 
3. Practically no financial assistance is given by the 
Government to meet the whole or entire 
expenditure of the Board. 
4. The Board does enjoy a monopoly status in the 
field of cricket but such status is not State -
conferred or State-protected. 
5. There is no existence of a deep and pervasive 
State control. All functions of the Board are not 
public functions nor are they closely related to 
governmental functions. 
6. The Board is not created by the transfer of a 
government-owned corporation.  It is an 
autonomous body. 
 
6.8 BCCI, was, therefore, held not to be ‘State’ under Article 12 
of the Constitution. The Supreme Court sounded a note of 
caution in this case that the situation prevailing in the Rajasthan 
State Electricity  case and Sukhdev Singh  case, was no longer 
prevalent as in the meantime the socio -economic policy of the 
Government of India had changed, and hence there was no need 
to further expand the scope of ‘other authorities’ under Article 12 
by judicial interpretation. 
Minority View in Zee Telefilms Case 
6.9 The minority view in the Zee Telefilms case was expressed 
by Justice Sinha on behalf of Justice S.N. Variava and himself ; 
and the same deserves a special mention here. It was said that 
our Constitution is an ongoing document and thus req uires a 
liberal interpretation and therefore the interpretation of Article 12 
with regard to the exclusive control and management of the game 
                                                 
154AIR 1992 SC 76. 
155AIR 1981 SC 212. 

 
87 
 
of cricket by the Board and the enormous power exercised by it, 
called for a new approach.156 
 
6.10 The minority judges a lso maintained that the Pradeep 
Kumar Biswas judgement was not a binding precedent within the 
meaning of Article 141 of the Constitution. This was because the 
question which arose in the Pradeep Kumar Biswas  case was , 
whether the judgment in Sabhajit Tewary was correctly rendered 
or not. Since the decision in Pradeep Kumar Biswas case revolved 
around the activities of CSIR vis -à-vis the tests laid down in 
Sabhajit Tewary case, the ratio must be considered to be in 
respect of those questions only. They added  that the questions 
raised in the present case were “neither canvassed nor was there 
any necessity therefor”.157 
 
6.11 It was further said that: 
Broadly, there are three different concepts which 
exist for determining the questions which fall within 
the expression ‘other authorities’: 
(i) The corporations and the societies created by the 
State for carrying on its trading activities in terms 
of Article 298 of the Constitution wherefor the 
capital, infrastructure, initial investment and 
financial aid, etc. are provided by the State and it 
also exercises regulation and control thereover. 
(ii) Bodies created for research and other 
developmental works which are otherwise 
governmental functions but may or may not be a 
part of the sovereign function. 
(iii) A private body is allo wed to discharge public 
duty or positive obligation of public nature 
and furthermore is allowed to perform 
regulatory and controlling functions and 
                                                 
156 Para 55. Note: All future references to the paragraphs of the Zee Telefilms case are of the 
SCC citation. 
157 Paras 257 and 258. 

 
88 
 
activities which were otherwise the job of the 
Government.158 
 
6.12 The judges (minority view) further observed that one cannot 
have the same yardstick for judging different bodies to ascertain 
whether any of them fulfils the requirement of the law and what 
actually is necessary to see are the functions of the body 
concerned.159 
 
6.13 After perusal of both domestic and foreig n jurisprudence, 
the learned judges laid down certain tests that could assist in 
solving this complex issue:160 
(i) When the body acts as a public authority and has 
a public duty to perform. 
(ii) When it is bound to protect human rights. 
(iii) When it regula tes a profession or vocation of a 
citizen which is otherwise a fundamental right 
under a statute or its own rule. 
(iv) When it regulates the right of a citizen contained 
in Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution available to 
the general public and viewers of  the game of 
cricket in particular. 
(v) When it exercises a de facto  or a de jure  
monopoly. 
(vi) When the State outsources its legislative power 
in its favour. 
(vii) When it has a positive obligation of public 
nature. 
6.14 Continuing thereon, it was said that the traditional tests of 
control - financial, functional and administrative, by the 
Government as laid down in Pradeep Kumar Biswas case would 
apply only when a body is created by the State itself for different 
purposes but incorporated under the Companies Act or registered 
                                                 
158 Para 70. 
159 Para 71 and 73. 
160 Para 172. 

 
89 
 
under the Societies Registration Act. Those tests may not be 
applicable in a case like that of BCCI, where it was established as 
a private body many years ago. Being allowed by the State to 
represent the country at the international stage it became an 
archetypal body for Indian cricket . The magnanimity and 
enormity of the functions of BCCI provide it with a monopolistic 
status for all practical purposes. BCCI tinkers with  the 
fundamental rights of citizens pertaining to their right of speech 
or right of occupation, and has a final say in several matters such 
as those of registration of players, umpires and others connected 
with the game of cricket , which is extremely  popular in the 
country.  
 
6.15 By virtue of being the organisers of competitive  cricket 
between one association and another or representing different 
States or different organisations having the status of State, 
making bye -laws for the same BCCI is de facto  legislating on 
‘sport’ related activities. This is essentially a State functi on in 
terms of Entry 33 List II of the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution. Additionally, BCCI enjoys State patronage as a 
national federation, conferred by the Central Government. This 
necessitates and justifies the application of a different test.161 
 
6.16 Thus, it can be seen that the minority judgment in the Zee 
Telefilms case did make some very interesting points which are 
extremely pertinent to the discussion endeavoured here. 
 
6.17 Now, in conjunction with the above deliberation some 
uncontentious points can be culminated as follows: 
 
1. With BCCI, one finds an entity permitted de facto by the 
State to represent the country at the international stage. 
                                                 
161 Para 173. 

 
90 
 
BCCI selects the ‘Indian Team’, and the selected players 
wear the national colours.162 
2. ICC recognises BCCI as the ‘of ficial’ body representing 
India. 
3. Neither the Government, nor BCCI have ever sought to 
challenge, discuss or change the aforesaid status. 
4. BCCI practically enjoys a monopolistic status in 
controlling and regulating the game of cricket in India. 
BCCI controls  the policy formulation  related to cricket  
and its implementation , affecting the country at large, 
which is essentially a State function.163 
5. BCCI and its actions/ activities, directly and indirectly, 
affect the fundamental rights of citizens, players, and 
other functionaries. 
 
6.18 The aforementioned points bear a  striking resemblance to 
a ‘State-like’ entity wielding ‘State -like’ powers. In light of these 
facts, it is difficult to convince oneself  that BCCI does not fall 
within the definition of ‘State’ under Article 12. 
 
6.19 Moreover, the doctrine of contemporaneaexpositio entails 
that “the best meaning of a statute or document is the one given 
by those who enacted it or signed it, and that the meaning 
publicly given by contemporary or long professional usage is 
presumed to be the correct one, even if the language may have a 
popular or an etymological meaning that is very different.”164 This 
rule has been applied by the Supreme Court in several cases. 
However, the Court added words of caution that such a rule must 
give w ay where the language of the statute is plain and 
unambiguous.165 
 
6.20 BCCI’s political significance is also highlighted, time and 
again, by the desire of governing part ies to control it by 
                                                 
162See, Annexure to the Report – MoA of BCCI. 
163Ibid. 
164 Black’s Law Dictionary (8thedn.). 
165See, Desh Bandhu Gupta v. Delhi Stock Exchange Association Ltd., AIR 1979 SC 1049; K.P. 
Varghese v. ITO, AIR 1981 SC 1922; Indian Metals and Ferro Alloys Ltd., Cuttack v. Collector 
of Central Excise, Bhubaneshwar, AIR 1991 SC 1028; N Suresh Nathan v. Union of India, AIR 
1992 SC 564; M.B. Joshi v. Satish Kumar Pandey, AIR 1993 SC 267. 

 
91 
 
controlling the position at the helm of the Board . As has been 
noted on several occasions over the years  that the post of the 
President of BCCI was occupied by a politician owing allegiance 
to the then governing political party. For example: Mr. N.P.K. 
Salve, veteran politician and Union Minister  from INC was the 
BCCI Presiden t between the years of 1982 and 1985; Mr. 
Madhavrao Jivajirao Scindia, politician and Minister from INC  
held the position from1990 to 1993; Mr. Ranbir Singh Mahendra, 
politician from INC between the years 2004 and 2005; Mr. Sharad 
Pawar politician from Nat ionalist Congress Party and a Cabinet 
Minister in the UPA -I Government from the year 2005 to 2008; 
and, very recently Mr. Anurag Thakur, a Member of Parliament 
from BJP was the BCCI President from 2016 to 2017. 
 
BCCI –Performing ‘Public Functions’? 
6.21 The answer to this question would be in affirmative taking 
into consideration the judgments/decisions of the Apex Court, 
various High Courts and other adjudicatory bodies at the Central 
and State level.  It has been explicitly observed in various cases 
that BCCI e njoys a monopoly status in the cricket ing domain , 
which is recognised by the Union Government as well as the ICC, 
the international governing body of cricket. 166 The intent of the 
Government of India, to hold BCCI accountable under RTI Act, by 
tacitly recognising it as an NSF and thereby a ‘public authority’ 
was abundantly clear by the answer provided by the Minister of 
Youth Affairs and Sports, in the Lok Sabha. 
 
6.22 Justice Sinha  while discussing the scope of public 
functions, in the Zee Telefilms case, referred to the book American 
                                                 
166See,Netaji Cricket Club  case, Zee Telefilms  case, Cricket Association of Bihar  case (the 
referral case), decision of CIC in Subhash Chandra Agarwal case, 2017.   

 
92 
 
Constitutional Law by Laurence H. Tribe, where such functions 
are described in the following terms:167 
The ‘public function’ cases. —When the State 
‘merely’ authorizes a given ‘private’ action — 
imagine a green light at a street corner  authorizing 
pedestrians to cross if they wish — that action 
cannot automatically become one taken under ‘State 
authority’ in any sense that makes the Constitution 
applicable. Which authorizations have that 
Constitution-triggering effect will necessarily turn on 
the character of the decision -making responsibility 
thereby placed (or left) in private hands. However , 
described, there must exist a category of 
responsibilities regarded at any given time as so 
‘public’ or ‘governmental’ that their discharge by 
private persons, pursuant to State authorization 
even though not necessarily in accord with State 
direction, is subject to the federal constitutional 
norms that would apply to public officials 
discharging those same responsibilities. For 
example, deciding to cross the street when a police 
officer says you may is not such a ‘public function’; 
but authoritatively deciding who is free to cross and 
who must stop is a ‘public function’ whether or not 
the person entrusted under State law to perform that 
function wears a police uniform and is paid a salary 
from State revenues or wears civilian garb and 
serves as a volunteer crossing guard…. 
 
6.23 With respect to regulation of cricket in India, it is true that 
there exists no such legislation, Central or State. BCCI took o n 
the role of regulating the game, makes laws to that effect, which 
were allowed by the State. Justice Sinha further observed that 
many public duties are prescribed by the courts rather than laid 
down by the Legislature, and some can even be said to be 
assumed voluntarily. Some statutory public duties are 
“prescriptive patterns of conduct” in the sense that they are 
“treated as duties to act reasonably so that the prescription in 
                                                 
167Laurence H. Tribe, American Constitutional Law, 1705 (The Foundation Press Inc., 1978). 

 
93 
 
these cases is indeed provided by the courts, not merely 
recognised by them.”168 
 
6.24 Thus, it can be concluded that the monopolistic nature of 
the power exercised by BCCI, the de facto recognition afforded by 
the Government, the impact of the Board’s actions/decisions on 
the fundamental rights of the players, umpires and the citizenry 
in general, entail that the nature and character of functions 
performed by BCCI are that of public functions. 
 
BCCI – a National Sports Federation? 
 
6.25 In reply to an unstarred question, number2097 raised on 
March 27, 2012, the Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports, in the 
Lok Sabha, Shri Ajay Maken, stated that the Government in April, 
2010, declared that all the National Sports Federations (NSFs) 
receiving a grant of Rs. 10 lakhs or more would be treated as 
‘public authority’ under section 2(h) of the RTI Act.[emphasis 
added].169 Thus, RTI Act is applicable to all such NSFs being 
deemed ‘public authorities’. 170 The Hon’ble Minister continued 
that, so far as BCCI is concerned, the Government of India 
has been treating it as an NSF and has been approving its 
proposals for holding events in India and participating in 
international events abroad. [emphasis added] The answer of 
the Minister clearly shows that the Government of India has been 
treating BCCI as a  NSF, and therefore it should also be treated 
as a ‘public authority’ in terms of section 2(h) of the RTI Act.  
                                                 
168Zee Telefilms case. Para 144. 
169Available at : 
http://164.100.47.194/Loksabha/Questions/QResult15.aspx?qref=117915&lsno=15  (last 
visited on 15 -02-2018). See also, Subhash Chandra Agrawal  v. PIO, Department of Sports , 
CIC/LS/C/2012/000565. Decided on 16 -06-2017. ( Subhash Chandra Agrawal  case, 2017); 
Annexure II. 
170Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Department of Sports’ letter number F.No.36 -2/2010-
SP-II, dated March 30, 2010 ‘Declaring National Sports Federations as Public Authority’; 
Annexure III.  

 
94 
 
 
6.26 Further, r eference may also be made to the Reply  dated 
July 27, 2016 to the Lok Sabha Starred Question No. 142 by Shri 
Vijay Goel, the then Minister of State for Youth Affairs and Sports. 
In this reply, the Hon’ble Minister, elaborating on the ‘pivotal role’ 
of NSFs in promotion of various sports disciplines, listed the 
following activities and programmes as undertaken by various 
NSFs: “organization of national/international tournaments in 
the country, selection of sportspersons/teams, sending them 
for training and participation in international tournaments 
abroad, organization of training/coaching under renowned 
Indian and foreign coaches….”. And, it be noted that in relation 
to cricket, BCCI exclusively performs/undertakes these activities 
in as well as on behalf of India; thereby operating and functioning 
as the NSF for cricket.  
 
BCCI – ‘Substantially financed’ by the Government? 
 
6.27 It may be accurate to say that the Central Government does 
not extend any direct financial assistance to BCCI, but it is also 
on record that it has been giving financial assistance in other 
forms and manner such as granting concessions in income tax, 
customs duty etc., providing land at excessively subsidised rates, 
among others.  
 
6.28 It is on record that t he State Governments have also 
provided land  at subsidised rates,  at many places to Cricket 
Associations (for example: The State of Himachal Pradesh 
allocated about fifty -thousand square metres land to Himachal 
Pradesh Cricket Associ ation on a ninety -nine-year lease at Re. 

 
95 
 
one per month) 171 and that cumulatively, BCCI has enjoyed tax 
exemptions of thousands of crores. To be precise, between 1997-
2007, the total tax exemption amounted to INR 21,683,237,489/- 
(INR Twenty-one billion six h undred eighty -three million two 
hundred thirty -seven thousand four hundred eighty -nine).172It 
may also be noted here that f rom 2007-2008 onwards, the 
registration of BCCI under section 12A of the Income Tax Act, 
1961, as a Charitable Trust, was withdrawn. 
 
6.29 Now, after a perusal of the economic connotation of the 
term “substantially financed” as well as a thorough examination 
of the judgments of the Apex Court, various High Courts, the CIC 
as well as other adjudicatory fora, it can be concluded that this 
term d oes not necessarily imply “majority financing/funding”. 
What is “substantial” would have to be adjudged on a case-by-
case basis, and seen contextually rather than attempting to apply 
a straight-jacket formula. 
 
6.30 It is also not necessary that the financing only be in the 
form of direct grants, funding etc., as has been held by the Courts 
and the CIC , in  an array of cases,  that tax 
exemptions/subsidies/concessions, provi ding land at paltry 
lease amounts  etc., all amount to indirect financing by the 
Government, rendering such impugned bodies  as ‘public 
authorities’.  
 
If the Government is foregoing a significant amount of money (in 
the form of tax or other levy) , which otherwise would have been 
deposited in the National/State Exchequer, and would have been 
                                                 
171Available at: 
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/anurag-thakur-former-
himachal-cms-son-turned-hpca-into-a-company-after-benefitting-from-state-
largesse/articleshow/31431494.cms (last visited on 05-01-2018). 
172See, Annexure II. 

 
96 
 
‘public money’, it would qualify as indirect “substantial funding” 
by the Government. And, it would follow that the body/entity 
receiving such benefits would be a ‘public authority’, even though 
it may be a private , non-statutory or non -Government body, 
thereby putting such a body squarely within the purview of the 
RTI Act. 
6.31 It is worth mentioning here that the Government, Central 
as well as the States, allowing the use of their infrastructure by 
BCCI, regularly at the time of events or even otherwise  also 
tanatamounts to ‘substantial financing’. It may be noted that the 
amount of revenue that can alternatively be generated by the 
Government from making available such infrastructure to any 
third party, on payment basis, makes the level of this financing 
particularly ‘substantial’. 
 
6.32 Further, the Central as well as the State Governments 
allowing the BCCI to have monopoly in the game of cricket, 
impliedly authorising BCCI to raise funds/generate resources 
from numerous other sources, funds and resources , which 
otherwise could have been directed to  the National/ State 
Exchequer, also amounts to ‘substantial financing’. 
 
6.33 In view of the above, it can be asserted that BCCI has, over 
the decades, indeed received ‘substantial financing’ from the 
Governments. 
  

 
97 
 
CHAPTER VII 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
7.1 The preceding chapters of this Report , with the aid of 
various tools of interpretation , binding precedents, 
judgements/decisions having a persuasive value, rules of 
construction and juristic writings, arrives at a conclusion  that 
BCCI ought to be classified as ‘State’ within the meaning of Article 
12 of the Constitution. An analysis of the functioning of BCCI also 
shows that the Government does exercise control over its 
activities and functioning. As was argued in the Zee Telefilms case 
that BCCI, falling in line with the foreign policy of India , did not 
recognise a player from South Africa due to the ir practice of 
apartheid; and that the cricket matches between India and 
Pakistan in view of tense international relations were m ade 
subject to Government approval. The foregoing positions BCCI as 
a ‘limb of the state’, and it should, therefore, be held to be ‘State’.  
 
7.2 The case  law discussed in the preceding chapters also 
sheds light on the threshold of ‘control’ that the Governmen t is 
required to have on a body under section 2(h) of the RTI Act. It 
can be deduced from the same that such ‘control’ is much lower 
in magnitude than what is required under Article 12 of the 
Constitution. Thus, t he threshold for ‘public authority’ being 
lower than that of ‘State’ under Article 12, bastions the argument 
that BCCI would have to be covered under the RTI regime. 
 
7.3 Moreover, even if BCCI is continued to be regarded as a 
private body, but owing to its monopolistic character coupled 
with the  public nature of its functions and the ‘substantial 
financing’ it has received from appropriate Governments over the 
years (in the form of tax exemptions, land grants et al) it can, 

 
98 
 
within the existing legal framework, still be termed as a ‘public 
authority’ and be brought within the purview of the RTI Act. 
 
7.4 In addition to the above , there are certain other relevant 
factors that ought to be taken into consideration apriori the 
recommendations of the Commission, which are as follows: 
 
 The uniform of the players of the Indian team (as selected 
by BCCI) contains the national colours and their helmets 
display the Ashok Chakra.173 
 BCCI, though not a NSF, nominates cricketers for the 
Arjuna Awards etc.174 
 The Parliament and the State Legislatures chose not to 
enact a legislation to govern the sport of cricket reflecting 
tacit recognition on the issue afforded to BCCI.175 Recently, 
the Apex Court reaffirmed that BCCI is the “approved” 
national level body holding virtually monopoly rights to 
organize cricketing events in the country.176 
 
7.5 In light of the preceding discussion s, the Commission 
makes the following recommendations: 
 
(1) Non-consideration of the role played by BCCI as 
monopolistic in regulation of the game of cricket has 
resulted in the Board flying under the radar of publi c 
scrutiny, encouraged an environment of o pacity and 
non-accountability. In the past, t his has probably given 
an impression in the minds of the general public that 
corruption and other forms of malpractices are adversely 
affecting one of the most popular sports played in India. 
                                                 
173Zee Telefilms case. Para 236. 
174Id. Paras 5 and 248. 
175Id. Para 242. 
176See, Union of India v. Board of Control for Cricket in India & Ors., 2017 (9) SCALE 400 

 
99 
 
BCCI exercise s ‘State-like’ powers affecting the 
fundamental rights of the stakeholders, guaranteed 
under Part III of the Constitution. It is hereby 
recommended that BCCI be viewed as an agency or 
instrumentality of State, under Arti cle 12 of the 
Constitution, thereby making it amenable to the writ 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32. 
(2) Human rights are sacrosanct and innately associated 
with the human personality. These rights are continually 
evolving, are to be respecte d by, and can be enforced 
against not only the ‘State’ but also private 
bodies/entities.  Therefore, the BCCI  should be held 
accountable, under all circumstances, for any violations 
of basic human rights of the stakeholders. 
(3) BCCI virtually acts as a National Sports Federation (NSF). 
Its own M emorandum of Association  states that the 
Board’s objects and purposes are to control, improve 
quality, lay down policies pertaining to the game of 
cricket in India as well as select teams to represent India 
at internati onal fora. Moreover , as per the statement 
made in the Lok Sabha, the Central Government has 
already been regarding BCCI as a National Sports 
Federation and hence, it  is recommended that, for the 
removal of any doubt, the same be explicitly mentioned 
in the  list of NSFs available on the ministry’s website.  
This express mention would automatically bring BCCI 
within the purview of RTI Act.  Other sports bodies listed 
as NSFs’ in Annual Report 2016-17,177 of the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports  available on it s website do 
attract the provisions of the RTI Act.  This website also 
contains information regarding (Chief Public Information 
                                                 
177Available at:https://yas.nic.in/sites/default/files/English_Annual%20Report_2016-17-
min.pdf (last visited on 13-02-2018). See also, supra note 160; Annexure II. 

 
100 
 
Officer) CPIOs and Appellate Authorities catering to RTI 
requests addressed to specific NSFs.178 
In light of the above stated facts , since all other sports 
bodies which are listed as NSFs are covered under the 
RTI Act, it is inconceivable as to why BCCI should be an 
exception. 
(4) Additionally, it is recommended that RTI Act be made 
applicable to BCCI along with all of its constituent 
member cricketing associations , provided they fulfil the 
criteria applicable to BCCI, as discussed in this Report. 
The Commission recommends accordingly. 
  
                                                 
178Available at:https://yas.nic.in/sites/default/files/File907.pdf (last visited on 13-02-2018). See 
also, supra note 160; Annexure II. 


 
101 
 
LIST OF CASES 
 
DOMESTIC CASES 
1. A.C. Muthiah v. Board of Control for Cricket in India &Anr. , 
(2011) 6 SCC 617. [Supreme Court]. 
2. Air India Statutory Corporation &Ors.  v. United Labour 
Union &Ors., (1997) 9 SCC 377. [Supreme Court]. 
3. Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, AIR 1981 SC 487. 
[Supreme Court]. 
4. Ajay Jadeja  v. Union of India &Ors. , (2002) 95 DLT 
14.[Delhi High Court] 
5. Andi Mukta  Sadguru Shree Mukta  Jeevandas Swami 
Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav  Smarak Trust  v. V.R. Rudani , 
AIR 1989 SC 1607. [Supreme Court]. 
6. Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board  v. A. 
Rajappa, AIR 1978 SC 548. [Supreme Court]. 
7. Bennet Coleman& Co. v. Union of India, AIR 1973 SC 106. 
[Supreme Court]. 
8. Bharat Coop. Bank (Mumbai) Ltd. v. Coop. Bank Employees 
Union, (2007) 4 SCC 685. [Supreme Court]. 
9. Binny Ltd. v. V. Sadasivan, (2005) 6 SCC 657. [Supreme 
Court]. 
10. Board of Control for Cricket  v. Cricket Association of Bihar 
&Ors.,(2015) 3 SCC 251.[Supreme Court]. 
11. Board of Control for Cricket, India &  Anr. v. Netaji Cricket 
Club &Ors., AIR 2005 SC 592. [Supreme Court]. 
12. C.I.T. A.P. v. Taj Mahal Hotel, AIR 1972 SC 168; [Supreme 
Court]. 
13. Chander Mohan Khanna v. National Council of Educational 
Research and Training, AIR 1992 SC 76. [Supreme Court]. 
14. CIT v. Desia Vidyashala Samiti Shimoga, ITA No. 1133 of 
2008, dated 02.08.2011.[Karnataka High Court]. 

 
102 
 
15. CIT v. Indian Institute of Management, 2014 SCC (2014) 226 
TAXMAN 301 (Kar) [Karnataka High Court]. 
16. CIT v. Parley Plastics Ltd., 322 ITR 63 (Bom.).[Bombay High 
Court]. 
17. Committee of Management, Azad Memorial Poorva  
Madhyamik Vidyalaya, Koloura v. State of Uttar Pradesh , 
AIR 2008 (NOC) 2641 (All). [Allahabad High Court]. 
18. Darbari v. PIO, Willington Gymkhana Club , 
CIC/SH/A/2014/000684. [decided on 04.12.2017. 
Central Information Commission]. 
19. Dhara Singh Girls High School through its Manager, 
Virendra Chaudhary v. State of Uttar Pradesh &Ors., AIR 
2008 All 92. [Allahabad High Court]. 
20. Dinesh Trivedi, MP &Ors. v. Union of India &Ors., (1997) 4 
SCC 306. [Supreme Court]. 
21. Federal Bank Ltd.  v. Sagar Thomas, AIR 2003 SC 4325. 
[Supreme Court]. 
22. G. Bassi Reddy  v. International Crops Research Institute , 
AIR 2003 SC 1764. [Supreme Court]. 
23. General Manager, Kisan Sahkari Chini Mills Ltd., Sultanpur, 
Uttar Pradesh  v. Satrughan Nishad, (2003) 8 SCC 639. 
[Supreme Court]. 
24. High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan  v. Ramesh Chand 
Paliwal, AIR 1998 SC 1079. [Supreme Court]. 
25. Indian Olympic Ass ociation v. Veerish Malik &  Ors., ILR 
(2010) 4 Del 1.[Delhi High Court]. 
26. Indian Railway Welfare Organisation  v. D.M. Gautam , 
(2010) 169 DLT 508.[Delhi High Court]. 
27. Jeeja Ghosh & Anr. v. Union of India  & Ors.,AIR 2016 SC 
2393.[Supreme Court]. 
28. K. Ramanathan v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1985 SC 660. 
[Supreme Court]. 

 
103 
 
29. Krishak Bharti Cooperative Ltd. v. Ramesh Chander Bawa, 
(2010) 118 DRJ 176.[Delhi High Court]. 
30. LIC of India  v. Consumer Education and Research Centre , 
AIR 1995 SC 1811. [Supreme Court]. 
31. M.P. Varghese v. Mahatma Gandhi University, AIR 2007 Ker 
230.[Kerela High Court]. 
32. Madan Mohan Choudhary  v. State of Bihar , (1999) 3 SCC 
396. [Supreme Court]. 
33. Mohinder Amarnath & Ors. v. BCCI, 
CW.NO.632/89.[decided on 23.08.1989. Delhi High Court]. 
34. Mother Dairy Fruit a nd Vegetable Private Limited  v. Hatim 
Ali &Ors.,AIR 2015 Delhi 132 [Delhi High Court]. 
35. Munish Kumar Seth  v. Public Information Officer , 2012(3) 
RCR (Civil) 660. [ Punjab State Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission]. 
36. N.D.P. Namboodripad v. Union of India, (2007) 4 SCC 502. 
[Supreme Court]. 
37. Nagar Yuwak  Shikshan Sanstha v. Maharashtra State 
Information Commission , AIR 2010 Bom 1.[Bombay High 
Court]. 
38. National Stock Exchange of India Limited  v. Central 
Information Commission &  Ors., (2010) 100 SCL 464 (Del) 
[Delhi High Court]. 
39. P. Kasilingam v. P.S.G. College of Technology, AIR 1995 SC 
1395.[Supreme Court]. 
40. Panjabrao Deshmukh Urban Co-operative Bank Ltd. (Dr.) v. 
State Information Commissioner, Vidarbha Region, Nagpur , 
AIR 2009 Bom 75.[Bombay High Court]. 
41. People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) &Anr.  v. Union of 
India, AIR 2003 SC 2363. [Supreme Court]. 
42. People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) &Anr.  v. Union of 
India, AIR 2004 SC 1442.[Supreme Court]. 

 
104 
 
43. Ponds India Ltd.  v. Commissioner of Trade Tax , 2008 (8) 
SCC 369. [Supreme Court]. 
44. Population Services International v. Rajesh Dhiman, W.P.(C) 
3422/2012. [decided on 16.09.2013.Delhi High Court]. 
45. Pradeep Kumar Biswas  v. Indian Institute of Chemical 
Biology, (2002) 5 SCC 111. [Supreme Court]. 
46. Praga Tools Corporation v. C.V. Imanual, AIR 1969 SC 1306. 
[Supreme Court]. 
47. Prasar Bharati v. Amarjeet Singh , (2007) 9 SCC 539. 
[Supreme Court]. 
48. Principal, M.D. Sanatan Dharam Girls College, Ambala City 
&Anr. v. State Information Commissioner, Haryana &Anr., 
AIR 2008 P&H 101. [Punjab and Haryana High Court]. 
49. R.K. Jain &Ors. v. lndian Bank Association (lBA), Complaint 
Nos. CIC/MP/C/2015/000044 and 
CIC/SH/C/2016/000123. [decided on 13.11.2017. 
Central Information Commission]. 
50. Rahul Mehra & Anr. v. Union of India, (2004) 78 DRJ 155 
(DB).[Delhi High Court]. 
51. Rajasthan State Electricity Board, Jaipur v. Mohan Lal, AIR 
1967 SC 1857. [Supreme Court]. 
52. Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airports Authority 
of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628. [Supreme Court]. 
53. Regional Director  v. High Land Coffee W orks of P.F.X. 
Saldah, 1991(3) SCC 617. [Supreme Court]. 
54. Reliance Petrochemicals Ltd . v. Proprietors of Indian 
Express, AIR 1989 SC 190.[Supreme Court]. 
55. S.P. Gupta v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 149. [Supreme 
Court]. 
56. Sabhajit Tewary v. Union of India , AIR 1975 SC 1329. 
[Supreme Court]. 

 
105 
 
57. Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
Government of India &Ors. v. Cricket Association of Bengal 
&Ors., AIR 1995 SC 1236.[Supreme Court]. 
58. Sh. Surinder Singh Barmi  v. Board for Control of Cricket in 
India (BCCI) , Case No.61/2010.[ decided on 08.02.2013. 
Competition Commission of India]. 
59. Shikha Singh v. Tuberculosis Association of India , File No: 
CIC/AD/C/2010/001271 [decided on 29.1.2011. Central 
Information Commission.] 
60. Shri Subhash Chandra Aggarwal  & Shri Anil B airwal v. 
Indian National Congress/All India Congress Committee 
&Ors., 2013 (3) RCR (Civil) 400. [Central Information 
Commission]. 
61. Som Prakash Rekhi  v. Union of India , AIR 1981 SC 212. 
[Supreme Court]. 
62. South Gujarat Roofing Tiles Manufactures Association  v. 
State of Gujarat, (1977) SC 90. [Supreme Court]. 
63.  State of Uttar Pradesh  v. Raj Narain & Ors., AIR 1975 SC 
865.[Supreme Court]. 
64. State of West Bengal  v. Nripendra Nath Bagchi, AIR 1966 
SC 447. [Supreme Court]. 
65. Subhash Chandra Agrawal  v. PIO, Department of  Sports, 
CIC/LS/C/2012/000565. [decided on 16.06.2017.Central 
Information Commission]. 
66. Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi,  
AIR 1975 SC 1331.[Supreme Court]. 
67. Tamil Nadu Road Development Company Ltd. v. Tamil Nadu 
Information Commission , (2008) 6 Mad LJ 737. [Madras 
High Court]. 
68. Thalappalam Service Coop. Bank Ltd.  & Ors. v. State of 
Kerela & Ors., 2014 (1) ALLMR 451 : (2013) 16SCC 82. 
[Supreme Court]. 

 
106 
 
69. The Hindu Urban Cooperative Bank Ltd.  v. The State 
Information Commission & Ors., (2011) 2 P&H 64. [Punjab 
and Haryana High Court] 
70. Union of India v. Board of Control for Cricket in India & Ors., 
2017 (9) SCALE 400 [Supreme Court]. 
71. Visvesvaraya Technological University  v. Assistant 
Commissioner of Income Tax, (2016) 12 SCC 258. [Supreme 
Court]. 
72. Yoginath D. Bagde  v. State of Maharashtra , (1999) 7 SCC 
739. [Supreme Court].  
73. Zee Telefilms Ltd.  v. Union of India , AIR 2005 SC 2677: 
(2005) 4 SCC 649. [Supreme Court]. 
 
FOREIGN CASES 
 
1. Abdelhamid Benhadj and Ali Benhadj v. Algeria, U.N. Doc. 
CCPR/C/90/D/1173/2003. [Human Rights Committee]. 
2. Aston Cantlow and Wilmcote with Billesley Parochial Church 
Council v. Wallbank, [2003] UKHL 37. [House of Lords]. 
3. Bank of New South Wales v. Commonwealth, (1948) 76 CLR 
1. [High Court of Australia]. 
4. Chirwa v. Transnet Limited and Ors., [2007] ZACC 23. [High 
Court of South Africa, Eastern Cape Local Division, 
Mthatha]. 
5. Costello-Roberts v. United Kingdom , 247 -C Eur. Ct. H.R. 
(ser. A) (1993). [European Court of Human Rights]. 
6. Finnigan v. New Zealand Rugby Football Union Inc., [1985] 
2 NZLR 159. [Court of Appeal New Zealand]. 
7. Franz Nahlik  v. Austria, Communication No. 608/1995, 
U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/57/D/608/1995 (1996). [Human 
Rights Committee]. 
8. Gough v. Gough, (1891) 2 QB 665. [Queen’s Bench]. 

 
107 
 
9. Palser v. Grimling, (1948) 1 All ER 1,  11 (HL). [House of 
Lords]. 
10. Poplar Housing and Regeneration Community Association 
Ltd v. Donoghue, [2002] Q.B. 48.[Queen’s Bench]. 
11. Storck v. Germany, 2005-V Eur. Ct. H.R. [European Court 
of Human Rights]. 
12. Sychev v. Ukraine, App. No.4773/02 (2005) (unreport ed). 
[European Court of Human Rights]. 
13. Tae Hoon  Park v. Republic of Korea, U.N. Doc. 
CCPR/C/64/D/628/1995. [Human Rights Committee]. 
14. William Eduardo Delgado Páez  v. Colombia, U. N. Doc. 
CCPR/C/39/D/195/1985 (1990). [Human Rights 
Committee]. 
15. Woś v. Poland, 2005-IV Eur. Ct. H.R. [European Court of 
Human Rights]. 
  

 
108 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
1. A.P. – Andhra Pradesh 
2. AICC – All India Congress Committee 
3. AIR – All India Reporter 
4. All. – Allahabad 
5. Anr. – Another 
6. BCCI – Board of Control for Cricket in India 
7. BJP – Bharatiya Janta Party 
8. Bom. – Bombay 
9. BSP – Bahujan Samaj Party 
10. CAR - Civil Aviation Requirements 
11. CBI - Central Bureau of Investigation 
12. CIC – Central Information Commission 
13. CIT – Commissioner of Income Tax 
14. Coop. – Cooperative 
15. CPI – Communist Party of India 
16. CPI(M) - Communist Party of India (Marxist) 
17. Ct. – Court 
18. Del. – Delhi 
19. DGCA - Directorate General Civil Aviation 
20. Doc. – Document 
21. ECHR – European Court of Human Rights 
22. ECOSOC - Economic and Social Council 
23. Edn. – Edition 
24. Eur. – European 
25. FDI – Foreign Direct Investment 
26. FIFA -  The Fédération Internationale de Football 
Association 
27. FOI - Freedom of Information 
28. GDP - Gross Domestic Product 
29. HC – High Court 

 
109 
 
30. HL – House of Lords 
31. HR – Human Rights 
32. IBA – Indian Banking Association 
33. Ibid – Ibidem (is used to refer to an authority in the 
footnote immediately preceding the current footnote and 
the same page/ place is being referred to.) 
34. ICC – International Cricket Council 
35. ICCPR - International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights 
36. Id. – Idem (is used if the authority is the same but the 
page or place of reference is different.) 
37. IFC - Industrial Finance Corporation 
38. IHRB - Institute for Human Rights and Business 
39. IMF - International Monetary Fund 
40. INC – Indian National Congress 
41. INR – Indian Rupee 
42. Jrnl. - Journal 
43. Ker. – Kerela 
44. L. Rev. – Law Review 
45. LIC – Life Insurance Corporation 
46. LJ – Law Journal 
47. M.P. – Member of Parliament 
48. Mad. – Madras 
49. NCP – Nationalist Congress Party 
50. NCRWC - National Commission to Review the Working of 
the Constitution 
51. NGO – Non-Government Organisation 
52. NHRC - National Human Rights Commission 
53. NSF – National Sports Federation 
54. OHCHR – Office of the High Commissioner of Human 
Rights 
55. ONGC - Oil & Natural Gas Commission 
56. Ors. – Others 

 
110 
 
57. P&H – Punjab and Haryana 
58. PIO – Public Information Officer 
59. PPP - Public-Private Partnership 
60. PUCL - People's Union for Civil Liberties 
61. QB – Queen’s Bench 
62. RTI – Right to Information 
63. SBI – State Bank of India 
64. SC – Supreme Court 
65. SCC – Supreme Court cases 
66. SDG - Sustainable Development Goal 
67. Supra - used to refer to a prior footnote 
68. UDHR - Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
69. UK – United Kingdom 
70. UN – United Nations 
71. UNESCAP - United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission in Asia and the Pacific 
72. UNHRC – United Nations Human Rights Committee 
73. UPA - United Progressive Alliance 
74. v. – versus 
  

 
111 
 
ANNEXURES 
I - MoA of BCCI 
 
1. The name of the Association is “THE BOARD OF CONTROL 
FOR CRICKET IN INDIA” and it shall hereafter be referred to as 
the “BCCI”. 
 
2. The objects and purposes of the BCCI are: 
(a)To control and improve quality and standards of the 
game of Cricket in India, lay down policies, 
roadmaps, guidelines and make rules and regulations 
(and amend or alter them) in all matters relating to 
the game of Cricket[emphasis added], recognizing that 
the primary stakeholders are the players and Cricket 
fans in India, and that accountability, transparency and 
integrity of the Game are the core values; 
(b)To provide for measures necessary for promotion and 
development of the game of Cricket, welfare and interest 
of Cricketers and elimination of unethical and unfair 
practices in the Game of cricket; and for that purpose, 
organize coaching schemes, establish coaching 
academies, hold tournaments, exhibition matches, Test 
Matches, ODIs, Twenty/20, and any other matches and 
take all other required steps; 
(c)To strive for sportsmanship and professionalism in the 
game of Cricket and its governance and administration; 
inculcate principles of transparency and ethical 
standards in players, team officials, umpires and 
administrators; and to ban doping, age fraud, sexual 
harassment and all other forms of inequity and 
discrimination; 

 
112 
 
(d)To encourage the formation of State, Regional or other 
Cricket Associations and the organization of Inter -State 
and other Tournaments; to lay down norms for 
recognition which achieve uniformi ty in the structure, 
functioning and processes of the Member Associations; 
(e)To arrange, control, regulate and if necessary, finance 
visits of Teams that are Members of the International 
Cricket Council and teams of other Countries to India; 
(f)To arrange , control, regulate and finance, visits of 
Indian Cricket Teams to tour countries that are 
members of the International Cricket Council or 
elsewhere in conjunction with the bodies governing 
cricket in the countries to be visited[emphasis added]; 
(g)To select teams to represent India[emphasis added] in 
Test Matches, One Day Internationals, Twenty/20 
matches and in any other format in India or abroad as 
the BCCI may decide from time to time; 
(h)To foster the spirit of sportsmanship and the ideals of 
cricket amongst school, college and university students 
and others and to educate them regarding the same; 
(i)To appoint India's representative/s on the International 
Cricket Council, as also to Conferences and Seminars 
connected with the game of Cricket; 
(j)To appoint Managers and/or other team officials for the 
Indian Teams; 
(k)To employ and appoint CEOs, professional managers, 
auditors, executive secretaries, administrative officers, 
assistant secretaries, managers, clerks, team support 
staff, players, and other service personnel and staff; and 
to remunerate them for their services, by way of salaries, 
wages, gratuities, pensions, honoraria, ex -gratia 
payments and/or provident fund; and to 

 
113 
 
remove/terminate or dismiss such employees or 
personnel; 
(l)To ensure that tickets to cricket matches are widely 
available well in advance of the matches to members of 
the public at reasonable rates, and to prevent 
distribution of the same as largesse; and also to offer 
seats gratis or at nominal rates to students; 
(m)To lay out cricket grounds and to provide pavilion, 
canteen and other facilities and amenities for the 
convenience and benefit of the members, players, and 
the Cricket fans including the women and the disabled, 
and to ensure the availability of Cricket gear and 
amenities to Cricket players; 
(n)To constitute Committees, from time to time, and 
entrust or delegate its functions and duties to such 
Committees, for achieving the objects of the BCCI; 
(o)To vest immovable properties and funds of the BCCI in 
Trustees appointed by it, for carrying out the objects of 
the BCCI; 
(p)To sell, manage, mortgage, lease, exchange, dispose of or 
otherwise deal with all or any property of the BCCI; 
(q)To acquire or purchase properties – movable and 
immovable, and assets – tangible and intangible, and to 
apply the capital and income therefrom and the proceeds 
of the sale or transfer thereof, for or towards all or any of 
the objects of the BCCI; 
(r)To collect funds, and wherever necessary, borrow with or 
without security and to purchase, redeem or pay off any 
such securities; 
(s)To carry out any other activity which may seem to the 
BCCI capable of being conveniently carried on in 
connection with the above, or calculated directly or 
indirectly to enhance the value or render profitable or 

 
114 
 
generate better income/revenue, from any of the 
properties, assets and rights of the BCCI; 
(t)To promote, protect and assist the Players who are the 
primary agents of the game by: 
(i)Creating a Players’ Association to be funded by the 
BCCI; 
(ii)Being sensitive t o Players’ before international 
calendars are drawn up so that sufficient time is 
provided for rest and recovery; 
(iii)Taking steps, particularly on longer tours, so the 
emotional wellbeing and family bonds of the 
Players’ are strengthened; 
(iv)Compulsorily having qualified Physiotherapists, 
Mental Conditioning Coaches / Counsellors and 
Nutritionists among the Team’s support staff; 
(v)Having a single point of contact on the logistics 
and managerial side so that Players’ can fully 
concentrate on the game; 
(vi)Registering all duly qualified agents to ensure 
there is oversight and transparency in player 
representation; 
(vii)Offering appropriate remuneration of an 
international standard when representing the 
country on the international stage, and always 
recalling that national representation has priority 
over club or franchise; 
(u)To grant/donate such sum/s for: 
(i)Such causes as would be deemed fit by the BCCI 
conducive to the promotion of the game of Cricket; 
(ii)The benefit of Cricketers or their spouses and 
children by introducing benevolent fund schemes 
or other benefit schemes, as the BCCI deems fit, 
subject to its rules and regulations;  

 
115 
 
(iii)The benefit of any other persons who have served 
Cricket or their spouses and children as the BCCI 
may consider fit; 
(iv)To award sponsorships to sportspersons in games 
other than Cricket for development of their 
individual skills; and  
(v)To donate to any charitable cause;  
(v)To start or sponsor and/or to subscribe to funds or stage 
matches for the benefit of the Cricketers or persons who 
may have rendered service to the game of Cricket or for 
their families, or to donate towards the development or 
promotion of the game and to organize matches in aid of 
Public Charitable and Relief Funds; 
(w)To impart physical educati on through the medium of 
Cricket; 
(x)To co-ordinate the activities of members and institutions 
in relation to the BCCI and amongst themselves; 
(y)To create and maintain a central repository and database 
of all Cricketers along with their game statistics; 
(z)To introduce a scheme of professionalism and to 
implement the same; 
(aa)To provide a fair and transparent grievance 
redressal mechanism to players, support personnel 
and other entities associated with Cricket; 
(bb)Generally to do all such other acts and things as 
may seem to the BCCI to be convenient and/or 
conducive to the carrying out of the objects of the 
BCCI. 
 
3.  The income, funds and properties of the BCCI, however 
acquired, shall be utilized and applied solely for the promotion of 
the objects of t he BCCI as set forth above to aid and assist 

 
116 
 
financially or otherwise and to promote, encourage, advance and 
develop and generally to assist the game of cricket or any other 
sport throughout India. 
 
4. The BCCI shall not be dissolved unless the dissolution  is 
decided upon by a resolution passed at a General Meeting of the 
BCCI convened for the purpose, by a majority of 3/4th of the 
Members present and entitled to vote. The quorum for such 
meeting shall be 2/3rd of the Members who have a right to vote. 
In the case of dissolution of the BCCI, if there shall remain after 
satisfaction of all debts and liabilities, any property whatsoever, 
it shall be given or transferred to some other institution or 
institutions having objects similar to those of the BCCI and no t 
running for profit. 
  

 
117 
 
II – Reply of Hon’ble Minister of State for Youth Affairs and 
Sports to Unstarred Question No. 2097 in the Lok Sabha 
 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO: 2097 ANSWERED ON: 27.03.2012 
SPORTS FEDERATIONS UNDER RTI 
SEEMA UPADHYAY SUSHILA SAROJ USHA  VERMA OM 
PRAKASH YADAV MAHESHWAR HAZARI Will the Minister of  
YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS be pleased to state: 
(a) whether the Government proposes to bring various sports 
association/federations including the Board of Control for 
Cricket in India (BCCI) under  the ambit of the Right to 
Information Act, 2005 so as to ensure transparency in their 
functioning; 
(b) if so, the details thereof and the response of these federations 
and BCCI thereon; (c) the progress made by the Government 
so far in this regard; 
(d) wh ether the BCCI gets various concessions in income tax, 
custom duty etc. and land at concessional rates for stadia; 
and 
(e) if so, the details thereof during the last three years and the 
current year? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF THE STATE (INDEPENDENT CHARGE) IN TH E 
MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS (SHRI AJAY 
MAKEN) 

 
118 
 
(a) to (c) The need for bringing National Sports Federations (NSFs) 
including BCCI under ambit of Right to Information Act, (RTI) 
2005 has been voiced from to time to time. Accordingly 
Government in April, 2010 declared all the NSFs receiving grant 
of Rs.10.00 lakhs or more as Public Authority under Section 2(h) 
of the RTI, 2005. There are major court rulings for treating the 
National Sports Federation as a public authorities, especially in 
view of th e state -like function discharged by them such as 
selection of the national team and control and regulation of sports 
in the country, which also make them amenable to the writ 
jurisdiction of High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution 
of India Notwit hstanding the above, the Government has 
proposed to bring all the National Sports Federations including 
BCCI under the RTI Act in the proposed Draft National Sports 
Development Bill, with provision of exclusion clause protecting 
personal/confidential information relating to athletes. 
(d) & (e) In so far as BCCI, in particular, is concerned, 
Government of India has been treating BCCI as a National Sports 
Federation and approving the proposal of BCCI for holding the 
events in India and participation in intern ational events abroad. 
The Central Government does not extend any direct financial 
assistance to BCCI. But the Central Government has been 
granting concessions in income tax, customs duty, etc. to BCCI. 
The State Governments also have provided land in many  places 
to the Cricket Associations. 
As per the Section 80(G) 92) (viii) (c) and sum paid by the 
assesses, being a company, in the previous year as donations to 
the Indian Olympic Association or to any other association or 
institutions established in India, as the Central Government may, 
having regard to the prescribed guidelines, by notifications in the 
official gazette specify in this behalf for (i) the development of 
infrastructure for sports and games; (ii) the sponsorship of sports 

 
119 
 
and games. For being  eligible under the above Act BCCI was 
registered under Section 12 (a) read with Section 17 (a) as an 
charitable institution and was availing tax exemptions. 
Department of Revenue has informed that the registration 
granted to BCCI under section 12A of the Act was withdrawn in 
December 2009 with effect from 1 June, 2006. As such BCCI has 
availed tax exemptions as a charitable organization till 
30.06.2006 as per details given below: 
S.No. Annual year Amount of exemption 
1. 1997-1998 Rs.11,01,44,329/- 
2. 1998-1999 Rs.18,18,20,87,740/- 
3. 1999-2000 Rs.8,37,14,734/- 
4. 2000-2001 Rs.36,01,22,999/- 
5. 2001-2002 Rs.42,98,07,762/- 
6. 2002-2003 Rs.31,46,41,089/- 
7. 2003-2004 Rs.26,28,78,110/- 
8. 2004-2005 Rs.33,46,89,451/- 
9. 2005-2006 Rs.32,99,98,557/- 
10. 2006-2007 Rs.127,51,52,718/- 
   
Further, Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) has informed 
that no specific exemption of Customs, Central Excise duty and 
Service Tax has been extended to BCCI in the last three years and 
the current year, except an exem ption for temporary import of 
specified sports, medical, photographic, broadcast and office 
equipment for the purpose of organizing the International Cricket 
Council World Cup 2011 as per Notification No.07/11-Customs, 
dated 9.2.2011. 
 
 
 

 
120 
 
III - Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Department of 
Sports’ letter number F.No.36-2/2010-SP-II, dated March 30, 
2010 ‘Declaring National Sports Federations as Public 
Authority’ 
 


 
121 
 
  


 
122 
 
 
