 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
 
Report No. 276 
 
 
 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK:  
GAMBLING AND SPORTS BETTING 
INCLUDING IN CRICKET IN INDIA 
 
 
 
 
July 2018 


 
  


ii 
 
Report No. 276 
 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK: GAMBLING AND 
SPORTS BETTING INCLUDING IN CRICKET 
IN INDIA 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter Title Pages 
I Background 1-5 
 
A Mudgal Committee 1-2 
B Lodha Committee 3-4 
C Reference to the Commission 4-5 
II History of Betting and Gambling 6-15 
A Betting and Gambling in Ancient 
India 
7-13 
B In ancient Europe 13-14 
III Distinction between Wagering, 
Gambling and Betting  
15-27 
A Gambling and Betting- a Game of Chance 
or Skill? 
21-25 
B Examining Foreign decisions 25-27 
IV Constitution of India and Betting 28-47 
A Morality and Betting  31-37 
B Legal perspe ctive of Gambling and 
Betting 
37-47 
1 Doctrine of res extra commercium 39-42 
2 Immorality or opposed to public policy  42-45 
3 Wagering Agreements  45-47 
V Statutory Provisions 48-73 
A Central Laws 48-57 
1 The Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998 48 
2 Indian Penal Code, 1860   48-49 
3 The Indian Contract Act, 1872 (Contract Act) 49 
4 Prize Competitions Act, 1955 50-51 
5 Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 51 
6 Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 52 
7 The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 52-53 

iii 
 
2002 
8 The Young Person’s (Harmful Publications) 
Act, 1956 
53-54 
9 The Indecent Representation of Women 
(Prohibition) Act, 1986 
54 
10 The Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act) 54-55 
11 Information Technology (Intermediaries 
Guidelines) Rules, 2 011 (Intermediaries 
Rules) 
55 
12 Telecom Commercial Communications 
Customer Preference Regulations, 2010 
55 
13 The Cable Television Network Rules, 1994  56 
14 Income Tax Act, 1961 56 
15 The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 56-57 
16 Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 57 
B The Public Gambling Act, 1867: 
Whether a Central Enactment 
57-60 
C State Laws 60-73 
(a) Maharashtra and Gujarat 60 
(b) Meghalaya 60-61 
(c) Rajasthan 61 
(d) Goa, Daman and Diu  61-62 
(e) Tamil Nadu  62-63 
(f) Sikkim 63-65 
(g) Nagaland 65-68 
(h) Telangana 68-70 
(i) Other State Acts on Gambling 70 
D Act Pending Notification 70-71 
E Bill pending before the Lok Sabha 71 
F Draft Bill 71-73 
VI International Perspective 74-95 
A Gambling & Betting In Different 
Jurisdictions 
74-75 
1 United Kingdom 74-77 
2 South Africa 77-79 
3 United States of America 79-85 
4 Australia  85-87 
5 France 87-88 

iv 
 
6 Austria 88-89 
7 Russia 89 
8 Malaysia 89-91 
9 Spain 91-92 
10 Switzerland 92-93 
11 The European Gaming and Betting 
Association (EGBA) 
94-95 
VII Public/ Government Responses 96-99 
VIII Need for Regulation 100-112 
A Consequences that ensue due to 
unregulated gambling and betting  
104-105 
B Illegal Commerce 105-106 
C Corruption in sports 106-109 
D Advantages of  regulated gambling 
and betting industry: 
109 
E Autonomous regulation of gambling 
and betting industry 
109-110 
F Suggestions by FICCI  111-112 
IX Conclusions and Recommendations 113-121 
Annexure   
I Responses from Stakeholders 122-136 
II Separate Opinion of Member 137-138 
 List of cases 139-140 
 
 
 
  

Chapter I 
Background 
 
1.1 Cricket is the most popular game in India today, and the 
game has a glorious history in the country.  However, t he 
current decade has also witnessed controversies relating to 
Indian Premier Leagu e (IPL) matches, along with its glory. In 
2013, there arose the case of spot -fixing and betting by three 
players of a team in IPL. In a separate case, the Mumbai Police 
arrested a player, an official and a relative of an office bearer of 
BCCI for betting a nd having links with bookies. A two-member 
committee of the Board of Cricket Control of India (BCCI) had 
reported it to be a case of no evidence.  The Supreme Court 
appointed Mr. Justice Mukul Mudgal, the retired Chief Justice 
of Punjab and Haryana High Cou rt to enquire into the 
allegations.  
 
A. Mudgal Committee 
 
1.2 The Mudgal Committee found that a large number of 
people associated with IPL had indulged in hedging bets (Team 
against Team) and match fixing. The matches had been played 
in contravention of the IPL Operational Rules which brought 
about a stigma to the game. The Committee reported that the 
investigative agencies lack the tools to track the bookies, the 
wager amount and detect sporting fraud sans intelligence from 
sources such as phone tapping. In light of these problems, the 
investigative agencies stated before the Mudgal Committee that, 
“legalising sports betting would reduce the element of black 
money and the influence of the underworld besides helping 
them in detection and focusing their investigation”. 
 
 

2 
 
 
1.3 In light of these observations, the Committee made the 
following recommendations: 
 
 The present measures undertaken by BCCI in 
combating sporting fraud are ineffective and 
insufficient. The IPL governing body should be 
independent of BCCI. 
 Agents of the players should be registered and 
should not be allowed to travel with the players. 
 Employment of players in franchise group 
companies should be avoided. Players should not 
have stakes in agencies involved in the game of 
cricket. There is a nee d for stringent and effective 
control on players’ agents. 
 Separate law, investigating  sic investigative  agency 
and courts to deal with betting and match -fixing 
charges should be designed. 
 The Law to govern such activities must be stern akin 
to anti- terror and anti-drug laws. 
 Post-match parties where players have access to 
undesirable elements should be banned.  
 BCCI should maintain and circulate among players, 
a list of undesirable elements. 
 Senior players with unimpeachable record like 
Sachin Tendulkar, R ahul Dravid, Anil Kumble, and 
so on should caution and advise the younger players 
against pitfalls of indulging in malpractices like 
betting and match fixing/spot fixing. Such 
interactions with legends of the sport might be the 
most effective and deterrent  means of preventing 
future wrongdoing. 
 Most investigative agencies lament the fact that they 
lack proper tools for detecting sport s frauds, know 
the names of the bookies and the betting amount. 
They can only use sources of intelligence such as 
phone tapping to detect fraud, which again has its 
own issues of privacy. These agencies have stated 
that legalising betting would reduce the involvement 
of black money, and the influence of underworld. 
Additionally, it would help them in detection of 
fraud and keep their investigation focused1. 
 
                                  
1 Mukul Mudgal,  Law and Sports in India: Development Issues and Challenges  226 ( 
LexisNexis, 2016). 

3 
 
B. Lodha Committee 
  
1.4 While disposing of Civil Appeal in the case of Board of 
Control for Cricket in India v. Cricket Association of Bihar & Ors.2, 
the Supreme Court constituted a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of former Chief Justice, Mr. Justice R M Lodha to 
examine and make suitable recommendations for reforms in 
practices and procedures and necessary amendments in the 
Memorandum of Association and Rules & Regulations of the 
Board of Cricket Control in India.  In its Report, the Committee 
distinguished between match/spot fixing - which compromises 
the integrity of the game by attempting to change the course of 
the match, with betting. It emphasised the need for separate 
treatment, i.e. punishing match fixing and regulating betting. 
 
1.5 The Lodha Committee recommended the legalisation of  
betting (with strong safeguards), except for those covered by the 
BCCI and IPL regulation s. It also recommended that 
match/spot-fixing be made a criminal offence. The Committee 
opined that a regulatory framework would enable the 
government in differentiating betting from match fixing.  It 
recommended that following safeguards be provided in the 
legislation regulating betting:3 
 
(i) Regulatory watchdogs would be 
necessary to ensure that the bettin g 
houses as well as those transacting 
there, are strictly monitored, failing 
which their registrations would be 
susceptible to cancellation. 
(ii) The Players, Administrators and 
others closely associated with the 
sport would be required to furn ish the 
                                  
2 (2014) 7 SCC 383 
3 Report of the Supreme Court Committee on Reforms in Cricket at 61-62 (December, 2015). 

4 
 
details o f their income  and assets for 
the sake of transparency. 
(iii) Licence would have to be issued to 
those placing the bets as well, with age 
and identification details recorded. 
(iv) Strict penal sanctions would have to 
be imposed on those transgressing the 
licence and other requirements. 
 
C. Reference to the Commission 
 
1.6 In July 2017, the Supreme Court, while considering the 
Lodha Committee Report, in Board of Cricket Control in India v. 
Cricket Association of Bihar & Ors.4, made a reference to the Law 
Commission to examine the issue of legalising betting in India, 
observing: 
 
…..the recommendation made by the 
Committee that betting should be legalised 
by law, involves the enactment of a Law 
which is a matter that may be examined by 
the Law Commission and the Government 
for such action as it may consider 
necessary… 
 
1.7 The Oxford dictionary defines the term ‘betting’ as “the 
action of gambling money on the outcome of a race, game, or 
other unpredictable event”. In other words, betting is a more 
sophisticated ‘word-substitute’ coined for the activity of 
gambling, since gambling per se carries with it a social stigma, 
which is known to bring along other social and moral vices.  
Nonetheless, understanding the intertwining connection of 
betting with gambling, the Commission decided to also consider 
gambling in the ambit of its study for this report. Though the 
issue of legalizing gambling was not referred to the Commission 
                                  
4 (2016) 8 SCC 535 
 
 

5 
 
by the Supreme Court, the Commission decided to study it, 
because, in the opinion of the Commission, betting and 
gambling are two sides of the same coin. Therefore, given the 
interconnectedness of betting and gambling, in the present 
report, various aspects of legalising both betting and gambling 
are considered.   
 
1.8 On 30 May 2017, the Commission issued a public appeal 
eliciting the views and suggestions from all stakeholders, and 
placed it on the website of the Commission (A copy of the Appeal 
is appended to the Annexure).  While doing so, the Commission 
explained the need for considering gambling along with betting.  
The relevant part of the Appeal is reproduced below: 
 
While considering the issue, the Commission 
discerned that gambling is also a subject which is 
very closely associated with betting.  While 
considering legalisation of betting, leaving aside 
gambling may render the whole exercise futile.  
Therefore, the Commission would like to study the 
issue of legalising betting as well as gambling in 
the country. 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER II 
History of Betting and Gambling 
 
2.1 Betting and gambling have always been a  part of human 
civilisation. Gambling is perhaps as old as mankind and has 
been globally practi sed in different forms such as gaming, 
betting, races, wagering, etc. The attitude of society towards 
betting and gambling has varied across time and geography. 
Despite being frowned upon from a moral and religious 
perspective, laws have failed to desist people from indulging in 
this activity because of its perennial allurement. This activity is 
looked upon as a means of winning huge with small 
investments and as a ubiquitous pastime. It is widely practi sed 
as entertainment by the rich. Its notorious companionship with 
most other human vices is well known. It generally has 
disastrous consequences for the families of gamblers who 
belong to vulnerable class of the so ciety. Betting and gambling 
are susceptible to a risk of self -inflicted damage. This has made 
gambling a formidable problem for law and morals5. 
 
2.2 This activity involves a lot of risk as the results of the 
betted event are uncertain. Betting involves tr ansaction of 
money or any property and this arrangement may be arrived 
face to face, or through virtual means. The revolution of Internet 
technology has opened new dimensions of betting and gambling, 
and has created a global market for it. Due to this, the  manner 
of playing games has undergone a drastic change in recent 
years. Therefore, l aws on betting and gambling are required to 
be examined so as to ensure that consumers are adequately 
protected from its ill effects. 
 
                                  
5M.B. Majumdar, Commentary on the Bombay Prevention and Gambling Act, 1887 (Sweden 
Maxwell). 

7 
 
A. Betting and Gambling in Ancient India 
 
2.3 Several instances of betting and gambling are found in 
Indian history and mythology. References of t hese activities are 
found in both the epics, Ramyana and Mahabharata. 
Yudhishtir, the eldest son of Pandu had a penchant for 
gambling. One of the mos t gripping scenes in the Mahabharata 
shows him losing not only his whole kingdom, but also his 
brothers and wife in the ‘Game of Dice’. 
 
2.4 The mythological story of Nala and Damayanti, depicts 
that gambling existed in ancient India. In fact, laws were framed 
in ancient India to regulate it 6. Like Yagnavalkya7, the Narada -
Smriti8 and Kautilya9, all advocated that gambling should exist 
under the control of the State. 
 
2.5 These activities also find mention in ancient texts like the 
Rig Veda  and the Atharva Veda, both written around  1500 
B.C.  
 
vU;s tk;ka ifj e`”kUR;L; ;L;kx`/k Onsnus okT;{k% A 
 
firk ekrk Hkzkjkrj ,uekgquZ tkuheks u;rk c)esre~ AA 
       (R+g 10.34.4)                                                                                          
v{kSekZ nhO;% d`f’kfeRd`’kLo foŸks jeLo cgq eU;eku% A 
r= xko% fdro r= tk;k rUes fo p’Vs lfork;e;Z% AA 
                                                                                            (R+g 10.34.13) 
This verse of Rig Veda means that: 
                                  
6 Mukul Mudgal,  Law and Sports in India: Development Issues and Chal lenges 226 
(LexisNexis, 2016).  
7 2nd Ed. Ancient Indian History and Civilization by Sailendra Nath Sen, New age 
International Publishers page 69; See Also State of Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala, AIR 
1957 SC 699. 
82nd Ed. Ancient Indian History and Civilization by Sailendra Nath Sen, New age International 
Publishers page 69. 
9 2nd Ed. Ancient Indian History and Civilization by Sailendra Nath Sen, New age 
International Publishers page 138; See Also State of Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala, 
AIR 1957 SC 699. 

8 
 
 
The gambler's w ife is left forlorn and 
wretched: the mother mourns the son who 
wanders homeless. 
In constant fear, in debt, and seeking 
money, he goes by night to the home of 
others [probably to steal]. Play not with dice, 
[but] cultivate your corn -land. Enjoy the 
gain, and deem that wealth sufficient.  
There are your cattle, there your wife, O 
gambler: So this good Savit ur himself has 
told me. 
 
2.6 In Hymn XXXVIII of Atharv Veda, reference is found to “a 
charm for success in gambling” and summoning the Apsaras to 
obtain the stake and gain the victory with skill. 
 
2.7 Yagnyavalkya Smriti deals with the issue differently. It 
states: 
 
lqjkdkeíwrd`ran.M”kqYdkof”k’Vde~A 
 
o`Fkknkua rFkSosg iq=ks níku~ u iSr`de~AA ;kKLe`Œ O;ogkjk/;k;% †‰ AA 
 
This verse means that: 
 
The son shoul d not pay the paternal debt 
which was contracted for the purposes of 
spirituous liquor, lust or gambling, or which 
is due as the balance of an unpaid (i.e., 
remaining portion of) fine or toll, as also a 
gift without any consideration. 
 

9 
 
2.8 Translation of t he verses 935 to 939 Katyayana Smriti 
reads: 
 
If gambling cannot be stopped in the 
kingdom, it shall be regulated . Gambling 
should be allowed to be carried on openly in 
the gambling hall (the hall licensed for the 
purpose).The gambling hall should be 
provided with an ornamental arch to indicate 
that it is a gambling hall, so that respectable 
men may not mistake the nature of the 
place. The King should impose tax on 
gambling and make it a source of income. 
Gambling could be carried on openly after 
payment of  tax to the King 10. (emphasis 
added) 
 
2.9 Manu Smriti, in this respect states: 
 
|wra lekâ;a pSo jktk jk’VªfUuokj;sr~A 
 
jktkUrdj.kkosrkS OnkS nks’kkS i`fFkoh{khrke~AA 
                          ¼euqLe`- 9-221½ 
 
izdk”kesrÙkkLd;Za ;Ìsoulekâ;kSA 
 
r;ksfuZR;a izfr?kkrs u`ifr;Zrzoku~ Hkosr~ AA 
                          ¼euqLe`- 9-222½ 
XX XX XX XX XX 
|wresrRiqjk dYis n`’Va oSjdja egr~ A 
 
rLekn~ |wra u lsosr gkL;kFkZefi cqf)eku~ AA 
                          ¼euqLe`- 9-227½ 
 
                                  
10 See Reeja v. State Of Kerala, 2004 (3) KLT 599. 

10 
 
izPNUua ok izdk”ka ok rfUu’ksosr ;ks uj% A 
 
rL; n.MfodYi% L;k|Fks’Va u`irsLrFkk AA 
                          ¼euqLe`- 9-228½ 
 
These verses mean: 
 
Gambling and betting let the king exclude from his realm; 
those two vices cause the destruction of the kingdoms of 
princes (221). 
 
Gambling and betting amount to open theft; the king shall 
always exert himself in suppressing both (of them) (222). 
 
XX XX XX XX XX 
 
In a former Kalpa this (vice of) gambling has been seen to 
cause great enmity; a wise man, therefore, should not 
practise it even for amusement (227). 
 
On every man who addicts himself to that (vice) either 
secretly or openly, the king may inflict punishment 
according to his discretion (228). 
 
2.10 According to Manu, such activities are prohibited as they 
destroy truth, honesty and wealth. These are  means of self -
destruction and enmity. 
 
2.11 Brihaspati, dealing with gambling in chapter XXVI, verse 
199, recognises that though gambling had been proscribed by 
Manu, other law -givers allowed it when conducted under the 
State-control providing the King, a share from every stake11. 
 
                                  
11 As cited in State of Bombay v. RMD Chamarbaugwala, AIR 1957 SC 699. 

11 
 
2.12 Narad Smriti describes gambling as a lawful 
amusement, when carried out in, public gaming houses. 
 
2.13 Chanakya 12 suggested severe penalty for violation of 
gambling regulations as he considered all gamblers to be 
cheats13.  Kautilya’s Arthshastra reads: 
 
ftrnzO;kn/;{k% i¥~da “kreknnhr]  
 
dkd.l{kkjyk”kykdkoØ;eqndHkwfedeZØ;a paA 
 
¼12½ nzO;k.kkek/kkua foØ;a p dq;kZr A ¼13½ v{kHkwfegLrnks’kk.kka 
pkizfr’ks/krs f}xq.ks n.M% A rsu lekà;ks O;k[;kr% vU;= 
fo|kf”Yilekà;kfnfr A ¼14½ 
 
These verses mean that: 
 
The Superintendents of gambling house 
shall, therefore, be honest and supply dice at 
the rate of a kákani of hire per pair. 
Substitution by tricks of hand or  dice other 
than thus supplied shall be punished with a 
fine of 12 panas. A false player shall not only 
be punished first with the amercement and 
fines leviable for theft and deceit, but will 
also be subjected to forfeit the stakes he has 
won. The Superintendent shall take not only 
5 per cent of the stakes won by every winner, 
and the hire payable for supplying dice and 
other acces sories of dice play, but also  the 
                                  
12Chanakya is an Indian Philosopher, economist, jurist he is traditionally identified as Kautilya 
who authored ancient Indian treatise the Arthashastra. 
13Kautilya, “The Arthshashtra”, edited and translated by L.N. Rangrajan 61 (Penguin Books 
India, 1992). 

12 
 
fee chargeable for supplying water and 
accommodation, besides the charge for 
licence. He can at the same time carry on 
the transactions of sale or mortgage of 
things. If he does not forbid tricks of hand 
and other deceitful practices, he shall be 
punished with twice the amount of the fine 
(levied from the deceitful gamblers.). The 
same rules shall apply to betting and 
challenging except those in learning and art. 
 
2.14 Despite prevalence of gambling, the ancient texts reflect a 
sceptical approach towards it, as it is considered to be a risky 
activity which can lead  not only  to self -harm but also to even 
self destruction.  
 
2.15 It has always been debated whether gambling and b etting 
is a game of skill or chance. Allusions to ‘dicing being an art’ are 
found in Mahabharata and folklore. For example, there is a 
story in Jataka tales, where a king was considered to be so 
skilled in the art of dicing that he could predict the result  of the 
throw before the dice struck the board. If the result was 
unfavourable to him, he would catch the dice before it landed 
and would make his opponent repeat the throw14. 
 
2.16 With the passage of time, the forms and ways of betting 
and gambling have changed. Today, people gamble and bet over 
phone, SMSs, Skype etc. Easy access to internet betting sites, 
having a global presence has made regulation of betting a 
serious challenge. Telecommunication technology and global 
                                  
14 W. Norman Brown, “The Indian Games of Pachisi, Chaupar, and Chausar” 6(2) Expedition 
Magazine (1964), available at : http://www.penn.museum/sites/expedition/?p=729 (last 
visited on 01-06-2018). 

13 
 
bank transfers have linked betting  hosts into networks. But 
despite these developments, ‘skill’ or ‘chance’ is still a decisive 
factor in determining the legality of gambling and betting in 
India. 
 
2.17 A five -judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Kishan 
Chander & Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh15, observed: 
 
Considering the fact that gambling is an evil 
and it is rampant, that gaming houses 
flourish as profitable business and that 
detection of gambling is extremely difficult, 
the law to root out gambling cannot but be 
in the public interest. Such a law must of 
necessity provide for special procedure but 
so long as it is not arbitrary and contains 
adequate safeguards it cannot be 
successfully assailed. 
 
B. In ancient Europe: 
 
2.18 The Greek and Roman civilisations were amongst the first 
to practis e gambling 16 . Archaeological surveys suggest that 
gambling was prevalent even among the earliest cavemen. Cave 
drawings depicting gambling offer proof of the existence of 
gambling in pre-historic times. The discovery of dice-like objects 
called Astragali made from ankle bones of sheep or dogs dating 
back to 40,000 years, further adds to the archive of evidence for 
the existence of gambling in ancient Europe. Pairs of dice, some 
of them ‘loaded’ to fall a certain way have also been found in the 
ruins of Pompeii17. 
 
2.19 From references in the writings of Homer as well as other 
ancient texts, it is evident that gambling activities were 
                                  
15AIR 1965 SC 307. 
16 Roll of a Dice, The Ball is in motion, PL 59 (September 2013). 
17The History of Gambling, available at: http://www.gypsyware.com/gamblingHistory.html 
(last visited on 25-05-2018). 

14 
 
widespread in ancient Greece. Games contingent upon ‘luck’ viz. 
flipping of coins and dice games have always been popular 
among different social groups.   There were designated 
establishments, though of ill -repute, to cater to people with a 
passion for gambling. In Greece, certain Gods like Hermes and 
Pan were associated with gambling. Even the Gods were said to 
have gambled; Greek mythology shows that Zeus, Hades and 
Poseidon played dice to divide the Universe amongst 
themselves18. 
 
2.20 The first mention of dice is found in Greek history in 
Sophocles’s writings dated 500 BC, though dice was first 
discovered in an Egyptian tomb dated 3000 BC. Even though all 
forms of gambling were forbidden within the Rome’s boundaries 
and were punishable with a penalty worth four times the stake, 
gambling was still prevalent among ancient Romans. 
Consequent to the ban, enterprising citizens of Rome i nvented 
the first gambling chip, so  that if they were caught they could 
claim to be playing for chips and not real money19. 
 
2.21 In Italy, the earliest gambling houses akin to modern 
casinos began emerging in the early 17th century. For example, 
in 1638, t he Ridotto was established in Venice to provide a 
controlled gambling environment during the annual carnival 
season. History of land based casinos in Austria dates back to 
1765 when, in Baden, first legal casino in Europe had been 
opened. During 19 th century Casinos were emerging in Europe 
while in the United States of America informal gambling houses 
were more prevalent20.  
                                  
18Gambling in ancient civilisations, available at: http://www.ancient-origins.net/ancient-
places-europe/gambling-ancient-civilizations-00931 (last visited on 25-05-2018). 
19 The History of Gambling available at: http://www.gambling.net/history/ (last visited on 25-
05-2018). 
20Ibid. 

15 
 
CHAPTER III 
Distinction between Wagering, Gambling and Betting  
 
3.1 Wagering is a generic term that encompasses within its 
ambit, the various acts of gambling and betting. It may or may 
not require an opposite party. In some instances, the operator 
conducts the process of gambling through various schemes. It 
involves people predicting the occurrence or non -occurrence of 
an event. 
 
3.2 Manu has defined Gambling as: 
 
vizkf.kfHk;Zr~ fØ;rs rRyksds n~;wreqP;rs A 
 
izkf.kfHk% fØ;rs ;Lrq l foKs;% lekâ;% AA „„… AA 
 
This verse means: 
 
when inanimate (things) are used (for 
staking money on them), that is called 
among men gambling (dyuta), when anima te 
beings are used (for the same purpose), one 
must know that to be betting (samahvaya) 
(223) When birds, rams, deer or other 
(animals) are caused to fight against one 
another after a wager has been laid, it is 
called betting (samahavya). 
 
3.3 Kautilya’s Arthshastra defined gambling as wagering 
with inanimate objects such as dice; and betting as something 
that involved challenges and was concerned with cock fights, 
animal races and similar contests21. 
 
3.4 This differentiation may not be very apt in today’s time 
because of the emergence of different forms of wagering. 
 
                                  
21LN Rangarajan (ed.), Kautilya’s Arthshastra 347 (Penguin Books India Ltd., Calcutta, 
1992). 

16 
 
3.5 Sir William Anson has defined a wager or bet as “A 
promise to give money or money’s worth upon the determination 
or ascertainment of an uncertain event ”22 or it can be said that 
a wager is a  contract where two or more parties agree on a 
certain sum of money to be paid to one of them on  the 
happening of an uncertain event23.  
 
3.6 The Finance Act, 1994 24 defined “Betting or Gambling” 
under Section 65-B (15) as: 
 
means putting on stake something of value, particularly 
money, with consciousness of risk and hope of gain on 
the outcome of a game or a contest, whose result may be 
determined by chance or accident, or on the likelihood of 
anything occurring or not occurring. 
 
3.7 However, the Finance Ac t, 201725 does not define Betting 
or Gambling. 
 
3.8 Cambridge English Dictionary defines gambling as “t he 
activity of risking money on the result of something, such as a 
game or horse race, hoping to make money26”. 
 
3.9 According to the Oxford English Dictio nary, “Betting can 
be defined as an action of gambling money on the outcome of a 
race, game, or other unpredictable event”27. 
 
                                  
22Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya & Ors., AIR 1959 SC 781. 
23 What is wager available at: https://thelawdictionary.org/wager (last visited on 23-05-2018). 
24 The Finance Act, 1994.  
25 The Finance Act, 2017. 
26Available at: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/gambling#dataset-business-
english (last visited on 25-05-2018). 
27 Available at: https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/betting (last visited on 25 -05-
2018). 

17 
 
3.10 According to the Black’s Law Dictionary 28  gambling is 
defined as “the act of risking something of value for a chance to 
win a prize”. 
 
3.11 Betting in sports, is the act of wagering on the result of 
the sporting event. The term “betting” is generally considered 
synonymous with wagering, however, it alludes to antes in 
connection with events in the nature of races or matches 
between individuals or teams29. 
 
3.12 It can be said that wagering has various forms like 
gambling, betting and gaming. The United Kingdom Gambling 
Act, 2005 30, has defined gambling to include, betting, gaming 
and participation in a lottery.  On the other hand, betting is 
defined as the “making or accepting of a bet on the outcome of a 
race, competition or other event or process, the likelihood of 
anything occurring or not occurring; or whether anything is or 
is not true…”31. 
 
3.13 Thus, betting can simply be defined as an act of putting 
at stake a wagering amount (valuable or liquid cash) on the 
prediction of occurrence or non -occurrence of an event. It is 
always done against a second party who places his stake 
against the one placed by the first party. Neither of t he parties 
that have put at stake their wagering amounts should have any 
control over the event on which the amount is wagered. On the 
other hand, gaming includes a game of chance or skill or a 
combination of both. Examples of such gaming activities would 
                                  
28Bryan A. Garner, Black’s Law Dictionary, (8th ed. West Publishing Co.) 701, 2004.  
29 Sethi, Sethi’s Law relating to Gambling, Betting, Lotteries and Clubs  47(Law 
Publishers(India) Pvt. Ltd., Allahabad, 3rdedn). 
30 It s an Act of Parliament of United Kingdom. It applies to England, Wales and Scotland and 
is designed to control all forms of Gambling. 
31Section 9. 

18 
 
include Poker, Pool, Billiards, Fantasy Football, Internet Games, 
Crap, Roulette and Slot Machines. 
 
3.14 “Lottery”, being enumerated under Entry 40 of List I of the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India , has been 
generally excluded from the ambit of “gambling”, which is a 
State subject under Entr y 34 of List II of the Seventh Schedule. 
The Public Gambling Act, 1867 (as applicable to States such as 
Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh) as well as section 2(i) 
of the Delhi Public Gambling Act, 1955, s uggest the same. The 
Goa, Daman and Diu Public Gambling Act, 1976, expressly 
defines the term ‘gaming’ in the following words:  
 
‘[g]aming’ includes (a) wagering or betting 
and includes wagering or betting on the 
digits of a numerical figure arrived at by 
manipulation in any manner whatsoever, or 
on the order of the digits, or on the digits 
themselves or on pictorial representations, 
(b) any transaction by which a person in any 
capacity whatever employs another person in 
any capacity whatever or engages for another 
in any capacity whatever, to wager or bet 
with any other person, (c) the collection or 
soliciting of bets, receipts or distribution of 
winnings or prizes in money or otherwise in 
respect of wagering or betting or any act 
which is intended to aid o r facilitate 
wagering or betting or such collection, 
soliciting, receipt or distribution, but does 
not include a lottery. 
 
3.15 The Supreme Court in the case of Dr. K. R. Lakshmanan v. 
State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.32, defined gambling as follows:  
 
Gambling in  a nut -shell is payment of a 
price for a chance to win a prize. Games may 
be of chance, or of skill or of skill and chance 
combined. A game of chance is determined 
                                  
32AIR 1996 SC 1153. 

19 
 
entirely or in part by lot or mere luck. The 
throw of the dice, the turning of the wheel, 
the shuffling of the cards, are all modes of 
chance…A game of skill, on the other hand - 
although the element of chance necessarily 
cannot be entirely eliminated - is one in 
which success depends principally upon the 
superior knowledge, training, attention, 
experience and adroitness of the player. Golf, 
chess and even Rummy are considered to be 
games of skill. 
 
3.16 The Calcutta High Court in Bimalendu De v. Union of 
India 33 , referred to the definition of Gambling given in 
the Black's Law Dictionary34, and defined gambling as: 
 
Making a bet occurs when there is a chance 
for profit if a player is skilful and lucky…A 
play for value against an uncertain event in 
hope of gaining something of value…It 
involves not only chance, but a hope of 
gaining something beyond t he amount 
played. Gambling consists of a 
consideration, an element of chance, and a 
reward…The elements of gambling are 
payment of a price for a chance to win a 
prize. 
 
3.17 The Supreme Court in M.J. Sivani & Ors. v. State of 
Karnataka & Ors. 35 referred to two definitions of Gaming  as 
given in t he Strouds Judicial Dictionary  and the Black’s Law 
Dictionary36, as given below: 
  
(i) The Strouds Judicial Dictionary: 
 
To play any game, whether of skill or chance for 
money or money's worth; and the act is not less 
gaming because the game played is not in itself 
                                  
33AIR 2001 Cal 30. 
346th edn.at 679. 
35AIR 1995 SC 1770. 
36Bryan A. Garner & Henry C. Black, Black’s Law Dictionary, (6th ed.) 679, 1990. 

20 
 
unlawful and whether it involved or did not 
involve skill. 
 
(ii) The Black’s Law Dictionary37  
The practice or act of gambling. An agreement 
between two or more persons to play together at 
a game of chance for a s take or wager which is 
to become the property of the winner, and to 
which all contribute. The element of gaming are 
the presence of price or consideration, chance 
and prize or reward. 
 
3.18 The Court also noted that section 2(7) of Mysore Police 
Act, 1963, defines "gaming" to mean that “it does not include a 
lottery but all forms of wagering or betting in connection with any 
game of chance, except wagering or betting on a horse-race, when 
such wagering or betting takes place ”. Accordingly, the Court 
defined ‘Gaming’ in the following words: 
 
Gaming is to play any game whether of skill or 
chance for money or money’s worth and the act 
is not less gaming because the game is not in 
itself unlawful and whether it involved or did not 
involve skill. 
 
3.19 Though both Betting and Gambling are primarily wagers, 
there is a slight difference between the two terms. Wagering, 
gambling and betting are often mistaken to be synonymous. The 
Madras High Court in Public Prosecutor  v. Veraj Lal Sheth38, 
explained the distinction as follows: 
 
The principal distinction between gaming 
and betting or wagering is thus immediately 
apparent; in gaming the stake is laid by the 
players upon a game, the result of which 
may depend to some extent upon the skill of 
the players, but in a bet or wager, the 
                                  
37Bryan A. Garner & Henry C. Black, Black’s Law Dictionary, (6th ed.) 679, 1990.  
38 AIR 1915 Mad 164. 

21 
 
winning or losing of stake depends solely 
upon the happening of an uncertain event. 
 
3.20 Therefore, one may conclude that wagering, includes 
within its ever -so-wide meaning, gambling, betting and gaming. 
Gambling entails the occurrence or non -occurrence of an 
unpredictable event. An important distinction between betting 
and gambling is that in gambling, the stakes or wager is placed 
on an event without any clue of the outcome; whereas, in 
betting the stakes are placed on an event, the outcome of  which 
is based on the performance of the players, influenced by their 
skill.  
 
A. Gambling and Betting- a Game of Chance or Skill? 
 
3.21 The main test to determine whether a game amounts to 
gambling or not is, what dominates/preponderates , whether 
skill or chance. Games of chance are those where the winner is 
predominantly determined by luck;  the result of the game is 
entirely uncertain and a person is unable to influence such 
result by his mental or physical skill. The person indulging in 
game of chance wins or loses by sheer luck and skill has no role 
to play. On the other hand, the result of a game of skill is 
influenced by the expertise, knowledge and training of the 
player. In India, games of chance fall under the category of 
gambling, and are generally p rohibited, while games of skill, 
falling outside the ambit of gambling are usually exempted.  
 
3.22 In RMD Chamarbaugawala  v. Union of India 39, the Apex 
court relied on the ‘skill test’  to decide whether an activity is 
gambling or not. The court held that competitions which 
                                  
39AIR 1957 SC 628. 

22 
 
substantially involve skills are not gambling activities but are 
commercial activities, protected under Art. 19(1)(g).  
 
3.23 Relying again on the ‘skill test’, the Supreme Court in 
State of Andhra Pradesh v. K. Satyanarayana  & Ors.40, hel d 
that, rummy is preponderantly a game of skill and not of 
chance. The Court further observed that, “it requires certain 
amount of skill because the fall of the cards has to be 
memorised and the building up of rummy requires considerable 
skill in holding a nd discarding cards”. The expression ‘mere 
skill’ means presence of skill of a substantial degree. 
 
3.24 Distinguishing between the terms ‘games of skill’ and 
‘games of c hance’, the Supreme C ourt in  K.R. Lakshmanan  v. 
State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.41, stated: 
 
[In a] game of skill […] although the element 
of chance necessarily cannot be entirely 
eliminated, is one in which success depends 
principally upon the superior knowledge, 
training, attention, experience and 
adroitness of the player. 
 
3.25 In this case, th e court was considering whether horse -
racing was a game of skill or chance. It observed that the 
outcome in a horse race depends on several factors like form, 
fitness and inherent capacity of the animal, the ability of the 
jockey, the weight carried and th e distance of the race, which 
are all objective facts capable of being assessed by persons 
placing the bets. Thus, unlike lottery, the prediction of the 
result of the race is an outcome of knowledge, study and 
observation. 
 
                                  
40AIR 1968 SC 825. 
41AIR 1996 SC 1153. 

23 
 
3.26 In Pleasantime Products v. Commissioner of Central Excise, 
Mumbai-I 42 , the Supreme Court, while considering whether 
‘scrabble’ is a puzzle or a game, held that scrabble is a game. It 
was also observed that, unlike puzzle where the outcome is 
fixed, scrabble is a game of skill as the skill of player influences 
the outcome.  
 
3.27 In M.J. Sivani  case 43 , the Supreme Court, while 
determining the issue of the legality of prohibition on video 
games, under Section 2 (7) of the Mysore Police Act, 1963, 
observed that, even if video games were c onsidered to be game s 
of skill, the outcome could be manipulated by tampering with 
the machines. Therefore, the court refused to grant protection to 
these games.  
 
3.28 The Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of D. Krishna 
Kumar v. State of Andhra Pradesh44, held that games of skill like 
rummy, even when being played for stakes, are outside the 
ambit of the Andhra Pradesh Gaming Act, 1974. However, the 
Division Bench of the Madras High Court in the case of Director, 
Inspector General of Police v. Mahalakshmi Cultural 
Association45, had taken a contrary view holding that a game of 
skill for stakes falls within the definition of gaming under 
section 3 of the Madras City Police Act, 1888. However, the 
Supreme Court vide order dated 18th August, 2015 allowed the 
poker club Mahalakshmi Cultural Association to withdraw its 
Special Leave Petition as the members of the club had been 
acquitted of all the criminal charges in this regard by the trial 
court. Further, in its order, the Court clearly mentioned that the 
                                  
42(2010) 1 SCC 265. 
43AIR 1995 SC 1770. 
442003 Cr LJ 143. 
45(2012) 3 Mad LJ 561. 
 

24 
 
writ petitions before the Madras High Court stood withdrawn 
and therefore observations contained in the High Court order 
did not survive. 
 
3.29 In the case of M/s Gaussian Networks Private Limited v. 
Monica Lakhanpal and State of NCT46, an application was file d 
under Order XXXVI Rule 1 of Civil Procedure Code, 1908 before 
a District Court in Delhi , seeking the Court’s opinion  whether 
participants be allowed to play a game of skill for stakes with 
the intention of making profit. It was held that playing skill-
based games for money in the virtual space, renders them 
illegal. The degree of skill that is involved in playing these games 
in physical form cannot under any circumstances be equated 
with games played online. The Court held that since there was a 
possibility for manipulation of outcomes by cheating and 
collusion in online gambling, it can be assumed that the degree 
of chance would also increase. The court echoed the 
observations made by the Supreme Court in the M.J. Sivani 
case47. On April 21, 2016 while the matter was still sub judice, 
Gaussian sought permission to withdraw both the Civil Revision 
Application and the original Order XXXVI Application, on the 
ground that in light of the decisions in State of Andhra Pradesh 
v. K. Satyanarayana & Ors.48 and K.R. Lakshmanan v. State of 
Tamil Nadu49,  the position of law on the exemption for ‘games of 
skill’ is already clear. Further, with the enactment of the 
Nagaland Act the position of online games of skill stands 
clarified. In light of the District Court Order, the right of 
Gaussian to offer online games of skill would have been limited 
even under the Nagaland Act. The request to withdraw the 
                                  
46Order of the Delhi District Courts dated November 19, 2012 in Suit No. 32 of 2012.  
47AIR 1995 SC 1770. 
48AIR 1968 SC 825. 
49AIR 1996 SC 1153. 

25 
 
petitions was acceded to by the Delhi High Court, consequently 
the observations of the District Court did not survive50. 
 
B. Examining Foreign decisions 
 
3.30 It is found that, in the Canadian case of Rex v. Fortier51, 
the distinction between game of chance and game of skill was 
set out by the Court stating that,“[A] game of chance and a 
game of skill are distinguished on the characteristics of the 
dominating element that ultimately determines the result of the 
game.” 
 
3.31 In Philip D. Murphy, Governor of New Jersey v. National 
Collegiate Athletic Association etc. (case no. 16-476 and 16-477) 
decided by the Supreme Court of the United States on 
14.05.2018, the Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act 
1992 (PASPA) was under scrutiny, as to whether it is in conflict 
with the Constitution of the United States of America or not. 
The provisions of the Act provided that neither the States nor 
the non-state actors can indulge in the activities surrounding 
the sports gambling, such as sponsorship, promotion, 
advertisement and licensing the same. 
 
3.32 The Supreme Court of the United States, with a ratio of 
6:3. Declared the Act unconstitutional. It opined that the 
scheme of the Act is “anti-commandeering” in nature, the 
Congress could not directly control the States, rather regulate 
the action of the individual, directly. Therefore, prohibiting the 
States from regularising the sports gambling was 
unconstitutional. 
                                  
50 M/s Gaussian Network Pvt. Ltd. v. Monica Lakhanpal & Anr., Order dated April 21, 2016 
in CRP No. 119 of 2012, Delhi High Court. 
5113 Q.B. 308. 

26 
 
 
3.33 While dealing with various constitutional and legal issues, 
the Court took note of both sides’ arguments, left the policy 
making to the Congress. In case the Congress does not wish to 
do so, the States are at liberty to regulate the sports gambling. 
 
3.34 In the case of State v. Gupton,52 the Supreme Court of 
North Carolina held that any athletic game or sport is not a 
game of chance. In the United States, the ‘dominant factor test’ 
is applied by many States to determine wh ether or not a 
particular game is a ‘game of skill’ or ‘game of chance’. For 
instance, poker is considered to be a game of skill because more 
skilful players will always win over the less skilled or novice 
players.  
 
3.35 In a study carried out by the Comp uter Scientist Roman 
Yampolskiy, it is concluded that Poker is a game that requires a 
specific set of skills and some of those skills include:53 
 
1.  The ability to precisely calculate probability of a needed 
card coming on a turn; 
2.  The skill to read opp onents’ behaviour and body 
language; and  
3.  The competence to apply strategic concepts such as 
“semi-bluffing and playing for implied odds.” 
 
3.36 The Court of Justice of the European Union in the case 
of The English Bridge Union Limited v. Commissioner for Her 
Majesty’s Revenue and Customs 54 , while deciding whether 
‘duplicate bridge’ would constitute a “sport” within the meaning 
                                  
52 30 N.C. 271, as cited in Mukul Mudgal, supra note 2 at 234. 
53 Roman Yampolskiy, “Game Skill Measure for Mixed Games” 1:3WASET 308-310 (2007). 
54 ECLI:EU:C:2017:814 

27 
 
of an exemption provision under the Council Directive on Value 
Added Tax 55, opined that even though an activity promotes 
physical and mental health, it is not, in itself, sufficient to 
conclude that such activity would be covered within the term 
“sport” in the said provision; and even if it were so,  activities of 
pure rest and relaxation are not included within the purview of 
‘sports’. The Court further noted that the concept of ‘sport’ 
appearing in the said provision is limited to activities satisfying 
the ordinary meaning of the term ‘sport’, characterised by a “not 
negligible physical element”, and does not cover all activities 
that may, in one way or another, be associated with that 
concept of ‘sports’. 
 
3.37 Analysis of the aforementioned decisions brings out two 
principles. Firstly, prize competitions and contests , where the 
winner is determined by draw of lots are in the natur e of 
gambling and cannot be extended protection under Article 
19(1)(g) of the Constitut ion of India. Secondly, games where 
preponderance of skill dominates cannot be considered 
gambling and are protected under the Constitution. 
 
  
                                  
55 Article 132(1)(m), Title IX “Exmeptions”, Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 
2006 on the Common System of Value Added Tax. (OJ 2006 L 347).   

28 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Constitution of India and Betting 
 
4.1 During the C onstituent Assembly Debates  on 02 
September 1949 56, a motion was taken up to add Entry 45, 
(present entry 34) dealing with betting and gambling, under List 
II of the Seventh Schedule. The move was strongly opposed by 
Prof. Shibban  Lal Saksena, Shri  Lakshminarayan Sahu and 
Sardar Hukam Singh. Prof. Saxena felt that gambling was a 
crime and that gambling and betting should be banned. Shri  
Sahu opposed the move by observing that we were guided by 
the lofty ideals of Mahatma Gandhi and that the lessons learnt 
from the Mahabharat were not to be forgotten. He felt that even 
taxation on such items did not appear proper. The Members of 
the Constituent Assembly were of the view that Constituent 
Assembly must prohibit betting and gambling. 
 
4.2 However, Dr. Ambedkar had a different view. He explained 
that not mentioning betting and gambling would not mean that 
there will not be any betting and gambling in the country at all.  
He apprehended that  if this entry was omitted, there would  be 
absolutely no control over betting and gambling activities at all.  
He felt that if Entry 45 under List II  were to be there, it would 
either be used for the purpose of permitting betting and 
gambling or for the purpose of prohibiting them. If the entry  
didn’t exist, the provincial governments would be absolutely 
helpless in the se matters. Another consequence that Dr. 
Ambedkar pointed out was that in the absence of the proposed 
Entry 45 of List II, ‘betting and gambling’ would automatically 
find a place in List I under Entry 91.  He was of the opinion that 
if there is a strong objection to adding Entry 45 under List II, 
                                  
56 Constituent Assembly Debates, Official Report, Vol IX, Sixth Reprint, Reprinted by Lok 
Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi, 2014. 

29 
 
then there must be an Article in the Constitution itself explicitly 
declaring betting and gambling as an offence. He explained that 
the e ntry would act as a preventive measure and the States 
would have full power to prohibit gambling. Hence the Entry on 
‘betting and gambling’ was included in the State list to empower 
the States to make laws either to prohibit betting or gambling or 
to regulate it, according to the socio -economic requirements of 
the State. This stance provided the scope to accommodate 
different notions of morality prevailing in various States.  
 
4.3 According to Constitutional experts, the Constitution 
provides for a quasi-federal structure, entailing that it is federal 
in form but unitary in spirit 57 . The Legislative powers are 
distributed between the Centre and the States under Article 246 
of the Constitution of India, on various s ubject matters 
enumerated in  three legislativ e lists of the Seventh Schedule.  
According to Entry 40 of List I , the Parliament has the power to 
legislate on ‘Lotteries organized by the Government of India as 
well as the Government of any State ’. Article 249 of the 
Constitution empowers the Parliament to legislate with respect 
to a matter in the State List in the National Interest while Article 
252 empowers the Parliament to legislate for two or more States 
on request made by such States. Thus, in the event that, the 
Parliament legislates on the subject  of gambling and betting, 
such a law will not stand vitiated on the ground of lack of 
competence or that it infringes the legislative powers of the 
States.  
 
4.4 The power of the State governments to make laws on 
gambling can be traced to Entry 34 List II  of the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution. Thus, the States have exclusive 
power to make laws on this subject including power to prohibit 
                                  
57KC Wheare, Modern Constitutions 51 (Oxford University Press, London, 1962). 

30 
 
or regulate gambling etc. in their respective territorial 
jurisdiction. In H. Anraj v. State of Maharashtra 58, the Supreme 
Court observed: 
 
........there is no dispute before us that the 
expression "Betting and gambling" includes 
and has always been understood to have 
included the conduct of lotteries. Quite 
obviously, the subject 'Lotteries organised by 
the Government o f India or the Government 
of a State' has been taken out from the 
legislative field comprised by the expression 
"Betting and gambling" and is reserved to be 
dealt with by Parliament. Since the subject 
'Lotteries organised by the Government of 
India or the Government of a State' has been 
made a subject within the exclusive 
legislative competence of Parliament, it must 
follow, in view of Act (sic) Art. 246(1) and (3), 
that no legislature of a State can make a law 
touching lotteries organised by the 
Government of India of  (sic) or  the 
Government of a State … This, as we said, is 
but recognition of the prevailing situation 
under the Constitution. The Constitutional 
position cannot be altered by an act of the 
State legislature. 
 
4.5 The ideals and objectives envi sioned by the framers of the 
Constitution are embodied in Directive Principles of State Policy. 
They provide a blueprint for the States to formulate new laws 
while keeping in mind the spirit of good governance. Article 38 
of Constitution of India provides that the State shall secure 
social order for promoting welfare of its people by securing 
justice, social, economic and political.  Article 39 of the 
Constitution directs the State to provide adequate means of 
livelihood to every citizen and to make sure tha t the economic 
system does not lead to unfair accumulation of wealth, rather 
the ownership and control of the resources of the community 
                                  
58AIR 1984 SC 781. 

31 
 
are so distributed as best to sub serve every class of society. It 
is also expected that the State oversees that childr en and youth 
are protected against exploitation, both moral and material. 
 
A. Morality and Betting  
 
4.6 India has been culturally opposed to gambling even 
though it existed in Indian society since ancient times. The 
textual references also suggest that these activities have never 
been approved by the society.  
 
4.7 The Government generally prohibits such activities to 
prevent societal harm. The  governmental policy may , not 
necessarily be in tune with  existing social values. Despite being 
illegal, there  are a few activities that the p ublic at large, 
continues to indulge in. Illegal activities can be divided into two 
categories (A) activitie s, which definitely cause  damage to the 
society viz. trade in contraband substances, and (B) activities 
like gambling and b etting, which cause  damage to the 
individuals but whose social impact varies59. 
 
4.8 Whether the State has the right to regulate private 
morals, is a question that has often underpinned gambling 
prohibition laws. J.S. Mill discussed the extent to which Stat e 
should be allowed to restrict liberty of individuals and 
highlighted the conflict between liberty of individuals to carry 
trade of their choosing and be involved in desired activities and 
the effect of such choice on the society at large. While he was 
indecisive on the justifiability of prohibiting activities like 
                                  
59Nirod Kumar Palai, Sarojini Mishra, et.al., “Gambling v, State: A Study of Problems and 
Prospects of Gambling Industry in India under Globalization Regime” XIV International 
Economic History Congress, Helsinki (2006). 

32 
 
gambling, he implicitly recognised the need for regulation of 
those activities that may cause harm to others. He remarked: 
A person should be free to do as he likes in 
his own concerns; but he o ught not to be 
free to do as he likes in acting for another, 
under the pretext that the affairs of another 
are his own affairs. The State, while it 
respects the liberty of each in what specially 
regards himself, is bound to maintain a 
vigilant control over  his exercise of any 
power which it allows him to possess over 
other60. 
 
4.9 Those who argue in favour of legalising gambling, give 
primacy to individual autonomy and minimum State 
interference. Those who disfavour it, argue that immorality is a 
justifiable ground for restricting individual liberty, as such 
restrictions help in maintaining societal order. Arguments made 
in favour of regulating gambling, call for dissociating morality 
from gambling. It is believed that the connection between the 
two is merely derivative and associative and therefore, by freeing 
the concept of gambling from unwelcome moral negativity, it 
becomes easier to regulate it as an activity61. 
 
4.10 In the case of Guru Prasad Biswas & Anr. v. State of West 
Bengal & Ors.62, the Calcutta High Court remarked that betting 
and gambling activities affect a person’s morality and therefore 
infringe the right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the 
Constitution. 
 
                                  
60J.S. Mill, On Liberty and Utilitarianism (Bantom Classic, New York, 2008). 
61Harsimran Kalra, Abhishek Mukherjee, et.al., “Twited Willow, Gambling, Sport and Cricket 
in India” Hindu Centre of Politics and Public Policy (2013) available 
at:http://www.thehinducentre.com/multimedia/archive/01478/Issue_Brief_1478229a.pdf (last 
visited 31-05-2018). 
62(1998) 2 Cal LT 215. 

33 
 
4.11 In Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya & Ors.63, the 
Supreme Court observed: 
 
The word ‘immoral’ is a very comprehensive 
word. Ordinarily it takes in every aspect of 
personal conduct deviating from the 
standard norms of life. It may also be said 
that what is repugnant to good conscience is 
immoral. Its varying content depends upon 
time, place and the stage of civilis ation of a 
particular society. In short, no universal 
standard can be laid down and any law 
based on such fluid concept defeats its own 
purpose. 
 
4.12 The notion of morality involved in gambling can be 
distinguished from t hat in sports -betting. Sports are ‘games of 
skill’ where tentative parameters like physical skill s, effort, 
strategy and tactics , essential purpose, etc. are also taken into 
consideration. Gambling necessarily entails the determination of 
a result based on  eventualities beyond human control. In 
sports, however, determination of results are primarily based on 
skill rather than chance. If in an event, substantial amount of 
skill is required to place the bets, the argument of immorality of 
the activity does not survive. 
 
4.13 Ideally, Constitutional morality should be the touchstone 
for justifying State intervention. Offending public morality 
cannot be a ground for determining the legality of an action. In 
2002, the Haryana Assembly passed two Bills , namely the  
Public Gambling (Haryana Amendment) Bill of 2002, which was 
an essential aspect of the second Bill,  i.e. the Haryana Casino 
(Licensing and Control) Bill of 2002  that called for allowing 
Casino projects in Haryana. The Governor of Haryana had 
reserved t he Amendment Bill for the consideration  of the 
                                  
63AIR 1959 SC 781. 

34 
 
President under Article 200 of the Constitution of India. Th e 
Amendment Bill sought to add s ection 19 to the Public 
Gambling Act, 1867 applicable to the State of Haryana with the 
purpose and objective to allow ca sino projects as an instrument 
of infrastructural growth, attract global investment, promote 
tourism and create employment opportunities. The proposed 
section 19 read as: 
 
“19. Authorised Gambling. - Nothing in this Acts shall apply 
to any gambling activity  carried on under the aut hority and 
subject to the licence granted in accordance with any law for 
the time being in force.” 
 
The Amendment Bill was reserved on the following grounds, viz.: 
 
1. “The Bills received strident criticism from different 
sections of society” 
2. Increase in “various criminal activities such as drug 
running, prostitution and extortion by organised crime 
syndicates”. 
3. Difference of “socio -cultural mores and value and 
traditions” from the State of Goa, “whose liberation from 
the Portuguese rule is a compara tively recent historical 
development and has left that State with a unique 
cultural legacy” 
4.  “Casinos are essentially a gambling activity for which 
Foreign Direct Investment is barred” and “foreign 
investment and foreign technology collabora tion in any 
form are report edly prohibited in the lottery business, 
gambling and betting sector.”. 
5. The Bills would “attract the doctrine of ‘occupied field’ as 
they occupy the same field as The Public Gambling Act, 
1867 and relate to the subject matter the  Act of 1867 and 
are repugnant to its spirit as they seek to legitimise and 
license gambling Activities in Casinos whereas the Act of 
1867 represses public gambling.”. 
6. It would have “ramifications beyond the State of Haryana 
affecting the socio -political f abric of the entire nation as 
Haryana’s physical proximity to the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi ra ises among other issues, the spectre 
of security concerns”. 
 
4.14 In 2005, the President of India withheld the assent from 
the Public Gambling (Haryana Amendment) Bill of 2002. In 

35 
 
withholding the assent therefrom, the President was guided by 
the recommendations of various Ministries of the Central 
Government, which are summarised as follows: 
 
1. The Ministry of Home Affairs (Judicial Cell) 
conveyed ‘no comments’ on the proposal. 
2. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative 
Department) conveyed ‘no comments’ on the 
proposal. 
3. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry, 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
conveyed that both, Foreign Investment and 
Foreign Technology Collaboration, in any form, are 
completely prohibited in the lottery business, 
gambling and betting sector. 
4. The Ministry of Home Affairs (Centre -State 
Division) stated that “in view of the national 
policy of discour aging gambling in all forms 
they are opposed to the Public Gambling (Haryana) 
Amendment Bill, 2002 as it seeks to defeat the 
very purpose of the Original Act viz. The Public 
Gambling Act, 1867”. They further argued “that 
casinos, gambling and betting sector etc. might 
encourage organised crimes”.   
5. The Ministry of Home Affairs (Judicial and Political 
Pensions Section), in view of the strong objection of 
the Department of Industrial Policy and Prom otion 
and the Centre -State Division of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, proposed that the assen t of the 
President be withheld from the Bill.  
6. The Ministry of Tourism & Culture (Department of 
Tourism), on the other hand, supported the 
proposal from the point of view of tourism 
development in the country. 
 
4.15 It is noted that Ministry  of Home Affair s, Government of 
India, while recommending to the President to withhold his 
assent from this Bill, distinguished the purpose and object of 
the Bill with the Goa, Daman and Diu Publi c Gambling Act, 
1976, the only S tate enactment that allows casinos. The 
Ministry stated that the Goa Act of 1976 was assented by the 
President because it was enacted to provide for punishment for 
public gambling and keeping of c ommon gaming houses 

36 
 
whereas Haryana Amendment Bill was to  authorise any public 
gambling activity, provi ded a licenc e is obtained. However, the 
object and purpose of the Public Gambling Act, 1867 as stated 
by the Governor in his reference is “to provide for the 
punishment of public gambling and the keeping of common 
gaming-houses”, which is identical to that  of the Goa Act, thus, 
rendering the distinction vague.  
 
4.16 Further, as rightly stated by the Ministry  of Home Affairs, 
the Goa, Daman and Diu Public Gambling Act, 1976 64 was 
accorded assent by the President, because, at  the time of 
enactment, this Act did not permit games of chance/casinos to 
operate in Goa, Daman and Diu. It was later with the enactment 
of the A mendment Act of 1992; provisions were made  for 
permitting licensed casinos/games of chance to operate through 
the region65. However, the assent of the President was not taken 
while bringing the Amendment Act 1992. 
 
4.17 While the main argument  in favour of regulating the 
betting and gambling is revenue generation through taxation on 
its proceeds, the question remains whether one can choose 
revenue over morality. In this regard, it is pertinent to note that  
in the State of Bihar  the revenue collection from liqu or 
increased from Rs. 500 crore in 2005 to Rs .4,000 crores 
(approx.) in 2014 -2015. Yet, taking note of the immorality 
associated with the consum ption of liquo r and its ill -effects on 
Society, the State of Bi har put a State -wide ban  on the sale, 
consumption and production of liq uor in 2015 66. Other  States 
such as Gujarat, Nagaland, Manipur and Lakshad weep too, 
                                  
64Notification No. LD/Bill/6/76, Official Gazette, Government of Goa, Daman and Diu, S eries 
I No. 20 dated 12-08-1976. 
65 Notification No. 7-6-92/LA, Official Gazette, Government of Goa, Daman and Diu, Series I 
No. 25 dated 17-09-1992. 
66 Ravish Tiwari, Santosh Singh, “Why Nitish says no to liquor”, Indian Express, New Delhi, 
31/05/2018. 

37 
 
guided by the unwritten principl es and notions of morality 
prevalent in their States and taking into consideration the ill -
effects of consumption of liquor in an uncontrolled manner, 
have prohibited the sale of liq uor to protect the vulnerable 
sections of the society, in spite of huge revenue losses. 
 
4.18 ‘Immorality’, per se, cannot be a ground to challenge the 
Constitutional validity of an enactment as morality is a 
subjective concept. If, however, some form of morality is 
reflected in any provision of the Constitution, for example, if an 
enactment compromises the dignity of an individual, it may be 
challenged as being violative of Article 21 of the Constitution.  
Additionally, if a custom or usage has been deemed ‘immoral’ by 
a particular demographic it may be challenged by them as such. 
It should also be noted that morality and criminality are not co -
extensive 67 . Morality is a ground for imposing reasonable 
restrictions on individual’s freedom 68. It is said that the  law 
remains in a state of flux  while defining morality, for it is 
required that the law must continuingly  evolve to accommodate 
the needs of changing time. 
 
B. Legal perspective of Gambling and Betting 
 
4.19 There are chances that people in a bid to earn a quick 
buck through gambling might resort to unlawful means. A 
comprehensive analysis of the socio -economic circumstances in 
light of the Constitutional guidelines is thereby essential before 
framing a legislation(s) for regulating gambling. 
 
                                  
67S. Khushboo v. Kanniammal, AIR 2010 SC 3196. 
68Ramesh Yeshwant Prabhoo v. Prabhakar Kashinath Kunte &Ors., AIR 1996 SC 1113;  See 
also, Bobby Art International, etc. v. Om Pal Singh Hoon & Ors., AIR 1996 SC 1846; and 
Shri Raghunathrao Ganpatrao v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 1267. 

38 
 
4.20 There are two kinds of wrongful conduct, malum in se , 
i.e., conduct that is inherently wron gful and malum in 
prohibitum, i.e., conduct that is wrong because it is prohibited.  
Those arguing in favour of regulating  Betting and G ambling, 
believe it to be an inherently immoral activity since it disrupts 
the work ethic, leads to crime and is addictive69. Since betting & 
gambling may lead to exploitation of the vulnerable class, it is 
believed to be against the principles of morality.  
 
4.21 The Apex Court has while taking note of the negative 
impact of gambling in State of Bombay  v. RMD 
Chamarbaugwala70  said: 
 
....which encourages a spirit of reckless 
propensity for making easy gain by luck  or 
chance, which leads to the loss of the hard -
earned money of the undiscerning and 
improvident common man and thereby 
lowers his standard of living and drives him 
into a chronic state of indebtedness and 
eventually disrupts the peace and happiness 
of his humble home..... 
 
4.22 Indiscriminate gambling and betting activities create a 
platform for individuals to be involved in immoral, corrupt and 
socially pernicious ac tivities. According to the Rangarajan 
Committee Report, persons having monthly per capita 
consumption expenditure below Rs.972 (Rs.32 per person per 
day) in rural areas and Rs.1,407 (Rs.47 per person per day) in 
urban areas in 2011 -12 are considered to be below the poverty 
line. According to this threshold, it was estimated by the 
Rangarajan Committee in 2014 that 30.9% of the rural 
                                  
69 K. Rand and S. Righty, “Moral Policymaking and Indian Gaming: Negotiating a Different 
Terrain” available at: 
https://www.bc.edu/content/dam/files/centers/boisi/pdf/f07/gamblingpapers/Rand -Light.pdf 
(last visited on 02-06-2018) 
70AIR 1957 SC 699. 

39 
 
population and 26.4% of the urban population in India was 
below the poverty line in 2011-1271.  
 
4.23  This makes the problem g rave in light of the fact that one 
third of the population in India lives below the poverty line. 
 
1) Doctrine of res extra commercium 
 
4.24 The doctrine of res extra commercium  seeks to exclude 
certain activities from the ambit of freedom of trade and 
profession guaranteed under Articles 19(1)(g) and 301 of the 
Constitution of India. In State of Bombay v. RMD 
Chamarbaghwala72, the Apex Court observed that: 
 
“We find it difficult to persuade ourselves that gambling 
was ever intended to form any part of this ancient 
countries’ trade commerce or intercourse to be declared 
as free under Article 301… the real purpose of Articles 
19(1)(g) and 301 could not possibly have been to 
guarantee or declare the freedom of gambling. Gambling 
activities from their very natur e and essence are extra 
commerciumal though the external forms, formalities and 
instruments of trade maybe employed and they are not 
protected either by Article 19(1)(g) or Article 301 of the 
Constitution.”  
 
4.25 The Court remarked that though these activ ities employ 
external forms, formalities and instruments of trade, they could 
not be considered commerce. It is pertinent to note that this 
distinction between activities that were protected under Article 
19(1)(g) of the Constitution and those that were no t, was made 
on the basis of whether the said activity involved substantial 
element of skill or chance. While the former ha ve been afforded 
constitutional protection, the latter have been termed illegal.  
                                  
71 Planning Commission, Report of the Expert Group to Review the Methodology for 
Measurement of Poverty (June, 2014). 
72AIR 1957 SC 699. 

40 
 
 
4.26 However, the Supreme Court while refe rring to its earlier 
decision of State of Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala 73 in 
R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala v. Union Of India74 observed that “trade 
commerce protected by Article 19(1)(g) and Article 301 are only 
those activities which could be regarded as lawful trading 
activities, that gambling is not trade but res extra commercium , 
and that it does not fall within the purview of these Articles”. 
 
4.27 A similar view was taken in M/s. B.R. Enterprises v. State 
of U.P. &  Ors.75, observing that gambling is not a ‘trade’ withi n 
the meaning of Article 19(1)(g) or 301 of the Constitution, and is 
therefore not constitutionally protected. This is because 
gambling is inherently based on chance with minimum to no 
involvement of skill, while trade is predominantly skill -based. 
Interestingly, the Supreme Court also held lottery to be a form 
of gambling due to the overriding factor of chance and said that 
merely because lottery is run by State, it will not change its 
character as res extra commercium. 
 
4.28 Further in K.R. Lakshmanan (Dr.) v. State of Tamil Nadu 76, 
the Apex Court, once again, while relying on the two 
Chamarbaugwala judgments held that gambling was not trade 
and as such was not protected by Article 19(1)(g) of the 
Constitution. 
 
4.29 It is clear that the courts in India whi le relying on State of 
Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala  continue to hold that 
gambling does not fall within the ambit of trade, commerce etc. 
and therefore, does not enjoy the protection of Articles 19(1)(g) 
                                  
73 Supra 
74AIR 1957 SC 628. 
75AIR 1999 SC 1867. 
76AIR 1956 SC 1153. 

41 
 
and / or 301. Accordingly, one can conclude that t he two  
Chamarbaugwala cases77 lay down the prevailing law on this 
aspect of the subject. While analysing the decisions of the 
Supreme Court of India in the two Chamarbaugwala cases with 
reference to the doctrine of “ res extra commercium” , Mr. Arvind  
Datar78, tracing back the origin of the doctrine to Roman Law 
has commented to the effect: 
 
1. The res extra commercium  doctrine traces its 
conceptual roots to Roman law. Res in 
commercio, in Roman law, were things capable of 
ownership and hence, the subject of prope rty 
rights, while res extra commercium  were things 
incapable of ownership.  
2. The Supreme Courts used this expression for the 
first time in State of Bombay v. R.M.D. 
Chamarbaugwala, (Supra). This case was 
concerned with the constitutional validity of the 
Bombay Lotteries and Prize Competition Control 
and Tax Act., 1948.  
3. The incorrect usage of this expression, on the 
other hand, can be attributed to the judgment of 
the Supreme Court in R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla  
v. Union of India (Supra), a case decided on the 
same day as State of Bombay  v. R.M.D. 
Chamarbaugwala(Supra).  
4. The Court, unfortunately interpreted the first 
judgment as holding that gambling was not trade 
but res extra commercium , when the said 
judgment had actually laid down that “ gambling 
activities from  their very nature and in essence 
are extra-commercium”. 
5. This expression has been wrongly used in the 
last sixty years by the Indian Courts. No activity 
can be called “ res extra commercium”. It is either 
permitted or not. Even if gambling is harmful to 
society, there is nothing that prohibits the State 
Government from allowing gambling casinos to 
function. 
6. The erroneous view that Art. 19(1)( g) does not 
apply to noxious substances unduly widens the 
                                  
77 AIR 1957 SC 699; AIR 1957 SC 628. 
78Arvind Datar, "Privilege, Police Power and Res Extra Commercium - Glaring Conceptual 
Errors", National Law School of India Review, Vol. 21, No.1, 2009, p.145. 

42 
 
power of the State in two important respects. 
First, it is p ossible for the State to affect 
detrimentally the trade in such substances by 
the use of mere executive power. ( Khoday 
Distilleries Ltd.  v. State of Karnataka , (1995) 1 
SCC 574.) Second, it is also possible for the State 
to impose reasonable restrictions o n those 
employed in distilleries or in lottery agencies 
since they have no right to be there. 
 
4.30 Further, the law laid down in the two Charmbaugwala 
cases falls vulnerable under the Prevention of Money 
Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2013, a special enactme nt. 
Section 2 (1)(sa) now defines “a person carrying on a designated 
business or profession” to include “a person carrying on 
activities for playing games of chance for cash or kind, and 
includes such activities associated with casino”. Therefore, 
under th e aegis of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 
2002 gambling and casino activities, having deemed to be 
designated businesses/professions ought to enjoy protection 
under Articles 19(1)(g) and 301. 
 
2) Immorality or opposed to public policy  
 
4.31 Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 79, stipulates 
that consideration or object of an agreement would be lawful 
unless regarded as immoral, or opposed to public policy, by the 
Court.  
 
(i) What is public policy?  
 
4.32 Public policy is a Common Law Doctrine , that is invoked 
whenever an action affects/offends the public interests or where 
harmful result of permitting the contract in terms of injury to 
                                  
79 The Indian Contract Act, 1872.  

43 
 
the public at large, is evident 80. Thus, Public policy varies from 
generation to generation and even within the generation, and 
therefore it does not remain static 81. Social circumstances and 
societal needs change with time and so changes the public 
policy of a society82.  
 
4.33 The Apex Court in Central Inland Water Transport 
Corporation Limited & Anr. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly & Anr.83, while 
considering the scope of the essentials of Section 23 opined:  
 
the Indian Contract Act does not define the expression 
"public policy" or "opposed to public policy". From the very 
nature of things, the expressions "public policy", "o pposed 
to public policy" or "contrary to public policy" are 
incapable of precise definition…..Public policy, however, is 
not the policy of a particular government. It connotes 
some matter which concerns the public good and the 
public interest. The concept of what is for the public good 
or in the public interest or what would be injurious or 
harmful to the public good or the public interest has 
varied from time to time. 
 
4.34 Thus, there lies a distinction between public policy and  
policy of law84; and they are not co-extensive. 
 
4.35 The Supreme Court in the case of Gherulal Parakh v. 
Mahadeodas Maiya & Ors. 85  while examining the scope of 
Section 23 held: 
 
The word 'immoral' is very comprehensive word. 
Ordinarily it takes in every aspect of personal conduct 
deviating from the standard norms of life It may also be 
                                  
80Union of India v. Gopal Chandra Misra, AIR 1978 SC 694; See also, Firm of Pratapchand 
Nopaji v. Firm of Kotrike Venkata Setty & Sons, AIR 1975 SC 1223. 
81 ONGC v. Saw Pipes, AIR .2003 SC 2629. 
82Murlidhar Agrawal v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1974 SC 1924; See also, Board of 
Control of Cricket in India v. Cricket Association Of Bihar (2015) 3 SCC 251. 
83AIR 1986 SC 1571. 
84Murlidhar Agrawal (Supra Note 82); and CBI v. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal (2013) 15 SCC 
222. See also Egerton v. Earl of Brownlow (1853)4 HLC 484. 
85AIR 1959 SC 781. 

44 
 
said that what is repugnant to good conscience is 
immoral. Its varying content depends upon time, place 
and the stage of civilization of a particular society. In 
short, no universal standard can be lai d down and any 
law based on such fluid concept defeats its own purpose. 
The provisions of Section 23 of the Contract Act indicate 
the legislative intention to give it a restricted meaning. Its 
juxtaposition with an equally illusive concept, public 
policy, indicates that it is used in a restricted sense; 
otherwise there would be overlapping of the two concepts. 
In its wide sense what is immoral may be against public 
policy covers political, social and economic ground of 
objection. Decided cases and authorita tive text -books 
writers, therefore, confined it, with every justification, 
only to sexual immorality. The other limitation imposed 
on the word by the statue, namely, "courts consider 
immoral" brings out the idea that it is also a branch of the 
common law l ike the doctrine of public policy, and, 
therefore, should be confined to the principles recognized 
and settled by Courts. Precedents confine the said 
concept only to sexual immorality and no case has been 
brought to our notice where it has been applied to any 
head other than sexual immorality. In the circumstances, 
we cannot involve a new head so as to bring in wagers 
within its fold. 
 
4.36 The Courts in India have been unwilling to extend the 
scope of “immorality” under section 23 of the Contract Act. 
However, in Union of India v. M/s N.K. Garg & Co. 86, the Delhi 
High Court held that any agreement by which a party is 
deprived of interest (any legitimate claim) would be rendered 
void for being immoral and violative of public policy. The Delhi 
High Court in North Delhi Municipal Corporation v. Prem Chand 
Gupta87, examined the third part of  section 23 of the Contract 
Act to determine as to whether the clause of the contract 
between the parties that prohibited the payment of interest can 
be said to be immoral or a gainst the public policy. The Court 
observed: 
                                  
86O.M.P. No.327/2002decided on November 2, 2015. 
87 RFA Nos. 623 and 628/2017 decided on July 17, 2017available at: 
http://lobis.nic.in/ddir/dhc/VJM/judgement/18-07-2017/VJM17072017RFA6232017.pdf (last 
visited on 02-06-2018). 

45 
 
 
Therefore, in today’s date and age to say that 
moneys can be retained for years and years 
and decades is clearly immoral and has to be 
held against public policy otherwise there 
will be gross injustice to the existence of the 
commercial world which cannot survive 
without payment of moneys in time. 
 
4.37 Therefore, it can be seen that though gambling and 
betting might be considered morally questionable, the framers of 
the Constitution were cognizant of the fact that it would be 
nearly impossible to completely prohibit these activities. This 
difficulty has increased manifold with the advent of Internet 
Technology. Thus the decision to put gambling and betting 
under the State List, empowering the States to regulate  these 
activities as per the socio economic conditions of that particular 
State has proven to be a right decision. 
 
3) Wagering Agreements 
 
4.38 Those who argue in favour of betting and gambling being 
regulated contend that under Section 30 of the Indian C ontract 
Act, 187288 a wager is void and unenforceable, but at the same 
time it is not forbidden by law and hence, cannot be termed 
illegal 89. The section provides that wagering agreements are 
void. In the case of Carlill v. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co . 90 , a 
wagering agreement was defined as: 
 
one by which two persons, professing to hold 
opposite views touching the issue of a future 
uncertain event, mutually agree that, dependent 
upon the determination of that event, one shall win 
from the other, and that other shal l pay or hand 
over to him, a sum of money or other stake; neither 
                                  
88 The Indian Contract Act, 1872. 
89Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya & Ors., AIR 1959 SC 781. 
90[1892] 2 Q.B. 484. 

46 
 
of the contracting parties having any other interest 
in that contract than the sum of stake he will so 
win or lose, there being no other real consideration 
for the making of such a contract by either of the 
parties. 
 
4.39 The object behind this provision is to deter people from 
indulging in games of chance to make a quick buck. Instead, 
they could devote their time and efforts on endeavors that are 
more productive for themselves, their famili es as well as the 
society91.  
 
4.40 Section 30 of the Indian Contract Act in its current form 
is detrimental to the players and consumers of the Gaming 
Industry. A legal casino or online gaming operator could refuse 
to pay the winnings citing the provisions  of Section 30 and 
unenforceability of the gambling transaction to its favour. 
Further, the section does not distinguish between wagers on 
games of chance versus wagers on games of skill. 
 
4.41 This s ection can be equated with Section 18 of the 
Gambling Act, 184592 of the United Kingdom. Thus, when posed 
with the question of enforceability of contracts relating to 
gambling and betting activities, the United Kingdom dealt with 
the issue by enacting the Gambling Act, 2005 (hereinafter UK 
Gambling Act). The UK Gambling Ac t repealed certain 
provisions of  a number of statutes, dating back to  the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, which prevented contracts 
relating to gambling from being enforceable. The UK Gambling 
Act by way of Section 334 repealed Section 18 o f the Gambling 
Act, 1845, which read as: 
 
 
                                  
91Subhash Kumar Manwani v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 2000 MP 109. 
92Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya & Ors., AIR 1959 SC 781. 

47 
 
18. Wagers not recoverable at Law .-All contracts 
or agreements, whether by parole or in writing, by 
way of gaming or wagering, shall be null and void; 
and no suit shall be brought or maintained in any 
court of law  and equity for recovering any sum of 
money or valuable thing alleged to be won upon 
any wager, or which shall have been deposited in 
the hands of any person to abide the event on 
which any wager shall have been made: Provided 
always, that this enactment shall not be deemed to 
apply to any subscription or contribution, or 
agreement to subscribe or contribute, for or 
towards any plate, prize, or sum of money to be 
awarded to the winner or winners of any lawful 
game, sport, pastime, or exercise. 
 
4.42 Section 334 of the UK Gambling Act , 2005  did not give 
retrospective effect to the repealing. Furthermore, Section 335 
thereof provides that the fact that a contract relates to gambling 
shall not affect negatively to its enforcement. However, it d oes 
not, override  any other provisions  of law that pre vents 
enforcement on the ground  of unlawfulness that means any 
ground for a void contract applicable to any other kind of 
contract. 
 
4.43 Section 336 of the 2005 Act, further allows the Gaming 
Commission to declare void  certain bets (even when made 
through a licensed operator) on grounds of unfairness, and all 
contracts or arrangements in relation to such bets. 
 
4.44 It is most important to note that even though, Section 30 
of the Indian Contract Act and Section 18 of th e Gambling Act 
of 1845 (UK) prevented the enforcement of agreements relating 
to gambling or betting, it has not prevented parties from 
entering into such agreements. 
 
 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER V 
Statutory Provisions 
 
5.1 Whilst ‘betting and gambling’ and taxation thereof  are 
State subjects, as enumerated under Entries 34 and 62 of List II 
(State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, 
there still exist certain Central Legislations, affecting the 
subject. The Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC), the Indian Co ntract 
Act, 1872 (Contract Act), the Foreign Exchange Management 
Act, 1999, and the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 
(PMLA) are some examples. A brief description of these laws is 
as under: 
 
A. Central Laws 
 
1. The Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998 
 
5.2 “Lotteries”, falling under Entry 40 of List I of the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution of India is a Central Subject and is 
therefore governed by the Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998, a 
Central enactment. Accordingly, “lotteries” have been generally 
excluded from the scope of ‘betting and gambling’. 
 
5.3 The Act of 1998 lays down the conditions subject to which 
lotteries may be organised by State Governments, viz. the place 
of the draw should be located in the concerned State, and vide 
section 4, sale proceeds to go to the State treasury, etc.  At the 
same time,  section 5 of the Act, 1998 gives to the State 
Governments, the prerogative to run lotteries, within their 
geographical territories, while prohibiting the sale of their lottery 
tickets in any other State. 
 
2. Indian Penal Code, 1860   
 
5.4 Sub-section (1) of section 292 of the Indian Penal Code 
provides for a “matter” to be obscene if: 

49 
 
 
[I]t is lascivious or appeals to the prurient 
interest or if its effect, or (where it comprises 
two or more distinct it ems) the effect of any 
one of its items, is, if taken as a whole, such 
as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons, 
who are likely, having regard to all relevant 
circumstances, to read, see or hear the 
matter contained or embodied in it. 
 
5.5 Sub-section (2)  supplements Sub -section (1) of Section 
292 by laying down a list of instances as also the penalties of 
offences covered under this provision. Section 294 strikes at 
punishing anyone who “to the annoyance of others does any 
obscene act in a public place or  sings, recites or utters any 
obscene song, ballad or words, in or near any public place”. 
 
5.6 These provisions of the IPC may be attracted if any 
obscene matter is used for the purpose of advertising ‘Betting 
and Gambling’ activities. 
 
3. The Indian Contract Act, 1872 (Contract Act) 
 
5.7 Section 23 of the Contract Act, states that “the 
consideration or object of an agreement is lawful, unless – it is 
forbidden by law; or is of such a nature that, if permitted it 
would defeat the provisions of any law”. This opens the gateway 
for Section 30 to come into operation which states that an 
agreement by way of wager is “void and unenforceable, but at 
the same time it is not forbidden by law and hence, cannot be 
termed illegal”93. In such a situation, no suit can  be brought to 
enforce any winnings accruing out of winning a bet or gamble. 
However, this provision makes an exemption for betting on 
horse-racing, making them legally permissible under the 
Contract Act. 
 
                                  
93Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya & Ors., AIR 1959 SC 781 

50 
 
4. Prize Competitions Act, 1955 
 
5.8 Prize Competitions in India are treated as a separate 
category from the general proscription on gambling. Accordingly 
they are governed by the Act, 1955. Section 2(d) of the Act 
defines the term “Prize Competition” as: 
 
any competition (whether called a cross - word 
prize compet ition, a missing - word prize 
competition, a picture prize competition or by any 
other name) in which prizes are offered for the 
solution of any puzzle based upon the building 
up, arrangement, combination or permutation, of 
letters, words, or figures. 
 
5.9 Section 4 of the Act provides that maximum prize that 
may be offered in a prize competition cannot exceed Rs.1,0 00, 
with the upper -limit of ent ries not exceeding 2,000 persons. 
Further, it lays down the condition that a licenc e must be 
obtained before offe ring a prize competition and provides for a 
detailed mechanism for gra nt and revocation of such licenc es. 
The Act also provides that any person violating these provisions 
shall be liable for penal consequences. 
 
5.10 The Prize Competition Act, 1955 has, in  fact, been 
enacted by the Parliament Of India in exercise of  its powers 
under Article 252(1) on being authorised to legislate on prize 
competitions by the S tates of Andhra, Bombay, Madras , Orissa, 
Uttar Pradesh, Hyderabad, Madhya Bharat, Patiala and East 
Punjab States Union, Saurashtra and all the erstwhile Part C 
States. 
 
5.11 The P.C. Jain Committee, 2014  which was constituted by 
the Prime Minister’s office to identify the Central Acts which are 
no longer relevant or needed or required, recommended that the 

51 
 
Prize Competition Act, 1955 be repealed as most States have 
their own State Legislations to deal with ‘Betting and Gambling’. 
Further, some of the States mentioned in section 1(2) of the Act 
no longer exist.  
 
5. Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 
 
5.12 Remittances of Income from lottery winnings, 
racing/riding, sweepstakes etc. are prohibited under the Act, 
1999 read with Rule 3 and Schedule 1 of the Foreign Exchange 
Management (Current Account Transaction) Rules, 2000. 
 
5.13 The Foreign Exchange Manag ement (Transfer or Issue of 
Security by a Person Resident Outside India) Regulations, 
201794 and the Consolidated Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
Policy, 2017 95 issued by the Government of India,  vide clause 
5.1(a) prohibit both, “Foreign Direct Investment” and 
“investment by a person resident outside India ” in entities 
conducting “lottery Business including Government/private 
lottery, online lotteries etc.” and “Gambling and Betting 
including casinos etc.”  by clause 5.1(b) . The Cons olidated FDI 
Policy and the Foreign Exchange Management (Transfer or Issue 
of Security by a Person Resident Outside India) Regulations, 
2017 are reflective of the National Policy of India in matters 
pertaining to foreign direct investment and investment by a 
person resident outside  India. Similarly, collaborations in 
foreign technology in any form whatsoever, for the purposes of 
gambling and betting activities is also prohibited  under clause 
5.1. 
                                  
94Notification No. FEMA 20(R)/ 2017-RB, Reg. 15, 07-11-2017, available at: 
https://rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_FemaNotifications.aspx?Id=11161 (last visited on 31 -05-2018). 
95D/o IPP F. No. 5(1)/2017-FC-1, 28-8-2017,  available at: 
http://dipp.nic.in/sites/default/files/CFPC_2017_FINAL_RELEASED_28.8.17.pdf (last 
visited on 31-05-2018). 

52 
 
 
6. Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 
 
5.14 The Reserve Bank of India is the sole a uthority in India to 
regulate all forms of electronic payment under the Act, 2007. 
 
5.15 Section 4(2) thereof provides that any payment system or 
clearing house with majority of the equity held by a foreign bank 
requires prior authorisation of the RBI to operate in India. 
 
5.16 Under section 17 of the Act, 2007, t he Reserve Bank of 
India has been given the right to draft policies, in accordance 
with this Act, on demand for almost everything involving 
payment processing in India, which are to be compulsorily  
complied with as provided in section 19 of the Act. 
 
5.17 In the past, RBI has exercised the powers under this Act 
to achieve its objective, by going after PayPal India 96 , 
Neteller and Entro Pay 97. If the RBI were to similarly decide to 
go after gambling p rocessors, the legal framework and 
authority, as it already exists, would, in fact, make it possible to 
curb the functioning of these gambling processors. 
 
7. The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 
 
5.18 The Act, 2002  came into force with effect from 1s t July, 
2005, governs the law relating to anti -money laundering in 
India. All entities offering games to be played for cash or its 
equivalent, whether online or offline, are required to adhere to 
                                  
96 “India Says Paypal Not Authorized For Money Transfer” available at 
https://www.reuters.com/article/urnidgns002570f3005978d8002576c7004772a9/india -says-
paypal-not-authorized-for-money-transfer-idUS16299391020100211/ (last viewed on 30 -05-
2018). 
97 “Paypal Banking” availab le at: https://sportsbetting.net.in/banking/paypal/  (last viewed on 
30-05-2018). 

53 
 
the provisions of the Act and The Prevention of Money 
Laundering (Maintenance of Records) Rules, 2005 98. Section 12 
of the Act requires “reporting entities”, as defined in Section 
2(1)(wa) to include “a person carrying on activities for playing 
games of chance for cash or kind, and includes such activities 
associated with casino” to maintain records of transactions and 
documents showing the identity of their clients in accordance 
with the 2005 Rules. These rules prescribe the nature as well as 
value of the transactions for which such records are to be 
maintained.  
 
5.19 After the Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) 
Act, 2013 Section 2(1)(sa) reads that “a person carrying on 
designated business or profession” shall include “a person 
carrying on activities for playing games of chance for cash or 
kind, and include s such activities associated with casino”. 
Thus, offering games of chance or activities associated with 
casino, after the amendment of 2013 constitute a “designated 
business or profession” under the Act. 
  
8. The Young Person’s (Harmful Publications) Act, 1956 
 
5.20 The Act, 1956 prohibits the dissemination of certain types 
of publications harmful to young persons. Section 2(a) of the Act 
defines “harmful publication” to mean any book, magazine etc. 
“which as a whole tend to corrupt a young person”99. 
 
                                  
98 The Prevention Of Money-Laundering (The Manner Of Forwarding A Copy Of The Order 
Of Provisional Attachment Of Property Along With The Material, And Copy Of The Reasons 
Along With The Material In Respect Of Survey, To The Adjudicating Authority And Its 
Period Of Retention) Rules, 2005, brought to force by Section 73 (1)(b) & (2) of The 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, available at: 
http://www.enforcementdirectorate.gov.in/pmla_rules.pdf (last visited at 26 -05-2018). 
99 Section 2(c) defines ‘young person’ to mean a person under the age of twenty-years. 

54 
 
5.21 Section 3 of the Act further provides for penal 
consequences in case of sale etc. of such ‘harmful publication’.  
Accordingly, any literature related to gambling and betting 
activities, that may adversely influence “young persons”, would 
attract the relevant provisions of this Act. 
 
9. The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) 
Act, 1986 
 
5.22 In India, many games and gaming websites display 
content, po rtraying animated human caricatures depicting 
women in a manner which is offensive/indecent. It must be 
noted that, any indecent or derogatory depiction of women, as 
defined in section 2(c), is prohibited under Section 3 of the 
Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986, 
which would also cover within its ambit, the above mentioned 
offensive/indecent content displayed on online 
gambling/gaming platforms. 
 
10. The Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act) 
 
5.23 Publishing and transmitting material “which is lascivious 
or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect is such as to 
tend to deprave an d corrupt persons who are likely, having 
regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the 
matter contained or embodied in it”, in el ectronic form is 
prohibited and  a violation thereof is punishable under section 
67 of the  IT Act . Further, s ection 67A strikes at any material 
which “contains sexually explicit act or conduct”, penalis ing the 
same.  
 
5.24 Section 69A further strengthens the Central Government 
by conferring upon it the power to direct its agencies or 

55 
 
intermediaries to block access to infringing websites. In doing  
so, the IT Act is supported by the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines) Rules, 2011100. 
 
11. Information Technology (Intermediaries 
Guidelines) Rules, 2011 (Intermediaries Rules) 
 
5.25 The Intermediaries Rules, which have been framed under 
Section 87(2)(zg) read with Section 79(2) the Information 
Technology Act, 2000. Rule 3(2)(b) thereof requires 
‘intermediaries’ like internet service providers, network service 
providers, search engines, telecom operators etc. not to host or 
transmit any content which inter alia relates to or encourages 
gambling. Further, Rule 3(4) requires intermediaries to remove 
content relating to or encouraging gambling within thirty -six 
hours, either “upon receiving actual knowledge or on being 
notified to do so by the appropriate government or its agency 
that any information, data or communication link residing in or 
connected to a computer resource controlled by the 
intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act...” 
 
12. Telecom Commercial Communications Customer 
Preference Regulations, 2010 
 
5.26 The Telecom Co mmercial Communications Customer 
Preference Regulations, 2010 have been issued by The Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India, with the objective of prohibiting 
“Unsolicited Commercial Co mmunications”. These regulations 
have been framed in response to various complaints made 
against spam calls and SMSs. Therefore, any sort of unsolicited 
commercial communication pertaining to gambling or betting 
will attract the prohibition contained in these Regulations. 
 
                                  
100Notification No. G.S.R. 314(E), 11-04-2011. 

56 
 
13. The Cable Television Network Rules, 1994  
 
5.27 The Cable Television Network Rules, 1994 101 prohibit the 
advertisement of gambling activities. However, as set out in rule 
7 the advertisement of games of skills, such as horse racing, 
rummy and bridge, is not prohibited. 
 
14. Income Tax Act, 1961 
 
5.28 The current taxation regime in India covers the gaming 
industry, both directly as well as indirectly, in terms of 
imposition of tax and the revenue generated from taxation of 
legalised and regulated  gambling contributes towards India’s 
GDP. The “tax on winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzle, 
races, card games, betting [etc.]” is levied under Section 115BB 
of the Income Tax Act, 1961. 
  
5.29 This position is augmented by section 194B, which 
provides for Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) in cases of winnings 
from lotteries, crossword puzzles, card games or any other 
games and horse races.  
 
15. The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 
 
5.30 Section 2(1)(r)  of the Act, 1986  defines the term “unfair 
trade practice” t o mean a trade practice which, for the purpose 
of promoting the sale, use or supply of any goods or services, 
adopts any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice . 
Section 2 (1)(r)(3)(b) includes the conduct of any  contest, lottery, 
game of chance or skill, for the purpose of promoting, directly or 
indirectly, the sale, use or supply of any p roduct or any 
business interest in the ambit of unfair trade practices. 
 
                                  
101 Notification No. G.S.R 729 (E), 1944. 

57 
 
5.31 Accordingly, if a ‘contest’, ‘lottery’ or ‘game of chance or 
skill’ is employed for th e purpose of promoting betting and 
gambling activities, such ‘means of promotion’, and not the 
concerned betting or gambling activities themselves, would be 
understood to fall within the meaning of an unfair trade 
practice, and would accordingly, attract s sections 6 and 14 of 
the Act. For instance, the same may be in the nature of a lucky 
draw to win free credits at a casino, etc. 
 
16. Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 
 
5.32 Unlike the previous indirect tax regime, the new Act, 
2017, has put in an integr ated unitary system in place, i.e. 
Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST), Central Goods and 
Services Tax (CGST) and State Goods and Services Tax (SGST) 
or Union Territory Goods and Services Tax (UTGST), depending 
upon the “location of the supplier” and the “place of supply of 
services”. 
 
5.33 “Actionable claims in the form of chance to win in betting, 
gambling, or horse racing in race club”, being in the nature of 
services are also taxable under the new GST system, thereby 
ensuring that both, the States as well as the Centre earn 
revenue from the same102. 
 
B. The Public Gambling Act, 1867: Whether a Central 
Enactment 
 
5.34  The Act 1867 is derived from the British Gaming Act, 
1845 and the Betting Act, 1853 . The Acts of 1845 and 1853 
made wagering contracts une nforceable while repealing the 
                                  
102https://cbec-gst.gov.in/gst-goods-services-rates.html (last visited on 26-05-2018). 

58 
 
Unlawful Games Act 1541 103. The Act of 1867 was primarily 
enacted with the purpose of punishing public gambling and  the 
keeping of common gaming-houses. 
 
5.35 The Constitution of Ind ia confers upon the States the 
power to make laws on “Betting and Gambling”, for they are 
enumerated in Entry 34 of List II of the Seventh Schedule. Such 
being the constitutional arrangement, there cannot be a Cen tral 
Legislation on the subject unless the Parliament legislates by 
exercising its power under Articles 249 or 250 , as the case may 
be, or by exercising power conferred by Article 252 of the 
Constitution. In f act, the Act 1867,  enacted by the erstwhile  
British rulers was  applicable only to the North -West Provinces, 
the Presidencies of Fort Wi lliam, the Punjab, Oudh, the Central 
Provinces and British Burma.  
 
5.36 The Government of India Act, 1935 listed all matters 
pertaining to betting and gambling under Entry 36 of the List II 
(Provincial Legislative List). Accordingly, under sub section 3 o f 
section 100, the Provincial legislatures alone were authorised to 
enact laws pertaining to betting and gambling. In addition to 
this, the Provincial legislatures had legislative competence 
under Entry 50 of List II  of Act 1935 to enact laws pertaining to 
taxation on betting and gambling. 
 
5.37 The Constitution of India adopted the same classification 
as provided for in the Government o f India Act, 1935. Betting 
and Gambling are listed as Entry 34 of List II of the Seventh 
Schedule, and therefore, only the  State legisla tures have 
competence to make laws pertaining to betting and gambling. 
                                  
103 Unlawful Games Act, 1541, 33 Hen. 8 c. 9 (Eng.); Carl Rohsler (Ed.), The Gambling Law 
Review, 2 nd Edn., Gideon Roberton, Law Business Research Ltd., London, United Kingdom,  
2017, p. 129. 

59 
 
Further, Entry 62 of the State List confers upon the State 
legislatures, the competence to make laws pertaining to taxation 
on ‘betting and gambling’. 
 
5.38 Accordingly, a fter 1935, with the States in India having 
been conferred with the exclusive power to enact  laws on 
“betting and gambling” as also laws concerning taxation thereof, 
the Public Gambling Act ceased to be a Central Legislation, 
such that it was no longer a la w applicable to the whole of 
the territory of India . In the current regime, the only manner 
in which it can still be held to be applicable is if it is adopted by 
a State(s) legislature(s) out of its own free will (emphasis added). 
 
5.39 The following 14 St ates/Union Territories have passed 
enactments adopting the Public Gambling Act, 1867 as it is, 
namely:   
 
1. Andaman Nicobar 
2. Arunachal Pradesh  
3. Chandigarh 
4. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
5. Haryana 
6. Himachal Pradesh  
7. Lakshadweep  
8. Punjab 
9. Madhya Pradesh 
10. Chhattisgarh 
11. Manipur 
12. Mizoram 
13. Tripura 
14. Uttarakhand 
 

60 
 
5.40 Other States like Andhra Pradesh 104, Delhi 105, Gujarat 
and Maharashtra 106, Jammu & Kashmir 107 Meghalaya108 and 
Goa109 among many o thers have resorted to enacting  their own 
gambling legislations. A brief description of some of these A cts 
is as follows: 
 
C. State Laws 
 
(a) Maharashtra and Gujarat 
 
The Bombay Prevention of Gambling Act, 1887 
 
5.41 The Act, 1887, applies to the States of Maharashtra  and 
by virtue of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960, to Gujarat as 
well. 
 
5.42 While prohibiting and penalising ‘betting or wagering’, the 
Act, under section 3, exempts from its ambit “wagering or 
betting upon a horse -race or dog race” and under section 13, 
“games of mere skill wherever played”. 
 
(b) Meghalaya 
 
The Meghalaya Prevention of Gambling Act, 1970  
 
5.43 The Act, 1970  not only permits “games of mere skill 
wherever played”, but also those games and sports that it may 
by notification, exempt from the operation of this Act, provided 
it is not likely to encourage gambling or otherwise defeat the 
objects thereof. 
 
5.44 The government of Meghalaya has used the power available 
under Section 13(2) to permit the local archery game of ‘teer’.  
                                  
104 The Andhra Pradesh Gambling Act, 1974. 
105 The Delhi Public Gambling Act, 1955. 
106 The Bombay Prevention of Gambling Act, 1887. 
107The Jammu & Kashmir Gambling Act, 1977. 
108 Meghalaya Prevention of Gambling Act, 1970. 
109 The Goa, Daman and Diu Public Gambling Act, 1976. 

61 
 
Betting on it is licensed under Section 14A of the Meghalaya 
Amusement and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act 1982.  
 
(c) Rajasthan 
 
The Rajasthan Public Gaming Ordinance, 1949 
 
5.45 The Ordinance, 1949 provides that nothing therein shall 
be held to apply to any game of mere skill, as distinguished 
from a game of chance and skill combined, unless it is carried 
on in common gamin g house. Thus, the Rajasthan Ordinance 
prohibits even games of skill, only if played in a common 
gaming house.  
 
(d) Goa, Daman and Diu  
 
The Goa, Daman and Diu Public Gambling Act, 1976 
 
5.46 The Act , 1976  aims t o “provide for the punishment for  
public gambling and the keeping of common gaming houses in 
the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu”. However, it is one 
of the only two State Legislations in operation that permits 
casinos and other games of chance. 
 
5.47 The Goa Legislative Assembly by amending the Act in 
1992110 and 1996111 added Section 13A, which allows the State 
Government to authorise games of “ electronic amusement/slot 
machines in Five Star Hotels” and “such table games and 
gaming on board in vessels offshore as may be notified”.  
 
                                  
110The Goa Public Gambling (Amendment) Act, 1992.  
111The Goa Public Gambling (Amendment) Act, 1996.  

62 
 
5.48 The 2012 Am endment112, further widened the ambit and 
regulatory system by amending some of the  provisions and also 
inserting a new range of provisions. The prominent among the 
new provisions so added are:  
 
a) Section 13C, enabling  the State government to appoint a 
Gaming Commissioner; 
b) Section 13D, provides for powers, duties and functions of 
the Gambling Commissioner; and, 
c) Section 13L, excludes the jurisdiction of Civil Courts with 
respect to entertaining any matter arising out of any 
order, direction, rule issued or framed under the Act. 
 
(e) Tamil Nadu  
 
(i) The Tamil Nadu Gaming Act, 1930 
 
5.49 The Act, 1930  applies to the State of Tamil  Nadu, 
excluding the City of Madras, which is governed by the Madras 
Police Act, 1888 and aims to “provide for punishment for  
gaming and the keeping of common-gaming houses in the State 
of Tamil Nadu”. 
 
5.50 Under the Act,  1930, “gaming” does not include a lottery 
but includes wagering or betting, which for the purposes of this 
definition are “deemed to comprise the collection or soliciting of 
bets, the rece ipt or distribution of winnings or prizes, in money 
or otherwise, in respect of any wager or bet, or any act which is 
intended to aid or facilitate wagering or betting or such 
collection, soliciting, receipt, or distribution”113.  
 
5.51 Further, Section 11 of the Act , 1930,  exempts games of 
mere skill from the prohibition contained in Sections 5 -10 
                                  
112The Goa Public Gambling (Amendment) Act, 2012. 
113Ibid., Explanation to Section 3.  

63 
 
thereof. After the judgement in the case of Dr. K.R. 
Lakshmanan114, where  horse-racing was considered a game of 
skill, betting on horse-racing is legal in the State of Tamil Nadu.  
 
5.52 The Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935  provides for the 
structure of taxation with respect to horse-races and pony-races 
in the State. 
 
(ii) The Tamil Nadu Prize Schemes (Prohibition) Act, 1979 
 
5.53 The Act, 1979 has been enacte d to “prohibit the 
promotion or conduct of prize schemes in the State of Tamil 
Nadu”. Section 2(b) of the Act defines “prize schemes”. 
 
5.54 Section 12 of the Act empowers  the State Government, to 
exempt from this prohibition, prize schemes or classes ther eof. 
If the Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in 
the public interest so to do, they may, by notification exempt 
subject to such conditions as they deem fit , from the provisions 
of this Act. 
 
(f) Sikkim 
 
(a) Games of Chance 
 
The Sikkim Casinos (Control & Tax) Act, 2002 
 
5.55 The Act , 2002 authorises the Gove rnment of Sikkim to 
grant licences to bus inesses and individuals to operate casinos 
in the State. The Sikkim Regulation of Gambling (Amendment) 
Act, 2005, grants discretion upon the go vernment to grant 
licences, authorizing gambling on certain days and making 
certain gambling houses legal. The Sikkim Casino Games 
                                  
114K.R. Lakshmanan (Dr) v. State of T.N., AIR 1996 SC 1153. 

64 
 
(Control and Tax) Rules, 2007 115 are made under Section 18 of 
the Act. The Act and the Rules framed thereunder regulate 
games of chance played us ing a machine or instrument in  five-
star hotel s. In July 2016, the Government of Sikkim, vide a 
notification, banned its local population from playing in casinos 
situated in the State. 
 
(b) Online Gaming 
 
The Sikkim Online Gaming (Regulation) Act, 2008 
 
5.56 The Act, 2008  is the first Indian legislation to expressly 
permit and regulate online gaming.  
 
5.57 The Sikkim Online Gaming (Regulation) Rules, 2009 are 
framed under section 23 of the 2008 Act.  Rule 3 of these Rules , 
read with the Sikkim Online Gaming (Regulation) Amendment 
Act, 2009, provides that the following games may be operated 
and played under a licence  obtained from the State 
Government: 
 
(i) Roulette 
(ii) Black Jack 
(iii) Pontoon 
(iv) Punto Banco 
(v) Bingo 
(vi) Casino Brag 
(vii) Poker 
(viii) Poker Dice 
(ix) Baccarat 
(x) Chemin-de-for 
                                  
115Notification No.FIN/DSSL/2010/III(247)/818, Finance, Revenue and Expenditure 
Department, Government of Sikkim, March 30, 2011  

65 
 
(xi) Backgammon 
(xii) Keno 
(xiii) Super Pan 9 
(xiv) sports betting on games, which involve prediction of 
the results of the sporting events and placing a bet on 
the outcome, either in part or in whole, of such 
sporting event, and including football, cricket, lawn 
tennis, chess, gold, horse-racing, etc.  
 
5.58 The Governme nt of Sikkim, however, restrict ed the 
offering of “online games and sports games” to the physical 
premises of ‘gaming parlours ’ through intranet gaming 
terminals within the geographical boundaries of the State, by 
enacting the Sikkim Online Gaming ( Regulation) Amendment 
Act, 2015. 
 
(g) Nagaland 
 
The Nagaland Prohibition of Gambling and Promotion and 
Regulation of Online Games of Skill Act, 2015 
 
5.59 The Act, 2015 defines “Gambling” as the act of “wagering 
or betting on games of chance but does not include betting or 
wagering on games of skill”. “Wagering” or “Betting”, has been 
defined in section 2(5) as “the staking of money or virtual 
currency, whether or not it is equivalent to a recognized 
currency”. 
 
5.60 The Nagaland Act is the only legislation in India , section 
2(3) thereof defines the term, “games of skill”, to “include all 
such games where there is preponderance of skill over chance, 
including wher e the skill relates to strategis ing the manner of 
placing wagers or placing bets or where the skill lies in team 
selection or selection of virtual stocks based on analysis or 

66 
 
where the skill relates to the manner in which the moves are 
made, whether through deployment of physical or mental skill 
and acumen”. 
 
5.61 The Explanation to section 2(3)  broadens the ambit of 
“games of skill” in the following words: 
 
i. All Games provided in Schedule A of this Act 
shall fall under the category of “Games of Skill” 
ii. ‘Games’ which have been declared or 
determined to be ‘games of skill’ by Indian or 
International courts or other statutes, or 
games where there are domestic and 
international competitions and tournaments, 
or games which can be determined to be 
‘games of skill’ shall further be entitled to be 
included in Schedule A. 
iii. Games of skill may be (a) Card based and (b) 
action/ virtual sports/ adventure/ mystery 
and (c) calculation/ strategy/ quiz based. 
 
5.62 Section 2(4) of the Act , 2015  states that “Games of 
chance”, subject to the provision of s ection 2(3), are defined to 
mean “all such games where there is preponderance of chance 
over skill”. Schedule A to the Act lays down a detailed list of 
games that are considered to be ‘games of skill’ for the purpose 
of the Nagaland Act. These games are as follows: 
 
1. Chess 
2. Sudoku 
3. Quizzes 
4. Binary Options 
5. Bridge 
6. Poker 
7. Rummy 
8. Nap 
9. Spades 

67 
 
10. Auction 
11. Solitaire 
12. Virtual Golf 
13. Virtual racing games, including virtual horse 
racing, virtual car racing, etc. 
14. Virtual sports, including virtual soccer, virtual 
cricket, virtual archery, virtual snooker/ brid ge/ 
pool 
15. Virtual fighting 
16. Virtual wrestling 
17. Virtual boxing 
18. Virtual combat games 
19. Virtual adventure games 
20. Virtual mystery and detective games 
21. Virtual stock/ monopoly games 
22. Virtual team selection games 
23. Virtual fantasy games 
 
5.63 The Nagaland Act seeks to hav e pan-India application b y 
virtue of the Explanation to section 2(1) and s ection 2(2). The  
Explanation to section 2(1) reads as follows: 
 
Once a licenc e has been obtained under this Act, 
wagering or betting on online ‘games of skill’ or 
making profit by pr oviding a medium for playing 
‘games of skill’ shall not amount to gambling so long 
as they are being provided to players and are being 
accessed by players operating from territories where 
‘games of skill’ are exempted from the ambit of 
gambling.  
 
5.64 Section 2(2) defines the term “territory” for the purpose of 
this Act, as “any territory in India in which “games of skill” are 
permitted, and are recognised as being exempted from the ambit 
of “gambling””. 
 

68 
 
5.65 A conjoint reading of s ection 2(2) and the Exp lanation to 
section 2(1), provide s for a pan India application of the 
Nagaland Act, 2015 in matters of Online Gaming, to all those 
States where the games so being offered are legally permissible 
‘games of skill’. 
 
5.66 Section 3 provides that as long as a licencee under it is 
not providing a portal to players from other territories, games 
that are prohibited or considered to be gambling in those 
territories, the same shall be considered to be a genuine 
business venture not amounting to gambling. 
 
5.67 Further, Rule 3(1) of the Nagaland Prohibition of 
Gambling and Promotion and Regulation of Online Gaming 
Rules, 2016 makes eligible for a licence, only those individuals/ 
companies/ firms that are not engaged in ‘gambling’. 
 
(h) Telangana 
 
The Telengana Gaming Act, 1974 
 
5.68 The State of Telangana, introduced the Ordinances of 
June 116  and July 117 , 2017 with the object of expressly 
prohibiting gambling as a whole, both online and offline.  
 
5.69 The Telangana Gaming (Amendment) Act, 2017, amended 
the Telangana Gaming Ac t, 1974, incorporating the changes 
introduced by the abovementioned Ordinances, with the object 
of implementing “the policy of zero tolerance against gambling 
which has serious impact on the financial status and well -being 
of the common public”. 
                                  
116The Telangana Gaming (Amendment) Ordinance, 2017. 
117The Telangana Gaming (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2017. 

69 
 
 
5.70 The object behind this amendment is to “completely 
eradicate the menace of gambling, due to its ease of access and 
wide solicitation, several people, the youth in particular, are 
being addicted to online gaming when played for stakes etc., 
and this addiction i s affecting various sections of society 
including students and women, thereby causing threat to the 
very public order itself”. 
 
5.71 The important changes brought about by this amendment 
can be summarised as follows: 
 
a) The term, “cyber space” has been inser ted in the 
definition of “common gaming house” in s ection 2(1)(ii) 
and in the Explanation to Section 2(1)(ii) to cover 
online gaming; 
b) The Amended Explanation to s ection 2(2), widens the 
scope of proscription under this Act, and clarifies that 
wagering and betting now includes “any act of risking 
money on an uncertain event, including on a game of 
skill”; 
c) Now, the definition  of “instruments of gaming” in 
section 2(4), includes within its ambit, online/ 
electronic instruments of gaming; 
d) section 3 of the Telan gana Act, now, not only 
proscribes the keeping, operating or using of common 
gaming houses, but also the keeping, operating or 
using of online gaming. 
e) Now, all violations of the Act are ‘non -bailable’ and 
‘cognizable’ under the Section 5. 
f) The old s ection 15 exempted games of mere skill from 
the ambit of the prohibition contained in the Ac t. Now, 
the new section 15 empowers the State Government to 
issue orders to remove difficulties in implementation of 
the Act. 
 
5.72 It must be noted that the Ordinances of June and July 
and the Telangana Gaming (Amendment) Act, 2017 have been 
challenged as being violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 of 
the Constitution of India. The cases are currently pending 

70 
 
before the High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad in W.P. Nos. 
20261, 20323, 20352, 21643 and 23247 of 2017118. 
 
(i) Other State Acts on Gambling 
 
5.73 Other States like Kerala, Jammu & Kashmir, Bihar, 
Jharkhand, etc., have enacted their own l aws on ‘Betting and 
Gambling’, following, in a way, the model of the Public Gambling 
Act, 1867, and prohibiting gambling and keeping of common 
gaming houses, while making an exception for ‘games of skill’. 
 
D. Act Pending Notification 
 
The Maharashtra Casinos (Control and Tax) Act, 1976 
 
5.74 The Act, 1976, a revenue driven piece of legis lation, has 
however, till date not been notified. The Statement of Objects 
and Reasons of its Bill was as follows: 
 
1. Taking into account the increasing tourist 
traffic in the State of Maharashtra, 
particularly foreign tourist traffic, as also the 
need to ra ise additional revenues for the 
State, it is considered expedient to provide for 
the licensing of casinos in the State of 
Maharashtra, for the taxation of moneys 
stakes on games of betting or wagering played 
therein, and also to regulate the functioning 
of such licensed casinos under a system of 
adequate controls. 
 
2. This Bill to provide for the licensing of casinos 
and for the taxation of moneys staked in 
casinos games seeks to achieve the above 
objectives. 
 
5.75 This Act provides for the licensing of casino s, permitting 
certain types of casino games to be played therein, taxation on 
                                  
118 As on 30-05-2018 

71 
 
money paid/agreed to be paid by participants in these casinos 
(not exceeding 25%), the punishment for contravention of the 
provisions of the Act, and certain other connected provisions.  
 
E. Bill pending before the Lok Sabha 
 
The National Sports Ethics Commission Bill, 2016 
 
5.76 This Bill was introduced as private member bill   by Shri  
Anurag Singh Thakur, MP in the Lok Sabha in 2016 with the 
following objective119: 
 
To provide for th e constitution of a National 
Sports Ethics Commission to ensure ethical 
practices and fair play in sports including 
elimination of doping practices, match fixing, 
fraud of age and sexual harassment of women in 
sports and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
 
5.77 It was introduced in pursuance to United Nations General 
Assembly Resolution No. 58/5, adopted on 17.11.2003, 
recognizing sports as a means to promote education, health and 
peace120. 
 
5.78 This Bill of 2016, till date, remains  pending in the Lok 
Sabha. 
 
F. Draft Bill 
 
5.79 The Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs, Government of 
India  drafted a  Bill titled Prevention of Sporting Fraud Bill, 
                                  
119 Ibid, Object and Purpose, available at: 
http://164.100.47.4/billstexts/lsbilltexts/AsIntroduced/4408LS.pdf (last visited on 28-05-
2018). 
120 G.A. Res. 58/5, U.N. GAOR, 58th Sess., U.N. Doc. A/58/5 (Nov. 17, 2003) available at 
https://www.un.org/sport2005/resources/un_resolutions/engl_58_5.pdf 

72 
 
2013 121 with the purpose to counter the fraud effecting the 
integrity and fair play in relation to sporting events. It 
criminalises sporting fraud and provides the punishment for the 
same.  
 
5.80 The Bill defines sporting fraud as: 
 
A person is said to commit the offence of sporting 
fraud in relation to a sporting event if he, directly or 
indirectly,-  
 
(i) manipulates sports result, irrespective of 
whether the outcome is actually altered 
or not, or makes arrangement of an 
irregular alteration of the field of play or 
the result of a sporting event including 
its incidental events or deliberately 
misapplies th e rules of the sport, in 
order to obtain any economic or any 
other advantage or benefits or promise of 
an advantage or benefits, for himself or 
for any other person so as to remove or 
reduce all or part of the uncertainty 
normally associated with the resul ts of a 
sporting event; or 
(ii) wilfully fails to perform to his true 
potential for economic or any other 
advantage or benefit for himself or for 
any other person unless such under 
performance can be attributed to 
strategic or tactical reason deployed in 
the interest of that sport or team; or 
(iii) being in possession of inside information 
as a member, discloses such information 
to any person before or during any 
sporting event with the knowledge that 
disclosure of such information is likely to 
result in financial gai n or is likely to be 
used in relation to betting or 
manipulation of a sporting event; or 
(iv) omits to perform the duty imposed on 
him under section 4. 
                                  
121 Available at: 
http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media/draft/Draft%20Prevention%20of%20Sporting%20 
Fraud%20Bill%202013.pdf. (last visited on 24th May 2018). 

73 
 
 
5.81 Section 4 of the Bill lays down the duty to inform in the 
following words: 
 
Whoever gets any information as to the commission of any 
of the acts referred to in clauses (i) to (iii) of section 3, 
shall forthwith or within such time as may be prescribed, 
give the information regarding the same to the 
appropriate authority or the team management or the 
National Sport Federation, in writing: 
 
Provided that the team management or National Sport 
Federation, as the case may be, shall inform the 
appropriate authority within three working days of 
receiving such information.  
 
5.82 This Bill, however, still remains a draft and has not been 
introduced in either of the Houses of the Parliament. 
 
  

74 
 
CHAPTER VI 
International Perspective 
 
6.1 Countries across the globe have adopted three approaches 
in the matter of regulating gambling and betting activities. Some 
Countries, especially those which give primacy to religious 
morality, have taken the view that the role of government is to 
protect its citizens from the negative e ffects of such activities.  
The Countries that give primacy to religious morality often 
impose a complete ban on gambling, while others view gambling 
and betting as an industry to drive trade and revenue; and 
encourage tourism and employment. Some countries also 
operate between these two extremes, striking a balance and 
permit gambling in a controlled and regulated environment; as a 
result, they earn substantial revenue from the tax imposed on 
such activities. This revenue can be utilised for promoting 
sports, cultural, charitable activities or any other activity aimed 
at the economic growth or development122.  
 
A. Gambling & Betting In Different Jurisdictions 
 
1. United Kingdom 
 
6.2 Initially governed by the Public Gambling Act, 1845, 
today, the United Kingdom’s gambling and betting industry is 
governed by the United Kingdom Ga mbling Act, 2005. Section 3 
thereof defines gambling, to be inclusive of “gaming”, “betting” 
and “lottery”. Section 6 of the Act explains ‘gaming’ as playing a 
game of chance for prize. It defines a ‘game of chance’ to include 
a game, which involves an element of chance and skill; or a 
game involving an element of chance that can be eliminated by 
                                  
122 Regulating Sports Betting in India: FICCI available at:http://blog.ficci.com/sports-betting-
india-faq/3708/2/(last visited on 01-06-2018). 

75 
 
superlative skill but does not include a sport. The Secretary of 
State may, by regulation, provide that a specified activity can be 
treated as a ‘game of chance’ for the purposes of this section.  
 
6.3 Betting has been defined under Section 9 of the Act as 
accepting a bet on the outcome of a race, competition or other 
event or process, the likelihood of anything occurring or not 
occurring or whether anything is or is not true.  The actual 
outcome of the b et is of no significance whatsoever. This broad 
definition also includes betting on sports within its ambit. 
 
6.4 The Act regulates gambling and betting practices in the 
country and aims to protect “children and other vulnerable 
persons from being harmed o r exploited by gambling.” 123. To 
achieve this objective, the Act covers a wide range of practices 
associated with betting and gambling, such  as paying an 
individual to deliberately lose a game and to profit from a bet 
placed on the result of the game 124. Section 50 of the  Act allows 
persons above the age of eighteen to take part in all gambling 
activities while persons above the age of 16 are allowed to play 
the lotteri es and private or non -commercial betting and 
gambling.  
 
6.5 Under Section 20 of the 2005 Act , a body corporate called 
the “Gambling Commission”, is constituted, which regulates 
gambling and betting activities through licen sed operators. 
These operators act as betting intermediaries providing related 
services. The operators also have to pay a Remote Gaming Duty 
to finance the working of the Commission. 
 
                                  
123s. 1(c). 
124Rohani Mahyera,“Saving Cricket: A Proposal for the Legalization of Gambling in India to 
Regulate Corrupt Betting Practices in Cricket” 26 Emory Intl L. Rev.378 (2012). 

76 
 
6.6 The 2005 Act allows for imposing limits on stakes, fees, 
winnings or prizes. Recently, the Minister for Sport and Civil 
Society, announced a reduction on the upper limit of stakes on 
Fixed Odds Betting Terminals from £100 to £2. In order to cover 
any negative impact on the public finances by such reduction, 
and to protect funding for vital public services, this change will 
be linked to an increase in Remote Gaming Duty, paid by online 
gaming operators, in the relevant Budget125. 
 
6.7 Betting in the sport of cricket is regulated in the United 
Kingdom by the England and Wales Cricket Board Rules 126 
along with the 2005 Act.  
 
6.8 Britain’s Gambling Industry is one of the largest in the 
world and continue s to increase in size. It generated a Gross 
Gambling Yield of £13.8 billion between October 2015 and 
September 2016. Online gambling generated a gross gambling 
yield of £4.5 billion that amounts to 33% of total gambling in 
Britain. This implies that online  gambling is the largest 
gambling sector in Britain. Over the same period, the National 
Lottery generated £3.4 billion, of which £3.3 billion was 
generated by the high -street betting sector and £1 billion by 
traditional casinos. Between April 2016 and Marc h 2017, the 
National Lottery contributed £1.6 billion towards social 
causes127. In 2016 , a total of £208 million was raised for social 
                                  
125 Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2018/may/17/maximum-stake-for-
fixed-odds-betting-terminals-cut-to-2 (last visited on 31-05-2018). 
126  England & Wales Cricket Board., Regulations Governing the Qualification and 
Registration of Cricketers available at: https://www.ecb.co.uk/governance/regulations/first-
class-county-regulations (last visited on 02-06-2018) . 
127 Gambling Commission Annual Report – 2016-17, available 
at:http://www.gamblingcommission.gov.uk/PDF/Annual-report-and-accounts-2016-
2017.pdf(last visited on 01-06-2018). 

77 
 
causes through large  society lotteries, recording  a 10.5% 
increase over the previous year128. 
 
2. South Africa 
 
6.9 Gambling activities in South Africa were governed 
previously by the South Africa Gambling Act, 1965, that banned 
all forms of betting and gambling except on horse -racing which 
is considered to be a sport. It was seen that this total 
prohibition on gambling, sparked  more illegal casinos to crop 
up. Therefore, it was recognised that the licensing and 
regulating of gambling in the country could: 
• Generate significant economic benefit to the country.  
• Create meaningful employment opportunities. 
• Contribute towards the adv ancement of persons 
previously disadvantaged by discrimination on the basis 
of race. 
 
6.10 Thus, the National Gambling Act 1996  was enacted , 
which stood repealed by the National Gambling Act, 2004. The 
primary objective of the new enactment was to include 
provisions with greater precision and therefore to co -ordinate 
activities relating to the concurrent exercise of legislative 
competence and to provide for the licensing and regulating  of 
interactive gambling by the National Gambling Board. 
 
6.11 Section 3(a) of the 2004 Act defines  gambling to include 
“placing or accepting a bet or wager.” As per section 4(1)(a), a 
person “places or accepts a bet or wager when that person . . . 
stakes money or anything of value on a fixed -odds bet, or an 
open bet, with a bo okmaker on any contingency.” It can be 
                                  
128Gambling Commission of UK, Industry Statistics – April 2013 to March 2016. Report 
available at:http://www.gamblingcommission.gov.uk (last visited on 01-06-2018). 

78 
 
inferred from the definition of gambling that informal bets 
conducted on a non-commercial basis are not illegal, contingent 
on the fact that the party involved is not a bookmaker, or 
derives a significant portion of h is livelihood from gambling. 
Moreover, no one should be paid a fee or gain anything from the 
activity other than the winning on the bet itself. These types of 
gambling activities are legal and can be licensed. There also 
exist provisions for expressly allo wing casinos to be set up and 
operated. 
 
6.12 Online gambling is referred to in the 2004 Act as 
"interactive gaming". Interactive gaming is essentially the 
engaging in or making available of an "interactive game". An 
"interactive game" is defined under section 2 of the Act as: 
 
a gambling game played or available to be played 
through the mechanism of an electronic agent 
accessed over the internet other than a game that 
can be accessed for play only in licensed premises, 
and only if the licensee of such prem ises is 
authorised to make such a game available for play. 
 
6.13 The National Gambling Board (NGB) established under 
the 2004 Act, effectively regulates gambling activities. The Board 
ensures observance of nationally and internationally recognised 
standards of compliance thereby ensuring and maintaining the 
reputation of the industry.  
 
6.14 The NGB regulates gambling activities such as bingo, 
casinos, limited payout machines and racing & betting. 
Provincial licensing authorities can also issue licences under the 
Act. Both the national and provincial legislatures have 
concurrent power to make laws related to the gambling 
activities. By issuing licences, the NGB and provincial 

79 
 
authorities keep track of gambling activities as well as the 
individuals indulging therein.  
 
6.15 Gross Gambling Revenue (GGR) generated in the casino 
industry increased by 4.5% from 2014 to 2015 and by 7.4% 
from 2015 to 2016. The generation of GGR increased by 4.3% 
from R20.9 billion in 2013 to R21.8billion in 2014, by 9.6% to 
R23.9 bi llion in 2015 and by 9.9% to R26.3 billion in 2016. 
During the year of 2016 casinos accounted for the highest GGR, 
being 70.5% as compared to other gambling modes. The 
collection of taxes/levies increased by 6.6% from R2.1 billion in 
2013 to R2.2billion in  2014, by 10.7% to R2.5 billion in 2015, 
and by 11.9% to R2.8 billion in 2016.129 
 
3.  United States of America 
 
6.16 In United States, gaming laws are comparatively liberal. 
Gambling activities are governed by three sets of regulations, 
one at each level - Local, State, and Federal. While some States 
have detailed gaming laws that go back more than two 
centuries, other States are yet to address key facets of this 
industry.  
 
Federal Online Gambling Laws 
6.17 Multiple Federal laws were enacted to regulate gamb ling 
activities, both online and offline. These enac tments together 
make for a comprehensive regulatory system, comprising of: 
 
1. The Interstate Wire Act,1961130 (The Federal Wire Act). 
2. International Travel Act of 1961131 (Travel Act). 
                                  
129 National Gambling Statistics available 
at:http://www.ngb.org.za/SiteResources/documents/2016/Stats%20FY16%20Audited.pdf (last 
visited on 23-11-2017). 
13018 U.S.C. 1084. 

80 
 
3. Interstate Transportation of Wagering Paraphernalia 
Act of 1961132 (Paraphernalia Act). 
4. Illegal Gambling Business Act of 1970133. 
5. The Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act, 
1992134 (PASPA). 
6. The Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act, 
2006135 (UIGEA). 
 
6.18 The Federal Wire Act  penalises the act of knowingly 
placing bets or wagering or assisting in placing of bets or 
wagering “using a wire communication facility” for the 
transmission in interstate or foreign commerce domain. 
 
6.19 The Act was brought in to tighten the noose arou nd the 
neck of major organised crime bosses and not to deal with the 
legality or morality of gambling per se . The Wire Act as 
interpreted by the Department of Justice for the United S tates 
of America outlaws only transmissions rel ating to “sporting 
events or contest” 136 . The Depar tment of Justice has also 
interpreted the Act to outlaw all forms of online gambling. 
However, the Court of Appeal of the Fifth Circuit in Thompson v. 
MasterCard International et al.137 affirmed a lower court ruling, 
holding that the A ct struck online betting for sports only and 
casino games played online were legal. There still exists 
ambiguity regarding the application of the Act to online 
gambling. 
                                                                                       
13118 U.S.C. 1952. 
13218 U.S.C. 1953. 
13318 U.S.C. 1955. 
13428 U.S.C. 3701 et seq. 
13531 U.S.C. 5361 et seq. 
136 United States Department of Justice, Whether Proposals By Illinois And New York To Use 
The Internet And Out-Of-State Transaction Processors To Sell Lottery Tickets To In-State 
Adults Violate The Wire Act, Sept. 20, 2011, available at: 
https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/olc/opinions/2011/09/31/state-lotteries-opinion.pdf 
(last visited at 29-05-2018). 
137313 F.3d 257 (5th Cir. 2002). 

81 
 
 
6.20 The Travel Act 138 aims to punish anyone who travels in 
interstate or foreign comme rce, uses any facility in interstate or 
foreign commerce, or uses the mail, with intent to distribute the 
proceeds of any business enterprise involving unlawful activities 
(including gambling) or money laundering; or to otherwise 
promote, manage, establish , carry on, etc. any business 
enterprise involving unlawful activities ( including gambling ); 
and thereafter distributes the proceeds from any business 
enterprise involving gambling or from any act indictable as 
money laundering, or promotes, manages, estab lishes, carries 
on, or facilitates the promotion, management,  establishment, or 
carrying on of any business enterprise involving unlawful 
activities ( including unlawful gambling ) or any act indictable 
as money laundering. 
 
6.21 Interstate Transportation o f Wagering Paraphernalia Act, 
1961 was enacted with the purpose to criminalising interstate 
transportation, except by common carrier, "of any  record, 
paraphernalia, ticket, certificate, bills, slip, token, paper, 
writing, or other device used, or to be use d, adapted, devised or 
designed for use in" bookmaking, wagering pools with respect to 
sporting events or a numbers, policy, bolita, or similar game 139. 
This enactment was designed to "erect a substantial barrier to 
the distribution of certain materials used  in the conduct of 
various forms of illegal gambling"140. 
 
6.22 The Illegal Gambling Business Act, 1970 was enacted as a 
part of the Organized Crime Control Act, with the purpose of 
striking at syndicated gambling 141 . Many experts 142  have 
                                  
13818 U.S. Code 1952; 12 U.S.C. 1752; 12 U.S.C. 1813. 
139U.S. Code.& Cong. News, 87th Cong. 1st Sess., 2635. 
140Erlenbaugh v. United States, 409 U.S. 239, 246 (1972). 
141United States v. Sacco, 491 F.2d 995, 998 (9th Cir. 1974). 

82 
 
expressed that Section 1955, which outlaws conducting an 
illegal gambling business, prima facie strikes at any illegal 
gambling business conducted using the Internet. Violations are 
punishable with imprisonment  and/or fine 143 . Further, the 
Federal G overnment has been entrusted wit h the power to 
confiscate any money or other property used in violation of this 
provision144.  
 
6.23 In Philip D. Murphy, Governor of New Jersey  v. National 
Collegiate Athletic Association etc ., (Case Nos. 16 -476 and 16 -
477) decided by the Supreme Court of t he United States, on 
14.05.2018 , the Professional and Amateur Sports Protection 
Act 1992 was under scrutiny, as to whether it was in conflict  
with the Federal Constitution or not. The Act provided that 
neither the States nor the private actors could indul ge in the 
activities of sports gambling. It curtailed all the activities 
surrounding the sports gambling, such as sponsorship, 
promotion, advertisement and licensing the same.  
 
6.24 The Supreme Court of the United States, with a ratio of 
6:3, declared the  Act to be unconstitutional. It opined that the 
scheme of the Act was ‘anti -commandeering’ in nature; the 
Congress could not directly control the States; rather it could 
regulate the actions of the individual, directly. Therefore, 
prohibiting the States fr om regularising sports gambling was 
unconstitutional.  
                                                                                       
142Winner, Winner, No Chicken Dinner: An Analysis of Interactive Media Ent’mt & Gaming 
Ass’n v. Att’y Gen. of the U.S. and the Unjustified Consequences of the UIGEA, 31 
LOYOLA OF LOS ANELES ENTERMAINENT LAW REVIEW 55, 59 (2011); Geolocation 
and Federalism on the Internet: Cutting Internet Gambling’s Gordian Knot, 11 COLUMBIA 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LAW REVIEW, 41, 45 (2010); Gottfried, The Federal 
Framework for Internet Gambling, 10 RICHMOND JOURNAL OF LAW AND 
TECHNOLOGY 26, 53 (2004); General Accounting Office [now the Government 
Accountability Office], Internet Gambling: An Overview of the Issues 11 (Dec. 2002); 
Blackjack or Bust: Can U.S. Law Stop Internet Gambling? 16 LOYOLA OF LOS ANGELES 
ENTERTAINMENT LAW JOURNAL 667, 675-77 (1996). 
14318 U.S.C. 1955(a), 3571(d). 
14418 U.S.C. 1955(d). 

83 
 
 
6.25 While dealing with various constitutional and legal issues, 
the Court took note of arguments from both sides, in the 
following words: 
 
The legalization of sports gambling is a controversial 
subject. Supporters argue that legalization will 
produce revenue for the States and critically 
weaken illegal sports betting operations, which are 
often run by organized crime.  Opponents contend 
that legalizing sports gambling will hook the young on 
gambling, e ncourage people of modest means to 
squander their savings and earnings, and corrupt 
professional and college sports. (emphasis added) 
 
6.26 The Supreme Court left the task of policy making to the 
Congress and in case the Congress did not wish to do so, the  
States were at liberty to regularise the sports gambling.  
 
6.27 The Unlawful Internet Gambling Act regulates online  
gambling in the United States of America. The Act declares that 
no person engaged in business of betting or wagering may 
knowingly accept in connection with Unlawful Internet 
Gambling, credit, electronic fund transfer, che que, draft, etc . 
Unlawful Internet Gambling is defined to mean “to place, 
receive, or otherwise knowingly transmit a bet or wager by any 
means which involves the use, at le ast in part, of the Internet 
where such bet or wager is unlawful under any applicable 
Federal or State law in the State or Tribal lands in which the bet 
or wager is initiated, received, or otherwise made”145. 
 
6.28 Violations of its provisions  are punishable  by 
imprisonment and/or fine 146. Further, offenders may also be 
subject to both civil and regulatory enforcement actions147. 
                                  
145 31 U.S.C. 5362 
14631 U.S.C. 5366(a), 18 U.S.C. 3571.  

84 
 
 
6.29 This Act prohibits online betting by targeting the 
intermediaries such as banks and financial groups to process 
payments made in regard to gambling or betting. The Act 
explicitly excludes a few markets viz. certain fantasy sports bets 
and existing legal intrastate and inter -tribal gaming. The Act 
also explicitly covers lotteries 148. The list of activities exempted 
from the definition includes securities and commodities 
exchange activities 149 , insurance 150 , Internet games and 
promotions that do not involve betting 151, and certain fantasy 
sporting activities152.  
 
6.30 There exist other federal laws such as the Racketeer 
Influenced and Corrupt O rganization Act, 1970 153, and  Money 
Laundering enactments 154 that supplement the aforementioned 
enactments to form a cohesive system of regulation at the 
Federal level. 
 
6.31 In short, it is a federal offence to: 
 
Use wire communications to place or receive bets on, or to 
transmit gambling information relating to, sporting 
contests or events 155 ; Conduct a large -scale gambling 
business in violation of state law 156; Travel interstate or 
overseas, or to use any other facility of interstate or 
foreign commerce, to faci litate the operation of an illegal 
gambling business 157; Conduct a gambling business and 
accept payment for illegal Internet gambling 
                                                                                       
14731 U.S.C. 5364, 5364. 
14831 U.S.C. 5362(1)(B),(C).  
149 31 U.S.C. 5362(1)(E)(i)-(iv). 
15031 U.S.C. 5362(1)(E)(v)-(vii). 
15131 U.S.C. 5362(1)(E)(viii)  
15231 U.S.C. 5362(1)(E)(ix). 
15318 U.S.C. 1961 et seq. 
15418 U.S.C. 1956, 1957. 
15518 U.S.C. 1084. 
15618 U.S.C. 1955. 
15718 U.S.C. 1952. 

85 
 
participation 158; Systematically commit these crimes in 
order to acquire or operate a commercial enterprise 159; 
Launder the proceeds of an illegal gambling business or to 
plough them back into the business 160; Spend or deposit 
more than $10,000 of the proceeds of illegal gambling in 
any manner161; or conspire with others, or to aid and abet 
them, in their violation of any of these federal laws162.  
 
6.32 At State level, there exist other enactments for regulation 
of gambling activities. According to the American Gaming 
Association, commercial casinos paid $8.95 billion towards 
direct gaming taxes applied by state, county and municipal 
governments in 2016, which helped State and Local 
Governments across the country to balance their budgets and 
fund education programs, make investments in infrastructure 
and keep essential services running. Notably, 2016’s $38.96 
billion revenue total represents only moneys won by commercial 
casino operations across the United States. Native American 
casinos generated a record total of $31.2 billion in gross gaming 
revenues in 2016, according to the National Indian Gaming 
Commission. Combined, the tribal and c ommercial casino 
industries in 2016 generated a total annual gross gaming 
revenue in excess of $70 billion163. 
 
4. Australia  
 
6.33 Both the Federal and State G overnments in Australia are 
involved in nearly every aspect of gambling ranging from acting 
as sup pliers, tax collect ors, police, funding and organis ing of 
help services for gamblers experiencing problems, regulators 
and have put into place a host of laws and regulations in terms 
                                  
15831 U.S.C. 5363. 
15918 U.S.C. 1962. 
16018 U.S.C. 1956. 
16118 U.S.C. 1957. 
16218 U.S.C. 371, 2. 
163 The AGA Survey of the Casino Industry, 2017 State of the States, available at: 
https://www.americangaming.org/sites/default/files/research_files/2017%20State%20of%20th
e%20States.pdf (last visited on 25-05-2018). 

86 
 
of who can gamble, where, when and what they can gamble on 
etc. The Feder al Government determines national laws on 
internet gambling . State and Territory G overnments oversee 
most aspects of gambling, while Local Governments have to deal 
with planning164.  
 
6.34 The Interactive Gambling Act of 2001 (IGA)  protected the 
residents fr om the harmful effects of online gambling.  Under 
the Act i t was illegal to provide some interactive gambling 
activities, such as 'online casinos', to someone physically 
present in Australia. Examples include roulette, poker, craps, 
online 'pokies' and bla ckjack. Some activities were however 
excluded from the list and are subject to licenc es, an absence of 
licence under the Act would amount to an offence. Further, 
section 7A prohibited advertisements of interactive gambling on 
websites designed for the Australian audience.  
 
6.35 The Interactive Gambling Act was amended in 2017 in 
response to the 2015 Review of the Impact of Illegal Offshore 
Wagering.  
 
6.36 The 2017 Ame ndment Act sought to inter alia prohibit 
interactive gambling services (‘ illegal services ’) and regulate  
interactive gambling services (most of the current excluded 
services).Prohibit ‘click to call’ in -play betting services by 
tightening the definition of a ‘telephone betting service’ (a 
regulated interactive gambling service) to require deal ings with 
customers to be wholly by way of spoken co nversations between 
individuals; a mend the Australian Communications and Media 
Authority Act 2005 (the ACMA Act) to enable the ACMA to notify 
international regulators of information relating to prohibited  or 
regulated interactive gambling services (including the names of 
                                  
164 International Study of Gambling Jurisdictions, Gambling Commission Report 2010, The 
Department of Trade and Industry, South Africa, p.8, available at: 
https://www.thedti.gov.za/news2011/Appendix.pdf (last visited on 29-05-2018). 

87 
 
operators); and simplify and streamline the complaints handling 
and investigation process to remove mandatory requirements to 
refer matters to the police and enable the ACMA to handle the 
entire process from receipt of complaints to enforcement, similar 
to its complaints handling and enforcement role in relation to 
other legislation. 
 
6.37 Sports b etting, hors e-racing and greyhound -racing are 
exceptions to the prohi bition and can be offered  by licenc ed 
authorities or operators.  
 
6.38 “The Interactive Gambling Amendment ( Lottery Betting) 
Bill 2018”  aims at  prohibiting betting on the outcome, or a 
contingency that may or may not happen in the course of the 
conduct, of a lottery (including a k eno draw) is still pending in 
the Parliament. 
 
6.39 In 2014 -15, the government revenue from total gaming 
activities combined amounted to $5,507.829 million, while the 
government revenue from sports -betting activities amounted to 
$36.452 million. The govern ment revenue from total gambling 
activities was reported to be $5,760.217 million165. 
 
5. France 
 
6.40 The Code de la sécuritéintérieure (hereinafter CSI) (the 
domestic security code) section 320 -1166 and Law No. 2010 -476 
of 12 May 2010 167 regulate gambling and betting activities in 
France.  The CSI is based on the principle that games of chance, 
                                  
165Latest edition (32nd) of the Australian Gambling Statistics available at: 
http://www.qgso.qld.gov.au/products/reports/aus-gambling-stats/aus-gambling-stats-32nd-
edn.pdf (last visited on 01-06-2018). 
166 Available at: 
https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichCode.do;jsessionid=E279E76100934840D376F7E28616
81AF.tpdjo04v_1?idSectionTA=LEGISCTA000025507989&cidTexte=LEGITEXT00002550
3132&dateTexte=20140912 (last visited on 29-05-2018). 
167available at: 
https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichTexte.do?cidTexte=JORFTEXT000022204510 (last 
visited on 29-05-2018). 

88 
 
betting, lotteries, gambling and casinos are prohibited unless 
the operator can benefit from  an exception to the law, or has 
obtained an authorisation and approval  from the French 
Administration. Betting is illegal in France with the exception of 
horse-racing, which is available through the PariMutuelUrbain 
(PMU)168 and operators approved by Autorité de régulation des 
jeux en ligne (hereinafter, ARJEL a regulatory authority  for 
online activities) for horse racing and sports betting online 169.  
Poker and other games are allowed in offline casinos and all 
online activiti es are regulated by ARJEL licen sed operators. 
Lotteries, on the other hand, are regulated by the Française des  
Jeux (FDJ) in France. 
 
6.41 Profits from such activities have contributed to financing 
sports, which helped football to become the nation’s number 
one sport. As the benefits of regulated gambling were realised, 
the government reduced the restriction on th ese activities. It 
was only in 2001, that the FDJ and the PMU received 
permission to offer their services online.  
 
6.42 All networks included, the gambling market in France 
generated a Gross Gaming Revenue of €9.75 billion  in 2016 
(against €9.53 billion i n 2015). The amount of tax revenue 
collected on the online gambling activity (including VAT), 
amounted to €429 million for the year 2016170. 
 
6. Austria 
 
6.43 Austrian law applicable to all kinds of gaming and betting 
activities is the Austrian Civil Code.  The E -Commerce Act 
                                  
168 Available at: https://www.pmu.fr (last visited on 01-06-2018). 
169 Available at: http://www.arjel.fr (last visited on 01-06-2018). 
170ARJEL, Annual Report 2016-17, available at:http://www.arjel.fr/IMG/pdf/rapport-activite-
2016en.pdf (last visited on 01-06-2018). 

89 
 
which came into force on 1 st January 2002, governs online 
gaming and betting. 
 
7. Russia 
 
 
6.44 Gambling was completely prohibited from 1928 to 1987 in 
erstwhile Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) 171. The 
1987 decree of the Council  of Ministers effectively legalised 
gambling, with the creation of joint commercial ventures for the 
promotion of tourism, and the entrepreneurial hospitality sector 
businesses taking full advantage of this, installed 226 slot 
machines in hotels frequently  visited by foreigners. After 2002, 
the Federal Sports Agency (FSA) was aut horised to grant 
gambling licenc es. However, in 2006 with the Federal Law 
N244-FZ 172  being passed, a prohibition was imposed on 
gambling venues with slot machines and table games 
everywhere in Russia (including online), except for four special 
gambling zones.  
 
6.45 The Supreme Court of Russia, in 2012, mandated 
Internet Service Providers to block Russian users from 
accessing certain gambling websites 173. The Courts also held 
that even the act of providing access to restricted information on 
gambling amounted to dissemination of information174.  
 
8. Malaysia 
 
6.46 As the official religion of Malaysia is Islam, the authorities 
have been adhering to the prohibition on gambling as stipulated 
                                  
171Pavel V. Vasiliev Bo J. Bernhard, Global Gaming Industry: A Genealogy and Media 
Content  
Analysis of Gaming Restrictions in Contemporary Russia, UNLV GAMING RESEARCH & 
REVIEW JOURNAL VOLUME15, 71,75(2011). 
172Available at: https://rg.ru/2006/12/31/azart-dok.html (last visited on 01-06-2018). 
173 Deputy State Prosecutor for the Pskov Region v. Rostelecom (Case No. 91-KGPR12-3) 
174Ibid. 

90 
 
by the teachings of Islam 175 . First and foremost all Malay 
Muslims are governed by the Syariah Criminal Offences (Federal 
Territories) Act 1997 176 , Section 18 thereof punishes  for 
gambling or simply being found inside a casino (even when not 
actually gambling).  For citizens not governed by the Syariah 
Criminal Act, the Malaysian Contract Act 177, 1950 forms an 
impediment. The Act stipulates that any agreement by way of 
wager is void with the exception of certain prizes for horse -
racings 178 . Nevertheless, there are pr ovisions whereb y legal 
licensing is provided either to the private companies or 
individuals for gambling activities. 
 
6.47 The primary legislations that regulate gambling activities 
in Malaysia are: 
 
 Betting Act, 1953  outlaws all possible forms of 
gambling and regulating telecommunications and 
other means of transmitting bets between customers 
and betting houses. 
 
 Common Gaming Houses Act 1953  suppresses 
common gaming houses, public gaming, and public 
lotteries The Act criminalises operating a gaming 
house.  It also provides for penal consequences for a 
person who is caught inside a gaming house. 
 
 Pool Betting Act 1967  provides for the issu e of a 
licence and  the establishment of a Board for the 
operation or promotion of pool betting and for 
matters incidental thereto. The Act enables the Yang 
di-Pertuan Agong (Head of State of the Country) to 
establish a Board for the governing of pool betting 
activities and for such other purposes stated in the 
Act. 
 
                                  
175 Guru Dhillon& Ng, YihMiin, The regulations and control of online betting in Malaysia, 
UUM JOURNAL OF LEGAL STUDIES (Volume 4, 2013,) Pg. 79, 81 
176Act 559. 
177 (Act 136) 1950. 
178 S. 31, Contract Act, 1950, Malyasia. 

91 
 
 Lotteries Act 1952  provides for the grant of permits 
for t he promotion of public and private lotteries for 
philanthropic, religious, educational, welfare and 
other charitable purposes, to make provision for the 
levy of a tax on lotteries and other matters connected 
therewith. 
 
 Racing Club (Public Sweepstakes) Act 1965 allows for 
betting on Horse -racing in Malaysia, provided the 
racing club is established in Malaysia; the racing 
club is registered in the  name of Malayan  Racing 
Club. Sweepstakes under the Act includes any 
sweepstake promoted on the outcome of horse -race. 
Even a non -member of the Club can take part in 
such sweepstakes. 
 
6.48 In 2016, the total gambling revenue of Malaysia was 
valued at US$1,805.29 million179. 
 
9 Spain 
 
6.49 Gambling was de -criminalised in Spain in 1977. The 
Spanish Gaming Act, 2011 180regulates all forms of gambling, 
which are undertaken through electronic, interactive and 
technological medium like internet, television, mobile phones, 
land lines and any other interactive communication system. 
However, the seventeen autonomous communities of S pain are 
free to set their  gambling policy. The default rule is that 
gambling is forbidden unless it is authorised by the regional 
government of the specific autonomous community. The Act,  
defines four specific types of games (lotteries, betting, raffles 
and contests) and one general category (‘other games’) that 
serves as a catch -all for activities that fall under the general 
definition of gambling but not under the definition of any of the 
four specific games. 
 
                                  
179Available at: http://www.gamblingresearch.com/gambling-oligopolies-of-malaysia-
limiting-competition-and-encouraging-growth-of-grey-markets/ (last visited on 01-06-2018). 
180Ley 13/2011, de 27 de mayo, de regulacióndel Juego. 

92 
 
6.50 Lottery activities in Spain are reserved for the state-owned 
operator Loterías y Apuestas del Estado (LAE), which has a 
monopoly on state -wide sports and horse betting, and the 
National Organisation of the Blind in Spain (ONCE), a Spanish 
foundation aimed at supporting people with serious visua l 
impairment that operates its own lottery181.  
 
6.51 Since 2010, match -fixing has been made a criminal 
offence under the Spanish Criminal Code, 1995 as a form of 
‘corruption of private persons’.  The conviction is followed by the 
imprisonment ranging from 6 months to 4 years182. 
 
6.52 The estimated g ross gambling revenue in 2016 was  
€8,399.71 million and the gambling duties, collected in 2016 
exceeded €12.6 million183. 
 
10. Switzerland 
 
6.53 Switzerland has a federal legal system, whereunder the 
law is governed on a national as well as a state or canton level . 
Gambling and Lotteries be long essentially to the Federal 
Level184. In 1923, the Federal Law of Lotteries and Commercial 
Betting Law was enacted followed by the Gambling Houses Act 
of 1929. Together they create a double ban with the exception of 
Canton regulated lottery and certain G aming Houses 
established in specific areas for tourism purposes.  
 
                                  
181 Carl Rohsler (Ed.), The Gambling Law Review, 2nd Ed. Law Business Research Ltd, 
London, ISBN 978-1-910813-63-8, at Pg. 252. 
182Código Penal (Criminal Code), 10/1995 (Spain), art.286bis. 
183 As per the figures released by, the Directorate General for the Regulation of Gambling, 
available 
at:https://www.ordenacionjuego.es/cmis/browser?id=workspace://SpacesStore/4cabef34-
1605-435d-a21f-2a991eee34bf (last visited on 30-05-2018). 
184Sports Betting: Law and Policy edited by Paul M. Anderson, Ian S. Blackshaw, Robert 
C.R. Siekmann, Janwillem Soekpg, 777. 

93 
 
6.54 Subsequently, the Swiss Federal Constitution vide Article 
106, distinguished185 between games offered in casino, governed 
by the Federal Act on Games of Chance and Casinos of 1998 
(FGA) and other games (such as bets, lotteries and bingos), 
governed under the Federal Act on Lotteries and Commercial 
Betting 1923 (LLB). The Act legalised gambling activities in a 
regulated form with limited -stakes casino gambling. There is 
also a federal and cantonal supervisory body called the Swiss 
Federal Gaming Board (SFGB), which is responsible for 
monitoring and enforcing the legal provisions on games of 
chance and casinos, supervising the casinos and investigating 
violations of the gambling laws and regulations.  
 
6.55 The Money Gaming Act, 2017  liberalised gambling and 
permitted online gambling in the country . The 2017 Act has 
been challenged with 60,000 signatures and voting on the 
referendum took place on June 10th, 2018186. In the referendum 
the Act ha s been supported by about 73 per cent of voters and 
the Act would come into effect in 2019.  The Act allows only 
Swiss-certified casinos and gaming firms to operate.  It is 
reported that the provisions contained therein could tackle 
addiction to gambling.  The Act has been indicated to tax 
gambling revenue and direct revenues to fund anti -gambling 
measures as it was estimated by the Government of Switzerland 
that gamblers have been spending roughly about $ 250 million  
per year on unregulated foreign betting sites187. 
 
 
 
                                  
185Article 106, Swiss Federal Constitution. 
186 Available at: https://www.admin.ch/gov/en/start/documentation/votes/20180610/Federal -
Act-on-Gambling.html (last visited on 01-06-2018) 
187 https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-44430267 (last visited on 15.06.2018) 
 

94 
 
11. The European Gaming and Betting Association 
(EGBA) 
 
6.56 The European Gaming and Betting Association (EGBA) is 
the Brussels -based industry body representing the leading 
online gaming and betting operators established, licensed and 
regulated wit hin the EU. EGB A works together with National 
Authorities, EU authorities and other stakeholders towards a 
well-regulated and attractive offer for EU citizens. It focuses on 
protecting the interest of the consumers by providing a reliable, 
safe and secure digital environment to ensure consumer 
protection, while keeping in mind consumer demand. The 
Association promotes transparency and integrity in betting 
activities. This Association is co -funded by the European 
Commission. The EGBA investigates the best pr actices in the 
industry and recommends appropriate standards for conducting 
gambling and betting, in order to protect the interests of 
consumers, industry stakeholders and regulators 188 . This 
commitment is underpinned further by a rigorous independent 
assessment of EGBA Members that is performed annually in 
order to ensure compliance. The European Commission has 
valued the European Union’s gambling market to be worth  
€84.9 billion with a 3% growth rate per year189. 
 
6.57 The European Court of Justice has duly taken note of the 
major characteristics of Online Gambling in the case of Carmen 
Media Group Ltd v. Land Schleswig -Holstein and Innenmin ster 
des Landes Schleswig-Holstein190, observing: 
                                  
188The Framework, Principles and Standards to which EGB A Member operations annually 
subscribe, commit and adhere to, available at: http://www.egba.eu/media/EGBA-Standards-
October-2011.pdf (last visited on 01-06-2018). 
189 European Commission on Growth in Gambling Sector, available at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/gambling_en (last visited at 30-05-2018). 
190 Opinion of Advocate General, Mengozzi, delivered on 3 March 2010 in Case C-46/08, 
Para 103. 

95 
 
 
…the characteristics specific to the offer of games 
of chance by the internet may prove to be a source 
of risks of a different kind and a greater order in 
the area of consumer protection, particularly in 
relation to young persons and those with a 
propensity for gambling or likely to develop such a 
propensity, in comparison with traditional markets 
for such games. Apart from the lack of direct 
contact between the consumer and the operator… 
the particular ease and the permanence of acces s 
to games offered over the internet and the 
potentially high volume and frequency of such an 
international offer, in an environment which is 
moreover characterised by isolation of the player, 
anonymity and an absence of social control, 
constitute so many factors likely to foster the 
development of gambling addiction and the related 
squandering of money, and thus likely to increase 
the negative social and moral consequences 
attaching thereto, as underlined by consistent 
case-law. 
 
6.58 Other Countries such as Portugal, Ireland, Austria, 
Ghana, Singapore and Malta all follow a regulated format of 
gambling and betting activities being offered in their own 
respective territories. Countries such as Singapore charge extra 
fee on their own citizens to partake in g ambling activities 191. 
From the above discussion it is evident that gambling and 
betting laws across the world are at variance from each other 
and are influenced by their respective socio-economic milieu. 
 
                                  
191 Available at: http://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/infopedia/articles/SIP_1615_2009 -11-30.html 
(last visited on 31-05-2018) 

96 
 
CHAPTER VII 
Public/ Government Responses 
 
7.1 On receiving the reference from the Supreme Court in 
Board of Control of Cricket in India v. Cricket Association of Bihar 
& Ors.,192 to study the possibility of legalising betting in India 
and its positive and negative implications, the Commission 
issued an Appeal dated 30 May, 2017 asking the stakeholders, 
operators, organisations, and the public at large to respond to 
the same. Besides this, letters were also sent to the State 
Governments to give their respective opinions on the following 
issues: 
 
a. Will legalising betting and gambling help in curbing illegal 
activities undertaken by the citizens of our country in this 
regard? 
b. Will licensing such activities help the government in 
earning substantial revenue and generate employment? 
c. How far legalising betting and gambling will be morally 
acceptable in the Indian scenario? 
d. What would be the possible mode by which people 
indulging in these activities can be safeguarded from 
bankruptcy? 
e. In the event it is decided to be legalised, should foreign 
companies operating in the field of   betting and gambling 
be allowed to have a foothold in the country? 
f. Any other relevant issue. 
 
7.2 The Commission received numerous responses from 
various stakeholders including State governments, individuals, 
operators, associations of operators and institutions. The 
questionnaire received a mixed response. Some people have 
opposed the legalisation of gambling and betting, contending 
that it creates a pernicious atmosphere and tends to vitiate the 
solemn nature of transactions. Such activities expose and 
exploit the vulnerable sections of society. A losing gambler, 
                                  
192(2016) 8 SCC 535. 

97 
 
chases the metaphorical rainbow and is allured by the chances 
of recouping wins, which misleads any human, only to cause 
further sorrow. Such activities are not consistent and in 
conformity with the Directive Principles of State Policy 
enshrined in Article 39 of the Constitution. 
 
7.3 Many responses cited examples from the Mahabharat and 
the Ramayana and referred to various prohibitory clauses from 
ancient texts. They canvassed that it would breed corruption, 
match fixing and may give rise to various criminal activities. The 
State Government of Odisha has expressed that such activities 
are unethical and not in the interest of the public at large. 
However, if they prevail, such activities should be regulated 
within the premises of clubs, hotels, and associations. In any 
case, foreign companies should not be allowed to operate 
gambling facilities in India.  
 
7.4 While some responses have expressly suggested to legalise 
gambling for entertainment purposes, others have, however, 
suggested that, as it is not possible to prevent such illegal 
activities, they should be legalised and there must be stringent 
provisions for regulating the same. They have argued that 
gambling should be regulated like the stock market, for some 
degree of skill is involved in both the activities. 
Decriminalisation of these activities could prevent people from 
being subjected to loan-sharking, i.e., incurring debts and 
borrowing loans at exorbitant rates. It will also preserve the 
integrity of the ‘game’. As the illegal and unregulated betting 
industry is thriving and it is extremely difficult to curb/control 
it, it is necessary to legalise and regulate such activities to 
prevent pernicious consequences that it ensues. This will, on 
one hand, generate huge revenues for the States and on the 
other hand, would save people from any kind of inconvenience 

98 
 
at the hands of the law enforcement agencies. This would 
especially help in curbing unethical betting activities of the likes 
of match fixing in sports. 
 
7.5 It has also been argued by many that since horse-racing 
has always been considered legal, gambling and betting 
activities should also be treated alike. 
 
7.6 The straight-jacket prohibition on gambling has resulted 
in a rampant increase in illegal gambling, resulting in a boom in 
black-money generation and circulation. Regulated gambling 
could ensure detection of fraud and money laundering and 
would create transparency. Betting and gambling transactions 
should be linked with operator’s as well as player’s/participant’s 
Aadhaar card/PAN card, so as to ensure transparency and State 
supervision. The cap on the maximum amount that can be 
staked in a wager should be fixed by law and be strictly 
implemented. Such amount must be so prescribed that an 
individual with limited means can also participate in gambling 
activities. Further, wagering should be restricted to money 
alone; not in kind. Gambling transactions should be made 
cashless, making use of electronic means of payment such as 
credit cards, debit cards, net-banking, Virtual Currencies (VC – 
also known as Cryptocurrency), etc. Stringent law(s) should be 
put in place to control Foreign Direct Investment and at the 
same time, to prevent money laundering, while also 
implementing necessary tax reforms. 
 
7.7 There were some responses that expressed concern that if 
websites are to advertise content related to gambling, then it 
should be ensured that there is no objectionable or 
pornographic content displayed on their platforms/portals. 
Violations of relevant provisions of law laying down standards of 

99 
 
obscenity should attract severe penal consequences for the 
same. 
 
7.8 It was also suggested that if the tax rate is higher than 20 
per cent of gross gaming revenue (GGR), it will have a negative 
influence on the pay-out level of the licenced operators. 
Therefore, there must be a moderate rate of tax on such 
activities as also a moderate/low GST rate.  
 
7.9 The All India Gaming Federation (AIGF) has inter alia 
suggested to remove the embargo on goods and/or service 
providers from offering games or contests as long as there is no 
separate consideration for entry fee apportioned for 
participating in such games/contests. Thus, section 2(1)(r)(3)(b) 
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 which prevents the 
conduct of any contest, lottery, games of chance or skill for the 
purpose of promoting any product or interest should be 
accordingly remedied.  
 
7.10 Some people have suggested that since a huge amount is 
siphoned off to foreign countries every year and the government 
loses the revenue, it is in the interest of the general public that 
though gambling and betting are State subjects, the Parliament 
should enact a law in exercise of its legislative competence 
under Article 249 or Article 252 of the Constitution of India. 
Additionally, it was suggested that, an Inter State Council may 
be constituted under Article 263 of the Constitution for effective 
regulation of Gambling activities in India.  
 
7.11 A gist of the responses from the stakeholders is given in 
the Annexure I to this Report. 
  

100 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
Need for Regulation 
 
8.1 Gamblers are often tempted to play for longer durations 
and up the ante when it appears to them that they are just 
about to win. This is, quite often than not, a mirage, and over  
time, this overly optimistic attitude manifests itself as ‘loss 
chasing’, wherein gamblers keep on playing in an effort to 
recover their incessantly accruing loss. ‘Loss chasing’ is one of 
the most important identifier of ‘problem gambling’, and closely 
resembles drug addiction. Problem gamblers also experience 
cravings and withdrawal -symptoms when deprived of  
gambling193. 
 
8.2 Gamblers tend to over -estimate their chances of winning 
and often suffer from an ‘illusion of control’, i.e., the belief on 
their pa rt that they can employ skill over an outcome which 
actually depends upon chance194. 
 
8.3 There are no specific Central Laws governing online 
gambling in India. Sikkim and Nagaland are the only States that 
expressly permit online gambling. While the Sikkim O n-line 
Gaming (Regulation) Act, 2008 (as it stands after the 
Amendment of 2015) restricts the offering and playing of “online 
games and sports games” to the physical premises of gaming 
parlours through intra-net gaming terminals within the territory 
of the  State, the Nagaland P rohibition of Gambling and 
Promotion and Regulation of Online Gaming Act, 2016  
(hereinafter referred as Nagaland Act) on the other hand, seeks 
                                  
193 Dr. Luke Clark: http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/the-psychology-of-gambling (last 
visited on 25-05-2018). 
194Ibid. 

101 
 
to provide for  pan-India application of licenc es obtained 
thereunder.  
 
8.4 Explanation to Section 2 (1) of the Nagaland Act states 
that: 
“Once a licen ce has been obtained under this act, 
wagering or betting on online ‘games of skill’ or 
making profit by providing a medium for playing 
‘games of skill’ shall not amount to gambling so long 
as they  are being provided by players and being 
accessed by players operating from territories where 
‘games of skill’ are exempted from the ambit of 
gambling.” 
 
8.5 Section 2 (2) of the Nagaland Act defines the term 
“territory” for the purposes thereof as “any te rritory in India in 
which ‘games of skill’ are permitted and are recognised as being 
exempted from the ambit of ‘gambling’.”. 
 
8.6 Accordingly a conjoint reading of these two provisions 
may imply that the Nagaland Act, while being in consonance 
with Articl e 246 of the Constitution of India provi des that a 
licence obtained there under may be used to offer games of skill 
throughout the country, provided that such games are 
exempted by the States in which they are so offered under their 
own prevalent laws. 
 
8.7 On the other extreme rests the Telangana Gaming 
Amendment Act, 2017 195  enacted with the object of 
implementing “the policy of zero tolerance against gambling 
which has serious impact on the financial condition and well-
being of the common public”.  With this objective, the Telengana 
Act seeks to expressly prohibit gambling as a whole, both online 
and offline.  
                                  
195Telangana Gaming Amendment Act, 2017, Act No. 15, Acts of Government of Telangana, 
2017 (India). 

102 
 
 
8.8 A District Cour t in Delhi was confronted with similar 
issues. The following issues, among others, were raised before 
the court:  
 Whether there i s any restriction on 
playing games of skill with stakes on 
websites making profits by offering such 
games? 
 Whether wagering and betting on games 
of skill constitute the act of ‘gambling’?  
 
8.9 The court held that a game when  played in a physical 
form as a skill based  game need not necessarily be considered 
as such when played online, as technology can be manipulated 
to increase the degree of chance involved in the game. A Civil 
Revision Application was filed before the Delhi High Court 
challenging this or der, however, the petitioners filed an 
application to withdraw the proceedings before the District 
Court and also the revision application filed before the High 
Court. The High Court allowed this request and also ordered 
that the observations of the District court no longer survive196. 
 
8.10 To curb online betting and gambling, authorities rely on 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 (Technology Act). Section 
67 of the Act, reads as:  
 
Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be 
published or transmitted in the electronic form, any 
material which is lascivious or appeals to the 
prurient interest or if its effect is such as to tend to 
deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having 
regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or 
hear the matter conta ined or embodied in it, shall 
be punished on first conviction with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to 
                                  
196 Order of the Delhi High Court dated April 21, 2016 in C.R.P. 119/2012 arising out Order 
of the Delhi District Courts dated November 19, 2012 in Suit No. 32 of 2012  of M/s Gaussian 
Network Pvt Ltd v. Monica Lakhanpal & Anr., 

103 
 
three years and with fine which may extend to five 
lakh rupees and in the event of second or 
subsequent conviction with imp risonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to five 
years and also with fine which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees. 
 
8.11 Further, this may be supplemented by section 69-A of the 
Technology Act, which empowers the Central government to 
direct its agencies and/or intermediaries to “block for access by 
the public or cause to be blocked for access by the public any 
information generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted 
in any computer resource”. 
 
8.12 These section s may be pressed into se rvice to curb 
gambling or betting activities on the ground that such activities 
appeal to the prurient interest or tend to deprave and corrupt 
persons.  
 
8.13 As gambling is not defined in Information Technology 
(Intermediaries Guidelines) Rules of 2011(Ru les 2011),  taking 
action against foreign betting websites that may indulge in 
money laundering through online gambling, can be challenging. 
Moreover, as gambling websites are hosted in countries where 
gambling is legal, it is difficult for Indian law enfor cement 
agencies to take any legal or remedial action197. 
 
8.14 Initially online gaming was limited to a certain group of 
people. Slowly, its sphere increased and more people began to 
engage in it. Today, the scenario is such that people are even 
being hired to play or gamble online.  Even Industry giants are 
keen to hire and invest in ‘professional’ gamers. For example, 
Cobx is ready to invest a sum of $10 million on ‘professional’ 
players from India alone. Similarly, Nazara, a mobile company, 
                                  
197“Thanks to ambiguous laws, online poker websi tes are flourishing in India”, available 
at:http://www.business-standard.com/article/current-affairs/thanks-to-ambiguous-laws-online-
pokers-are-flourishing-in-india-116110400758_1.html(last visited on 25-05-2018).  

104 
 
is planning to invest $ 20 million on Indian e -sports198.  It is 
also estimated that the current market of online gaming in India 
will rise from $360 million to $1 billion by 2021 199. Another 
indicator of the flourishment of online gambling is the increase 
in the prize money  in tournaments, which has risen from Rs .3 
lakhs in the past two years to Rs .1 crore today. The trend is 
rising rampantly day by day. For example, as per a claim by 
Cobx, there were only 12 professional gaming teams in India as 
of 2016. However, there are 30 such teams today.  
 
8.15 Such activities show no signs of being stopped or curbed; 
the least that could be done is to regulate them. The 
Government, being a welfare State, acts in a manner to promote 
economic and social well-being of its citizens, and therefore, it is 
incumbent upon the State to protect the vulnerable sections of 
the society.  The linkage of PAN / Aadhaar would restrain the 
people from vulnerable sections, particularly those who are 
below poverty line (BPL)  and to whom, as a social welfa re 
measure, Central / State Governments provide subsidies 
through their Jandhan accounts. Putting such restrictions is a 
must so that the money provided by the Government under 
different heads is not misused by indulging in gambling and 
betting. Such regulation would serve a two-fold purpose, first, to 
provide protection to people involved and second, to use the 
revenue so generated for the development of the Country. 
 
A. Consequences that ensue due to unregulated gambling 
and betting  
 
8.16 Some of the major problems related to illegal gambling 
and betting activities are the exponential growth of illegal trade 
                                  
198Shalina Pillai, “Now, online gaming is a career for some”, (May 7, 2018) available at: 
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/now-online-gaming-is-a-career-for-
some/articleshow/64056984.cms, (last visited on 02-06-2018). 
199 Study by KPMG and Google, online gaming in India: Researching a new Pinnacle, May 
2017. See also https://www.stoodnt.com/blog/career-in-online-gaming/ last visited 25-05-
2018. 

105 
 
and commerce, and corrupt practices such as spot-fixing and 
match-fixing being employed in sports, particularly cricket, the 
most popular sport in India. Left unregulated, this problem 
could further manifest and grow uncontrollably. 
 
8.17 The data made available to the Commission by the Delhi 
Police reveals that in the year 2016, 1098 cases have been 
registered under the gambling act while in 2017, the figure 
stood at 1273.  In 2018 (up to 5 May 2018 alone), 544 cases 
have been registered.  A total of 2916 cases have been registered 
under the gambling act in a period of 28 months, i.e., 104 cases 
per month, on an average. 
  
8.18  The Delhi Police terms gambling as “connecting crime” 
that connects the gambler with other criminal activities.  In 
order to regain the lost money or in an attempt to ‘invest’ more 
money into gambling, expecting more return, when gambling is 
not in a regulatory framework, an illegal gambler is bound to 
end up in committing other crimes like chain snatching, looting, 
stealing, etc.  Legalising gambling and betting and for effectively 
regulating such activities could curb creation of more and more 
criminals.  
 
B. Illegal Commerce 
 
8.19 A total ban on gambling and betting activities would not 
completely eradicate the problem. Rather, it would drive it 
straight to the black-market200. This in turn would result in 
making it harder to monitor such illegal activities, it would also 
render the helpless out of the protection of the law and at the 
mercy of loan-sharks and crime-lords. It would further result in 
                                  
200 “Should Gambling Be Legalized?” The Hindu (Mar. 30, 2018) available 
at:http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/should-gambling-be-legalised/article23385128.ece 
(last visited on 25-05-2018). 

106 
 
crime syndicates profiting from unregulated gambling activities 
creating a vicious circle of proliferation of illegal activities and 
commerce. Needless to say, illegal betting causes substantial 
monetary loss to the economy, with profits escaping the purview 
of taxation, and also increases the circulation of black money in 
the market. In a nutshell, such illegal commerce so conducted, 
causes damage to the economy of the nation. 
 
8.20 The issue of Online Gambling has further been worsened 
by the rise in popularity and ease of availability of VC, a form of 
electronic money. Having taken the form of a parallel e -
economy, gambling with VC, pushes e ven the Online Gambling 
market underground, and very often, out of the reach of the law 
enforcement authorities. The Reserve Bank of India by way of 
Circular dated 6 th April outlawed the use of VC 201. The circular 
was challenged by the Internet and Mobile As sociation of India.  
The Supreme Court while entertaining the petition refused to 
grant any interim relief to the petitioner  vide Order dated 3 July 
2018202. Nonetheless the size of global market dealing with VC 
in Gambling is evident by the recent case of the Hong Kong 
police, where they caught people using online portals including 
some instant messaging applications to gamble with the help of 
VC of the likes of Bitcoin. The Philippine Gaming Regulator, 
PAGCOR is facing a similar problem, losing millions to illegal 
and unregulated gambling every year203.  
 
C. Corruption in sports 
 
8.21 Indian sports, particularly cricket, have been most 
adversely affected by illegal betting and gambling activities. To 
increase their chances of winning the bet, people engage in 
                                  
201 Available at: https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/NotificationUser.aspx?Id=11243&Mode=0, 
last viewed at 04.07.2018) 
202 Internet and Mobile Association of India v. Reserve Bank of India, W.P.(C) No.528/2018 
203  https://www.reuters.com/article/us-soccer-worldcup-gambling-asia/authorities-across-asia-
battle-illegal-gambling-surge-ahead-of-world-cup-idUSKBN1J70PN 

107 
 
corrupt practices viz. bribing individual players to perform 
poorly and sometimes entire teams to throw away the games. 
Contrary to ‘match-fixing’, where the end result of the game is 
pre-decided, ‘spot-fixing’ or ‘sessions betting’ 204 entails illegal 
activity in sports regarding a specific aspect of the game 
unrelated to the final result of the game. The bet is won if and 
when the event (for example, a batsman hitting a six within the 
following ‘x’ number of deliveries or a bowler claiming a wicket 
in a particular over etc.) takes place. Huge sums of money 
poured in these matches exacerbate this problem. 
 
8.22 The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Department of 
Sports enforced the “National Sports Development Code of 
India, 2011”, which aims at preventing betting and gambling in 
sports. The Ministry has recently appointed a committee to draft 
an updated version of the Code, which is expected to be 
published soon205. 
 
8.23 News reports206 suggest that bets worth INR 1,300 crore 
(approx.) are placed on every One Day International cricket 
match that the Indian team plays. For example, in 2015, the 
Indian cricket team played 21 One Day International matches, 
which brings the total betting figure to INR 27,300 crore 
(approx.).  
 
8.24 In the year 2000, the Delhi Police unearthed a match-
fixing scandal involving reputed players. The Committee, headed 
by former Chief Justice of India, Justice R.M. Lodha, was set up  
to investigate the spot-fixing incidents that took place in the 
                                  
204Sriram Veera, “The games cricket’s fixers love to play”, Indian Express, New Delhi, 31-05-
2018. 
205 Available at: http://www.espn.in/espn/story/_/id/20514748/coming-soon-new-sports-code-
targets-vips-voting-lobbies (last visited on 30-05-2018); See also 
http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/Govt.-constitutes-panel-to-draft-National-Sports-
Development-Code/article16993002.ece (last visited on 30-05-2018) 
206Available at: https://www.pressreader.com/india/the-times-of-india-new-delhi-
edition/20170131/textview (last visited on 30-05-2018). 

108 
 
IPL. The Committee suggested that regulated betting should be 
permitted to curb the menace of match-fixing. According to Sir 
Ronnie Flanagan, Chairman, International Cricket Council, 
Anti-Corruption Unit, it is easier to monitor illegal betting 
activity in a regulated market207. If a licensed entity is caught 
rigging games, its business would be ruined, both legally as well 
as in terms of customer base. There would be greater 
transparency when betting is done in the open markets, thereby 
preserving the integrity of sports by reducing the chances of 
rigged outcomes. 
 
8.25 In May 2018, a TV channel has revealed that corruption 
in sports, particularly cricket is more rampant than ever over a 
period of 18 months. The news agency has documented various 
evidences for the same, including tapes of multiple meeting with 
a “fixer” who is part of a crime syndicate in Mumbai. The 
Investigation report further points to match-fixing in various 
matches, specifically matches between India and England at 
Chennai in December 2016 and India and Australia at Ranchi 
in March, 2017.  The documentary has the “fixer” admitting to 
have paid millions of dollars to bribe players in the world's top 
Test teams and that such a payment is often made through a 
middleman or cricket official. The Report and all evidences have 
been passed onto the global governing body for cricket, the 
International Cricket Council, which commented, that it was 
taking Al Jazeera's findings very seriously and has launched an 
investigation on the evidences provided208. 
 
8.26 Therefore, it is obvious that betting and corruption in 
sports, especially cricket, is rampant throughout the world. It 
                                  
207Available at:http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci-icc/content/story/978837.html (last visited on 
25-05-2018). 
208 David Harrison (26th May 2018), Exclusive: Al Jazeera exposes the match fixer from 
Mumbai, available at: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2018/05/exclusive-al-jazeera-
exposes-match-fixer-mumbai-180526162256017.html (last visited at 30-05-2018). 

109 
 
has reached a point, where the State machinery is finding it 
difficult to completely curb it. Guided by this realisation, one 
possible way out would be to legalise sports betting209, which 
would go a long way in regulating and controlling the same, 
while also earning huge revenues by taxing it. In fact, Countries 
like Australia, United Kingdom, South Africa, Sri Lanka and 
New Zealand have taken a step in this direction, legalising and 
regulating betting in sports.  
 
D. Advantages of a regulated gambling and betting 
industry: 
 
8.27 Various stakeholders have made several arguments in 
favour of regulating this industry. Some of the advantages of 
regulating betting activities, pointed out, are as follows: 
 
i. It will generate considerable revenue; 
ii. It will generate  employment; 
iii. Development of tourism as it may work as a 
complimentary industry; 
iv. It will protect the vulnerable sections of the society; 
and 
v. Prevent any kind of inconvenience at the hands of the 
law enforcement authorities. 
 
E. Autonomous regulation of gambling and betting 
industry 
 
8.28 The strategy of allowing the industries to establish their 
own standards with a degree of Governmental control is not a 
rare phenomenon. There are several advantages of having an 
industry which is regulated by Industry Bodies, such as: 
 
                                  
209Sriram Veera, “The games cricket’s fixers love to play”, Indian Express, New Delhi, 31-05-
2018. 

110 
 
i. It is efficient for these Industry Bodies, comprising of the 
operators to set their own standards depending upon the 
variances in the games, the element of skill and the 
technical standards involved.  
ii. These Industry Bodies, dedicated to perform the activities 
of rule -making and monitoring, including the 
enforcement for violations, will result in the freeing -up of 
State resources. 
iii. There will be increased transparency in the consumer 
market a s the consumers would be able to identify the 
gaming operators which are certified by particular 
Industry Bodies. 
iv. Membership with these Industry Bodies will ensure 
better compliance of law as well as the industry codes, on 
the part of the operators. Additi onally, affiliation with a 
reputed industry body would instil consumer confidence 
and subsequent profit to the gaming operators. 
v. There are issues pertaining to the jurisdiction in cases 
where the games are offered online because the Internet 
is universally  accessible without any handicap of 
territorial limitations. The presence of a self -regulatory 
body, would enable the consumers as well as the State 
Governments to initiate action against an errant gaming 
operator at a single forum. 
vi.  Subjectivity may arise in cases where the enforcement of 
gaming enactments depends upon the establishment of 
knowledge or intention of the offender. A self -regulatory 
mechanism would incentivise these Industry Bodies to 
assist the State mechanism in relation to the subjective 
tests by laying down the standards under the Industry 
Codes. 
 
 
 
 
 

111 
 
F. Suggestions by FICCI  
 
8.29 In 2013, the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry (FICCI), in a report titled ‘Regulating Sports 
Betting in India’, highlighted that the undergro und betting 
market in India is huge at an estimated INR 3,00,000 crore210. It 
was also noted that sports betting is different from the other 
common forms of gambling like playing games of chance and 
taking part in lotteries. The Report highlighted various 
advantages of regulating rather than completely prohibiting 
sports betting. It noted that the greatest advantage of regulating 
sports betting would be the accountability for the large amounts 
of money which is otherwise transferred through illegal 
channels l eading to the reduction of national revenue/funds 
primarily due to match- fixing, money laundering and crimes.  
 
8.30 Some of the other important advantages mentioned in the 
Report are: 
 
1.  Protection for the young and vulnerable against the 
dangers of unwise betting behaviour. 
2.  Employment generation (more than 8000 people are 
employed in casinos in Goa). 
3.  Fairer and more trusted betting experience for 
consumers, offering entertainment in a controlled 
and responsible manner. 
4.  Blow against organize d crime like match fixing 
which threaten to damage public trust both in sport 
and in the legitimate betting industry. 
5.  Generation of revenues from taxation of sports 
development and preventing sport betting from 
                                  
210Available at:http://ficci.in/SEdocument/20208/report-betting-conference.pdf (last visited on 
25-05-2018). 

112 
 
being linked to criminality or used to la under 
proceeds of crime. 
6.  Protection of players, coaches and all involved with 
sport from unprincipled approaches. 
 
8.31 Having discussed the pros and cons of legalising 
regulated gambling and betting activities, it would be apt to say 
that the argument s in favour of the same far outweigh the 
arguments alluding to the immorality of these activities. The 
argument that had gambling been regulated in the Mahabharat 
period, Yudhishtir could not have put his brother s and wife as 
stakes, perhaps Mahabharat cou ld not have been there, is full 
of substance. This is evident especially in the light of the fact 
that the existing black -market operations relating to these 
activities are a major source of influx of black money in the 
economy, making, regulation rather t han complete prohibition 
the logical step to be taken. 

113 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
Conclusions and Recommendations 
 
 
9.1 With the advent of online gambling and the anonymity 
that it ensures, the gambling and betting activities have 
acquired a global presence.  It has, therefore, become more 
challenging for countries to monitor or curb these activities.  
Many countries that prohibit gambling have not been 
successful, particularly with regard to online gambling.  The 
transnational character of online gambling platforms calls for a 
much needed change in approach.  With the changing times, 
there could always be an option to have a relook at the earlier 
approach of a complete ban. The relook, if any, may take into 
account the possible loss of revenue and employment 
generation that a regulation could bring about.  
 
9.2 The size of the global gambling market has grown 
manifold in the last decade. This increase in size is naturally 
accompanied with an increase in revenue generation, that 
continues to rise every year. For example, Europe has reported 
a yield of 41% GGY (Gross Gaming Yield) and Asia has 
approximately yielded 39%211. In fact, Japan has the largest 
national betting market which is the result of permitting betting 
on horse racing, cycling, motorbike racing and boat racing, 
constituting a market twice the size of the United Kingdom. The 
same is also evident from the rapid increase in sales of 
Mainland China’s State lotteries, recording a $51.1 billion high 
in 2013. 
 
9.3 According to experts, though land-based lottery and 
casinos still dominate the gambling market, online gambling 
                                  
211 European Gaming and Betting Commission Report on Sports Betting, available 
at:http://www.egba.eu/facts-and-figures/studies/6-sports-betting-report/ (last visited on 25-05-
2018). 

114 
 
and betting are showing rapid growth. Such activities, if 
properly regulated would ensure transparency in the market, as 
also strike at the underworld’s control over the illegal and 
unregulated gambling industry. Additionally, the revenue so 
generated by regulating and taxing betting and gambling, may 
become a good source of revenue, which in turn, could be used 
for public welfare. 
 
9.4 Regulation would therefore, empower the authorised 
agencies to identify and prevent instances of gambling by 
minors and ‘problem-gamblers’ as well as save the public from 
any kind of inconvenience at the hands of the law enforcement 
authorities. It would also enable the Government to effectively 
curb the menace of black-money generation through illegal 
gambling.  
 
9.5 There is merit in the argument that, had gambling been 
regulated at the time of the Mahabharat, Yudhishtir could not 
have staked his wife and brothers in a gamble. On the other 
hand, the argument made for ‘revenue over morality’ lacks 
merit. States such as Gujarat, Bihar, Manipur, Nagaland and 
Lakshadweep, prioritising societal morality over revenue 
collection, have put legislative embargos on the sale, storing and 
consumption of liquor; taking into account its ill-effects on the 
society. Therefore, keeping in mind that the Indian society has 
always frowned upon gambling, considering its self-destructing 
capabilities and pernicious nature, it is most likely for the 
Indian people to choose morality over revenue in matters of 
gambling too.  
 
9.6 Gambling has been proven to result in financial losses, 
causing an adverse impact on one’s economic state, personal life 
and social life. Such activities affect the vulnerable sections of 
the society in unimaginable and often, irreparable ways. 

115 
 
Further, in an unregulated environment, inherent greed and 
corruption result in increased criminal activity. One of the 
major drawbacks of illegal gambling and betting activities is 
loan-sharking, i.e. taking loans at exorbitant ra tes for gambling. 
Aberrational behaviour sprouting out of compromised individual 
and social ethics is also a common side -effect of unchecked and 
unregulated ‘betting and  gambling’, ultimately weakening the 
moral fibre of the nation. 
 
9.7 The existing policy of the Government (National Sports 
Development Code of India, 2011, etc.), the current socio-
economic atmosphere in the country and the prevalent social 
and moral values do not encourage betting and gambling. 
Accordingly, the Commission reaches the inescapable 
conclusion that legalising betting and gambling is not desirable 
in India in the present scenario. Therefore, the State authorities 
must ensure enforcement of a complete ban on unlawful betting 
and gambling. 
 
9.8 However, incapability to enforce a complete ban has 
resulted in rampant increase in illegal gambling, resulting in a 
boom in black-money generation and circulation. Since it is not 
possible to prevent these activities completely, effectively 
regulating them remains the only viable option. Thus, if 
Parliament or the State Legislatures wish to proceed in this 
direction, the Commission feels that regulated gambling would 
ensure detection of fraud and money laundering, etc. Such 
regulation of gambling would require a three-pronged strategy, 
reforming the existing gambling (lottery, horse racing) market, 
regulating illegal gambling and introducing stringent and over-
arching regulations. For such an eventuality, the Commission 
recommends: 
 

116 
 
1. Since online betting and gambling are offered and 
played ove r media ( telephones, wireless, broadcasting 
and other like forms of communication) covered under 
Entry 31 of List I of the Seventh Schedule  to the 
Constitution, the Parliament has the legislative 
competence to enact a law(s) dealing with the same.  
 
2. The Pa rliament may also enact a model law for 
regulating gambling that may be adopted by the States 
or in the alternative, the Parliament may legislate in 
exercise of its power s under Articles 249 or 252 of the 
Constitution. In case legislation is made under Art icle 
252, States other than the consenting States will be free 
to adopt the same.  Being a State subject under List II 
of the Seventh Schedule  to the Constitution , it is 
needless to say that State Legislature(s) is competent to 
enact the required Law for the State(s) concerned, while 
duly taking note of the National Policy on gambling etc., 
and other legal considerations. 
 
3. Since horse -racing, being considered a game of skill, 
has been exempted from the ambit of blanket 
prohibition on “gambling”, both by the  legislatures and 
the judiciary, other skill -centric games may also be 
afforded this exemption. 
 
4. Operators ought to focus on the safety and protection of 
players indulging in such skill-centric games. 
 
5. Gambling and betting, if any, should be offered only b y 
Indian licensed operators  from India  possessing valid 
licences granted by the game licensing authority. For 
participants, there must be a cap on the number of 
transactions an individual can indulge in these 
activities in a specific period, i.e., monthly,  half-yearly 

117 
 
or yearly. The nature of stakes should be restricted to 
money with a linkage to PAN card and Aadhaar card,  
and the betting amount should be prescribed by law, 
having an upper limit on the amount one can legally 
stake in a gamble, which may be on the basis of the 
deposit, winnings or losses.  
 
6. Similar restrictions should also be prescribed for the 
purpose of the amount one would be allowed to stake 
while using electronic money facilities of the likes of 
credit cards, debit cards, net-banking, VCs, etc.. 
 
7.  Gambling must be classified into two categories, 
namely ‘proper gambling’ and ‘small gambling’. ‘Proper 
gambling’ would be char acterised by higher stakes. 
Accordingly, only individuals belonging to the higher 
income group shall be permitted to i ndulge in this form 
of gambling. On the other hand, individuals belonging 
to the lower income groups will have to confine 
themselves to ‘small gambling’, not being permitted to 
stake high amounts (falling within the bracket of 
‘proper gambling’). 
 
8. In order to protect the public from the ill-effects of these 
activities and with a view to have enhanced 
transparency and state supervision, all betting and 
gambling transactions should be linked to the 
operator’s as well as the participant’s/player’s Aadh aar 
Card/PAN Card. 
 
9. The enactment (s) so made to regulate gambling and 
betting activities must ensure that vulnerable sections 
of the society are protected from being exploited by the 
possible ill-effects of these activities. In particular, the 
youth and children b elow the age of 18 years (who may 

118 
 
or may not be posing as adults),  and those who are 
below poverty line and to whom as a social welfare 
measure, Central / State Governments provide 
subsidies to their Jan Dhan Account for sustenance.  
Putting such restricti on is a must so that the money 
provided by the Government for their sustenance on 
different heads under the Direct Benefit Transfer 
Scheme is not misused in participating in gambling and 
betting and these vulnerable people are protected from 
the vice of ga mbling and betting.  In other words, all 
those who get subsidies or do not fall within the 
purview of the Income Tax Act or the GST Act should be 
debarred from participating in online and / or offline 
gambling platforms.  
 
10. The websites advertising gambling  must compulsorily 
ensure that there is no objectionable or pornographic 
content on display on their portals/platforms. 
 
11. Information regarding the risks involved in 
gambling/betting and how to play responsibly must be 
displayed prominently on all gambling and betting 
portals/platforms. 
 
12. The transactions made between and among operators 
and players/participants indulging in these activities 
should mandatorily be made ‘cashless’. This would go a 
long way in enabling appropriate authorities to keep a 
close eye  on every single transaction so made. 
Necessary provisions should be made part of the 
relevant law(s), attracting penal consequences for cash 
transactions so made. 
 
13. Any i ncome derived from such activities should be 
made taxable under the Income Tax Act, 19 61, the 
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 and all other relevant 

119 
 
laws for the time being in force applicable to such 
activities in India. 
 
14. The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 and the 
Rules 212 made thereunder as also the Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) Policy213, may suitably be amended to 
encourage Foreign Direct Investment in the 
casino/online gaming industry, lawfully permitting 
technological collaborations, licensing and brand 
sharing agreements, etc. Allowing FDI in this industry 
would bring substantial amounts of investment to those 
States that decide to permit casinos, propelling the 
growth of the tourism and hospitality industries, while 
also enabling such States to generate higher revenue 
and employment opportunities. 
 
15. There must be a stringent law( s) in place to regulate 
Foreign Direct Investment on one hand and to prevent 
money laundering on the other. 
 
16. Under the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines) Rules, 2011 214, Intermediaries are barred 
from hosting or transmitting content relating to  or 
encouraging gambling. However, this provision creates 
an anomaly when a State decides to regulate or allow 
gambling. For instance, even though the State of 
Sikkim has permitted online gambling and betting, it is 
unclear whether the Rules of 2011 would apply to 
licensed online gambling and betting enterprises. It is 
                                  
212Notification No. G.S.R.381(E), 03-5-2000, available at: 
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/content/pdfs/87256.pdf (last visited on 26 -05-2018) 
213 Chapter 5 of D/o IPP F. No. 5(1)/2017-FC-1, 28-8-2017,  available at: 
http://dipp.nic.in/sites/default/files/CFPC_2017_FINAL_RELEASED_28.8.17.pdf (last 
visited on 26-05-2018). 
214 The Information Technology (Intermediaries guidelines) Rules, 2011 have been enacted 
under the power conferred upon the Central Government under clause (zg) of subsection (2) 
of section 87 read with sub -section (2) of section 79 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 
(21 of 2000). 

120 
 
therefore suggested that the Intermediary Guidelines 
Rules be suitably amended to insert the word ‘illegal’ 
before the word ‘gambling’ so that those intermediaries 
that transmit or host conte nt relating to illegal 
gambling, i.e., gambling activities not licensed by any 
State, may be held liable. 
 
17. The “National Sports Development Code of India, 2011”, 
which aims at preventing betting and gambling in 
sports or any other code applicable from time  to time, 
will also require an amendment/modification, to create 
an exception for the same, if betting and gambling are 
to be regulated. 
 
18. An agreement could be rendered unlawful by section 23 
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, if the consideration is 
not lawful or it affects the morality or is a gainst public 
policy. Further, s ection 30 thereof makes wagering 
contracts void but not illegal 215. These provisions stand 
detrimental to the interests of players/participants who 
indulge in gambling transactions and ma y not be 
provided winnings, as it makes it impossible for a party 
to assert such a right in a Court of Law. It is therefore 
suggested that s ection 30 be suitably amended to 
exempt transactions that legally take place with 
licensed gambling operators or cas inos, from the ambit 
of ‘wagering agreements’.  
 
19. Detailed safeguards inter alia, for employees of casinos, 
minors, internal control requirements for casinos (like 
customer due diligence), maintenance of accounts, 
audits etc., and establishment of a council  to look into 
                                  
215Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya & Ors., AIR 1959 SC 781. 

121 
 
and prevent ‘problem gambling’ and ‘gambling by 
minors’ must be put in place.  
 
20. Match-fixing and sports fraud should be specifically 
made criminal offences with severe punishments. 
 
21. Amend any other existing law(s) that puts an 
impediment to bring into effect the regulating 
mechanism to such effect. 
 
The Commission recommends accordingly. 
 
9.9 The Commission would like to conclude the Report by 
quoting Justice D P Madon that “as the society changes, the law 
cannot remain immutable ” and that “ the law exists to serve the 
needs of the society which is governed by it .” (Central Inland 
Water Transport Corporation Limited &  Anr. v. Brojo Nath 
Ganguly & Anr., AIR 1986 SC 1571). 
 
 
 
[Justice Dr. B.S. Chauhan] 
Chairman 
 
 
 
       * 
[Justice Ravi R. Tripathi]   [Prof. (Dr.) S. Sivakumar]    [Dr. Sanjay Singh] 
 Member    Member    Member-Secretary 
 
 
 
   ** 
  [Suresh Chandra]    [Dr. G. Narayana Raju] 
 Ex-officio Member       Ex-officio Member 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Submitted a separate opinion 
**  Out of country on official visit  

122 
 
Annexure -I 
Responses from Stakeholders 
 
Pursuant to the mandate given by the Supreme Court of 
India to study the possibility of legalising betting in India, the 
Commission issued an Appeal on 30 May 2017 requesting the 
stakeholders, operators, organisations, and the public at large 
to respond (Appended). State Governments and various sports 
associations were also requested to give their opinion on the 
following issues: 
 
a. Will legalising betting and gambling help in curbing illegal 
activities undertaken by the citizens of our country in this 
regard? 
b. Will licensing such activities help the government earn 
substantial revenue and generate employment? 
c. How far will legalising betting and gambling be morally 
correct in the Indian circumstances? 
d. What would be the possible model by which people 
engaging in these activities can be safeguarded from 
bankruptcy? 
e. If legalised, should foreign betting and gambling companies 
be allowed to have a foothold in the country? 
f. Any other relevant issue. 
 
 The Commission 
received numerous 
responses from various 
stakeholders including 
State governments, 
individuals, operators, 
sports associations, etc. It 
is observed that there has 
been a mixed response to 

123 
 
the questionnaire put in the public domain. The Commission 
received 195 responses.  The Commission examined the 
responses received from the stakeholders and a brief analysis is 
given below. 
 
GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS: 
 The Government of Uttar Pradesh was against the 
legalisation of betting and gambling on the basis that it is 
against social norms and would increase the crime rates. 
 
 The Government of Orissa in a similar manner further 
suggested that it would result in the elevation of 
corruption levels. However, it:  
 
 It should be allowed to limited extent and the 
revenue collected can be utilized for the welfare of 
the citizens and it will generate employment. 
 Foreign Companies should not be allowed to have 
foothold in any type of gambling and betting and 
will lead to various other complicated issues.  
 Betting and gambling need not be legalized except 
in specific area of operation such as in clubs, 
hotels, and similar places under control of 
responsible administration.  
 Mostly, poor people will suffer financially by getting 
themselves engaged in gambling and betting for 
which the tribal’s are even allowed to take part in 
similar events only on festive occasions.  
Hence, the Orissa Government has opined that as a social 
menace it should not be legalised in general terms.  
ADVOCATES:  
The Advocates were in favour for legalising of b etting and 
gambling. 

124 
 
 If gambling and betting gets legalised, India will collect tax 
revenue which can be used for development of India and 
then tax load on every individual will definitely decrease.  
 This will lead to an increase in employment and disabled  
individual will get a chance to earn a living.  
 India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) will increase when 
hotels and restaurants will come into existence and with 
increase of tourism. 
 Legalising betting and gambling will help the Government 
to keep the underworld activities under check. 
 If the sports betting get regulated then there will be 
accountability for large amount of money transferred 
through illegal channels leading to a reduction in cases of 
match-fixing, money laundering and corruption. 
 The need o f the hour is to come up with an active 
regulatory framework, whether the principle philosophy is 
to permit or restrict betting, but not compulsory banning 
it. 
 At present each state has power to legislate betting and 
gambling. The advocates have suggested that the Central 
Government must enact a Primary Legislation which 
would clearly define what constitute gambling, lotteries, 
sports betting and casual betting. 
 Set the procedure for procuring license and 
should be granted for limited period and that can 
be renewed. 
 Stringent reporting obligations will need to be put 
in place, which may include annual and monthly 
reports to be filed with a regulatory authority 
constituted specifically to govern the betting and 
gambling. 
 Should also mention the penalty and pu nishment 
provision in case any fraud happens. 

125 
 
 It may prescribe limits on the amounts that may 
be involved in each transaction. 
 Separate regulatory authority should be constituted who 
would issue license, review reports, issue directions, 
conduct inspection s and prescribe various security 
measures. 
 Most of such activities like gambling etc. are done 
through illegal sources and having strict Know Your 
Customer/Client (KYC) norms would help regulate the 
economy and help the government fighting corruption. 
Also, such KYC could prevent illegal activities like match -
fixing etc. 
 The law permitting gambling should mandate that only 
those persons who have attained majority under the 
Indian Majority Act, 1875 should be allowed to play 
games for stakes in casinos and t o open an account on 
online gambling websites. 
 The law regulating the payment systems, particularly in 
terms of mobile and internet wallets need to be amended 
to allow payment system providers to facilitate the use of 
such payment systems for gambling, the  operators of 
such payment systems would need to ensure that a KYC 
check is completed before allowing individuals, to use 
their instruments to place bets. 
 Responsibility of the Government while providing 
guidelines to also ensure that such online sites do not 
present any objectionable and pornographic content. 
 Compulsory Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
mandate and entity should pay certain percentage of its 
gross revenue to an NGO. 
 That ‘line -in-betting’ should be made illegal. That is 
betting on a ce rtain event should be closed at least one 
hour prior to the start of an event. This policy is similar to 

126 
 
that followed in horse riding in India, wherein betting take 
place prior to the beginning of the race. 
 Any person wishing to undertake betting and gamb ling 
activities must provide his/her PAN and Aadhar Card 
details. This shall not only allow the Regulator to monitor 
the earning of the person but shall also allow the betting 
and gambling operator to detect any signs of addictive 
behavior on part of the individual. 
STUDENTS: 
 If the legalisation of gambling and betting happens it 
must have authorities to keep a check on – 
(i) Age limit of adolescents 
(ii) Specific licenses for operators and those who do not 
have them must be penalized 
(iii) A gambling registration number  must be provided 
to each player 
(iv) A moral check on the players. 
(v) Heavy taxation would help build good monetary 
economy. 
 Jurisprudentially law must be conformed to the 
sociologically beneficial purposes. Thus, encouragement 
to the gambling industries would re sult in economic 
growth thus social welfare.  
 Those involved in malpractices like match fixing must be 
penalised. 
 A certain section of students who were against legalising 
betting and gambling suggested that these contracts are 
not legally enforceable and thus, must not be made legal. 
Further, they said it is immoral in nature. 
 Also, bringing the unregulated industries like the betting 
and gambling under the legal frame work would lead to 
overall increase in the economic benefits to the country. 

127 
 
But having a precisely functioning regulatory authority is 
a must. 
 A fundamentally precise legislative framework is needed 
to have an overall fiscal growth.   
 
 Further a new Gambling Act,2018 must be enacted  
which should contain the following points – 
 
1. Define the scope of law. 
2. Define the role and responsibility of Central and 
State governments. 
3. Define the national structure and supervising 
authority. 
4. Licensing structure, process, framework and due 
diligence. 
5. Full open market or limited accesses. 
6. Penalties and fees 
7. Social Responsibilities clauses on players and 
industries.   
8. Marketing code 
9. Regulatory Reforms 
10. Technical Standards. 
 Tax on gambling must be based on gross revenue and not 
on single bet basis. 
GAMING RELATED ORGANISATIONS AND FEDERATIONS: 
 A SMART CARD APPRAOCH must be adopted:- 
1. KYC based smart card must be made. 
2. Player can invest only 10% of his income as 
mentioned in Income Tax Return.  
3. NRIs would not have any limit to invest. 
4. Only those who have attained the age of 18years are 
allowed to participate.   
 

128 
 
 Certain changes need to be made to the existing 
legislative framework in order to accommodate gambling 
and betting. The suggested changes include:- 
 
 A provision must be incorporated under Section 30 
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 similar to the 
current exemp tion in favor of horse racing, to 
exempt contracts made with licensed gambling or 
betting operators from the main provision that 
makes wagering contracts void and unenforceable.  
 By way of a constitutional amendment, the power to 
enact and rule on online g aming (both skill and 
chance) can be entrusted with the Centre while the 
power to enact and deal with brick and mortar 
gaming (physical) can be entrusted to the States. 
The Integrated Gaming License can then be enacted 
as a central legislation.  
 For matters where the Parliament does not have the 
power to make laws for the States, Article 252 of the 
Constitution of India allows two or more states to 
approach the Parliament to enact laws regulating 
such matters which can apply to States which 
adopt the same b y passing a resolution to that 
effect. This article can be used for making the 
required legislation.  
 Section 2(1)(r)(3)(b) of the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986 which specifically prohibits the demeanor of 
any contest, lottery, games of chance or skill for  the 
purpose of promoting any product or interest 
should be amended or narrowed down. 
 Section 2(sa) of Prevention of Money Laundering 
Act, 2002 should be amended to bring all licensed 
online and offline gaming operators, whether 

129 
 
offering games of skill or chance within the 
definition of ‘person carrying out designation 
business and profession’. 
 
GENERAL PUBLIC: 
 
 The general public were of the opinion that the betting 
and gambling should be legalised because of the following 
reasons: 
 It should be legalised in a regulated manner. 
 It will help in generation of revenue. 
 It will create job opportunity. 
 Legalising would help curb the parallel economy of 
black money as it would help to keep a track on 
transactions done in such places. So, such entities 
would fall i n nexus with the Government and help 
to generate revenue for the development of our 
country. 
 It will help in promotion of tourism industry. 
 It will help in controlling of money laundering 
business- At present betting racket is run by the 
underworld and hug e amount of money is 
transferred through Hawala transactions which is 
used for terrorism. 
 The general public were of the view that: 
 The skill based games and sports must be legalised. 
 It should be legalized with certain rules and 
restrictions so that poor and lower middle class do 
not suffer. 
 The maximum limit for betting should be 
prescribed. 
 That betting and gambling should be made online 
or digitalised and the mode of payment should be 

130 
 
also digitalized through net banking so that the 
transactions can be tracked. 
 Some stakeholders have opposed the legalising of 
gambling and betting contending that it creates an 
unholy atmosphere and tends to vitiate the solemn 
nature of transactions. It is also observed that there 
is a conflict between Government and gaming 
related organizations and federations. The two State 
Governments who responded were of the view that 
it would be against the social norms and the 
principle of welfare State under Article 39 of The 
Constitution of India. However,  the gaming related 
organisations have supported the legalisation of 
betting and gambling and have suggested that 
having proper authorities and apt regulation would 
lead to increased income. They have opined that 
monetary and fiscal benefits would also be seen in 
the economy, which would thus lead to 
development of the country as a whole leading to 
formation of welfare State.  
  

131 
 
List of Persons Who Responded to Law Commission’s Appeal on 
Betting and Gambling 
 
ADVOCATES 
 
1. Harvindra Kumar Garg 
2. Amin Rozani 
3. NilayDutta 
4. Aman Gupta 
5. VarunSrinivasan 
6. BareddyNayana Reddy 
7. Devadas – V 
8. Catherine Qu 
9. Jain Pandit (J.Sagar Associates) 
 
STUDENTS 
 
1. Acharya Law School 
2. John T. Holden 
3. Vaibhav Parikh 
4. Harshita Mohan 
5. G.YashasviRaghavender 
6. AnindyaGopal 
7. Jay Sayta 
8. Praveen James Anthony 
9. SachitSingla 
10. Harpit Singh Gupta 
11. SIPLA, NLSIU 
 
GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS 
 
1. Government of Manipur, Secretariat law and Legislative 
Affairs Department 
2. Virendra Kumar Srivastava, Principal Secretary, Uttar 
Pradesh 
3. ShriLalit Das, IPS, Special Secretary to Government,, 
Government of Odisha 
 
GENERAL PUBLIC (INDIVIDUALS) 
 
1. Vivek Kumar Jain 
2. Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
3. JagdishDevragPawar 
4. SatyanarayanNarayanji Mohan 
5. Arun 
6. ShekharAnand 
7. Shaun 
8. Aaditya Kumar Nirala 
9. RaghuveerSoni 

132 
 
10. AshishDhanopia 
11. AyanHazra 
12. HirenAswani 
13. Dr. Deepak J Kalarickal 
14. LalitMistry 
15. Vikas Jain 
16. Manoj Sharma 
17. E. Raja 
18. Suryanarayanan 
19. Atul Kumar 
20. Gautam Mohan 
21. JignaKotecha 
22. BinaRai 
23. RajendraBansal 
24. ParveenThapa 
25. Ramesh Yadav 
26. Nawaz Husain 
27. Rodhasi Media 
28. SusantaChakraborty 
29. Gobal Tech Videos 
30. VinodKarki 
31. Anil Kumar 
32. Deepak Kodwani 
33. Suresh Ramchandani 
34. Rahul Chand Rawat 
35. P.S.Natarajan 
36. P.S SrinivasaRao 
37. B.S.S Sandilya 
38. Varsha Nanda Kumar 
39. JagannathSethyBala 
40. Dr.Shyam 
41. Fransis Pinto 
42. Prakash K 
43. Surendra 
44. Manish Kumar Pajnani 
45. Gitesh 
46. Rajat Kumar Nayak 
47. Nikhil Swami 
48. Mrinal Ali Hazarika 
49. Arvindra Pal Singh Gulati 
50. PradeepMandge 
51. VaibhavBhutani 
52. RaghunadhamNittala 
53. N.Raghunadham 
54. DilipGocul Das 
55. ShreenathMahajan 
56. Deepak lulla 
57. Amit Kumar 
58. PhanisuryaBathula 

133 
 
59. AshishMehra 
60. MadhumilindKamte 
61. NagarajSubramani 
62. Fanny 
63. Shreyansh Shah 
64. Ram Pratap Singh 
65. Chirag 
66. Francesco Rodano 
67. B.S Sahney 
68. Julio Ribero 
69. Ashok 
70. FirdausNariman 
71. Nitin Raj Tanwer 
72. Anant Mittal 
73. Raj Kundra 
74. SandeepPimpale 
75. SharukhGhyara 
76. NizwarKaranj 
77. AdityaTiwari 
78. Welesley Philip Vaz 
79. VeerendraTiwari 
80. Rena Tanna 
81. MohitPrashar 
82. Adiraj Singh 
83. SubySudhakaran 
84. Karan Thawrani 
85. Dr. Ravinder Reddy 
86. Patricia Castelino 
87. Shailendra Singh 
88. Anil Shrivastava 
89. ShaileshPandit 
90. Rajesh Dhanker 
91. DonalRozario 
92. Adhiraj Singh 
93. Rajender Kumar Pinjani 
94. AmitBansal 
95. AbhishekMazumder 
96. VrajeshUdani 
97. Nadeem Sheikh 
98. Shubham Gupta 
99. Paawan 
100. ChandanBalraj 
101. Alok Prasad 
102. M. Sarah 
103. VikasSoni 
104. Dr. VeerandraKaja 
105. Pradeep Singh 
106. RohitPathak 
107. UpamanyuChatterjee 

134 
 
108. Yogesh Jain 
109. AnandVijaywargi 
110. Mohinder Jindal 
111. BhupenKharawala 
112. HarunHafeez 
113. Abhishek Gupta 
114. RohitDandona 
115. Ra Parekh 
116. ManmadhaRai 
117. ChiragKhandelwal 
118. MayurGathani 
119. VikasVerma 
120. Suresh Bisht 
121. Abdul Samad 
122. SharukhGhyara 
123. JaydevMody 
124. Ranadev Nair 
125. A. Gandhy 
126. DarpanGoel 
127. Manoj Kumar 
128. GauravSethi 
129. AdiGapat 
130. Manjeet Singh 
131. VishwasShetty 
132. AmbrishLaddha 
133. Rudolph Furtado 
134. PradeepRaut 
135. Naveen Venugopal 
 
Gaming Related Federations and Organizations 
 
1. Playwin 
2. Deltin Group 
3. Hyderabad Race Club 
4. The Remote Gambling Association 
5. Greentube Malta 
6. Gambling Laboratories International, Australia 
7. UNLV International Center for Gaming Regulation 
8. Golden Play Private Limited 
9. Genius Sports 
10. Rowing Federation of India 
11. Saurashtra Cricket Association 
12. Hockey India  
13. Ice Skating Association of India 
14. All India Gaming Federation  
15. Equestrian Federation of India 
16. The week 
17. Amicus Rarus 
18. PMU, France 

135 
 
19. ESSA Sports Betting Integrity 
20. 1710 Gaming 
21. Tripura Cricket Association 
22. Indian Constitutional Law Review 
 
  

136 
 
Appendix 
 
  


137 
 
Annexure – II 
Separate Opinion of Prof.(Dr.) S. Sivakumar, Member 
 
  


138 
 
  


139 
 
 
LIST OF CASES 
 
1. Bimalendu De v. Union of India, AIR 2001 Cal 30, p.19 
2. Board of Control for Cricket in India v. Cricket Association of Bihar & 
Ors, (2014) 7 SCC 383, p.3 
3. Board of Control of Cricket in India v. Cricket Association Of Bihar 
(2015) 3 SCC 251, p.43 
4. Board of Cricket Control in India v. Cricket Association of Bihar & 
Ors., (2016) 8 SCC 535, pp.4, 96 
5. Bobby Art International, etc. v. Om Pal Singh Hoon & Ors., AIR 1996 
SC 1846, p.37 
6. Carlill v. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co., (1892) 2 Q.B. 484, p.45 
7. Carmen Media Group Ltd v. Land Schleswig-Holstein and 
Innenminster des Landes Schleswig-Holstein,  Opinion of Advocate 
General, Mengozzi, delivered on 3 March 2010 in Case C-46/08, 
Para 103, p.94 
8. CBI v. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal (2013) 15 SCC 222, p.43 
9. Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited & Anr. v. Brojo 
Nath Ganguly & Anr, AIR 1986 SC 1571 pp.43, 121 
10. D. Krishna Kumar v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 2003 Cr LJ 143, p.23 
11. Director, Inspector General of Police v. Mahalakshmi Cultural 
Association, (2012) 3 Mad LJ 561, p.23 
12. Dr. K. R. Lakshmanan v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr., AIR 1996 SC 
1153, pp.18, 23, 24, 40, 63 
13. Egerton v. Earl of Brownlow (1853)4 HLC 484., p.43 
14. Erlenbaugh v. United States, 409 U.S. 239, 246 (1972), p.81 
15. Firm of Pratapchand Nopaji v. Firm of Kotrike Venkata Setty & Sons, 
AIR 1975 SC 1223, p.43 
16. Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya & Ors., AIR 1959 SC 781, 
pp.16, 33, 43, 45, 46, 49, 120 
17. Guru Prasad Biswas & Anr. v. State of West Bengal & Ors, (1998) 2 
Cal LT 215., pp.32, 90 
18. H. Anraj v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 781, p.30 
19. Internet and Mobile Association of India v. Reserve Bank of India, 
W.P.(C) No.528/2018 
20. Khoday Distilleries Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, (1995) 1 SCC 574, 
p.42 
21. Kishan Chander & Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1965 SC 
307, p.13 
22. M.J. Sivani & Ors v. State of Karnataka & Ors, AIR 1995 SC 1770, 
pp.19, 23, 24 
23. M/s Gaussian Network Pvt Ltd v. Monica Lakhanpal, Order of the 
Delhi District Courts dated November 19, 2012 in Suit No. 32 of 
2012, pp.,24, 25, 102 
24. M/s. B.R. Enterprises v. State of U.P. & Ors., AIR 1999 SC 1867, p.40 
25. Murlidhar Agrawal v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1974 SC 1924, p.43 
26. North Delhi Municipal Corporation v. Prem Chand Gupta, RFA Nos. 
623 and 628/2017 decided on July 17, 2017, p.44 
27. ONGC v. Saw Pipes, AIR .2003 SC 2629, p.43 
28. Philip D. Murphy, Governor of New Jersey v. National Collegiate 
Athletic Association etc. (case no. 16-476 and 16-477) decided by the 
US Supreme Court, on 14.05.2018, pp.25, 82 
29. Pleasantime Products v. Commissioner of Central Excise, Mumbai-I, 
(2010) 1 SCC 265, p.23 
30. Pskov Region v. Rostelecom (Case No. 91-KGPR12-3), p.89 

140 
 
31. Public Prosecutor v. Veraj Lal Sheth, AIR 1915 Mad 164, p.20 
32. Ramesh Yeshwant Prabhoo v. Prabhakar Kashinath Kunte &Ors., AIR 
1996 SC 1113, p.37 
33. Reeja v. State Of Kerala, 2004 (3) KLT 599, p.9 
34. Rex v. Fortier, 13 Q.B. 308, p.25 
35. RMD Chamarbaugawala v. Union of India, AIR 1957 SC 628, pp.21, 
41  
36. S. Khushboo v. Kanniammal, AIR 2010 SC 3196, p.37 
37. Shri Raghunathrao Ganpatrao v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 1267, 
p.37 
38. State of Andhra Pradesh v. K. Satyanarayana & Ors., AIR 1968 SC 
825, pp.22, 24 
39. State of Bombay v. RMD Chamarbaugwala, AIR 1957 SC 699,  pp.7, 
10, 38, 39, 40, 41 
40. State v. Gupton, 30 N.C. 271, p. 26 
41. Subhash Kumar Manwani v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 2000 MP 
109, p.46 
42. The English Bridge Union Limited v. Commissioner for Her Majesty’s 
Revenue and Customs, ECLI:EU:C:2017:814, p. 26 
43. Thompson v. MasterCard International et al., 313 F.3d 257 (5th Cir. 
2002), p.80 
44. Union of India v. Gopal Chandra Misra, AIR 1978 SC 694, p.43 
45. Union of India v. M/s N.K. Garg & Co.,  O.M.P. No.327/2002 decided 
on November 2, 2015, p.44 
46. United States v. Sacco, 491 F.2d 995, 998 (9th Cir. 1974), p.81 
 
 
 