 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
 
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
 
Report No. 277 
 
 
Wrongful Prosecution (Miscarriage of Justice): Legal Remedies 
 
 
August 2018 


 
Report No. 277 
Wrongful Prosecution (Miscarriage of Justice): Legal Remedies 
Table of Contents     
Chapter Title Page 
I. Introduction and Reference 
A. Reference from the Delhi High Court  
B. Issues under Consideration  
C. Previous Reports of the Law Commission  
(i) The 1st Report on „Liability of State in Tort‟ 
(1956) 
(ii) The 78th Report on „Congestion of Under-
trial Prisoners in Jails‟ (1979) 
(iii)The 113th Report on „Injuries in Police 
Custody‟ (1985) 
(iv) The 152nd Report on „Custodial Crimes‟ 
(1994) 
(v) The 154th Report on „Criminal Procedure 
Code, 1973‟ (1996) 
(vi)  The 185th Report on the „Review of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872‟ (2003) 
(vii) The 273rd Report on „Implementation of 
„United Nations Convention against Torture 
and other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment‟ through 
Legislation‟ (2017) 
D. The Present Report 
1 
1 
2 
5 
5 
 
6 
 
6 
 
7 
 
7 
 
8 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
9 
II. Data and Analysis 10 

 ii 
III. International Perspective 
A. International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR) 
B. United Kingdom 
(i) Criminal Justice Act 1988 
(ii) Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC) 
(iii)UK Police Act, 1996 
C. Germany 
(i) Grundgesetz– The Constitution 
(ii)  Law on Compensation for Criminal 
 Prosecution Proceedings 1971 
(iii) Law on Compensation for Law 
 Enforcement Measures 
(iv)  The German Criminal Code 
(v)  The German Civil Code 
D. United States of America 
(i)  Federal Law 
(ii) State Laws 
E. Canada 
F. New Zealand 
G. Australia 
15 
15 
 
17 
17 
19 
19 
21 
21 
22 
 
22 
 
23 
24 
26 
26 
26 
28 
30 
32 
IV. Current Scenario – Overview and Inadequacies  
A. Public Law Remedy  
B. Private Law Remedy 
C. Criminal Law Remedy  
(i) Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(a) Offences by and relating to Public 
Servants 
(b) False Evidence and Offences Against 
Public Justice 
 
35 
35 
44 
48 
48 
48 
 
54 

 iii 
(c) Case law 
(ii) Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 
(iii)The Police Act, 1861  
D. Human Rights Commissions 
60 
63 
69 
69 
V. Standard of Miscarriage of Justice 
A. Standard to be applied to „Miscarriage of 
Justice‟ 
B. What amounts to Wrongful Prosecution? 
72 
72 
 
78 
VI. Conclusion and Recommendation 
A. Conclusion  
B. Recommendations 
80 
80 
84 
 Annexure – The Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Bill, 2018 
92 
 List of Cases 101 
 
  

 iv 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
 The subject matter of this Report required a focused study for framing of 
new provision for providing legal remedies to the wrongully prosecuted, as no 
such legislative framework exists today.  The C ommission gratefully 
acknowledges the valuable assistance and advise provided to it in this endeavour 
by Mr. Justice A P Sahi, Sr. Judge, Allahabad High Court ; Justice (Retd.) Mr. 
Pratyush Kumar ; Shri Sidharth Luthra, Sr. Advocate,  Supreme Court;  Shri 
Abhay, Director General, Narcotics Control Bureau ; and Dr. Aparna Chandara, 
Assistant Professor, National Law University, Delhi.   
**** 
 

 
Chapter - 1 
INTRODUCTION  
 
A. Reference from the Delhi High Court  
 
1.1 In Babloo Chauhan @ Dabloo  v. State Government of NCT of 
Delhi,1 the High Court of Delhi, while dealing with an appeal on the 
issues of fine and awarding of default sentences without reasoning, 
and suspension of sentence during pendency of appeal,  expressed 
its concerns about wrongful implication of innocent persons who 
are acquitted but after long years of incarceration , and the lack of 
a legislative framework to provide relief to those who are wrongfully 
prosecuted. The Court , vide its order dated 30 November 2017,  
specifically called for the Law Commission of India („the 
Commission‟) to undertake a comprehensive examination  of issue 
of „relief and rehabilitation to victims of wrongful prosecution , and 
incarceration‟ (“the Reference”), noting that: 
 
There is at present in our country no statutory or 
legal scheme for compensating those who are 
wrongfully incarcerated.  The instances of those being 
acquitted by the High Court or the Supreme Court after 
many years of imprisonment are not infrequent. They are 
left to their devices without any hope of reintegration into 
society or rehabilitation since the best years of thei r life 
have been spent behind bars, invisible behind the high 
prison walls. The possibility of invoking civil remedies 
can by no stretch of imagination be considered 
efficacious, affordable or timely…  
…The decisions in Khatri v. State of Bihar  (1981) 1 SCC 
627; Veena Sethi  v. State of Bihar  AIR 1983 SC 339; 
Rudul Sah  v. State of Bihar  AIR 1983 SC 1086; Bhim 
Singh v. State of Jammu and Kashmir  (1985) 4 SCC 677 
                                                 
1 247 (2018) DLT 31. 

 2 
and Sant Bir  v. State of Bihar  AIR 1982 SC 1470, are 
instances where the Supreme Court  has held that 
compensation can be awarded by constitutional courts 
for violation of fundamental right under Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India. These have included instances of 
compensation being awarded to those wrongly 
incarcerated as well. But the se are episodic and are 
not easily available to all similarly situated persons.  
There is an urgent need, therefore, for a legal (preferably 
legislative) framework for providing relief and 
rehabilitation to victims of wrongful prosecution and 
incarceration… Specific to the question of compensating 
those wrongfully incarcerated, the questions as regards 
the situations and conditions upon which such relief 
would be available, in what form and at what stage are 
also matters requiring deliberation... 
The Court,  accordingly, requests the Law 
Commission of India to undertake a comprehensive 
examination of the issue highlighted in paras 11 to 
16 of this order and make its recommendation 
thereon to the Government of India .” (Emphasis 
Supplied) 
 
B. Issue Under Consideration  
 
1.2 The expression „miscarriage of justice‟ is of wide amplitude. 
It has been defined as an error of justice meaning “errors in the 
interpretation, procedure, or execution of the law – typically, errors 
that violate due process, often resulting in the conviction of 
innocent people.” 2 Wharton‟s Law Lexicon (9th Edition) defines 
„Miscarriage of Justice‟ as the failure of justice.  
 
1.3 The Privy Council in Bibhabati Devi  v. Ramendra Narayan 
Roy,3 defined the contours of the term „miscarriage of justice‟ as a 
                                                 
2 Brian Frost, Errors of Justice, Nature, Sources and Remedies  (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2004) 3. 
3AIR 1947 PC 19. 

 3 
departure from the rules that permeates all judicial procedure so 
as to make the resulting proceedings not in the proper sense of the 
word „judicial procedure‟ at all. The Court highlighted two 
scenarios: one, where violation of law or procedure must be of such 
erroneous proposition of law that if that proposition were to be 
corrected, the finding could not stand; and the other, where the 
neglect is of such principle of law or procedure, whose application 
will have the same effect.4 
 
1.4 Over the years, the expression „miscarriage of justice‟ has 
been looked into in a plethora of judicial pronouncements, 
including within its purview a multitude of violations and 
desecrations. Miscarriage of justice is what arises from 
misconception of law, irregularity of procedure, neglect of proper 
precaution leading to apparent harshness of treatment or some 
underserved hardship to individuals.5 
 
1.5 In Ayodhya Dube & Ors.  v. Ram Sumar Singh 6, the Supreme 
Court held that lack of judicial approach, non -application of mind, 
non-consideration or improper consideration of material evidence 
inconsistencies with faulty reasoning such that amounts to 
perversity amounts to grave miscarriage of justice.  
 
1.6 A glar ing defect in the procedure or a manifest error on a 
point of law is consequently a flagrant miscarriage of justice. 7 If a 
                                                 
4 See also: Srinivas Ram Kumar v. Mahabir Prasad & Ors., AIR 1951 SC 177; and 
Union of India v. Ibrahim Uddin & Anr., (2012) 8 SCC 148. 
5 Janata Dal v. H. S. Chowdhary & Ors. AIR 1993 SC 892; see also: T. N. Dhakkal 
v. James Basnett & Anr. (2001) 10 SCC 419. 
6 AIR 1981 SC 1415. 
7 K. Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1962 SC 1788. 

 4 
judgment is unreasonable, based on an erroneous understanding 
of the law and of the facts of the case, it occasions miscarriage of 
justice. If a court‟s approach in dealing with the evidence is found 
to be patently illegal, with findings recorded to be perverse, and the 
conclusions arrived thereto contrary to the evidence on record, it 
leads to miscarriage of justice.8 
 
1.7 Non-compliance of the principles of natural justice, may 
deprive the accused to explain a particular circumstance. Unjust 
failure to produce requisite evidence may cause prejudice to the 
accused, which may result in failure of justice. Prejudice is 
incapable of being interpreted in its generic sense. The expression 
failure of justice is an extremely pliable or facile expression, which 
can be made to fit into any situation of a case.9 
 
1.8 Miscarriage of justice arises from a faulty and erroneous 
appreciation of evidence.10 In Ramesh Harijan  v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh11, the Court overturning an acquittal order, noted that 
undue importance to „insignificant discrepancies and 
inconsistencies‟ by the trial court observing that such a course 
                                                 
8  State Of Punjab v. Madan Mohan Lal Verma, AIR 2013 SC 3368; see also: Abrar v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh , AIR 2011 SC 354; Rukia Begum v. State of Karnataka , AIR 
2011 SC 1585; and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Dal Singh & Ors., AIR 2013 SC 2059. 
9 Nageshwar Sh. Krishna Ghobe  v. State of Maharashtra , AIR 1973 SC 165; 
Shamnsaheb M. Multtani  v. State of Karnataka , AIR 2001 SC 921; State v. T. 
Venkatesh Murthy, AIR 2004 SC 5117; Prakash Singh Badal  v. State of Punjab , AIR 
2007 SC 1274; Rattiram v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 2012 SC 1485; Bhimanna v. 
State of Karnataka , AIR 2012 SC 3026; and Darbara Singh v. State of Punjab , AIR 
2013 SC 840). 
10 State of Uttar Pradesh  v. Nawab Singh, AIR 2004 SC 1511; State of Uttar Pradesh  
v. Premi, AIR 2003 SC 1750; and Bangalore City Cooperative Housing Society Ltd. v. 
State of Karnataka & Ors., AIR 2012 SC 1395. 
11 AIR 2012 SC 979 

 5 
tantamount to miscarriage of  justice – and preventing the same is 
of paramount importance.12  
 
1.9 These judicial pronouncements discuss a broader view of the 
expression „ miscarriage of justice‟, but in the context of issue 
under discussion  in this report , „miscarriage of justice‟ refers to 
wrongful or malicious prosecution, whether or not it leads to a 
conviction by any court of law, and  whether or not it le ads to any 
incarceration. These are the cases where the accused was not 
guilty of the offence , and the police and/or the prosecution 
engaged in some form of misconduct in investigating and/or 
prosecuting the person.  
 
C. Previous Reports of the Law Commission 
(i)  The 1st Report on „Liability of State in Tort‟ (1956) 
 
1.10 The Commission looked into the question of a  specific law  
with respect to citizen claims based on tort against the Union and 
the States, and if so, what should be the extent of State liability. It 
recommended the enactment of a suitable law to define the 
position on Government‟s tortious liability , stating that it “is 
necessary that the law should, as far as possible, be made certain 
and definite.” On the extent to which such law should make the 
state liable for tortious acts, the Commission recommended that 
this issue requires “undoubtedly, a nice balancing consideration so 
                                                 
12 Allarakha K Mansuri v. State of Gujarat, AIR 2002 SC 1051, the Supreme Court 
held that in a case where the trial court has taken a view  based upon conjectures 
and hypothesis and not on the legal evidence, a duty is cast upon the appellate court 
to re -appreciate the evidence in  appeal for the purposes of ascertaining as to 
whether the accused has committed any offence or not. See Also: State of 
Rajasthan v. Shera Ram, AIR 2012 SC 1. 

 6 
as not to unduly restrict the sphere of activities of the State and at 
the same time to afford sufficient protection to the citizen.” 
 
1.11 The Commission also considered the scope of the immunity 
of the State for  the tortious acts of its officials  and recommended 
the relaxation of the rule of state immunity, and that “the old 
distinction between sovereign and non -sovereign functions should 
no longer be invoked to determine the liability of the State.” 
 
   (ii)  The 78 th Report on „Congestion of Under -trial Prisoners in 
Jails‟ (1979) 
 
1.12 The Commission in this r eport dealt with the issue of 
substantial number of undertrial prisoners in jails and the need for 
legal reforms required to  deal with the same. The Commission 
noting that the jails should primarily be meant for lodging convic ts 
and not for person s under tria l, recommended that the two 
categories of inmates be housed separately , that there should be  a 
separate institution for the de tention of undertrial prisoners. The 
report also contained other recommendations on disposal of cases 
(delay and arrears in trial courts); amount of bond; release on bond 
without surety etc.  
 
  (iii)  The 113th Report on „Injuries in Police Custody‟ (1985) 
 
1.13 The Commission in this report dealt with the issue of burden 
of proof in prosecution of a police officer for an alleged offence of 
having caused bodily injury to a person in custody. It 
recommended insertion of a Section 114B in the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 to provide that in the aforesaid cases of prosecution of a 
police officer, if there was evidence that the injury was caused 

 7 
during the period when the person was in the custody of the police, 
the Court may presume that the injury was cau sed by the police 
officer having custody of that person during that period.  
 
1.14 The Commission further recommended that the Court, while 
considering the question of presumption  in the said cases , should 
have regard to all relevant circumstances includin g the period of 
custody, statement made by the victim, medical evidence and the 
evidence which the Magistrate may have recorded. The report also 
recommended shifting of burden of proof in offences relating to 
custodial violence and tortures.  
 
  (iv)   The 152nd Report on „Custodial Crimes‟ (1994) 
 
1.15 The Commission in this report dealt with the issue of arrest 
and abuse of authority by the police officials. Referring  to the 
concerned Constitutional and statutory provisions , the report 
recommended many am endments on the subject matter . One of 
the amendments recommended was with respect to the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 - reiterating insertion of section 114B (as was 
recommended in the 113th report). The recommendations made 
hereunder also suggested amendments to the Criminal Procedure 
Code, 1973, adding of a section 41(1A) for recording the reasons 
for arrest, and a section 50A to inform the nominated person about 
the arrest, among others.  
 
  (v)  The 154th Report on „ The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973‟  
(1996) 
 
1.16 The Commission undertook a detailed examination of the 
Code 1973  “so as to remove the germane problems leading to 

 8 
consequential delay in disposal of criminal cases” . It made 
comprehensive recommendations including amendments in the 
Code, 1973, the Police Acts, amongst others. One of the se 
recommendations was to separate the investigating police force 
from the law and order enforcement police force : to inter alia 
increase the expertise of the investigating police; make 
investigations efficient which will reduce the possibility of 
unjustified and unwarranted prosecutions. The investigating police 
force was recommended to be placed under the supervision of 
higher authorities.  
 
   (vi) The 185th Report on the „Review of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872‟ (2003)   
1.17 The Commission  while reviewing the Act 1872, once again  
looked into section 114B (as recommended in the 113 th report and 
reiterated in the 152 nd report). Along with recommending 
amendments to other sections of the Act  1872, the Commission 
reiterated the aforesaid recommendation of section 114B, but with 
a modification to provide the meaning of the expression „police 
officer‟ for the purpose of the section. The said expression was 
recommended to include “officers of the para -military forces and 
other officers of the revenue, who conduct investigation in 
connection with economic offences”. 
(vi)  The 273 rd Report on „Implementation of „United Nations 
Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman and 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment‟ through Legislation‟ 
(2017)  
 
1.18 The Commission in this report , looking into the issue under 
consideration, made several recommendations . One of these was  
endorsing the views expressed in the 113 th, 152 nd and 185 th 

 9 
reports with respect to insertion of section 114B in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872. The Commission noted that this provision will 
ensure that in a case where a person in police custody sustains  
injuries, it is presumed by the Court that those injuries have been 
inflicted by the police, and the burden of proof shall lie on the 
concerned police officer to explain such injury. 
 
D. The Present Report 
 
1.19 Pursuant to the Reference , the Commission conducted 
broad-based research  and consulted stakeholders from various 
spheres – police, advocates, judicial officers, among others, on th e 
issue of miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful prosecution, 
incarceration and/or conviction. Taking into consideration  the 
inputs and suggestions received, and upon extensive deliberations, 
discussions and in -depth study, the Commission has given s hape 
to the present Report. 
     
1.20 The Report discuss es the international perspective on 
addressing the aforementioned miscarriage of justice; delving into 
the current scenario - remedies as available under the existing 
laws - identifying the standard o f miscarriage of justice in the 
Indian context ; and concludes with the recommendation s of the 
Commission in terms of a legal framework to address the issue. 
  

 10 
Chapter - 2 
DATA AND ANALYSIS 
 
2.1 The National Crime Records Bureau ‟s (NCRB) annual 
statistical report called the „Prison Statistics India‟  (PSI) contains 
information with respect to prisons, prisoners, and prison 
infrastructure. According to PSI 201513, there were 4,19 ,623 
prisoners across the country 14; out of which , 67.2% i.e. 2,82,076 
were undertrials (i.e. people who have been committed to judicial 
custody pending investigation or trial by a competent authority )15; 
substantially higher than the convict population  i.e. 1,34,168 
(32.0%): 
 
 
Source: National Crime Relations Bureau  
 
2.2 A review of the data in PSI shows that a cross the country as 
well as in S tates, u ndertrial prisoners continue to be higher in 
numbers than the convict  population. The States with the highest 
percentage of undertrials  were Meghalaya - 91.4%, Bihar - 82.4%, 
                                                 
13 Ministry of Home Affairs. Available. National Crime Records Bureau, Prison 
Statistics India – 2015 (September 2016). Available at 
http://ncrb.gov.in/statpublications/psi/Prison2015/Full/PSI-2015-%2018-11-
2016.pdf.  (Last Accessed: 10 August 2018) 
14 Central Jails; District Jails; Sub Jails; Women Jails; Open Jails; Borstal Schools; 
Special Jails; and Other Jails, Ibid. 
15 National Crime Records Bureau, Prison Statistics India – 2015, supra. 


 11 
Manipur -81.9%, Jammu & Kashmir -81.5%, Nagaland - 79.6%, 
Odisha - 78.8%, Jharkhand 77.1%,  and Delhi - 76.7%.16 This 
percentage of undertrials (of the total number of prisoners ) has 
remained consistently high over the preceding decade of 2005 -
2015: 
 
 
 
2.3 In terms of the State-wise statistics, the maximum number 
of undertrial prisoners in various jails across the country at the 
end of the year 2015 w ere reported from Uttar Pradesh - 62,669, 
followed by Bihar - 23,424, then Maharashtra - 21,667, Madhya 
Pradesh - 21,300, West  Bengal - 15,342, Rajasthan - 14,225, 
Jharkhand - 13,588, Punjab - 13,046, Odisha - 12,584, Delhi - 
10,879 and Haryana -10,489. 
 
2.4 With respect to the issue of miscarria ge of justice under 
consideration here, the period of incarceration of the undertrials 
also needs to be taken into consideration . The data shows that 
25.1% (70,616) of the total undertrials spent more than a year in 
prison; 17.8% (50,176) spend up to 1 year in prison as undertrials, 
                                                 
16 Ibid. 


 12 
21.9% (61,886) of the undertrials were in prison for 3 to 6 months, 
and 35.2% (99,398) undertrials spent up to 3 months in prison . 
The complete percentage breakup of „period of detention‟ of the 
undertrials is as follows: 
 
 Source: National Crime Relations Bureau  
 
2.5 Also to be noted is the data of release , which shows that 
during the year 2015, 82,585 prisoners were released by acquittal , 
and 23,442 prisoners were released in appeal.17  
 
2.6 Further, a ccording to the information compiled by NCRB 
(cited in the answer by Minister of State in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir in the Rajya Sabha to the 
Unstarred Question No. 550), during the year 2016, the number of 
undertrials increased by more than 10,000  (from 2015), recorded 
at 2,93,058; while the number of convicts increased by a little over 
1000, recorded at 1,35,683.18 
 
2.7 An international study has noted that India, with the 
aforementioned 67.2%, has one of the highest undertrial 
                                                 
17 National Crime Records Bureau, Prison Statistics India – 2015, supra. 
18 Available at https://mha.gov.in/MHA1/Par2017/pdfs/par2018-pdfs/rs-07022018-
ENG/550.pdf. (Last Accessed 12 August 2018) .  


 13 
populations in the world.19 It is noted to be the 16th highest in the 
world (out of a total of 217 countries );20 and the fifth highest in 
Asia – after Pakistan, Cambodia, Philippines and Bangladesh.21 
 
2.8 Such large number of undertrials (more tha n the number of 
convicts) year after year and their long detention periods show that 
undertrials spent a substantial  period of time awaiting trials / 
judicial determination  of their case. This delay and waiting 
becomes a graver miscarriage of justice when the person is 
wrongfully accused and incarcerated pending trial/proceedings, 
which he should not have been subjected to in the first place.  
 
2.9 While the data does not specifically highlight the number  of 
undertrials wrongfully incarcerated or acquitted pursuant to a 
wrongful pro secution or  conviction; t hese numbers , nonetheless,  
press upon  the importance of the issue and the urgency for a 
statutory remedial framework to provide relief to these victims of 
the system.  
 
2.10 The Apex Court , taking note of th is dreadful state of affairs, 
expressed anguish over the plight of accused person s languishing 
                                                 
19“Highest to lowest - pre-trial detainees /remand prisoners”. World Prison Brief, 
Institute for Criminal Policy Research. Available at: 
http://www.prisonstudies.org/highest-to-lowest/pre-trial-
detainees?field_region_taxonomy_tid=All. (Last Accessed: 12 August 2018). See 
also: Amnesty International India, Justice Under Trial: A Study of Pre -trial 
Detention in India 
20 World Prison Brief, Ins titute for Criminal Policy Research, „Highest to lowest - 
pre-trial detainees / remand prisoners‟. Available at: 
http://www.prisonstudies.org/highest-to-lowest/pre-trial-
detainees?field_region_taxonomy_tid=All 
21In a total of 28 entries. “Institute for Crim inal Policy Research, „Highest to lowest 
- pre-trial detainees / remand prisoners”. World Prison Brief. Available at: 
http://www.prisonstudies.org/highest-to-lowest/pre-trial-
detainees?field_region_taxonomy_tid=16. (Last Accessed: 12 August 2018). 

 14 
in prisons for unjustifiable extended periods of time , in Thana 
Singh v. Central Bureau of Narcotics22, observing:  
 
The laxity with which we throw citizens into prison reflects 
our lack of appreciation for the tribulations of 
incarceration; the callousness with which we leave them 
there re flects our lack of deference for humanity. It also 
reflects our imprudence when our prisons are bursting at 
their seams. For the prisoner himself, imprisonment for the 
purposes of trial is as ignoble as imprisonme nt on 
conviction for an offence  since the damning finger and 
opprobrious eyes of society draw no d ifference between the 
two….  
 
 
  
                                                 
22(2013) 2 SCC 590. See also: Hussainara Khatoon & Ors. v. Home Secretary, State of 
Bihar, Patna,  AIR 1979 SC 1369; Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee Representing 
Undertrial Prisoners v. Union of India and Ors. (1994) 6 SCC 731. 
 
 

 15 
 
Chapter - 3 
 
INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE 
 
A. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  
3.1 The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
1966 („ICCPR‟) is one of the key international documents on 
miscarriage of justice. ICC PR discusses the obligation of S tate in 
cases of miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful conviction. It 
requires the State to compensate the person who has suffered 
punishment on account of a wrongful conviction provided that the 
conviction was final , and was later reversed or pardoned on the 
ground of miscarriage of justice  i.e. a new fact proving that the 
accused was factually innocent. Article 14(6) of ICCPR states: 
When a person has by a final decision been convicted of a  
criminal offence and when subsequently his conviction 
has been reversed  or he has been pardoned on the ground 
that a new or newly discovered fact shows conclusively that 
there has been a miscarriage of justice, the person who 
has suffered punishment as a result of such conviction 
shall be compensated according to law,  unless it is proved 
that the non-disclosure of the unknown fact in time is wholly 
or partly attributable to him. (Emphasis Supplied) 
Article 9(5) states: 
Anyone who has been the victim of unl awful arrest or detention 
shall have an enforceable right to compensation. 
 

 16 
3.2 The United Nations Human Rights Committee 23 discussed 
Article 14 of the ICCPR in detail in its General Comment No. 32 
(2007). In explaining the obligations of the State in „Case s of 
Miscarriage of Justice‟, it required: 
 
52. …….  It is necessary that States parties enact 
legislation ensuring that compensation as required by 
this provision can in fact be paid and that the payment 
is made within a reasonable period of time.  
53. This guarantee does not apply if it is proved that the 
non-disclosure of such a material fact in good time is wholly 
or partly attributable to the accused; in such cases, the 
burden of proof rests on the State. Furthermore, no 
compensation is due if the co nviction is set aside up on 
appeal, i.e. before the judgment becomes final,24  
or by a pardon that is humanitarian or discretionary in 
nature, or motivated by considerations of equity, not 
implying that there has been a miscarriage of justice. 25 
(Emphasis Supplied)  
 
3.3 ICCPR and the above -referred General Comment together 
emphasise the need for a legislative framework for payment of 
compensation to the victims of wrongful conviction, and the same 
to be done within a “reasonable period of time”.   
  
3.4 A total of 168 State parties, including India, have ratified the 
ICCPR. However, not all countries have converted t heir 
commitment into law. State  parties have met their obligations 
under article 14(6) in one or more of the following ways: 
incorporation of the article (or a rewording of the article) directly 
                                                 
23 United Nations Human Rights Committee is the UN body whose interpretations of the 
ICCPR are considered authoritative. 
24 Communications No. 880/1999; Irving v. Australia, para. 8.4; No. 868/1999, Wilson v. 
Philippines, para. 6.6., as cited in  the General C omments 32, UN Human Rights 
Committee  
25 Communication No. 89/1981; Muhonen v. Finland, para. 11.2. ibid 
   

 17 
into domestic legislation to create a statutory right to 
compensation; conferring a dedicate d discretion on an 
administrative or judicial body to determine whether awards of 
compensation should be paid; or utilising the general power of 
domestic governments to make ex gratia payments. 
 
3.5 These States have developed legal frameworks for remedyin g 
such miscarriage of justice by compensating the victims  of 
wrongful convictions , providing them pecuniary and/or non -
pecuniary assistance. These frameworks establish the State‟s 
responsibility of compensating the said victims and also lay down 
other subs tantive and procedural aspects of giving effect to this 
responsibility – quantum of compensation - with minimum and 
maximum limits in some cases - factors t o be considered while 
deciding the right to compensation as well as while assessing the 
amount, claim procedure, the institution set up etc. The following 
section of this Chapter delves into few of these legal frameworks 
discussing their key features. 
 
B. United Kingdom 
 
(i) Criminal Justice Act 1988 
 
3.6 In conformity with its international obligation under ICCPR, 
the United Kingdom has incorporated the aforesaid provision of 
Article 14(6) into its domestic legislation, the Criminal Justice Act 
1988, under Part XI subtitled “Miscarriage s of Justice” , sections 
133, 133A, 133B.  
 
3.7 The said section lay down the legislative framework under 
which the Secretary of State, subject to speciﬁed conditions, and 
upon receipt of applications, shall pay compensation to a person 

 18 
who has suffered punishment as a result of a wrongful conviction, 
that was subsequently reversed or pardoned on the ground that 
there has been a miscarriage of justice  - where a new fact came to 
light proving beyond reasonable doubt that the person did not 
commit the offence . It also provides the factors to be considered 
while assessing the  amount of compensation i.e. harm to 
reputation or similar damage, the seriousness of the offence, 
severity of the punishment, the conduct of the investigation and 
prosecution of the offence . In terms of the amount of 
compensation, t he said sections  provide an overall compensation 
limit (distinguishing on the basis of period of incarceration i.e. less 
than ten (10) years or ten (10) years or more).26  
 
3.8 Prior to 2011, the eligibility for compensation under this law 
requires that the claimant be exon erated and not acquitted on 
grounds of legal technicalities or evidence falling short of “beyond 
reasonable doubt.” However, in 2011 vide the case of R (on the 
application of Adams) v. Secretary of State for Justice 27, the UK 
Supreme Court widened the deﬁnition of „miscarriage of justice and 
the notion of innocence‟. A majority judgment ruled that the 
requirement of conclusive innocence was too narrow and held that 
even those who cannot prove their innocence beyond reasonable 
doubt were entitled to compensation; further noting that:  
 
Innocence as such is not a concept known to our criminal 
justice system. We distinguish between the guilty and the 
not guilty. A person is only guilty if the state can prove his 
guilt beyond reasonable doubt… if it can be conclusively 
shown that the state was not entitled to punish a person, 
it seems to me that he should be entitled to compensation 
                                                 
26 Under the Act there is also a time limit for filing of the claim i.e. before the end of the 
period of 2 years from the date on which the conviction of the person concerne d is 
reversed or he is pardoned (Section 133).  
27 [2011] UKSC 18. 

 19 
for having been punished. He does not have to prove his 
innocence at his trial and it seems wrong in principle that 
he should be required to prove his innocence now. 
 
(ii) Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC) 
 
3.9 The UK also has a Review Commission dedicated to the task 
of ascertaining whether an accused has suffered miscarriage of 
justice. The Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCR C), which 
was established in March 1997, reviews cases with possibility of 
miscarriages of justice in the criminal courts of England, Wales, 
and Northern Ireland, and refers appropriate cases to the appeal 
courts for review.  
 
3.10 CCRC is the forum where those who believe they have either 
been wrongfully convicted or sentenced can apply to have their 
case reviewed. It can gather information related to a case and carry 
out its own investigation. Once completed, CCRC decides whether 
to refer the case to the appropriate appellate court for further 
review.  
 
(iii) UK Police Act, 1996 
 
3.11 Also noteworthy is the s ection 88 of the UK Police Act 1996 , 
that deals with the „Liability for wrongful acts of constables‟. This 
section lays down the remedy and procedure in the aforesaid 
cases. It makes the chief officer of police  liable in respect of  any 
unlawful conduct of  constables under his direction and control in 
the performance of their functions , in like manner as a master is 
liable in respect of torts committed by his servants in the course of 
their employment; and, accordingly shall as in the case of a tort, be 
treated for all purposes as a joint tortfeasor. It further provides for 
payment of any damages or settlement amount, for such cases, out 
of the police fund. 

 20 
 
3.12 In Hill v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire 28, the House of 
Lords held that police officers did not owe a duty to individual 
members of the public who might suffer injury through their 
careless failure to apprehend a dangerous criminal. The conduct of 
a police investigation involves a variety of decisions on matters of 
policy and discretion, including decisions as to priorities in the 
deployment of resources. To subject those decisions to a common 
law duty of care, and to t he kind of judicial scrutiny involved in an 
action in tort, was held to be inappropriate. 
 
3.13 In Brooks v. Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis & 
Ors.,29 the House of Lords approving the decision in Hill v Chief 
Constable of West Yorkshire (supra), reformulated the principle in 
terms of an absence of a duty of care rather than a blanket 
immunity, noting that “ it is, of course, desirable that police officers 
should treat victims and witnesses properly … But to convert that 
ethical value into general l egal duties of care … would be going too 
far. The prime function of the police is the preservation of the 
Queen’s peace … A retreat from the principle in Hill would have 
detrimental effects for law enforcement.” 
 
3.14 In Robinson v. Chief Constable of the West Yorkshire Police, 30 
the UK Supreme Court explained the scope of the common law 
duty of care owed by police when their activities lead to injuries 
being sustained by members of the public. It has long been the 
case that a claim cannot be brought in negligence against the 
police, where the danger is created by someone else, except in 
certain unusual circumstances such as where there has been an 
                                                 
28 [1987] UKHL 12. 
29  [2005] UKHL 24. 
30 [2018] UK SC 4. 

 21 
assumption of responsibility. This case, however, was focused on 
the question of injuries resulting from activities of the police, where 
the danger was created by their own conduct. The Court held that 
the police did owe a duty of care to avoid causing an injury to a 
member of the public in those circumstances. The Court while 
taking note of public law duties of  the police further noted as 
follows in relation to their private law duties:  
 
It follows that there is no general rule that the police are 
not under any duty of care when discharging their 
function of preventing and investigating crime. They 
generally ow e a duty of care when such a duty arises 
under ordinary principles of the law of negligence unless 
statute or the common law provides otherwise. Applying 
those principles, they may be under a duty of care to 
protect an individual from a danger of injury wh ich they 
have themselves created, including a danger of injury 
resulting from human agency, as in Dorset Yacht and 
Attorney General of the British Virgin Islands v. Hartwell. 
Applying the same principles, however, the police are not 
normally under a duty o f care to protect individuals from 
a danger of injury which they have not themselves 
created, including injury caused by the conduct of third 
parties, in the absence of special circumstances such as 
an assumption of responsibility. 
 
C. Germany 
 
3.15 In Germany, the issue of miscarriage of justice resulting in 
wrongful convictions et.al. is primarily dealt with by assigning the 
liability to the State („official liability‟) , and by providing 
compensation to those wrongfully convicted. 
 
(i) Grundgesetz – The Constitution 
 
3.16 The Constitution of Germany [Grundgesetz (GG)], 1949, also 
referred to as the Basic Law, in its Article 34 lays down the 

 22 
primary law in this respect. The Article titled „ Liability for violation 
of official duty‟ reads:  
 
If any person, in the exercise of a public office entrusted to 
him, violates his official duty to a third party, liability shall 
rest principally with the state or public body that employs 
him. In the event of intentional wrongdoing or gross 
negligence, the right of recourse against the individual officer 
shall be preserved. The ordinary courts shall not be closed to 
claims for compensation or indemnity. 
 
(ii) Law on Compensation for Criminal Prosecution Proceedings 
1971 
 
3.17 In addition to the above, specifically dealing with wrong ful 
conviction, there is also An Act of Parliament - the Law on 
Compensation for Criminal Prosecution Proceedings 1971, which 
speciﬁes that whoever has su ﬀered damage as a result of a 
criminal conviction which is later quashed or lessened (the 
“applicant”) shall be compensated by the State (Article 1).  The 
State also compensates a person who has su ﬀered damage as a 
result of a remand order or certain other types of detention, 
provided he or she is acquitted, or the prosecution is suspended or 
abandoned (Article 2). 
 
(iii) Law on Compensation for Law Enforcement Measures  
 
3.18 There is also the „Strafverfolgungsentschädigungsgesetz‟ 
(StrEG), translated as „Law on Compensation for Law Enforcement 
Measures‟ in force since 1971, dealing with claims for 
compensation mainly arising out of mitigation or elimination of 
final conviction, unlawful pre -trial detention and other unlawful 
detention, unlawful search and seizure.  

 23 
 
3.19 § 7 Abs. 3 StrEG provides for a fixed sum per day for the 
non-pecuniary damage as compensati on i.e. €25 per day 
(wrongfully spent in custody) in addition to any compensation for 
financial loss. Factors comprising financial loss include loss of 
earnings often due to a loss of the place of employment, losses in 
the pension insurance policy (usually due or in direct consequence 
to loss of earnings), cost of the lawyer, cost arising from the search 
of a place to live and from damage to health. 
 
3.20 Claim for compensation under this law is made before the 
state justice administration, which decides on  the claim. The 
burden of proof in the aforesaid claims lie on the claimant, which 
has been noted to make it difficult in reality for the claimant to 
obtain any compensations for financial loss. 
 
3.21 § 5 StrEG bars claims o f compensation in certain cases,  
such as causation of the prosecution by the injured party – 
deliberately or gross negligently ( the expression „gross negligently‟ 
includes an act where the wrongfully convicted person neglected 
their duty of care, for example, accused confessing to his guilt 
despite being innocent); the concealment of relieving 
circumstances by the claimant.  
 
(iv) The German Criminal Code 
 
3.22 In terms of other specific statutes, the German Criminal 
Code called the „Strafgesetzbuch‟ (in effect since 1872) in its 
sections 97a and 97b deals with the cases of suffering caused due 
to excessive length of the proceedings before the Federal 
Constitutional Court, providing for “adequate compensation” to 

 24 
victims of such delays; where the reasonableness of the length of 
the proceedi ngs shall be established on a case -by-case basis, 
taking into account the Federal Constitutional Court‟s tasks and 
position. A decision on compensation and reparation hereunder 
requires a formal complaint against judicial delay 
(Verzögerungsbeschwerde).31 The provision also talks in terms of a 
non-pecuniary disadvantage, which shall be assumed to exist if a 
case has taken excessively long. Compensation for such a 
disadvantage may only be claimed if the circumstances of the 
individual case do not permit a dif ferent kind of redress, in 
particular a declaration that the length of the proceedings was 
excessive.32  
 
(v) The German Civil Code 
 
3.23 With respect to official breach of duty pertaining to 
administrative acts, the „official liability‟ is the central standard  of 
the German state liability law. The legal basis for the same resides 
in the German Civil Code (in effect since 1900) called Bürgerliches 
Gesetzbuch (BGB). § 839, read with Art. 34 GG. § 839 BGB laying 
down the provision regarding „Liability in case of official breach of 
duty‟, states as follows:  
 
(1) If an official, intentionally or negligently, violates his 
official duty towards a third party, he shall reimburse the 
third party for the resulting damage.  If the official is only 
liable for negligence, he may only be charged if the injured 
person cannot obtain compensation in any other way. 
                                                 
31 Section 97b(1), The German Criminal Code. 
32 Compensation provided for in such a case is fixed at EUR  1,200 for each year of 
delay with the discretion for vested with the Federal Constitutional Court to set a 
higher or lower amount. Section 97a(1), The German Criminal Code. 

 25 
(2) If an official breaches his official duties in a judgment in 
a case, he is only responsible for the resulting damage if the 
breach of duty results in a criminal o ffense.  In a wrongful 
refusal or delay in the exercise of their office, this provision 
does not apply. 
(3) The duty of compensation shall not arise if the injured 
party intentionally or negligently failed to avert the damage 
by using an appeal. 
 
3.24 § 839 BGB in conjunction with Art. 34 GG forms the basis of 
the liability of the public authorities by its transfer to the state and 
deals the external relationship with the citiz en. Under these 
provisions, „o fficial liability‟ arises if public official breach es an 
official duty towards a third party, thereby causing harm to such 
third party be it a citizen or other legal entity. In terms of the 
examination scheme, the following 6 prerequisites must be 
fulfilled: 
(i) Exercise of a public office by a public official; 
(ii) Violation of a third-party duty; 
(iii) Violation / breach of duty; 
(iv) Imputability of the damage; 
(v) No disclaimer and no limitation of liability; and 
(vi) No statute of limitations 
 
3.25 The aforesaid provisions lay down the consequences of 
unlawful and culpable administrative acts and justifies a claim for 
damages. The official liability initially includes the personal liability 
of the person acting for the State and for this purpose appointed by 
the State. This liability is then  transferred to the State 
in accordance with  Art. 34 GG. The official is thus liable himself 
and is subsequently relieved by the State. The misconduct of the 
official is therefore not considered a State wrongdoing.  The State 
only assumes the guilt of the official.  The State takes the place of 

 26 
the actually liable as a protective shield and compensates the 
affected citizen. The official liability is therefore not an immediate, 
but only an indirect State liability.  
 
D. United States of America  
 
3.26 In the United States  of America (US), matters of miscarriage 
of justice resulting in wrongful conviction are primarily addressed 
by compensating th ose who have been wrongfully convicted in 
accordance with the federal or the respective state law, as may be 
applicable.  
 
(i) Federal Law  
 
3.27 The federal law on the issue is the United States Code Title 
28 § 1495 & §2513. I t  deals with  federal claims from persons 
unjustly convcited of an offence against the United States and 
imprisoned. A claimant is eligible for relief under this law o n the 
grounds of pardon for inn ocence, reversal of conviction or of not 
being found guilty at a new trial or rehearing. These claims lie in 
the U.S. Court of Federal Claims. The Code provides for a fixed 
compensation amount depending on the length of incarceration.33 
 
(ii) State Laws  
 
3.28 All the States in the US have their own respective laws 
providing for compensation - monetary and/or non -monetary 
assistance - to the victims of wrongful conviction, incarceration. In 
terms of mo netary compensation, while some  States have laid 
down fixed amount to be paid depending on the period of 
incarceration (Alabama, California, Colorado, District of Columbia, 
Florida, Illinois, Hawai, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Michigan, 
                                                 
33 The compensation amount is fixed at $50,000 for each year of incarceration, and 
$100,000 per year for each year on death row. 

 27 
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, North 
Carolina, Texas, Virginia, Vermont, Washington), others have given 
the discretion to the appropriate forum to decide the amount of 
compensation on case -to-case basis (with a statutory 
guidelines/prescribed maximum amount)(Connecticut, 
Massachusetts, Maine, Maryland, Nebraska, New Hampshire, West 
Virginia) 
 
3.29 The compensation framework of Illinois needs a specific 
mention, where the statute (Ill Rev Stat Ch. 705 § 505/1) provides 
a tabular compensation formula, laying down maximum amount 
payable depending on the period of incarceration: 
 5 years or less - $85,350 maximum 
 14 year or less - $170,000 maximum  
 More than 14 years - $199,150 maximum 
3.30 District of Columbia is also worth mentioning, where DC ST 
§ 2-421 provides for interim relief, st ating that within 21 days of 
approval of a petition for compensation, the claimant will receive 
$10,000 to assist in immediately securing services such as 
housing, transportation, subsistence, re-integrative services , and 
mental and physical health care. 
3.31 In addition to the above, most of the States in the US  also 
provide for non-monetary compensation for assisting the se victims 
in rehabilitation, and reintegration into society; it includes 
transitional services including housing assistance, job trainin g, 
assistance in terms of job search and placement services, referral 
to employers with job openings, and physical and mental health 
services, counselling services; and expunging of the record of 

 28 
conviction - helpful in allowing the claimants to reintegrat e into 
society. 
 
E. Canada 
 
3.32 Canada ratified the ICCPR in 1976; though no legislation has 
been enacted to give effect to the Covenant, the principles 
expressed in it appear to have informed a joint set of guidelines 
relating to compensation for the wrongf ully convicted, formulated 
by the Federal and Provincial Ministers of Justice in 1988. 
3.33 Titled as the „Federal/Provincial Guidelines on 
Compensation for Wrongfully Convicted and Imprisoned Persons‟, 
these Guidelines contain the criteria which is to be met before a 
person can be considered eligible for compensation. Notably, the 
Guidelines expressly limit the payment of compensation only to the 
actual person who was wrongfully convicted and imprisoned. 
3.34 As per the said Guidelines, the prerequisites f or eligibility for 
compensation are as follows: 
(i) the wrongful conviction must have resulted in 
imprisonment, all or part of which has been served; 
(ii) compensation should only be available to an individual 
who has been wrongfully convicted and imprisoned as a 
result of a Criminal Code or other federal penal offence; 
(iii) the conviction has been reversed, outside the normal 
appeal process, on the basis of a new or newly discovered 
fact;  
(iv) the new fact shows that the applicant is factually 
innocent i.e. the applicant d id not commit the crime, and 
that there has been a miscarriage of justice; and 

 29 
(v) when all available appeal remedies have been exhausted. 
 
3.35 The considerations for determining the quantum of 
compensation under the Guidelines include both non -pecuniary 
and pecuniary losses: 
(i) Non-pecuniary losses 
a) Loss of liberty and the physical and mental harshness 
and indignities of incarceration; 
b) loss of reputation which would take into account a 
consideration of any previous criminal record; 
c) loss or interruption o f family or other personal 
relationships. 
(ii) Pecuniary Losses 
a) Loss of livelihood, including of earnings, with 
adjustments for income tax and for benefits received 
while incarcerated; 
b) loss of future earning abilities; 
c) loss  of property or other consequential financial 
losses resulting from incarceration. 
 
3.36 In assessing the aforementioned amounts, the inquiring 
body is required to consider the following factors: 
(i) Blameworthy conduct or other acts on the part of the 
applicant which contributed to the wrongful conviction; 
(ii) due diligence on the part of the claimant in pursuing his 
remedies. 
 
3.37 Additionally, reasonable costs incurred by the applicant in 
obtaining a pardon or verdict of acquittal should be included in the 
award for compensation. Compensation for non -pecuniary losses 

 30 
should not exceed $100,000. It is to be noted that these Guidelines 
are not regarded as binding legislation; and just as they do not 
create any legal right to compensation, they also do not create a ny 
legal bar to compensation, payment of compensation remains at 
the discretion of the Crown. In this manner, reportedly, many of 
the awards of compensation that have been made in the last 20 
years departed in some manner or the other from the criteria 
proposed by the Guidelines.34  
 
3.38 In addition to the above, a wrongfully convicted person, in 
Canada, also has the option to purs ue a civil cause of action, such 
as a claim in tort for malicious prosecution, negligent investigation, 
prosecutorial misconduct, or false imprisonment, or a claim for 
breach of rights protected under the  Canadian Charter of Rights 
and Freedoms . „Negligent investigation‟, as a cause of action was 
recognized the Supreme Court of Canada in  the case of Hill v. 
Hamilton-Wentworth Regional Police Services Board ,35 where the 
Court noted that the appropriate standard of care, like for other 
professionals, is that of “a reasonable police officer in similar 
circumstances.” 
 
F. New Zealand 
 
3.39 In New Zealand , wrongful conviction and imprisonment is 
addressed via compensation granted ex-gratia by the State. These 
ex gratia payments are in accordance with the Ministry of Justice‟s 
„Compensation for Wrongful Conviction and Imprisonment (May 
2015)‟ (“Guidelines”).  These Guidelines are based on the „Cabinet 
                                                 
34 „Entitlement to Compensation - The Legal Framework‟. Available at:  
https://www.attorneygeneral.jus.gov.on.ca/english/about/pubs/truscott/section5.php 
35 [2007] SCC 41. 

 31 
Criteria for Compensation and Ex Gratia Payments for Persons 
Wrongly Convicted and Imprisoned in Criminal Cases ‟ (Ministry of 
Justice, 1998). The said Guidelines cover both the issue of whether 
or not someone rec eives the compensation , and how much 
compensation they receive.  
 
3.40 Under the Guidelines, a person is eligible for compensation if 
he is imprisoned following a wrongful conviction that is 
subsequently set aside; and is, at a minimum, innocent on the 
balance of probabilities. In addition to the foregoing, claimant must 
(i) be alive at the time of application; (ii) have served all or part of a 
sentence of imprisonment; (iii) have received a free pardon or have 
had their convictions quashed on appeal without order of retrial. 
 
 3.41 The Guidelines provide for three categories of compensation 
for successful claimants:  
(i) payments for non -pecuniary losses following conviction – 
based on a starting figure of $100,000 for each year in 
custody.  
(ii) payments for pecuniary losses following conviction.  
(iii) a public apology or statement of innocence. 
 
3.42 Where factors taken into consideration with respect to non -
pecuniary losses include:  loss of liberty , loss of reputation (taking 
into account the effect of any apology to the person by the Crown) , 
loss or interruption of family or other personal relationships , and 
mental or emotional harm. And, for pecuniary losses include: loss 
of livelihood, including l oss of earnings, with adjustments for 
income tax and for benefits received while incarcerated; loss of 
future earning abilities; loss of property or other consequential 
financial losses resulting from detention or imprisonment; and 

 32 
costs incurred by or on behalf of the person in obtaining a pardon 
or acquittal. The Guidelines also lay down the procedure for 
making a claim thereunder. 
 
3.43 Compensation for wrongful conviction though not 
germinating from a statutory right in New Zealand, and only given 
by the Government ex-gratia, is frequently invoked and resorted to. 
In this respect, the 2016 case of Teina Anthony Pora is worth a 
mention, where the claimant was wrongfully convicted of rape and 
murder, and spent 21 years in prison. Pursuant to the Guidelines , 
the claimant was paid a compensation of about $2.52m (towards 
non-pecuniary and pecuniary losses) by the Government of New 
Zealand for wrongful conviction and incarceration.36  
 
G. Australia 
 
3.44 In Australia, individuals wrongfully convicted and 
imprisoned do not have a common law or statutory right to 
compensation except for in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). 
However, a State or territory government may choose to make an 
ex gratia  payment either on its own accord or as a result of a 
request by a party for such a payment.37 
 
3.45 With respect to the ACT, Human Rights Act 2004  (ACT) lays 
down the law regarding compensation for wrongful conviction for 
                                                 
36“Second Report for Minister of Justice on Compensation Claim by Teina Antihony 
Pora”. Hon Rodney Hansen Cnzm Qc. Available at: 
https://www.justice.govt.nz/assets/Documents/Publications/pora-teina-
compensation-claim-quantum-report.pdf). (Last Accessed: 29 July 2018) 
37 In Australian jurisdictions, where ex gratia  compensation payments are made, they 
include both pecuniary and non -pecuniary loss to the person i.e. loss that is easily 
quantifiable (such as loss of income), and loss that is not readily calculable (such as pain 
and suffering or the loss of the expectations of life). 

 33 
ACT. Under section 23 of the Act, an individual who is wrongfully 
convicted of a criminal offence may apply for compensation if such 
individual: (i)  has been convicted of a criminal offence by a final 
decision of a court; (ii) they have suffered punishment because of 
the conviction; and ( iii) that conviction was reversed or the 
individual was pardoned as a result of a new fact showing 
conclusively that there has been a miscarriage of justice (Section 
23(1)). Foregoing criteria being met, the section provides for a right 
to be compensated „ according to law‟ (Section 23(2)). The section 
marks a specific exception for cases where it is proved that the 
non-disclosure of unknown fact in time is completely or partly the 
person‟s own doing (Section 23(3)).  
 
3.46 Section 23, though pursuant to Article 14(6) of ICCPR, via its 
sub-section 1(b) adds an additional element of the person having 
suffered punishment because of the conviction to qualify for 
compensation thereunder. It is notable that the term „punishment‟ 
as used in section 23(1)(b) has been interpreted to include not just 
imprisonment but even lesser sanctions, such as a fine or the 
recording of a conviction alone.38  
 
3.47 It is noteworthy that in the absence of a legal framework or 
even guidelines for the award of compensation, these ex gratia  
compensation payments have been noted to be „arbitrary‟ and 
generally „very modest‟, marred by lack of transparency, making it 
                                                 
38 Adrian Hole. Compensation for Wrongful Compensation . Trends & Issues in 
Crime and Criminal Justice: No. 356, May 2008, Australian Government, Australian 
Institute of Criminology. Available at https://aic.gov.au/publications/tandi/tandi356 
(Last Accessed: 29 July 2018) 

 34 
difficult to establish any formal or informal tariff of compensation 
payable39.  
 
3.48 A study of the international perspective shows that the 
international law and the law in Western countries (including the 
above-discussed) understands miscarriage of justice t o take place 
after the claimant has been convicted by a final court, and a new 
fact comes to light that proved conclusively that the claimant did 
not commit the offence . And, they primarily address this 
miscarriage of justice by providing relief to the vic tim of wrongful 
conviction via monetary compensation and non -monetary 
assistance. 
  
                                                 
39 Tom Percy QC. Despised Outsiders: Compensation for Wrongful Convictions . 
Precedent Issue 81 July/August 2007. Available at 
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2007/66.pdf. (Last Accessed 
29 July 2018). 

 35 
Chapter - 4 
CURRENT SCENARIO – OVERVIEW AND INADEQUACIES 
 
4.1 A review of the existing laws and the case law brings forward 
three categories of court -based remedies with respect to 
miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful prosecution , 
incarceration or conviction etc.: (i) Public Law Remedy ; (ii) Private 
Law Remedy ; and (iii) Criminal Law Remedy. This Chapter also 
takes note of the relevant provisions of the Police Act, 1861, and of 
the role of the Human Rights Commissions in this context. 
 
4.2 The first two of the  aforementioned remedies are victim -
centric providing for pecuniary relief from the State to persons who 
have suffered on account of wrongful prosecution, conviction  
and/or incarceration. The third remedy, available under criminal 
law, is on the lines of holding the wrongdoer accountable , i.e. 
proceeding with criminal action against the concerned officers of 
the state for their misconduct.  
 
A. Public Law Remedy  
 
4.3 Public law remedy for miscarriage of justice on account of 
wrongful prosecution, incarceration or conviction finds its roots in 
the Constitution of India. In such cases, it is the violation of 
fundamental rights under Article 21 ( the right to life and liberty), 
and Article 22 (protection against arbitrary arrests and illegal 
detention etc. ) that invokes the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court and the High Courts under Articles 32 and 226 of the 
Constitution respectively ; which includes the grant of 
compensation to the victim, who may have unduly suffered 

 36 
detention or bodily harm at the hands of the employees of the 
State. 
  
4.4 The function of maintaining law and order has been held to 
be a sovereign function. 40 According to the traditional 
classification, arrest and detention were classified as „sovereign‟ 
functions, whereby any person who suffered undue detention or 
imprisonment at the hands of the State was not entitled to  any 
monetary compensation  and, the courts could only quash an 
arrest or detent ion if it was not according to law. This, however, 
changed with the Maneka Gandhi judgment,41 where the Supreme 
Court gave a dynamic interpretation to Article 21, a new 
orientation to the concept of personal liberty. One of the important 
offshoots of the foregoing was that the courts started to consider 
awarding compensation in cases of undue detention and bodily 
harm. 
 
4.5 In this respect, t he case of Khatri & Ors. v. State of Bihar  & 
Ors.,42 (the Bhagalpur Blinding case), was one of the earlier cases 
where the question  was raised as to whether a person who has 
been deprived of his life or personal liberty in violation of Article 21 
can be granted relief by the Court, and what could such relief be . 
In this case , it was alleged that the police had blinded ce rtain 
prisoners and that the State was liable to pay compensation to 
them. The Court though not giving a definitive answer to the 
                                                 
40 See: The 'Ad Hoc' Committee, the Indian Insurance Company Association Pool v. 
Smt. Radhabai, AIR 1976 MP 164, the Co urt observed that “These cases show that 
traditional sovereign functions are the making of laws, the administration of Justice, 
the maintenance of order, the repression of crime, carrying on of war, the making of 
treaties of peace and other consequential f unctions. Whether this list be exhaustive 
or not, it is at least clear that the socio -economic and welfare activities undertaken 
by a modern State are not included in the traditional sovereign functions.”. 
41 Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597. 
42 AIR 1981 SC 928. 

 37 
question of the State‟s pecuniary liability to pay compensation, did 
order the State to meet the expenses of housing the blinded victims 
in a blind home in Delhi. 
 
4.6 Subsequent to the above, there was a series of Supreme 
Court judgments which expounded on the State‟s vicarious 
liability, which developed the foundational principle for holding the 
State liable for abuse of power by its employees - one of them being 
misconduct on the part of police and investigating agencies. These 
judgments established pecuniary compensation as a prominent 
public law remedy for the aforesaid violations of fundamental 
rights.  
 
4.7 One of the first precedent -setting cases is from the year 
1983, Rudal Sah  v. State of Bihar 43, where the Supreme Court, 
exercising its writ jurisdiction, passed an order of compensation for 
the violation of Articles 21 and 22  of the Constitution. In this ca se 
the petitioner was unlawfully detained in prison for 14 years after 
the order of acquittal. The court observed thus: 
 
One of the telling ways in which the violation of that 
right can reasonably be prevented and due compliance with 
the mandate of Article  21 secured, is to mulct its violators 
in the payment of monetary compensation.  Administrative 
sclerosis leading to flagrant infringements of fundamental 
rights cannot be corrected by any other method open to the 
judiciary to adopt. (Emphasis Supplied) 
 
4.8 The Court further observed that this remedy is independent 
of the rights available under the private law in an action based on 
tort, or that under criminal law i.e. via criminal proceedings 
                                                 
43 AIR 1983 SC 1086:  

 38 
against the wrongdoer. 44 On the heels of Rudal Sah (supra) came 
the Boma Chara Oraon 45 case, where the Supreme Court declared 
that anyone deprived illegally of his life or personal liberty can 
approach the Supreme Court and seek compensation for violation  
of his fundamental right under Article 21. Subsequently, th ere has 
been a string of cases, where the  Supreme Court award ed 
compensation to persons who se fundamental rights under Articles 
21 and 22  had been violated on account of illegal detention, 
wrongful incarceration etc.46  
 
4.9 Emphasising the need to compensate the victim s of wrongful 
arrests, incarceration et c. by awarding “suitable monetary 
compensation”, the Supreme Court in the case of Bhim Singh, MLA 
v. State of J  & K & Ors. 47 opined that the mischief, malice or 
invasion of an illegal arrest and imprisonment cannot just be 
“washed away or wished away ” by setting free the person so 
arrested or imprisoned. The Court awarded a sum of Rs. 50,000/ - 
as compensation for illegal detention but , it is noteworthy that it  
did not delve into the reasoning or mechanism of how this 
“suitable monetary compensation” was determined or should be 
determined in similar cases.  
 
4.10  Delving into question of „who is responsible to pay the 
compensation in c ases of State officials‟ misconduct  - individual 
police officers or the State‟, the Supreme Court in the case of 
SAHELI, A Women's Resources center & Ors.  v. Commissioner of 
                                                 
44 Ibid.  
45 B. C. Oraon  v. State of Bihar, cited in M. P. Jain, Indian Constitutional Law  
Volume 1 (LexisNexis, Gurgaon, India Updated 6 th Edition, 2013) 1618; see also: 
Devki Nandan v. State of Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 1134;  
46 See: Sebastian M. Hongray v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1026. 
47 (1985) 4 SCC 677. 

 39 
Police Delhi & Ors .48, upheld the principle of the vicarious liability 
of the State i.e. the State to responsible for the tortious acts of its 
employees; and, ordered the Delhi Administration to pay the 
compensation for police atrocities  which lead to the death of a 9 
year-old child; further noting that the Delhi Administration has the 
option to recover the amount paid from the officers found 
responsible.49  
 
4.11 The Supreme Court upholding the principle of vicarious 
liability of the State in the case of State of Maharashtra  v. Ravi 
Kant Patil,50 further observed that the individual officers cannot be 
held personally liable because even if it is assumed that such 
officers exceeded the limits of their power, they were still acting as 
officials. These cases recognised State‟s liability and responsibility 
to pay compensation for the wron gful acts of its employees but did 
not go into the compensation jurisprudence – factors taken into 
consideration for arriving at the amount of compensation etc. 
 
4.12 A crucial judgment often credited with crystalli sing the 
principle of vicarious liability of the State underlining the above -
discussed cases and that of principle of sovereign immunity vis-à-
vis violation of  fundamental rights by the State officials was 
delivered in the case  of Nilabati Behe ra v. State of Orissa 51. The 
Supreme Court in this case observed that award of compensation 
in writ proceedings is a remedy under public law, based on strict 
liability for contravention of fundamental rights, and that the 
                                                 
48 AIR 1990 SC 513. 
49 See also Peoples' Union for Democratic Rights through its Secretary & Anr. v. 
Delhi Police Headquarters & Anr. , (1989) 4 SCC 730;  Joginder Kaur v. State of 
Punjab, (1969) 71 PLR 85. 
50 AIR 1991 SC 871. 
51 AIR 1993 SC 1960; see also: State of Andhra Pradesh  v. Challa Ramkrishna 
Reddy, (2000) 5 SCC 712.  

 40 
principle of sovereign immunity is inapplicable in the ca ses 
involving violation of fundamental rights, though available as a 
defence under private law in an action based on tort 52. The Court 
further observed that the State in such cases in turn has the righ t 
to be indemnified by, and/or take action against the c oncerned 
officers in accordance with law through appropriate proceedings. 
The principle of strict liability of the state was also upheld in the 
landmark decision on the issue of „police atrocities and awarding of 
compensation‟ in the case of D. K. Basu v. State of West Bengal53. 
 
4.13 The defence of sovereign immunity is not applicable to cases 
of violations of the fundamental rights guaranteed under the 
Constitution. Claim for compensation is a constitutional remedy 
under Article 32 or 226, and the said defence is not available 
against a constitutional remedy . This was reiterated by the 
Supreme Court in the case of Consumer Education and Research 
Center & Ors. v. Union of India54. The Court further observed: 
 
… It is a practicable and inexpensive mode of redress 
available for the contravention made by the State, its 
servants, it instrumentalities, a company or a person in 
the purported exercise of their powers and enforcement of 
the rights claimed either under th e statutes or licence 
issued under the statute or for the enforcement of any 
right or duty under the Constitution or the law. 
 
4.14 The right of personal liberty of citizens is precious, and no 
one can be permitted to interfere with it except in accordance  with 
                                                 
52 The Court in this case distinguished the state‟s liability in cases involving vio lation of 
fundamental rights from a claim the claim of damages for the tort of conversion under 
the ordinary process, stating that the decision of “ the Court in Kasturilal (Kasturi Lal 
Ralia Ram Jain  v. State of U.P , AIR 1966 SC 1039) upholding the State's  plea of 
sovereign immunity for tortious acts of its servants is confined to the sphere of liability 
in tort.” 
53 AIR 1997 SC 610. 
54 AIR 1995 SC 922; Mrs. Sudha Rasheed v. Union of India, 1995 (1) SCALE 77. 

 41 
the procedure established by law. For any damage thereto, the 
State must be held responsible for the unlawful acts of its officers 
and it must repair the damage done to the citizens by its officers.55  
 
4.15 With respect to protection of fundamental r ights from 
excesses and abuse of power, the Courts have taken a very 
restrictive view of the „sovereign  functions‟ of the State, thereby 
expanding the scope of State‟s liability. In the case of People's 
Union for Civil Liberties  v. Union of India & Ors. ,56 the Supreme 
Court held that the State cannot deprive a citizen of his life and 
liberty except according to the procedure established by law, and 
cannot claim immunity on the ground that the said deprivation of 
life occurred while the officers of the State were exercising the 
sovereign power of the State. The claim for compensation is based 
on the principle of strict liability to which the defence of sovereign 
immunity is not available.  
 
4.16 The right to life under Article 21 is available not only to 
„citizens‟, but also to „persons‟ which would include „non -citizens.57 
A foreigner too can claim protection under Article 21 along with the 
Indian citizens. 58 A natural corollary to this is entitlement to 
compensation in the event of a violation of the said right.  In line 
with the foregoing, the Supreme Court in the case of Chairman, 
Railway Board & Ors.  v. Chandrima Das 59 ruled that a citizen of 
Bangladesh i.e. a foreign national when in India was entitled to the 
                                                 
55 Dhaman Joy Sharma  v. State of Haryana , AIR 1995 SC 1795; Dalbir Singh v. 
State of U.P., AIR 2009 SC 1674. 
56 AIR 1997 SC 1203; see also: Nasiruddin v. State, 2001 CriLJ 4925; Tasleema v. 
State (NCT of Delhi), 161 (2009) DLT 660. 
57 Anwar v. State of J & K, (1977) 3 SCC 367. 
58 See: Common Cause,  A Regd. Society  v. Union of India , AIR 1999 SC 2979; 
National Human Rights Commission  v. State of Arunachal Pradesh , AIR 1996 SC 
1234.  
59 AIR 2000 SC 988.  

 42 
protection of her person under Article 21, which when violated also 
entitled her to relief of compensation by the State under Article 
226 as the State was under constitutional liability to pay 
compensation to her. 
 
4.17 As the principle of granting compensation for violation of 
Article 21 was gaining ground, the scope of cases covered under 
this remedy once again came under review in the case of Sube 
Singh v. State of Haryana ,60 which laid down the proposition that 
compensation is not to be awarded in all cases. Th is case limited 
the award of compensation to cases where : (i) the violation of 
Article 21 is patent and inconvertible; (ii) the violation is gross and 
of a magnitude to shock the conscience of the court; or (iii) t he 
custodial torture alleged has resulted in death , or the custodial 
torture is supported by medical report or visible marks or scars or 
disability. In this case, the petition er alleged illegal detention, 
custodial torture and harassment to the family memb ers of the 
petitioner. Applying the foregoing criteria, the Court did not award 
any compensation in this case on the ground of lack of clear and 
incontrovertible evidence.  
 
4.18 In cases of wrongful incarceration, prosecution involving 
infringement or deprivation of a fundamental right, abuse of 
process of law, harassment etc., though it has evolved as a judicial 
principle that the Supreme C ourt and the High Courts have the 
power to order the State to pay compensation to the aggrieved 
party to remedy the wrong done to him as well as to ser ve as a 
deterrent for the wrong doer;61 but there is no set framework 
                                                 
60 (2006) 3 SCC 178. 
61 See: Dr. Rini Johar & Anr. v. State Of M. P. & Ors., Judgement dated 3 June 2016 in 
Criminal Writ Petition No. 30 of 2015; Ram Lakhan Singh v. State Government of Uttar 
Pradesh, (2015) 16 SCC 715; Raghuvansh Dewanchand Bhasin v. State of Maharashtra 
and Anr. , AIR 2011 SC 3393. See also : Geeta  v. Lt. Governor, 75 (199 8) DLT 822; 

 43 
(statutory or otherwise) within which the right to compensation or 
the quantum of comp ensation is determined. Compensation for 
violation of fundamental rights in aforementioned cases is a public 
law remedy but there is no express provision in the Constitution of 
India for grant of compensation by the State in such cases.62 It is a 
remedy determined and decided on case-to-case basis dependent 
on the facts of each case , the disposition of the court hearing the 
case etc.63; which makes this remedy arbitrary, episodic and 
indeterminate.   
 
4.19 As is evident from the famous case of Adambhai 
Sulemenbhai Ajmeri & Ors.  v. State of Gujarat ( the Akshardham 
Temple case), 64 where the accused persons spent more than a 
decade in prison; the Supreme Court acquitted the accused 
persons with a specific noting as to the perversity in the conduct of 
the case  from investigation to conviction to sentencing but did not 
award any compensation to those wrongfully convicted; despite 
also noting that the police instead of booking the real culprits 
caught innocent people and subjected them to grievous char ges. 
However, when a separate petition praying for compensation came 
up before another bench of the Supreme Court, the plea for 
compensation was rejected on the grounds that acquittal by a 
court did not automatically entitle those acquitted to compensation 
                                                                                                                                     
Phoolwati v. National Capital Territory of Delhi, 84 (2000) DLT 177, Sunita v. State of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi, 151 (2008) DLT 192. 
62 Vibin P.V. v. State of Kerela, AIR 2013 Ker 67. 
63 See: Inder Singh v. State of Punjab, (1995) 3 SCC 702; Malkiat Singh v. State of U.P., 
(1998) 9 SCC 351; Ajab Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2000) 3 SCC 521; and Munshi 
Singh Gautam v. State of MP (2005) 9 SCC 631. 
64 (2014) 7 SCC 716; see also: State of Orissa v. Duleshwar Barik, 2017 (I) OLR 824;  
Gopal Ramdas Sheyte v. State of Maharashtra , Judgement dated 5 May 2017 in 
Criminal Writ Petition No. 3960 of 2015.  

 44 
and if compensation is to be awarded for acquittal, it will set a 
„dangerous precedent‟, post which the petition was withdrawn.65  
 
4.20 The foregoing is in contrast to the other cases where under 
similar circumstances the court held the State accountable and 
awarded compensation. Perhaps it was owing to this kind of 
variance in the decisions on otherwise similar facts that the High 
Court of Delhi in its Reference to the Commission noted that “these 
(awards of compensation for wrongful incarceration  under public 
law) are episodic and are not easily available to all similarly 
situated persons.”66 
 
4.21 Further, w hether a warding or denying compensation, as 
noted above, most of these cases did not provide much clarity as to 
the basis of how the amount of compensation was arrived at – the 
pecuniary and non -pecuniary factors and peculiarities considered 
by the Court while determining the amount . In few of these cases 
in the last few decades, the compensation standard fixed at Rs. 
50,000/- in the Bhim Singh, MLA  case (supra) was applied after 
adjustment for inflation ; which in many instances amounts to a 
very modest sum, all things considered.67   
 
B. Private Law Remedy 
 
4.22 The private law remedy for errant acts of State officials exists 
in the form of a civil suit against the State for monetary damages. 
The Supreme Court h as time and again emphasised the above 
discussed Constitutional remedy of a claim based on strict liability 
                                                 
65 “There Must Be a Price to Pay for Wrongful Convictions” The Wire, 30 August 
2016. Available at: https://thewire.in/law/cops-judges-andterrorists. (Last Accessed: 
30 July 2018) 
66 I (2018) CCR 482 (Del.).  
67 Kamla Devi v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi, 114 (2004) DLT 57; Ashok Sharma v. Union of 
India, 2009 ACJ 1063; Prempal & Ors. v. The Commissioner of Police & Ors, (2010) 
ILR 4 Delhi 416; Neema Goyal v. Union of India, 2011 (125) DRJ 273. 

 45 
of the State being distinct from and in  addition to the remedy 
available in private law for damages on account of tortious acts of 
public servants68 – especially negligence by a public servant in the 
course of employment.  
 
4.23 The question of tortious liability of the state was examined in 
the State of Rajasthan v. Vidyawati Mst.69, the case regarded as the 
precursor of a new trend in the area of State liability; where the 
Supreme Court held that the State was vicariously liable for the 
rash and negligent acts of a driver of a State official car that fatally 
injured a pedestrian. Rejecting the State‟s plea of exercise of 
sovereign powers/ defence of sovereign immunity , the Supreme 
Court laid down the proposition that the government would be 
liable to pay damages for the negligence  of its employees if the 
negligence was “such as would render an ordinary employer 
liable”.  
 
4.24 This broadened scope of the State‟s liability was , however,  
later curtailed by the Supreme Court in the case of Kasturi Lal 
Ralia Ram Jain  v. State of U.P. ;70 where in a  suit filed against the 
State of Uttar Pradesh seeking damages for the gold ornaments 
lost because of the negligence of the police officials, the Supreme 
Court applied the principle of sovereign immunity , observing that 
the government was not li able to pay damages because the police 
officers were performing a sovereign function. The police in 
exercise of sovereign power has immunity from tortious liability; a 
stark contrast from judicial pronouncements under public law, 
                                                 
68 Rudal Sah (supra); Nilabati Behera (supra). 
69 AIR 1962 SC 933. 
70 AIR 1964 SC 1039. 

 46 
where the defence of sover eign immunity was rendered 
inapplicable in cases of police misconduct.71 
 
4.25 Nevertheless, civil/money suits is also a remedy for holding 
the State accountable by payment of monetary damages . For 
instance, in cases of malicious prosecution , such as in State of 
Bihar v. Rameshwar Prasad Baidya & Anr. 72, where criminal 
proceedings were initiated against an accused for the purpose of 
harassing him, the Court held the State liable to pay damages to 
the accused person for his malicious prosecution by the State 
employees. At the same time, there is a plethora of such civil suits 
where the function of maintaining law and order, since performed 
only by the State or its delegates, has been held to be a sovereign 
function, rendering the State to not be liable fo r consequences 
ensuing therefrom. 73 The Law Commission also looked into the 
scope of immunity of the government for the tortious acts of its 
employees in its 1st Report on „Liability of State in Tort‟ (1956); and 
recommended that “the old distinction between sovereign and non-
sovereign functions should no longer be invoked to determine the 
liability of the State.” 
 
4.26 Though there are these alternate remedies, a review of the 
precedent show s that with respect to illegal detention, wro ngful 
incarceration, and police/other investigating agencies‟ misconduct, 
public law remedy under Articles 32 and 226 has  been resorted to 
                                                 
71 Nilabati Behara  (supra); D. K. Basu  (supra); CERC v. Union of India  (supra); 
People's Union for Civil Liberties  (supra); Saheli, A Women's Resources center & Ors 
(supra); Consumer Education and Research Center & Ors. (supra). 
72 AIR 1980 Pat 267. 
73 State of Madhya Pradesh  v. Saheb Dattamal & Ors. , AIR 196 7 MP 246; State of 
Orissa v. Padmalochan Panda, AIR 1975 Ori 41; State of Madhya Pradesh  v. Chironji 
Lal, AIR 1981 MP 65; Roop Lal Abrol v. Union of India and Ors. , AIR 1972 J&K 22; 
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Premabai and Ors., AIR 1979 MP 85. 

 47 
more heavily than the remedy of civil suits. One of the reasons 
being that the foregoing actions also entail violation of 
fundamental rights for which this is the Constitutional remedy, 
that also tends to be speedier compared to ordinary civil 
proceedings. Further, the Constitutional Courts have also on 
various occasions emphasised public law remedy as the remedy for 
calling upon the St ate to repair the damage done by its officers to 
the fundamental rights of the citizen, notwithstanding the remedy 
by way of a civil suit or criminal proceedings.74  
 
4.27 The Apex Court distinguishing public law proceedings from 
private law proceedings in D. K. Basu  (supra) held that public law 
proceedings serve a d ifferent purpose i.e. to civilis e public power 
but also to assure the citizens that they live under a legal system 
wherein their rights and interest shall be protected and preserved. 
Constitutional remedy for the established violation of the 
fundamental rights under Article 21 is for fixing the liability for the 
public wrong on the State, which in the first place failed in the 
discharge of its public duty to protect the fundamental rights of the 
citizen.  
 
4.28 Further, „damages‟ pursuant to a civil action are different 
from „compensation‟ under Article 32 or Article 226, because the 
former is dependent on the rights available under the private law 
in an action based on tort, while the latter is compensation in the 
nature of exemplary damages . It is giving relief by way of making 
„monetary amends‟ for the wrong done due to breach of public duty 
of protecting the fundamental rights of a citizen.  
 
                                                 
74 Ibid. 

 48 
C. Criminal Law Remedy  
 
4.29 In terms of the remedy for wrongful prosecution, 
incarceration on account of police and prosecutorial misconducts, 
the applicable criminal law provisions focus on the other end of the 
miscarriage of justice i.e . wrongdoers - the concerned public 
officials. These provisions, as contained  in the Indian Penal Code, 
1860 (IPC) and the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973  (CrPC), lay 
down the substantive and procedural contours of the action(s) that 
can be taken against the wrongdoers. 
 
(i) Indian Penal Code, 1860  
 
4.30 Chapter IX  of the IPC  titled „ Of offences by or relating to 
Public Servants ‟, deals with offences which can be committed by 
public servants and the offences which relate to public servants, 
though not committed by them. Chapter XI titled „Of false evidence  
and offence against public justice‟, lays down the offences which 
obstruct the administration of justice. The sections as contained in 
these chapters together list offences that provide possible 
instances of police, investigating agency and prosecutorial 
misconduct concerning an investigation, prosecution, trial and 
other criminal proceedings. 
 
(a) Offences by or relating to Public Servants 
  
4.31 With respect to the issue under consideration, s ections 166, 
166A and 167 under Chapter IX are to be taken  note of. Section 
166 criminalises willful departure from the direction of the law by 
a public servant with an intent to cause injury to any person. To 
make an offence under the section it is required that (i) the 

 49 
offender must have done the act „being a p ublic servant‟; (ii) there 
must be a direction of law which the public servant was bound to 
obey; (iii) public servant knowingly disobeyed such direction; (iv) by 
such disobedience public servant must have intended to cause or 
knew it to be likely to cause  injury to a person. This section has 
been observed to be comprehensive and generally includes several 
offences involving abuse of official authority. Offence hereunder is 
punishable with maximum imprisonment for one year with or 
without fine. 
 
4.32 While section 166 deals  with the disobedience of any 
direction of law  in a general sense , a relatively more specific 
provision as contained in section 167 deals with particular 
instance of a public servant assigned the duty of preparation of a 
document, incorrectly prepares, frames, translates such document. 
A false entry in his d iary by a S tation House Officer (SHO)  to 
support an Inspector rendered him guilty under this section of 
intentionally framing an incorrect public record 75. The section 
prescribes a maximu m imprisonment of three either description 
upto 3 years, or fine, or with both. 
 
4.33 To constitute a charge under section 167, it is also required 
that such public servant knew or believed that he was incorrectly 
framing or translating the document, and that he did the same 
with the intent or with the knowledge that it was likely that he 
would thereby cause injury. The intention to cause injury to a ny 
person by perversion of official duty  is a requirement under the 
section, however, it is notable that where the act is in itself 
                                                 
75 Pasupuleti Ramdoss v. Emperor, 1911 MWN 64. 

 50 
unlawful, the proof of justification or excuse lies with the 
defendant; and in failure thereof, the law implies criminal intent.76  
 
4.34 In the case of State v. Saqib Rehman & Ors., 77 the Sessions 
Court, Dwarka, New Delhi , vide its order  dated 2 February 2011 , 
made a finding that the concerned police officials had framed the 
persons accused in a false criminal case, fabricating evidence etc., 
and ordered lodging of a complaint against the concerned officials 
under sections 166 and 167,  IPC, among others. In thi s case, the 
persons accused were already in illegal custody when the police 
officials scripted an encounter basing it on a „fake secret informer‟ 
and showing an arrest of a later date. 
 
4.35 In addition to the above, there is also section 166A,  IPC, 
titled „Public servant disobeying direction under law.‟78 This section 
lays down three kinds of derelictions of law by a public servant 
which would amount to an offence thereunder: public servant (a) 
knowingly disobeys  any direction of law prohibiting him from 
requiring attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of 
investigation into an offence or any other matter; (b) knowingly 
disobeys, to the prejudice of any person, any direction of law 
regulating the manner in which he is to conduct such 
investigation; and sub -clause (c) fail s to record FIR in relation to 
offence under certain sections specified therein . The punishment 
provided is minimum of 6 months rigorous imprisonment and 
maximum of 2 years, and fine.  
                                                 
76 Krishna Govind Patil  v. The State of Maharashtra , AIR 1973 SC 138 . See also:  
Dattajirao Bhausaheb Patil v. The State of Maharashtra , (1971) 3 SCC 410; Woodfall 
(1770) 5 Burr. 2661. 
77 Unique Case ID 02405R1310232005. 
78 Inserted vide the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 with retrospective effect 
from 3 February 2013. 

 51 
 
4.36 If a public officer  abuses his office  either by commission or 
omission, and that results in an injury to any individual, an action 
may be maintained for an  offence under Section 166(A) , IPC 
against such an officer; when a duty is performed arbitrarily or 
capriciously, or the exercise of power  results in harassment and 
agony then responsibility will be fastened upon erring officials and 
they be will be punished accordingly.79  
 
4.37 In addition to the above provisions  in Chapter IX , sections 
218 to 220 under Chapter XI also deal with disobedience on the 
part of public servants in respect of official duty. The said sections 
though better suited under Chapter IX are included in Chapter XI.  
 
4.38 Section 218,  IPC on the same lines as section 167,  IPC 
criminalises intentional preparation of a false/incorrect record by a 
public servant with the intent to cause  or knowing it to be likely to 
cause loss or injury to any person. It is wider in scope compared to 
section 167 because it includes within its purview incorrec t 
preparation or framing with the in tention of saving any person 
from legal punishment or saving some property f rom forfeiture or 
other charge. An offence under section 218, IPC is punishable with 
a maximum imprisonment of 3 year s of either description, or  with 
fine, or with both.  
 
4.39 An Assistant Sub -Inspector making incorrect entries in the 
general diary was held guilty of offence under section 218, IPC.80 In 
                                                 
79 Vide: Bharatbhai Chandubhai Gadhia  v. State of Gujarat, High Court  of Gujarat, 
Order dated 19 March 2014 in R/SCR.A/951/2014. See also: Jagdeo & Ors. v. The State 
of Maharshtra & Ors., 2017 (2) BomCR (Cri) 832. 
80 Vide: Ashfaq Ahmed, 1981 All LJ 871 

 52 
Maulad Ahmed  v. State of Uttar Pradesh ,81 the Supreme Court 
observed that if a police officer ma nipulates the record such as 
police diary etc., it will be the end of honest investigation; and, 
such offences shall receive deterrent punishment.82 
 
4.40 Section 219, IPC deals with corrupt or malicious exercise of 
power by public servants engaged in the discharge of judicial 
function; criminali sing corrupt  or malicious making or 
pronouncing of any report, order, verdict etc. by a public servant in 
a judicial proceeding knowing it to be contrary to law. An offence 
under this section is punishable with a ma ximum imprisonment of 
7 years of either description, or fine, or with both.  
 
4.41 This section is invok ed only with respect to judicial 
proceedings. Further, there must the judicial proceeding actually 
commenced or  pending, where in a party claims relief a gainst 
another and seeks the decision of the court in regard thereto, and 
there must be the making of real report or a real pronouncement of 
an order, verdict or decision. 83 Where a report was submitted by 
the police before any order under sections 112 or 1 45, CrPC was 
made, it was held that the report did not fall within the scope of 
section 219 , IPC  even if the same was corruptly or maliciously 
furnished.84  
 
4.42 While section 219 , IPC  is specific in application, extending 
only to judicial officers, its following section 220 is more general 
and applies to any person in an office  which gives him the legal 
authority to commit persons for trial or to confinement , such as a 
                                                 
81 (1963) Supp 2 SCR 38 
82 See also: Sohan Lal v. State of Punjab, High Court of Punjab & Haryana Order dated 
24 March 2011 in Crl. Revision No. 31 of 2011. 
83 Vide: Narapareddi Seshareddi (in re:), (1938) 39 Cr LJ 875 
84 Vide: Kodali Puranchandra Rao v. Public Prosecutor, A.P., AIR 1975 SC 1925; see 
also: Ram Narain, 1980 Cri LJn (NOC) 55 All. 

 53 
magistrate or a police officer. The section criminali ses corrupt or 
malicious commitme nt for trial or confinement of any person by 
such an officer knowing that in so doing he is acting contrary to 
law. An offence under this section is punishable by a maximum 
imprisonment of 7 years of either description, or fine, or with both. 
Knowledge that confinement is contrary to law‟ is a question of fact 
and not of law, and it must be proved in order to satisfy the 
requirement of section 220, IPC.85 
 
4.43 This section addresses executive abuses in intentionally 
illegally confining innocent persons . It is aimed at preventing 
abuse of power by officers with the power to commit persons to 
trial or confinement. One such instance, also relevant to the issue 
under discussion, would be the power of police under section 41 , 
CrPC to arrest a person without wa rrant in certain cases, subject  
to the requirement under Article 22(2) of the Constitution i.e. to 
produce the person arrested before the magistrate within 24 hours. 
A failure on the part of the police to comply with the foregoing 
requirement without a rea sonable cause would come under the 
purview of this section, making the concerned officer liable for 
punishment thereunder.  
 
4.44 However, for the purposes of this section 220,  IPC, unlawful 
commitment to confinement will not of itself warrant the legal 
inference of malice; it needs to be alleged and proved that the 
concerned officer corruptly and maliciously confined a person 
wrongfully.86  
 
                                                 
85 See: Narayan Babaji, (1872) 9 BHC 346. 
86 Sita Ram Chandu Lall  v. Malikar Singh, AIR 1956 Pep 30; Narayan Babaji (1872) 9 
BHC 346; Smt. Priya Dubey v. The State of Jharkhand, High Court of Jharkhand Order 
dated 13 November 2013 in Cr. M.P. No. 1146 of 2010. 

 54 
4.45 Confining a person on suspicion but with the knowledge that 
it is contrary to law invokes  section 220, IPC.87 If the confinement 
of a person is itself contrary to law, regardless of the legal 
authority of the officer to confine, it would be an offence under 
section 220, IPC.88 Excess of his leg al powers of arrest by a police 
officer invokes the requirements of acting corruptly or maliciously 
or the knowledge that he was acting contrary to law  under section 
220, IPC. However, where the arrest is legal, there can be no guilty 
knowledge “superadded to an illegal act”, such as it is necessary to 
establish against the accused to justify a conviction under section 
220, IPC .89 Interpreting the expression „maliciously‟ as it appears 
in section 220, IPC, the Court observed that unlawful confinement 
to put pressure on the person confined to come to terms with a 
person in whom the accused is interested amounts to „malice‟. 90 
The expression „corruptly and maliciously‟ was also interpreted to 
include wrongful confinement for the purpose of extortion.91  
 
(b) False Evidence and Offences Against Public Justice 
 
4.46 Including the above-discussed sections 218 to 220, there are 
44 sections in Chapter XI of IPC - relating to giving and fabricating 
of false evidence (Section 191 to 200) , and to offences against 
public justice (Sections 201 to 229).  With respect to the issue  
under discussion, this part of the report delves into the working of 
sections 191  (giving false evidence) , 192 (fabricating false 
                                                 
87 T.K. Appu Nair v. Earnest & Ors., AIR 1967 Mad 262. 
88 Afzalur Rahman & Ors. v. Emperor, AIR 1943 FC 18. 
89 Vide: Amarsingh Jetha, (1885) 10 Bom 506 . See also: Beharry Singh, (1867) 7 WR 
(Cr) 3. 
90 Sita Ram Chandu Lall v. Malkiat Singh, AIR 1956 Pep 30. 
91 Vide: Mansharam Gianchand and Anr. v. Emperor, AIR 1941 Sind 36 . In this 
case a Sub -inspector who wrongfully confined certain persons on charges of gambling 
to extort money on threat of prosecution that he knew to be false, was held guilty under 
section 220, IPC. 

 55 
evidence), 193 to195 (punishment for the aforesaid), and 211 (false 
charge with an intent to injure). 
 
4.47 Not specific to public servants, sections 191 and 192 , IPC  
deal with the offence of giving or fabricating false evidence, where 
section 191 defines what amounts to giving false evidence. To 
make a statement false evidence within the meaning of section 
191, IPC, it must be established that the accused was legally 
bound by an oath or an express provision of law to state the truth 
or to make a declaration upon any subject. And, the statement 
made by the accused must be a false statement and he must know 
or believe it to be false or must not believe it to be true. The 
essence of the section lies in intentional making of a false 
statement. 
 
4.48 In Ranjit Singh  v. State of Pepsu 92 in a matter concerning 
illegal det ention of a person by the police, the accused, a police 
officer when called upon to make a statement against an 
application under Article 226 of the Constitution for a writ of 
habeas corpus, filed a false affidavit denying that the man was ever 
arrested by the police or was in his custody. The Court held that 
the accused had committed the offence of giving false evidence 
under section 191, IPC.  
 
4.49 Section 192 , IPC  criminalises fabrication of false evidence 
done with an intention that such evidence appear in a judicial 
proceeding, and cause an erroneous opinion touching any point 
material to the result of such proceeding. The essence of the 
offence lies in either making a false entry in any book/ record or 
making a document or electronic containing a false statement so 
                                                 
92 AIR 1959 SC 843. 

 56 
as to cause a judge, a public servant or an arbitrator to entertain 
an erroneous opinion upon any material point.93  
 
4.50 It is the duty of the police officers  as well as  government 
officials to allow a case to come before the court with out 
fabrication or padding; prosecution not to determine the guilt of an 
accused in advance and deceive the court in to giving a verdict 
based on false evidence.94 It is to be noted that under both sections 
191 and 192,  IPC, mens rea  is an essential element , making 
punishable „intentional‟ giving or „intentional‟ fabrication of false 
evidence.  
 
4.51 Sections 193 to 195 , IPC  lay down the punishment for the 
giving and fabricating of false evidence including with the intent to 
procure conviction for offence punishable with capital punishment 
and life imprisonment. An investigating officer who was found to be 
concocting false ev idence framing an accused for murder – was 
found to be guilty under section 194, IPC.95  
 
4.52 With respect to the issue of miscarriage of justice resulting 
in wrongful prosecution, the next important section is 211, IPC . 
Under this section it is an offence if a person with the intention to 
cause injury  to another , either (i) institutes criminal proceedings 
against such person; or (ii) falsely charg es him of having 
committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful 
ground for such proceedings or c harge. Phrased generally, this 
section is applicable to anyone who commits an offence thereunder 
                                                 
93  Vide: Ashiq Mahomed v. Emperor, AIR 1936 Lah 330. 
94 Ashiq Mahomed (supra); Police padding evidence to establish a charge where 
evidence is otherwise weak is flagrant fabrication under section 192, IPC. (Vide: State of 
M.P. v. Babulal Ramratan & Ors., AIR 1958 MP 55). 
95Vide: Darshan Singh, 1985 CrLJ NOC 71 (P&H). 

 57 
– public or a public servant  alike. In one of the early judicial 
pronouncements, section 211 , IPC  was interpreted to be 
specifically applicable to investigating agencies including the police 
when they bring a false charge of an offence with an intent to 
injure.96  
 
4.53 The essence of section 211, IPC contained in the words “with 
intent to cause injury to any person, institutes any criminal 
proceedings knowing that there is no just or lawful ground” has 
been held to be parallel to the foundation for an action for 
malicious prosecution – without any reasonable or probable cause. 
The expression „reasonable and probable cause‟ has been defined 
as the honest belief in the guilt of the accused based upon a full 
conviction, founded upon existence of circumstances, which would 
reasonably lead any ordinary prud ent and cautious man to the 
conclusion that the person charged was probably guilty of the 
crime imputed.97   
 
4.54 While invoking section 211, IPC what needs to be established 
is that the person making the statement constituting the charge , 
did so, with the intention and object of setting the criminal law in 
motion against the person against whom such statement is 
directed.98  
 
4.55 In an instance of prosecutorial misconduct, where false 
evidence lead to wrongful conviction of an accused under sectio n 
                                                 
96 Vide: Nabodeep Chinder Sirkar, (1869) 11 WR (Cr) 2. 
97 Kapoor R. P.  v. Pratap Singh Kairon, AIR 1966 All 66.   
98 See: State v. Bala Prasad, AIR 1952 Raj 142, the Court observed that the term „false 
charge‟ is not giving of false evidence by a prosecution witness against an accused 
during the course of a criminal trial, it refers to a criminal accusation that sets in motion 
the process of a criminal investigation.  

 58 
363, 366 and 376 IPC, the Court directed the authorities to 
register a case against the prosecutor under section 211, IPC.99 A 
false report by a head constable to superiors, leading to 
prosecution of an accused who was later acquitted, made the 
constable liable under section 211, IPC.100 On the other hand, in a 
case where the report by the police officer was foun d to be false by 
the Magistrate  after hearing the evidence, but not resulting in 
criminal proceedings against the accused , the police officer was 
held not to be liable u nder section 211, IPC ;101 thereby 
emphasising the element of „institution of criminal proceedings‟ for 
establishing an offence under section 211 , IPC . However, 
subsequently in another case, i nterpreting the expr ession 
“institutes or causes to be instituted any criminal proceeding”, the 
Court held that just the laying of information before a Magistrate 
constitutes institution of a criminal proceeding. 102 Similarly, 
providing information to a police officer which he has power to 
investigate and/or causing the officer to investigate the information 
amounts to institution of criminal proceedings.103 
 
4.56 Distinguishing the expression “instituting criminal 
proceedings” from “falsely charge any person  with having 
committed an offence ”104, the Supreme Court in Hari Das v. State 
of West Bengal 105, held that the scope of section 211 is wide 
enough to include both. The expression „falsely charges any 
person‟ as used in section 211 , IPC means a false accusation , and 
                                                 
99 Jitendra (in jail) v. State of U.P., 2000 Cri LJ 3087 (All). 
100 Rhedoy Nath Biswas, (1865) 2 WR (Cr) 44. 
101 Thakur Tewary, (1900) 4 CWN 347. 
102 Boaler, (1914) 1 KB 122. 
103 Nanhkoo Mahton v. Emperor, AIR 1936 Pat 358. 
104 The term „offence‟ as used here is not only limited to the offences under IPC, but also 
includes offence under any special or local laws. 
105 AIR 1964 SC 1173. 

 59 
there is no necessity of this false accusation being made in 
connection with a criminal proceeding. 106 False charge must be 
made to a court or to an officer who has the power to investigate , 
send it for tr ial, who is in a position to get the other pers on 
punished.107  
 
4.57 In addition to the intention to cause injury, another 
important requirement for proving an offence under section 211 , 
IPC is that the accused should have known that there is „no just 
and lawful ground‟ for the proceeding or the charge. It has been 
held that it is not enough that the person making the charge acted 
in bad faith, without due care of inquiry or maliciously or th at he 
did not believe the charge to be true. Recklessness in acting upon 
information without scrutini sing the sources, malice towards the 
person charged are all relevant evidence but the ultimate test 
under section 211, IPC is that the accused knew that th ere was no 
just or lawful ground for the proceedings; and the same must be 
proved.108 
  
4.58 In Santosh Singh  v. Izhar Hussan ,109 the Supreme Court 
looking into section 211 on one hand , and sections 191 and 192 
on the other, noted that the two are not intended  to overlap, with 
proceedings under each optional to the other.  
 
4.59 The offences described in the above -discussed provisions of 
Chapter IX and XI , IPC – public servant disobeying law, framing 
                                                 
106  Dasrathi Mandal v. Hari Das, AIR 1959 Cal 293. 
107 Jamoona (1881) 6 Cal 620; Brajobashi Panda (1908) 13 CWN 398. 
108 Murad (1893) PR No. 29 of 1894; See also: Badri Prasad Sharma v. Shanti Prasad 
Sharma, 1982 A Cr R 9; Ahmed Kutty (1963) 1 Cri LJ 597 (ker.); Mirza Hassan Mirza 
v. Mussammat Mahbuban (1913) 18 CWN 391; Chidda (1871) 3 N.W.P. 327. 
109 AIR 1973 SC 2190. 

 60 
incorrect document, giving false evidence, fabricating false 
evidence, falsely charge a person of an offence – more often than 
not underscore the wrongful investigati ons, prosecutions, 
proceedings which are the subject of this report ; but to make an 
offence under these sections there needs to be proven an element 
of mens rea (knowledge, intention) on the part of the accused 
thereunder. Mens rea  in these cases is not only difficult  to 
establish or  prove in a court of law but also very often may not 
even be there for these cases of wrongful convictions , preceded by 
or entailing tainted investigations or other police and prosecutorial 
misconducts, also result from lack of due care, or negligence or 
recklessness on the part of the police or investigating agency and/ 
or prosecutors. Further, institution of criminal proceedings against 
a police officer/public servant is also subject to the procedural 
safeguards such as the requirement of Government sanction under 
section 197, CrPC (discussed in detail later in this Chapter).  
 
(c) Case law  
 
4.60 The aforesaid is evident from the caselaw , discussed 
hereafter, where the accused persons were wrongfully 
charged/convicted to be exonerated later on grounds of lapses and 
deficiencies in investigation ; of the evidence submitted by the 
police and the prosecution being false, tampered with, fabricated, 
or was without any legal sanction ; or of the prosecution‟s case 
being unreliable.  
 

 61 
4.61 In State v. Mohd. Naushad & Ors.  (the 1996 Lajpat Nagar 
Bombing case),110 the Delhi High Court in its order noted that the 
police showed casualness, and that there were grave lapses on the 
part of the police – not recording the statement of witnesses 
support its case, complete absence of diary entries to corroborate 
the movements of the police – “all betray(ing) a slipshod approach.” 
The Court further noted that the flaw is in the understanding and 
implementation of the law by the police force. Highlighting 
prosecutorial misconduct, the Court noted that there was a flaw in 
the presumption of guilt, a violation of the principle that the 
burden of proof i s on the prosecution - to prove the accused 
person‟s guilt and not on the accused to prove his innocence. 
 
4.62 Similarly, in Adambhai Sulemanbhai Ajmeri & Ors.  (supra), 
in an appeal against conviction order based primarily on the 
confessions of the accused, the Supreme Court highlighted various 
peculiarities and deficiencies  in the method of investigation - the 
nature of confessions, the absence of independent evidence etc. 
The Apex Court  specifically noted that there was fabrication of 
evidence, an attemp t on the part of the investigating agency to 
fabricate and make a case against the accused person since they 
had not been able to solve the case even after almost a year of the 
incidence.  
 
4.63 In the case of Mohd. Aamir Khan, who was wrongfully 
incarcerated for 14 years as the main accused in multiple terror 
cases, there appeared a uniform noting in all the cases against him 
with regard  to the lack of incriminating evidence connecting the 
accused with the explosions. The Delhi High Court in one of the 
                                                 
110 Delhi High Court Order dated 22 November 2012 in Criminal Appeal Nos. 948, 949, 
950 and 951 of 2010. 

 62 
said cases Mohd. Aamir Khan  v. State,111 noted the above and 
setting aside the conviction , held that the prosecution has “ failed 
to adduce any evidence to connect the accused with charges framed 
much less prove them”. 
 
4.64 One of the gravest instances of miscarriage of justice 
resulting in a n extremely long wrongful incarceration was in the 
case of Mohd. Jalees Ansari & Ors.  v. Central Bureau of 
Investigation.112 The accused Mohammad Nissarudin was taken in 
to police custody in the year 1994, then booked for a bomb blast in 
Hyderabad (October 1993 ), later booked under the Terrorist and 
Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (TADA) for bomb bla sts 
in five trains in Mumbai ( December 1993 ). Subsequently, after a 
„confession,‟ Nissarudin  was sent to a prison in Ajmer, where he 
spent the next 23 years - during which time, in 2005 a TADA court 
at Ajmer convicted  him and gave him life sentence.  In 2016, the 
matter reached the Supreme Court, where the Apex court , 
overturning the TADA court‟s decision, ruled that the confession 
(which was taken in police custody) and formed the basis of the 
conviction did not have legal sanction and was inadmissible. And, 
after suffering through 23 long years of wrongful incarceration , 
Nissarudin was exonerated of all charges. 
 
4.65 A report by the Jamia Teachers‟ Solidarity Association 
highlights more of such cases where the accused persons were 
charged with offences of planning and causing bomb blasts, 
criminal conspiracy, collection of arms, training of terro rists etc., 
but later acquitted for the reasons of shoddy investigation and 
flimsy evidence, or that the prosecution‟s case was doubtful and 
                                                 
111 138 (2007) DLT 759. 
112 AIR 2016 SC 2461. 

 63 
lacked credibility, or that there were procedural lapses and the 
investigating agency violated established legal no rms, lacking 
transparency.113 The report also noted a certain pattern of 
procedural lapses and misconducts in investigations and 
prosecutions/proceedings of the cases discussed therein: 
 
(i) Illegal detention, where the time and date of the actual 
„picking up‟ o f the accused , as revealed during the trial , is 
earlier than that alleged in the police‟s case. 
(ii) Secret information, often central to the police ‟s case leading 
them to the accused cannot be verified or disclosed.  
(iii) Public and independent witnesses are rarely  joined in the 
actual operation , even in cases where the accused were 
apprehended in public places with people around. 
(iv) Private vehicles used in the operation doing away with the 
need of maintaining logs, making it difficult to verify the 
information about the operation. 
(v) Delayed seizure memos – not made at the time of actual 
seizure – made later in the police station, often found to be 
in the same handwriting and ink as the FIR.114 
 
(i)     Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
 
4.66 Procedural embargoes to the substantive provisions of the 
IPC discussed hereinabove, sections 132  and 197 , CrPC  entail 
safeguards to protect judges and public servants from vexatious 
                                                 
113 “Framed, Damned, Acquitted: Dossiers of ‘Very’ Special Cell ”. A Report by 
Jamia Teachers‟ Solida rity Association (2012). Available at: 
http://www.jamiajournal.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/JTSA-Report-Framed-
Damned-and-Acquitted-Dossiers-of-a-Very-Special-Cell.pdf (Last Accessed: 16 
August 2018). 
114 Ibid. 

 64 
litigation with respect to their actions while performing a public 
function.115 While s ection 13 2, CrPC mandates sanction of the 
government for the  prosecution of police officers for any act 
purporting to be done under section 129 to 131 CrPC, which deal 
with controlling an unlawful assembly that is alleged to have 
caused a breach of peace ;116 section 197 requires that sanction be 
received from the Central or the State Government before any 
criminal proceeding is instituted against a police officer alleged to 
have committed a criminal offence “while acting or purporting to 
act within the discharge of his official duty”. 
 
4.67 As a general guiding principle for invoking section 197,  CrPC 
the Supreme Court in Subramanian Swamy v. Manmohan Singh & 
Anr.117 held “ ….These procedural provisions relating to sanction 
must be construed in such a manner as to advance the causes of 
honesty and justice and good governance as opposed to escalation 
of corruption”. Over the years, numerous judicial pronouncements 
have examined the scope of section 197, CrPC, and have ruled for 
police officers to have t he protection of Section 197 , CrPC, while 
also drawing exceptions for cases and situations where this 
protection will not be applicable .118 A few of these decisions are 
discussed hereinafter.  
 
                                                 
115 Jaysingh Wadhu Singh v. State of Maharashtra, 2001 CrLJ 456 (Bom).  
116 Nagraj v. State of Mysore , AIR 1964 SC 269, the Supreme Court held that under 
Section 132, if the accused police officer is able to establish that he attempted to 
disperse the unlawful assembly and that he used force only on the failure of such 
attempt, then he gets protection under Section 132, CrPC. 
117 (2012) 3 SCC 64. 
118 Baijnath v. State of Madhya Pradesh , AIR 1996 SC 220; Balbir Singh  v. D.N. 
Kadian, AIR 1986 SC 345; S.B. Saha  v. M.S. Kochar , AIR 1979 SC 1841; Matajog 
Dubey v. H.C Bhari, AIR 1956 SC 44; Amrik Singh v. State of PEPSU , AIR 1955 SC 
309. 

 65 
4.68 In Dhannjay Ram Sharma  v. M.S. Uppadaya & Ors. 119,  the 
Supreme Court observed that before the protection of Section 197 , 
CrPC can be claimed by an accused person  but he has in the first 
instance to satisfy the Court that he is a Public Servant "not 
removable from his office save by or with the sanction of a State 
Government or the Central Government", and next that the acts 
complained of, if committed by him were comm itted "while acting 
or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty".120 
 
4.69 In P.P. Unnikrishnan v. Puttiyottil Alikutty121, a case of illegal 
detention and custodial torture, the Supreme Court discussing the 
scope of section 197(1), CrPC held that there must be a reasonable 
connection between the act in question and the discharge of official 
duty. The act must bear such relation to the duty that the accused 
could lay a reasonable, and not just a pretended claim, that he did 
it in the course of his duty. The Court illustrated the foregoing with 
an example: if a police officer wrongly confines a person in lock -up 
for more than 24 hours without sanction of the court or assaults a 
prisoner, he is acting outside the contours of his duty, and 
therefore, not entitled to protection under section 197, CrPC.122  
 
                                                 
119 AIR 1960 SC 745. 
120 H. H. B. Gill v. The King, AIR 1948 PC 128, the Court observed that a public servant 
can only be said to act or to purport to act in the discharge of his official duty if his act is 
such as to be within the scope of his official duty. 
121 AIR 2000 SC 2952, a defence was raised by the police officers under Section 64 of 
the Kerala Police Act wherein there are procedural safeguards against initiation of legal 
proceedings against police officers acting in good faith in pursuance of any duty 
imposed or authority conferred by the State, the Court considered this provision to be 
based on the rationale of Section 197 of the CrPC.  
122 See also: S.S. Khandwala (I.P.S.) Addl. D.G.P. & Ors  v. State of Gujarat,  (2003) 1 
GLR 802, the Gujarat High Court held that the accused police officers would not get the 
protection under Section 197 because their acts of torture were clearly outside the scope 
of their official duty.   

 66 
4.70 On the same lines, it was held in Rajib Ranjan & Ors.  v.  R. 
Vijaykumar123, as follows:  
even while discharging his official duties, if a public servant 
enters into a criminal conspiracy or indulges in criminal 
misconduct such misdemeanor on his part is not to be 
treated as an act in discharge of his official duties and, 
therefore, provisions of S ection 197 of the Code will not be 
attracted.124 
 
4.71 With respect to the issue under consideration, reference 
needs to be made to Uttarakhand Sangharsh Samiti  v. State of 
U.P.125, where the Court specifically held that acts of wrongful 
restraint and detention, planting weapons to show fake recoveries, 
deliberate shooting of unarmed agitators, tampering with or 
framing incorrect records, commission of rape and molestation etc . 
are neither acts done, nor purported to be done in the discharge of 
official duties; and that n o sanction of the Government is required 
in ordering prosecution of such police officials. The Court also 
granted exemplary damages to the victims of police atrocities.  
 
4.72 The Courts have in a series of caselaw defined and whittled 
down the scope of section 197,  CrPC, however, it appears that the 
procedural safeguards under the said section are often misused by 
the police officials by not allowing lodging of complaints or First 
Information Report (FIRs), thereby hindering the process of 
remedying police and prosecutorial misconducts.126   
                                                 
123 (2015) 1 SCC 513. 
124 See also: Shambhoo Nath Misra v. State of U.P. & Ors., (1997) 5 SCC 326. 
125 (1996) 1 UPLBEC 461, this case involved mass human rights violations including 
firing by the police and paramilitary forces on an assembly of protestors, resulting in the 
loss of many lives, mass scale molestation and rape, illegal detentions and incarceration 
of large number of persons. See also: H. H. B Gill  (supra); Amrik Singh  v. State of 
PEPSU, AIR 1955 SC 309; Matajog Dubey  v. H.C Bhari,  AIR 1956 SC 44; Balbir 
Singh v. D.N. Kadian, AIR 1986 SC 345. 
126“Accountability for The Indian Police: Creating An External Complaints Agency ”. 
Human Rights Law Network (August 2009). Available at: 

 67 
 
4.73 In addition to these provisions in CrPC, there are also similar 
procedural safeguards vis -à-vis the police under a few of the 
States‟ Police Acts and the Rules thereunder. Further, various High 
Court Rules also contain provisions with respect to instituting 
proceedings against police officials or other Government servants. 
 
4.74 In this context, lastly reference needs to be made to the 
Supreme Court judgment in the case of The State of Uttar Pradesh  
v. Mohammad Naim ,127 which laid down the guidelines for the 
courts to bear in mind while making remarks about police or other 
public officials and authorities ‟ “improper conduct”.  The Apex 
Court in this case was reviewing Justice Mulla‟s ( of the Allahabad 
High Court) observation on police conduct inter alia, “…. That there 
is not, a single lawless group in the whole of the country whose 
record of crime comes anywhere near the record of  that organised 
unit which is  known as the Indian Police Force….”, and held that 
courts of law while making observations on the objectionable and 
improper conduct of the persons and authorities whose conduct 
comes before them for scrutiny should consider: “.. (a) whether the 
party who se conduct is in question is before the court or has an 
opportunity of explaining or defending himself; (b) whether there is 
evidence on record bearing on that conduct justifying the remarks; 
and (c) whether it is necessary for the decision of the case, as  an 
integral part thereof, to animadvert on that conduct.”. 
 
                                                                                                                                     
http://indiagovernance.gov.in/files/police_reforms.pdf (Last Accessed: 10 August 2018). 
See also: “ Torture in India 2011 ‟. Asian Centre for Human Rights (November 20 11). 
Available at: http://www.indianet.nl/pdf/torture2011.pdf. (Last Accessed: 11 August, 
2018) 
127 AIR 1964 SC 703; see also: In the Matter of: K, a Judicial Officer, (2001) 3 SCC 54; 
Amar Pal Singh v. State of UP, AIR 2012 SC 1995. 

 68 
4.75 Under the CrPC, another provisi on that merits a quick 
mention in this context is section 358 – providing for compensation 
to persons groundlessly arrested. From the wording of the section, 
it appears that it primarily targets groundless arrests instigated by 
one person against the other. It empowers the Court to order the 
person who has caused for a police officer to make such arrest to 
pay compensation to the person wrongfully arrested witho ut any 
“sufficient ground”. That is to say, if a person is instrumental in 
causing a groundless arrest of a person through the police, the 
Court may order such person to pay compensation to the person 
so arrested to make up for his loss of time and expense. In order to 
invoke this section, there must be some direct and proximate 
nexus between the complainant – complaint/information provided 
and the arrest that is made on the basis of such 
complaint/information. There should be evidence to indicate that 
the informant caused the arrest of accused without any sufficient 
cause. The test should be that but for the efforts of the 
complainant the arrest could not have been made.128 
 
4.76 The person at whose instance the arrest was made may be 
ordered to pay compensat ion of maximum Rs.1000/ - to the 
person(s) arrested, and the amount thereof may be recovered as if 
it were a fine; Such person may be liable to be sentenced to simple 
imprisonment for a maximum period of 30 days if the ordered 
compensation amount cannot be recovered. Though addressing 
wrongful (groundless) arrests, this section is not directly relevant 
to the discussion herein for it does not address the police officer(s) 
making such an arrest, even if he were acting in collusion with the 
person who caused t he arrest. Further, the modest amount of 
(maximum) compensation provided for in the section , hardly 
                                                 
128 Mallappa v. Veerabasappa & Ors., 1977 CriLJ 1856 (Kant.) 

 69 
makes it a relief for the wrong done or the suffering caused, or a 
deterrent to preclude such wrongs from happening. 
 
(ii) The Police Act, 1861 
 
4.77 In addition to the above discussed provisions of IPC, a police 
official can be held liable for violating laws and rules through 
internal police mechanisms of remedial action such as those 
provided for under the Police Act, 18 61. With provisions such as 
section 7 , which deals with the “Appointment, dismissal, etc of 
inferior officers”; and section 29 that deals with “Penalties for 
neglect of duty etc.”  
 
4.78 Such proceedings usually take place through internal 
disciplinary authorities that collect evidence and pass binding 
orders.129 As per the Act  1861, orders from these proceedings can 
be challenged before the Hi gh Court and the Supreme Court . 
However, it appears from caselaw on the issue that the powers of 
the courts in terms of interfering with the order(s ) of these 
proceedings is largely contained to assessing the punishment given 
on the ground of proportionality.130  
 
D.  Human Rights Commissions  
 
4.79 The National Human Rights Commission (N HRC) and State 
Human Rights Commissions (SH RCs) established, under The 
Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, have the power to inquire 
suo motu  or on petitions filed for matters pertai ning to human 
                                                 
129 See: Dayal Singh & Ors.  v. State of Uttaranchal,  AIR 2012 SC 3046, the Supreme 
Court in this case directed the concerned authority to initiate disciplinary proceedings 
against a police officer even if such officer had retired, for dereliction of duty or 
misconduct in investigation. See also: Karan Singh  v. State of Haryana & Anr. , AIR 
2013 SC 2348. 
130 Ramanuj Pandey v. The State of M.P. & Ors., (2009) 7 SCC 248; B.C. Chaturvedi v. 
Union of India, AIR 1996 SC 484 

 70 
rights violations , which is often the case in matters of illegal 
detentions, wrongful investigations, inca rcerations etc. However, it 
is pertinent to note that under the Act 1993, if the NHRC  or a 
SHRC through inquiries has proven certain human rights 
violations or negligence in the prevention of violation of human 
rights or abatement by a public servant, it may only recommend to 
the concerned Government or authority to pay compensation to the 
victims or to prosecute the concerned wrongdoer (Section 18).  
 
4.80 The Act 1993 does not specify if these recommendations are 
binding on the Government, nor does it empower the NHRC or 
SHRCs to give any directions  to the Government or authorities  in 
this regard. So, while every death in police and judicial custody is 
to be reported to the NHRC for scrutiny , irrespective of whether 
such death was natural or otherwise 131, its role and powers are 
limited to advising the government to prosecute the concerned 
persons or grant relief to the victim. This lack of power to obtain 
compliance makes this remedy inefficacious on both the fronts – 
compensating the victim and holding the concerned public servant 
accountable.  
 
4.81 As is evident from the NHRC‟s Annual Report  for the year  
2015 – 2016, in which out of a total of 332 recommendations of 
compensation made during the said year , 229 (i.e. 69%) 
recommendations remained not complied with by the concerned 
                                                 
131 “Guidelines on Procedure to be followed in case of Death during Police Action” . 
National Hum an Rights Commission.   (May, 2010). Available at: 
http://nhrc.nic.in/documents/death%20during%20the%20course%20of%20police%20ac
tion.pdf (Last Accessed: 10 August 2018); see also: “ On Custodial Deaths/Rapes ”. 
National Human Rights Commission. (December, 199 3). Available at: 
http://nhrc.nic.in/documents/sec-1.pdf. (Last Accessed: 10 August 2018). 

 71 
Government or authorities.132 Though dealing with one of the most 
crucial aspects of Rule of Law i.e. Human Rights  and its violations, 
this dependence of the NHRC on the Government or authorities for 
execution of relief or proceedings makes it a rather weak 
institution/mechanism. 
 
 
  
                                                 
132 This status is as of 14 March 2017. “ Annual Report 2015 -2016”. National Human 
Rights Commission. (June 2017) . Available at 
http://nhrc.nic.in/Documents/AR/NHRC_AR_EN_2015-2016.pdf. (Last Accessed: 11 
August 2018). Further, as of 14 March 2017, a total of 437 of Commission‟s 
recommendations for compensation/disciplinary action against the errant public servants 
remained not complied with, out of which, while 299 cases were pertaining to the year 
2015-2016, 66 cases were pertaining to the year 2014-2015, and 72 cases were pertaining 
to the years 2008-2009 to 2013-2014. 

 72 
Chapter - 5 
STANDARD OF ‘MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE’ 
 
5.1 One of the most critical aspect s of laying down a legal 
framework for addressing miscarriage of justice, with respect to the 
issue under consideration , is identifying what amounts to 
miscarriage of justice. Whether the standard of miscarriage of 
justice should be wrongful prosecution, incarceration, conviction, 
or all three; also, what would constitute „wrongful‟. 
 
A.  Standard to be applied to ‘Miscarriage of Justice’ 
 
5.2 The international law standard as laid down in the ICCPR133, 
and included in the law of compensation for miscarriage of justice 
of many Western countries (including the federal and state laws in 
the United States, Canada, Germany and others discussed in the 
previous chapter), recognize miscarriage of justice as resulting in 
„wrongful conviction‟ by virtue of a final order, after all avenues of 
appeal have been exhausted and a new fact surfaces which then 
proves conclusively that the convicted person was factually 
innocent, and only in such case  does the claimant qualify for the 
relief of compensation. The said standard bars compensation in 
cases where the c onviction was (partly or fully) attributable to the 
claimant. 
 
5.3 This standard of miscarriage of justice is , therefore, invoked 
only when a new fact establishes factual innocence of the claimant 
after a final conviction order by the final appellate court and after 
all avenues of appeal have been exhausted ; thereby recognizing 
                                                 
133 Article 14(6), ICCPR (supra). 

 73 
„wrongful conviction‟ (and suffering of punishment on its account) 
as the standard of miscarriage of justice. This standard  if applied, 
however, will fail to consider the systemic shortcomings of the 
criminal justice system in India.  
 
5.4 Firstly, this standard w ould not include within its purview 
forms of miscarriage of justice that an accused person may suffer 
even if they are eventually acquitted . For example, illegal and 
wrongful detention, torture in police custody, long incarceration, 
repeated denial of bail , among others . A requirement that all 
„avenues of appeal be exhausted and post which a new fact shows 
that there has been a miscarriage of justice‟ does not work in the 
Indian conditions because of the delays in the criminal trial/appeal 
process; the accused person may be in the prison (or suffer 
otherwise) for the period which may be as long  as or longer tha n 
the sentence for the offence for which he is ultimately acquitted.  
 
5.5 The second issue in applying this standard is the parameter 
of „new fact proving factual innocence‟ post the (final) conviction. In 
most of the western jurisdictions using this standard, given their 
advanced forensic investigation system , factual innocence is often 
proved through the use of DNA technology /evidence. For example, 
in the United States, since the early 1990s there is the Combined 
DNA Index System (CODIS) for the purpose of amalgamating 
forensic sciences and computer technology into an effectual 
apparatus for solving serious crimes. 134 Similarly, in the United 
                                                 
134 This was corroborated by the recent judgment of the US Supreme Court in 
Maryland v. King, 133 S. Ct. 1958 (2013),  wherein it was held that officers making 
an arrest for a serious offence are authorized to take and analyse a cheek swab of the 
arrestee‟s DNA and the same is legitimate under the Fourth Constitutional 
Amendment. See: Law Commission of India, Report No. 271 “ Human DNA 

 74 
Kingdom, there is the National DNA Database (NDNAD) , and the 
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act that allows the police to 
take DNA samples of the arrested person before the investigati on 
process begins so as to make the process faster , and to eliminate 
innocents. In India , however,  since the forensic investigation 
system is not that well developed, and the use of DNA based 
technology in criminal investigation and proceedings is yet to gain 
ground, the chances of DNA based evidence contributing towards 
the exoneration of innocents are very limited.  
 
5.6 Thirdly, this standard  excludes claims of compensation in 
cases where the conviction was partly or wholly attributable to the 
accused person; for example, causation of prosecution by the 
claimant such as confessing to guilt despite being innocen t. This 
exclusion, if applied, would disqualify from relief cases where the 
accused are forced to confess under duress and they do so despite 
being innocent; a practice endemic to criminal investigation s in 
India.135  
 
5.7 Further, if wrongfulness is understood as convicting a 
person of an offence of which they were factually innocent, it will 
create a hierarchy of acquittals – those who were factually innocent 
and those who were not. Currently, the Indian legal system 
presumes anyone who is not convicted of an offence to be innocent 
of it. This presumption of innocence would be in jeopardy by 
creating categories of innocent persons, and would seriously 
disadvantage those who cannot show that they were factually 
                                                                                                                                     
Profiling – A draft Bill for the Use and Regulation of DNA -Based Technology ” 
(2017). 
 
135 See: Adambhai Sulemanbhai Ajmeri (supra); and Mohd. Jalees Ansari & Ors, 
(supra).  

 75 
innocent. This is especially problematic because, as noted above, 
factual innocence is very difficult to prove.  
 
5.8 In this manner, wrongful conviction is too high a standard, 
and there are many forms of miscarriage of justice that arise even 
though there is no conviction  ultimately. This standard would 
therefore be under-inclusive in application in the Indian context. 
 
5.9 The second standard is that of „wrongful incarceration‟, i.e. 
miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful incarceration  - where 
the person has spent time in prison for an offence for which they 
may ultimately not be convicted, prosecuted, or even charged. This 
standard would invoke miscarriage of justice in all cases of 
acquittals where the person has spent some or substantial time in 
prison i.e. all cases with long-drawn trials resulting in acquittals.  
 
5.10 Although addressing a very serious form of miscarriage of 
justice, this standard in application would be both over -inclusive 
and under-inclusive. Firstly, because not all cases of acquittals are 
a result of wrongful prosecution ; acquittals may very well be on  
account of other reasons such as factual or legal errors, or the 
inability of the prosecution to prove the case beyond reasonable 
doubt, or the accused being given the benefit of doubt. But, this 
standard would include each of the cases where the person was 
incarcerated for whatever amount of time and was later found to 
be not guilty. A corollary of the foregoing would be relief being 
granted to those who may be factually guilty , but were acquitted 
for procedural reasons such as witness  turning hostile etc. In this 
manner, this standard in practice will overshoot its intended 
objective. 
 

 76 
5.11 Secondly, making only wrongful incarceration as th e 
standard of miscarriage of justice will exclude such cases of 
wrongful prosecution (resulting in acquittal) where the accused 
was granted bail and/or did not spend any time in prison ; but, 
they nonetheless suffered on account of such wrongful 
prosecution/charges – prolonged trial, social stigma, loss of 
employment, legal expenses and the mental and ph ysical 
harassment etc. This standard of „wrongful incarceration‟  in this 
manner would be under-inclusive. 
 
5.12 The third standard is that of wrongful prosecution. This 
standard identifies miscarriage of justice as police or prosecutorial 
(procedural) misconducts resulting in malicious or negligent 
investigation or prosecution of an innocent person. It targets cases 
where the police or prosecution maliciously, falsely or negligently 
investigated or prosecuted a person who was found not guilty of 
the crime. 
 
5.13 This standard is based on a finding that the accused was not 
guilty of the offence, but the police and/or prosecution engaged in 
some form of misconduct in investigating, charging and /or 
prosecuting the person. Since the qualifying threshold of t his 
standard is wrongful prosecution, it would include both the cases 
where the person spent time in prison as well as where he did not; 
and cases where the accused was adjudged innocent by the trial 
court or where the accused was convicted by one or more courts 
but was ultimately found to be not guilty.  
 
5.14 In the Indian context, the standard of wrongful prosecution 
should be the most effective for identifying the cases of miscarriage 
of justice as it directly targets procedural and other police and 

 77 
prosecutorial misconducts, which appears to be one of the primary 
sources of factual errors that results in innocent people being held 
guilty of offences they did not commit.  As is evident from the cases 
discussed earlier in the Report ( Chapter IV - „Current Scenario – 
Overview and Inadequacies‟) , bringing to light instances of police, 
investigating agency, and/or prosecutorial misconduct leading to 
wrongful prosecution of pers ons who were ultimately found not 
guilty in trial/appeal, with many of the court orders also recording 
a finding to that effect.   
 
5.15 Reference is made to an Order dated 31 May 2018 of a 
Special CBI Court in CBI v. Om Prakash Aggarwal & Ors. 136, where 
the Court noted the abuse of process of law , excess of discretion 
and jurisdiction and violation of the  mandate of  law by the IO 
(Investigating Officer) in booking innocent persons for a bank 
fraud; who were then acquitted , after a long trial of 14 y ears, for 
the lack of any incriminating evidence. The Court specifically 
observed that:  
 
It is astonishing to note that IO despite having come to the 
conclusion regarding 'no misuse' of power or breach or non -
following of the procedure by accused bank officers, yet 
decided to file the charge sheet against them. 
 
5.16 The underlined determining factor of this standard is the 
malpractice on the part of the police, investigating agency, and/or 
the prosecution in the proceedings leading up to and/or during the 
wrongful prosecution of the accused, who was later found to be not 
guilty of the offence.   
 
                                                 
136 CC No. 39/2016 (Unique Case ID No.: DLST01­000011­2003) in the Court of Savita Rao, Spl. 
Judge, (PC Act) CBI­01, (South) Saket Courts: New Delhi. 

 78 
B. What amounts to Wrongful Prosecution? 
 
5.17 Wrongful prosecution, as noted above, are the cases of 
miscarriage of justice where procedural misconducts - police or 
prosecutorial, malicious or negligent – resulted in wrongful 
prosecution of an innocent person, who was ult imately acquitted, 
with a court making an observation or recording a finding to that 
effect. The underlying sentiment being that such person should not 
have been subjected to these proceedings in the first place. 
 
5.18 This section delves into the forms  in which the said police 
and prosecutorial misconducts manifests. A review of the caselaw 
discussed earlier and other comparative examples shows that the 
said misconducts broadly surfaces in the form of disregard of 
procedural rules  such as  improper disclosure of information ; 
falsifying or planting or fabricating evidence; withholding , 
suppressing or destroying exculpatory evidence ; coercing 
confessions/recoveries or other abuse of process of law  etc. Within 
the existing criminal law framework, to determine what could 
amount to such misconduct, reference can be made to the 
provisions co ntained in Chapters IX and XI of the Indian Penal 
Code (IPC) (discussed in detail in Chapter IV - „Current Scenario – 
Overview and Inadequacies‟).  
 
5.19 Based on the aforesaid, a n illustrative list of procedural 
misconduct would include the following:  
(i) Making or framing a false  or incorrect record  or document 
for submission in a judicial proceeding or any other 
proceeding taken by law; 

 79 
(ii) Making a false declaration or statement authorized by law to 
receive as evidence when legally bound to state the truth - by 
an oath or by a provision of law; 
(iii) Otherwise giving false evidence when legally bound to state 
the truth - by an oath or by a provision of law; 
(iv) Fabricating false evidence for submission in a judicial 
proceeding or any other proceeding taken by law 
(v) Destruction of an evidence to prevent its production in a 
judicial proceeding or any other proceedings taken by law 
(vi) Bringing a false charge, or instituting or cause to be 
instituted false criminal proceedings against a person; 
(vii) Committing a person to confinement or tria l acting contrary 
to law; or 
(viii) Acting in violation of any direction of law in any other 
manner not covered in (i) to (vii) above, resulting in an injury 
to a person. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 80 
Chapter - 6 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
A. Conclusion  
 
6.1 After identifying  „wrongful prosecution‟ as the standard of 
miscarriage of justice and determining the contours of term 
„wrongful‟, this chapter discusses the rectification of  the said  
miscarriage i.e. how to make reparations for the same  because 
mere acquittals are not enough. This chapter, therefore, concludes 
the Report with Commission‟s recommendation s on rectification of 
this miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful prosecution. 
 
6.2 A person wrongfully prosecuted though acquitted and 
released from jail is free to go back to his life; but is it actually 
possible for him to go back to the same life – the life he had before 
he were subjected to the ordeal of wrongful prosecution . For a 
person who has been accused of a crime, who underwent criminal 
proceedings (often long drawn) , whose name and reputation has 
been affected for being accused and/or convicted of a crime he did 
not commit, who has spent time in prison for a crime he did not 
commit, there still lies an uphill battle even after acquittal.137 
 
6.3 There needs to be recompense for the years lost, for the 
social stigma, the mental, emotional and physical harassment, and 
for the expenses incurred  etc. There needs to be compensatory 
assistance by the State to help the innocent victims of miscarriage 
                                                 
137 “For the prisoner himself, imprisonment for the purposes of trial is as ignoble as 
imprisonment on conviction for an offence since the damning finger and opprobrious 
eyes of society draw no differe nce between the two…. ”, the Supreme Court in Thana 
Singh v. Central Bureau Of Narcotics (supra). 

 81 
of justice , who have suffered through wrongful prosecution , to 
rehabilitate and to adjust to the life-after, and to reintegrate into 
society.  
 
6.4 Article 14(6) of the ICCPR read with the General Comment 
32 of the United Nations Human Rights Committee (supra), dealing 
with miscarriage of justice , requires that the victims of proven 
cases of such miscarriage to be compensated „according to law‟. 
These provisions collectively create an obligation on the state 
parties to it to enact a legislation ensuring that the said victims are 
compensated, and such compensation is made within a 
„reasonable period of time‟. As noted earlier, many countries 
including the U nited Kingdom, the United States, and Germany 
have converted this commitment into law, where the State has 
assumed statutory responsibility for compensating the victims of 
such miscarriage of justice.  India ratified ICCPR in the year 1968 
(with certain reservations) but is yet to comply with its obligations 
and enact a legislation laying down the law for compensation of the 
victims of this miscarriage of justice.  
  
6.5 One of the reservations made by India, while ratifying ICCPR, 
was that the Indian legal system doe s not recognize the right to 
compensation for victims of unlawful arrest and detention. 138 
However, subsequently by virtue of judicial decisions, 
compensation was recognised as a remedy for redressal of 
miscarriage of justice  resulting in violation of right to life and 
personal liberty including wrongful prosecution ; albeit under 
                                                 
138 See: “1st Peoples’ Tribunal on Innocent Acquitted, Report of the Jury, Towards a 
Framework for Compensation & Rehabilitation for Victims of Wrongful 
Prosecution/ Conviction”. Innocence Network India (October 2016). Available at: 
http://jtsa.in/document/Innocence%20Network%27s%201st%20People%27s%20Tri
bunal%20-%20Jury%20Report.pdf) (Last Accessed on 25 July 2018). 

 82 
public law as a claim of constitutional tort against the State , to be 
filed in the Constitutional Courts  i.e. the Supreme Court  and the 
High Courts.  
 
6.6 From the landmark case s of Rudal Sah  (supra), Nilabati 
Behera (supra), D. K. Basu  (supra) to the 2016 case of Dr. Rini 
Johar (supra), the  Supreme C ourt has  recognised the remedy of 
recovering appropriate damages from the State as one of the telling 
ways in which the violation of fundamental rights can be prevented 
“…to mulct its violations in payment of monetary 
compensation”139. Holding monetary compensation for the 
suffering and humiliation as “a redeeming feature” 140; “… an 
appropriate and indeed an effective and sometimes perhaps t he 
only suitable remedy for redressal of the established 
infringement….to apply balm to the wounds of the family members 
of deceased victim who may have been the breadwinner of the 
family.”141. This view has also been echoed by various High Courts  
over the y ears, as was also observed in the Order dated 6 July 
2018 of a Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in the 
case of Durga @ Raja  v. State of Madhya Pradesh 142 and Nandu @ 
Nandkishore v. State of Madhya Pradesh ,143 where the Court held 
that appellants  who are innocent and have suffered because of 
poor investigation and tainted prosecution, deserve compensation 
from the State.  
                                                 
139 Rudal Sah (supra). 
140 Dr. Rini Johar (supra). 
141 D. K. Basu  (supra); See also: „ 1st Peoples’ Tribunal on Innocent Acquitted, 
Report of the Jury, Towards a Framework for Compensation & Re habilitation for 
Victims of Wrongful Prosecution/ Conviction ‟, Innocence Network India (October 
2016); Available at: 
http://jtsa.in/document/Innocence%20Network%27s%201st%20People%27s%20Tri
bunal%20-%20Jury%20Report.pdf). Last Accessed on 25 July 2018. 
142 Criminal Appeal No. 812 of 2008. 
143 Criminal Appeal No. 866 of 2008. 

 83 
 
6.7 Despite the above, under the current set of remedies , claim 
and grant of compensation for the said miscarriage of justice still 
remains complex and uncertain. Under public law (as discussed 
earlier, in Chapter IV – „Current Scenario – Overview and 
Inadequacies‟), a violation of fundamental rights due to police and 
prosecutorial misconduct can invoke State liability (as noted in the 
case laws discussed); but the amount and payment of 
compensation remains arbitrary  and lacks transparency. In other 
words, despite decades of jurisprudence on compensation  under 
public law, there is no set legislative principle regarding the basis 
for determining the award of compensation or its amount thereof.  
 
6.8 It needs to be noted that Article 21 protects „life and personal 
liberty‟, and by virtue of judicial pronouncements, deprivation of 
the „life and personal liberty ‟ invokes the aforesaid public law 
remedy of compensation, but there is no explicit provision in the 
Constitution of India for grant of compensation by the State for the 
infringement of right to life and personal liberty  (as noted earlier in 
the Report). In this manner, t he currently available remedies only 
create an ex gratia obligation, and not a statutory obligation on the 
State to compensate . A natural corollary of which is that while 
there is judicial precedent enabling a victim of the said miscarriage 
of justice to approach  the Supreme Court and the High Courts 
under their respective writ jurisdiction for relief, there is still no 
statutory right of compensation for such victim/claimant.  
 
6.9 The criminal justice system, as it stands, does not provide 
for an effective response from the State to the victims of 
miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful prosecutions . As things 
stand, there is no statutory or legal scheme articulating the State‟s 

 84 
response to this issue. Moreover, given the endemic and sensitive 
nature of the issue, and the glaring inadequacies of the available 
remedies, there is a pressing need  for an explicit law for 
compensating the victims who have suffered miscarriage of justice 
at the hands of the State machinery – laying down State‟s statutory 
obligation to recompense the se victims of wrongful prosecution , 
and a dedicated judicial mechanism to give effect to the same.  
 
B. Recommendations 
 
6.10 The Commission at this time, accordingly, recommends 
enactment of specific legal provision for redressal of cases of 
miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful prosecution  - covering 
both the substantive and procedural aspects ; i.e. a statutory and 
legal framework establishing the mechanism for adjudicating upon 
the claims of wrongful prosecution, and inter alia award payment 
of compensation by the State , if so determined. Consequently, 
creating a statutory obligation on the State to compensate the 
victims of wrongful prosecution, and a corresponding statutory 
right of compensation for the  said victims. And, in such cases 
where the State pays compensation for the errant acts of its 
officials, it can seek indemnification from the concerned officials, 
and also initiate appropriate proceedings against them  in 
accordance with law. 
 
6.11 The need for a legisla tive framework for redressal of harms 
inflicted by wrongful prosecution arises on many counts. One of 
the most important being that the injustice caused to the 
innocents needs to be redressed with in the framework of rights 
and not ex gratia by the State. The other being that there needs to  
be an established legislative process according a transparent , 

 85 
uniform, efficacious, affordable and timely remedy for the loss and 
harms inflicted on the victims on account of wrongful prosecution. 
In view of the foregoi ng, the core principle s underlining th e 
recommended legal framework would be as follows: 
 
(i) Special Court: One of the most important considerations in 
creating this remedy framework is that the claims need to be 
decided as speedily and swiftly as possible. The element of 
speed and time efficiency particularly gains importance 
because the claim itself arises from unjustified prosecution 
(often prolonged) , which the wrongfully accused and his  
family should not have been put through in the first place.  
Any process of relief so designed , therefore, needs to be 
speedy, expedient, and be made keeping in mind the interest 
of the claimant; and  the most crucial aspect of this is the 
forum at which these claims are adjudicated.   
  
Accordingly, the Commission recommends designation of 
special courts in each district for adjudicating upon the 
claims of compensation for wrongful prosecution. The choice 
jurisdiction should be made by the applicant , as follows:  (i) 
either the Special Court having jurisdi ction over the area in 
which the wrongful prosecution occurred; or (ii) the Special 
Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
applicant resides. 
 
(ii) Cause of Action : Within th is legal framework , the cause of 
action for filing a claim for compensation would be that of 
„wrongful prosecution ‟, which ended with an order o r 
judgment in favor of the accused , inter alia  acquitting him. 
The ambit of „wrongful prosecution‟ herein would include (i) 

 86 
malicious prosecutions; and (ii) prosecutions instituted 
without good faith.  
 
Malicious prosecution , as included herein, means malicious 
institution by one against another of unsuccessful 
proceedings without reasonable or probable cause. Where the 
expression „reasonable and probable  cause‟ is the honest 
belief in the guilt of the accused based upon a full conviction, 
founded upon existence of circumstances, which would 
reasonably lead any ordinary , prudent and cautious man to 
the conclusion that the person charged was probably guilty of 
the crime imputed144; the question being whether there was a 
case fit to be tried. The foundation of this cause of action lies 
in the abuse of legal process by wrongfully setting the law in 
motion, and it is designed to discourage the perversion of the 
machinery of justice for an improper cause.145 
 
A prosecution instituted without „good faith‟  would also be 
included within the purview of wrongful prosecution , giving 
rise to a claim for compensation hereunder . Section 52, IPC , 
laying down an exclusionary definition of the term „good 
faith‟, says that no act is done in good faith if it is done 
without “due care and attention” 146; where „due care‟ denotes 
the degree of reasonableness in the care sought to be 
exercised147 - when holding an office or duty requiring skill or 
                                                 
144 R. P. Kapoor v. Pratap Singh Kairon, AIR 1966 All 66. 
145 Mohammad Amin v. Jogendra Kumar, AIR 1947 PC 106. 
146 “Nothing is said to be done or believed in 'good faith' which is done or believed 
without due care and attention.”: Section 52, IPC.  
147 S.K. Sundaram, AIR 2001 SC 2374; Black's Law Dictionary explains „reasonable 
care‟ as "such a degree of care, precaution, or diligence as may fairly and properly 
be expected or required, having regard to the nature of the action, or of the subject 
matter and the circumstances surrounding the transaction. It is such care as an 

 87 
care, merely good intention is not enough but such care and 
skill as the duty reasonably demanded for its due discharge. 
Absence of „good faith‟ can , therefore, be understood to mean 
negligence or carelessness ;148 i.e. a prosecution instituted 
negligently without due care and attention would be included 
within the definition of wrongful prosecution under this legal 
framework. 
 
(iii) Who can apply : A claim for compensation hereunder would 
be for the harm or damage caused to any accused person in 
body, mind, reputation or property as a result of the 
wrongful prosecution  – i.e. for the „injury‟ resulting from 
wrongful prosecution . The claim for compensation can be 
brought by the accused person so injured; or by any agent 
duly authorized by the said accuse d person; or where the 
accused person died after the termination of the wrongful 
prosecution, by all or any of the heirs or legal 
representatives of the deceased.  
 
(iv) Nature of Proceedings : Keeping in mind the objective of 
efficiency in terms of time and process, it is recommended 
that the Special Court  for the purpose of inquiry and 
adjudication herein, follow summary procedures as may be 
prescribed. The standard of proof in these proceedings on 
probabilistic threshold will be that of „balance of 
                                                                                                                                     
ordinary prudent person would exercise under the conditions existing at the time he 
is called upon to act." (Black's Law Dictionary (8th ed. 2004). 
148 Bux Soo Meah Chowdry, AIR 1938 Rang 350; see also: Harbhajan Singh v. State 
of Punjab & Anr., AIR 1966 SC 97. 

 88 
probabilities‟149; with the burden on the claimant (accused) 
to prove misconduct which lead to wrongful prosecution , 
and/or the misconduct during the prosecution which made 
it wrongful . The standard is the supposition of a prudent 
man faced with connecting probabili ties or improbabilities 
concerning a fact -situation, after weighing the various 
probabilities and improbabilities, and arriving at the 
preponderance150 - i.e.  whether a reasonable man could 
have come to the same conclusion.151 
   
Additionally, the framework will also include prescribed 
timelines for the disposal of the application, for payment of 
compensation; period of limitation for filing the claim for 
compensation, and for filing an appeal against the order of 
the Special Court.  
 
Upon receiving an application for claim of compensation, 
the Special Court , after giving notice to the contesting 
parties (including the Central/State Government, as the 
case may be) , and giving them an opportunity of being 
heard, inquire into the claim , and may make an award 
determining the compensation to be paid by the 
Central/State Government . The Special Court may also 
direct the concerned authorities to initiate proceedings 
against the erring official(s) in accordance with law. 
 
                                                 
149 See: Mahesh Dattatray Thirthakar v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 2238; 
State of Rajasthan v. Netrapal, (2007) 4 SCC 45; and Sarjudas v. State of Gujarat, 
AIR 2000 SC 403. 
150 Gulabchand v. Kudilal, AIR 1966 SC 1734. See also: Dr. N. G. Dastane v. Mrs. 
S. Dastane, AIR 1975 SC 1534. 
151 See: U.P. State Road Transport Corporation v. State of U.P., 2000 All LJ 1461. 

 89 
(v) Compensation: The essence of a statutory response to the 
victims of wrongful prosecution lies in the relief provided to 
them, for that underlines the basic intent and objective of 
this law i.e. to assist the wrongfully accused/convicted in 
reintegrating into society or their lives for that matter . 
Accordingly, this statutory framework in addition to 
establishing the State‟s liability to pay compensation in the 
proven cases of wrongful prosecution , will also elaborate on 
the relief i.e. compensation to be paid in such cases. While 
at this point, it does not appear feasible for the law to  lay 
down a fixed amount of monetary compensation to be paid, 
the law will include the guiding principles/factors that a 
Special Court will be required to consider while determining 
the compensation including the amount of monetary 
compensation. There also needs to be a provision providing 
for interim compensation in certain specified category of 
cases, if applied for, for immediate assistance; to be paid 
pending the adjudication of the claim. 
 
Compensation under this framework will include both 
pecuniary and non -pecuniary assistance to effectuate the 
rehabilitation of these victims of wrongful prosecution  into 
society. While pecuniary assistance will be in terms of 
monetary award as may be determined by the Special 
Court; n on-pecuniary assistance will be awarded in the 
form of services such as counselling, mental health services, 
vocational/employment skills development , and such other 
similar services. 
 
Non-pecuniary assistance shall also include a specific 
provision for removing disqualifications attached to a 

 90 
prosecution or conviction  – particularly affecting wrongfully 
accused person‟s chances of finding employment in public 
and private sectors; getting admission in an educational 
institution etc. The foregoing is of utmost importance 
because of the social stigma and other such disadvantages 
attached to a prosecution and conviction  (notwithstanding 
that it was wrongful in the first place) . In a criminal case , 
acquittal by a trial co urt or by the appellate court recording 
a finding that the accused had been wrongly implicated in a 
case must take away the stigma because the charges 
themselves stand washed off , i.e. in cases of honourable 
acquittals152. An order of acquittal operates retr ospectively, 
and when given by the appellate court it also wipes out the 
sentence awarded by the lower court .153 To give practical 
effect to the foregoing, it is imperative to include a specific 
provision removing the aforesaid disqualifications. Such a 
provision, backed by statutory force, would go a long way in 
assisting the accused person to reintegrate into society. 
 
The factors to be taken into consideration while determining 
the amount of compensation  can be broadly categorised as 
„financial‟ and „other factors‟ including inter alia seriousness 
of the offence, severity of the punishme nt, the length of 
incarceration, loss or damage to health , psychological and 
                                                 
152 “When the accused is acquitted after full consideration of prosecution evidence and 
that the prosecution had miserably failed to prove the char ges levelled against the 
accused, it can possibly be said that the accused was honourably acquitted. ”: 
Management of Reserve Bank of India  v. Bhopal Singh Panchal, (1994) 1 SCC 541. See 
also: Baljinder Pal Kaur  v. State of Punjab , (2016) 1 SCC 671; Deputy Inspector 
General of Police and Anr.  v. S. Samuthiram, (2013) 1 SCC 598; and Commissioner of 
Police New Delhi v. Mehar Singh, (2013) 7 SCC 685.    
153 B.R. Kapur v. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors. , AIR 2001 SC 3435; and Vidya Charan 
Shukla v. Purshottam Lal Kaushik, AIR 1981 SC 547. 

 91 
emotional harm; status of the victim in the society, harm to 
reputation, loss of opportunities (of education, l ivelihood), 
loss of income/earnings, loss or damage to property.  
 
6.12 The principles discussed in the Report are articulated in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2018, attached 
herewith as „Annexure‟. 
 
The Commission recommends accordingly. 
 
 
  


 92 
Annexure  
 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
2018 
 
A   
 
BILL   
 
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.     
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic 
of India as follows: 
 
1.  Short title and commencement . (1) This Act may be 
called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2018. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 
2. Amendment of Section 2. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) (hereinafter referred to as the Code of Criminal 
Procedure), in section 2  
 
(ii) after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: 
  
„(ja) “ malicious prosecution ” means instituting the prosecution 
complained of  without any existing reasonable or probable 
cause;‟  
 

 93 
(iii) after clause ( x), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely: 
„(xa) “wrongful prosecution ” means malicious prosecution or 
prosecution instituted without good faith, which concluded in 
favour of the accused , and includes any of the following, 
namely:   
(i) making or fabricating a false  or incorrect record or 
document for submission; 
(ii) making a false  declaration or statement before an 
officer authorised by law to receive as evidence when 
legally bound to state the truth that is to say  by an 
oath or by a provision of law; 
(iii) otherwise giving false evidence when legally bound to 
state the truth that is to say by an oath or by a 
provision of law; 
(iv) fabricating false evidence for submission; 
(v) suppression or destruction of an evidence to prevent 
its production; 
(vi) bringing a false charge, or instituting or cause to be 
instituted false proceedings against a person; 
(vii) committing a person to confinement or trial acting 
contrary to law;  
(viii) acting in violation of any law in any other manner not 
specifically covered under (i) to (vii) above;‟ 
 
3. Insertion of new  Chapter XXVIIA. In the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, after Chapter XXVII , the following chapter shall be 
inserted, namely:   
 
 

 94 
„CHAPTER XXVIIA 
Compensation to persons wrongfully prosecuted 
 
Section 365A Application for compensation.   
(1) An application seeking compensation for a wrongful 
prosecution may be made 
(a) by the accused person, who has sustained the injury; 
or   
(b) by any agent duly authorised by the accused person, 
who has sustained the injury; or 
(c) where the accused person died either before or after the 
termination of the wrongful prosecution, by all or any 
of the heirs or the legal representatives of the deceased:   
Provided that where all the heirs or  the legal 
representatives of the deceased have not joined in any 
such application for compensation, the application shall  
be deemed to have been made on behalf of and for the 
benefit of all the heirs and the legal representatives of the 
deceased.  
Explanation 1. In this section and section 365B , “injury” 
means any harm caused to any accused, of body, mind, 
reputation or property, actual or as a probable result of 
the wrongful prosecution. 
Explanation 2. In this section and sections 365B , 365C, 
365D, 365E, 365F and 365I,  “compensation” includes 
pecuniary or non -pecuniary compensation, or both ; 
whereas the non-pecuniary compensation includes 
counseling services, mental health services, vocational or 
employment skills development, and such other services  

 95 
or assistance that the accused may require to facilitate 
reintegration into society. 
(2) Every application under sub -section (1) shall be filed, at 
the option of the applicant, either in the Special Court 
having jurisdiction over the area in which the wrongful 
prosecution occurred or to the Special Court within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction the applicant resides, in 
such form contain ing such particulars as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) In case of longer incarceration exceeding six months, the 
Special Court may, after providing an opportunity of 
hearing to the applicant and the other parties, award 
interim compensation to the applicant, if so claimed, to 
facilitate his immediate rehabilitation, such compensation 
which shall not exceed fifty thousand rupees, but in any 
case shall not be less than twenty five thousand rupees.   
 (4)Every application for such compensation under sub -
section (1) shall be preferred with in a period of two years 
from the date when acquittal attains finality: 
Provided that the Special Court may entertain the 
application after the expiry of the said period of two years 
but not later than three years , if it is satisfied  that the 
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making 
the application in time. 
 
Section 365B Option regarding claims for compensation 
in certain cases.  
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, where an injury gives rise to a claim for 
compensation under this Chapter, or through an y other  

 96 
remedy, the person entitled to compensation may claim such 
compensation under any one of these remedies to the 
exclusion of other remedies.  
 
Section 365C Award of the Special Court.  
(1) On receipt of an application for compensation made under 
section 365A, the Special Court shall, after giving notice of 
the application to the Central Government or as the case 
may be the concerned State Government, and after giving an 
opportunity of being heard to all the parties, hold an inquiry 
into the claim or, as the case may be, into each of the claims 
and, may make an award determining the just and 
reasonable compensation, specifying the person or persons 
to whom it shall be paid , and shall also specify the amount 
which shall be paid by the Central or the State Government  
concerned, as the case may be , and may also direct the 
Central or the State Government concerned to proceed 
against the erring official in accordance with law. 
(2) The Special Court shall arrange to deliver copies of the 
award to the parties concer ned, free of cost, within fifteen 
days from the date of the award.  
(3) The application made under section 365A shall be dispose d 
of within a period of one year from the date of receipt of the 
application. 
Provided that in case the application is disposed of within 
the said period, the Court shall record the reasons in writing 
for not disposing of the application within the specified 
period. 

 97 
(4) An application for interim compensation shall be disposed 
of within a period of ninety days from the date of service of 
notice to the respondent(s).  
(5) On an award being made under this section, the person (s) 
who is liable to pay any amou nt in terms of such award 
shall, deposit the entire amount within a period of thirty 
days from the date of making the award in such manner as 
may be prescribed in the rules. 
 
 
Section 356 D Award of interest where any claim is 
allowed.  
Where a Special Court allows a claim for compensation made 
under this Code, it may direct that in addition to the amount of 
compensation interest shall also be paid at the rate of six per 
cent per annum and from such date not earlier than the date of 
making the claim as it may specify in the award. 
 
Section 365 E Factors to be taken into account by the 
Special Court.  
While adjudicating the quantum of compensation or interest  
under section 36 5C or 365D, as the case may be, the Special 
Court shall take into consideration the following financial and 
other factors, namely: 
(i) seriousness of the offence ; severity of the punishment ; 
the length of incarceration; 
(ii) loss or damage to health; 
(iii) loss of income or earnings; 
(iv) loss or damage to property;  

 98 
(v) legal fees  and other consequential expenses resulting 
from the wrongful prosecution; 
(vi) loss of family life; 
(vii) loss of opportunities (of education, of possibilities of 
livelihood, future earning abilities, skills); 
(viii) stigmatization that is  harm to reputation or similar 
damage;  
(ix) psychological and emotional harm caused to accused 
and his family; 
(x) such other factors which the Special Court considers 
necessary as regards the claim in furtherance of 
justice. 
 
Section 365 F Removal of disqualification attaching to 
conviction.  
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law  for the 
time being in force , a person who is awarded compensation for 
wrongful prosecution under section 365C shall not suffer any 
disqualification on account of such prosecution or conviction. 
 
Section 365G Procedure and powers of Special Court.  
(1) For holding an  inquiry under section 365 C, the Special 
Court may, subject to any rules that may be made in this 
behalf, follow such summary procedures as it thinks fit.  
(2) The Special Court , while adjudicating a claim under this 
Chapter, shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in 
respect of the following matters, namely: 
(i) the summo ning and enforcing the attendance of any 
party or witness and examining the witness on oath; 

 99 
(ii) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 
(iii) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(iv) the requisit ioning of the report of the concerned 
analysis or test from the appropriate laboratory or  from 
any other relevant source; 
(v) issuing of any commission for the examination of any 
witness;  
(vi) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(3) Subject to the p rovisions of this Chapter, a Special Court 
shall, for the purpose of the adjudication of a claim  under 
this Chapter, have all the powers of a Civil Court for the 
purpose of taking evidence on oath and of enforcing the 
attendance of witnesses and of compelling the discovery and 
production of documents and material objects and for such 
other purposes as may be prescribed and shall adjudicate 
upon such a claim as if it were a Civil Court. 
 
Section 365H Appeals.  
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (2), any person 
aggrieved by an award of a Special Court may, within a 
period of ninety days from the date of the award, prefer an 
appeal to the High Court.  
(2) No appeal by the person, who is required to pay any amount 
in terms of such award , shall be entertained by the High 
Court, unless he has deposited with it twenty -five thousand 
rupees or fifty per cent of the amount so awarded, whichever 
is higher, in the manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of 
the said period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the 

 100 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring 
the appeal in time.  
(4) No appeal shall lie against an award of a Special Court if the 
amount awarded is less than fifty thousand rupees. 
 
Section 365I Power of State Government to make rules.  
(1) The State Government may , by notification,  make rules for 
the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:  
(a) the form of making application for claims for 
compensation and the particulars it may contain, to be 
paid in res pect of such applications  under sub -section 
(2) of 365A;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by a Special Court in 
holding an inquiry under  sub-section (1) and the powers 
vested in a Civil Court which may be exercised by a 
Special Court under sub-section (2)(vi) of section 365G;  
(c) the form and the manner of the payment of amount for 
preferring an appeal against an award of a Special Court 
under sub-section (2) of section 365H; 
(d) any other matter which is considered necessary.‟. 
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this section 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made , before the 
State Legislature. 
******** 
 
 
  

 101 
List of Cases 
 
 
1. Abrar v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 2011 SC 354 
2. Adambhai Sulemenbhai Ajmeri & Ors. v. State of Gujarat, (2014) 7 
SCC 716 
3. Afzalur Rahman & Ors. v. Emperor, AIR 1943 FC 18. 
4. Ahmed Kutty (1963) 1 Cri LJ 597 (ker.) 
5. Ajab Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2000) 3 SCC 521 
6. Allarakha K Mansuri v. State of Gujarat, AIR 2002 SC 1051  
7. Amar Pal Singh v. State of UP, AIR 2012 SC 1995. 
8. Amarsingh Jetha, (1885) 10 Bom 506 
9. Amrik Singh v. State of PEPSU, AIR 1955 SC 309 
10. Anwar v. State of J & K, (1977) 3 SCC 367. 
11. Ashfaq Ahmed, 1981 All LJ 871 
12. Ashiq Mahomed v. Emperor, AIR 1936 Lah 330 
13. Ashok Sharma v. Union of India, 2009 ACJ 1063 
14. Ayodhya Dube & Ors. v. Ram Sumar Singh, AIR 1981 SC 1415. 
15. B. C. Oraon  v. State of Bihar, cited in M. P. Jain, Indian 
Constitutional Law  Volume 1  (LexisNexis, Gurgaon, India 
Updated 6th Edition, 2013) 1618. 
16. B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India, AIR 1996 SC 484  
17. B.R. Kapur v. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors., AIR 2001 SC 3435 
18. Babloo Chauhan @ Dabloo v. State Government of NCT of Delhi, 247 
(2018) DLT 31. 
19. Badri Prasad Sharma v. Shanti Prasad Sharma, 1982 A Cr R 9 
20. Baijnath v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1996 SC 220 
21. Balbir Singh v. D.N. Kadian, AIR 1986 SC 345 
22. Baljinder Pal Kaur v. State of Punjab, (2016) 1 SCC 671 
23. Bangalore City Cooperative Housing Society Ltd.  v. State of 
Karnataka & Ors., AIR 2012 SC 1395. 
24. Beharry Singh, (1867) 7 WR (Cr) 3. 
25. Bharatbhai Chandubhai Gadhia  v. State of Gujarat, High Court  of 
Gujarat, Order dated 19 March 2014 in R/SCR.A/951/2014 
26. Bhim Singh, MLA v. State of J & K & Ors. (1985) 4 SCC 677. 
27. Bhimanna v. State of Karnataka, AIR 2012 SC 3026 
28. Bibhabati Devi v. Ramendra Narayan Roy, AIR 1947 PC 19. 
29. Boaler, (1914) 1 KB 122. 
30. Brajobashi Panda (1908) 13 CWN 398. 
31. Brooks v. Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis & Ors., [2005] 
UKHL 24 
32. Bux Soo Meah Chowdry, AIR 1938 Rang 350 
33. CBI v. Om Prakash Aggarwal & Ors., CC No. 39/2016 (Unique Case 
ID No.: DLST010000112003) in the Court of Savita Rao, Spl. Judge, 
(PC Act) CBI01, (South) Saket Courts: New Delhi 
34. Chairman, Railway Board & Ors. v. Chandrima Das,  AIR 2000 SC 
988 
35. Chidda (1871) 3 N.W.P. 327. 

 102 
36. Commissioner of Police New Delhi v. Mehar Singh, (2013) 7 SCC 685.    
37. Common Cause, A Regd. Society  v. Union of India , AIR 1999 SC 
2979 
38. Consumer Education and Research Center & Ors. v. Union of India, 
AIR 1995 SC 922  
39. D. K. Basu v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1997 SC 610 
40. Dalbir Singh v. State of U.P., AIR 2009 SC 1674. 
41. Darbara Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 2013 SC 840. 
42. Darshan Singh, 1985 CrLJ NOC 71 (P&H). 
43. Dasrathi Mandal v. Hari Das, AIR 1959 Cal 293. 
44. Dattajirao Bhausaheb Patil  v. The State of Maharashtra , (1971) 3 
SCC 410 
45. Dayal Singh & Ors. v. State of Uttaranchal, AIR 2012 SC 3046 
46. Deputy Inspector General of Police & Anr.  v. S. Samuthiram, (2013) 1 
SCC 598 
47. Devki Nandan v. State of Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 1134  
48. Dhaman Joy Sharma v. State of Haryana, AIR 1995 SC 1795 
49. Dhannjay Ram Sharma v. M.S. Uppadaya & Ors., AIR 1960 SC 745 
50. Dr. N. G. Dastane v. Mrs. S. Dastane, AIR 1975 SC 1534. 
51. Dr. Rini Johar & Anr. v. State Of M. P. & Ors. , Criminal Writ Petition 
No. 30 of 2015, decided on 3 June 2016. 
52. Durga @ Raja  v. State of Madhya Pradesh, Criminal Appeal No. 812 
of 2008. 
53. Geeta v. Lt. Governor, 75 (1998) DLT 822 
54. Gopal Ramdas Sheyte v. State of Maharashtra, Criminal Writ Petition 
No. 3960 of 2015, decided on 5 May 2017. 
55. Gulabchand v. Kudilal, AIR 1966 SC 1734 
56. H. H. B. Gill v. The King, AIR 1948 PC 128 
57. Harbhajan Singh v. State of Punjab & Anr., AIR 1966 SC 97. 
58. Hari Das v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1964 SC 1173 
59. Hill v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire, [1987] UKHL 12. 
60. Hill v. Hamilton-Wentworth Regional Police Services Board,  [2007] 
SCC 41. 
61. Hussainara Khatoon & Ors. v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar, Patna, 
AIR 1979 SC 1369 
62. In the Matter of: K, a Judicial Officer, (2001) 3 SCC 54 
63. Inder Singh v. State of Punjab, (1995) 3 SCC 702 
64. Irving v. Australia, para. 8.4; No. 868/1999 
65. Jagdeo & Ors.  v. The State of Maharshtra & Ors. , 2017 (2) BomCR 
(Cri) 832. 
66. Jamoona (1881) 6 Cal 620. 
67. Janata Dal v. H. S. Chowdhary & Ors. AIR 1993 SC 892 
68. Jaysingh Wadhu Singh  v. State of Maharashtra,  2001 CrLJ 456 
(Bom).  
69. Jitendra (in jail) v. State of U.P., 2000 Cri LJ 3087 (All). 
70. Joginder Kaur v. State of Punjab, (1969) 71 PLR 85. 
71. K. Chinnaswamy Reddy  v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1962 SC 
1788. 

 103 
72. Kamla Devi v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi, 114 (2004) DLT 57 
73. Kapoor R. P.  v. Pratap Singh Kairon, AIR 1966 All 66.   
74. Karan Singh v. State of Haryana & Anr., AIR 2013 SC 2348. 
75. Kasturi Lal Ralia Ram Jain v. State of U.P, AIR 1966 SC 1039 
76. Khatri & Ors. v. State of Bihar & Ors., AIR 1981 SC 928 
77. Kodali Puranchandra Rao v. Public Prosecutor , A.P., AIR 1975 SC 
1925 
78. Krishna Govind Patil v. The State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 138 
79. Mahesh Dattatray Thirthakar  v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 
SC 2238 
80. Malkiat Singh v. State of U.P., (1998) 9 SCC 351 
81. Mallappa v. Veerabasappa & Ors., 1977 CriLJ 1856 (Kant.) 
82. Management of Reserve Bank of India  v. Bhopal Singh Panchal , 
(1994) 1 SCC 541 
83. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597 
84. Mansharam Gianchand and Anr. v. Emperor, AIR 1941 Sind 36 
85. Maryland v. King, 133 S. Ct. 1958 (2013) 
86. Matajog Dubey v. H.C Bhari, AIR 1956 SC 44 
87. Maulad Ahmed v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (1963) Supp 2 SCR 38 
88. Mirza Hassan Mirza  v. Mussammat Mahbuban  (1913) 18 CWN 
391 
89. Mohammad Amin v. Jogendra Kumar, AIR 1947 PC 106. 
90. Mohd. Aamir Khan v. State, 138 (2007) DLT 759 
91. Mohd. Jalees Ansari & Ors. v. Central Bureau of Investigation. AIR 
2016 SC 2461. 
92. Mrs. Sudha Rasheed v. Union of India, 1995 (1) SCALE 77 
93. Munshi Singh Gautam v. State of MP (2005) 9 SCC 631. 
94. Murad (1893) PR No. 29 of 1894 
95. Nabodeep Chinder Sirkar, (1869) 11 WR (Cr) 2. 
96. Nageshwar Sh. Krishna Ghobe v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 
165 
97. Nagraj v. State of Mysore, AIR 1964 SC 269 
98. Nandu @ Nandkishore  v. State of Madhya Pradesh , Criminal Appeal 
No. 866 of 2008. 
99. Nanhkoo Mahton v. Emperor, AIR 1936 Pat 358. 
100. Narapareddi Seshareddi (in re:), (1938) 39 Cr LJ 875 
101. Narayan Babaji (1872) 9 BHC 346 
102. Nasiruddin v. State, 2001 CriLJ 4925 
103. National Human Rights Commission  v. State of Arunachal 
Pradesh, AIR 1996 SC 1234.  
104. Neema Goyal v. Union of India, 2011 (125) DRJ 273 
105. Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa. AIR 1993 SC 1960 
106. P.P. Unnikrishnan v. Puttiyottil Alikutty, AIR 2000 SC 2952 
107. Pasupuleti Ramdoss v. Emperor, 1911 MWN 64. 
108. People's Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India & Ors., AIR 1997 
SC 1203 
109. Peoples' Union for Democratic Rights through its Secretary & Anr. 
v. Delhi Police Headquarters & Anr., (1989) 4 SCC 730 

 104 
110. Phoolwati v. National Capital Territory of Delhi, 84 (2000) DLT 177 
111. Prakash Singh Badal v. State of Punjab, AIR 2007 SC 1274 
112. Prempal & Ors. v. The Commissioner of Police & Ors, (2010) ILR 4 
Delhi 416 
113. R (on the application of Adams) v. Secretary of State for Justice, 
[2011] UKSC 18. 
114. R. P. Kapoor v. Pratap Singh Kairon, AIR 1966 All 66. 
115. Raghuvansh Dewanchand Bhasin  v. State of Maharashtra and Anr. , 
AIR 2011 SC 3393 
116. Rajib Ranjan & Ors. v.  R. Vijaykumar, (2015) 1 SCC 513 
117. Ram Lakhan Singh  v. State Government of Uttar Prad esh, (2015) 16 
SCC 715 
118. Ram Narain, 1980 Cri LJn (NOC) 55 All. 
119. Ramanuj Pandey v. The State of M.P. & Ors., (2009) 7 SCC 248 
120. Ramesh Harijan v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 2012 SC 979 
121. Ranjit Singh v. State of Pepsu, AIR 1959 SC 843 
122. Rattiram v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 2012 SC 1485 
123. Rhedoy Nath Biswas, (1865) 2 WR (Cr) 44. 
124. Robinson v. Chief Constable of the West Yorkshire Police,  [2018] 
UK SC 4. 
125. Roop Lal Abrol v. Union of India and Ors., AIR 1972 J&K 22 
126. Rudal Sah v. State of Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 1086  
127. Rukia Begum v. State of Karnataka, AIR 2011 SC 1585 
128. S.B. Saha v. M.S. Kochar, AIR 1979 SC 1841 
129. S.K. Sundaram, AIR 2001 SC 2374 
130. S.S. Khandwala (I.P.S.) Addl. D.G.P. & Ors  v. State of Gujarat,  
(2003) 1 GLR 802 
131. SAHELI, A Women's Resources center & Ors.  v. Commissioner of 
Police Delhi & Ors., AIR 1990 SC 513. 
132. Santosh Singh v. Izhar Hussan, AIR 1973 SC 2190 
133. Sarjudas v. State of Gujarat, AIR 2000 SC 403 
134. Sebastian M. Hongray v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1026. 
135. Shambhoo Nath Misra v. State of U.P. & Ors., (1997) 5 SCC 326. 
136. Shamnsaheb M. Multtani v. State of Karnataka, AIR 2001 SC 921 
137. Sita Ram Chandu Lall v. Malikar Singh, AIR 1956 Pep 30 
138. Smt. Priya Dubey  v. The State of Jharkhand , High Court of 
Jharkhand Order dated 13 November 2013 in Cr. M.P. No. 1146 of 
2010. 
139. Sohan Lal v. State of Punjab, High Court of Punjab & Haryana Order 
dated 24 March 2011 in Crl. Revision No. 31 of 2011. 
140. Srinivas Ram Kumar v. Mahabir Prasad & Ors., AIR 1951 SC 177 
141. State of Andhra Pradesh v. Challa Ramkrishna Reddy, (2000) 5 SCC 
712. 
142. State of Bihar v. Rameshwar Prasad Baidya & Anr. AIR 1980 Pat 267 
143. State of M.P. v. Babulal Ramratan & Ors., AIR 1958 MP 55 
144. State of Madhya Pradesh v. Chironji Lal, AIR 1981 MP 65 
145. State of Madhya Pradesh v. Dal Singh & Ors., AIR 2013 SC 2059. 
146. State of Madhya Pradesh v. Premabai and Ors., AIR 1979 MP 85. 

 105 
147. State of Madhya Pradesh  v. Saheb Dattamal & Ors. , AIR 1967 MP 
246 
148. State of Maharashtra v. Ravi Kant Patil, AIR 1991 SC 871 
149. State of Orissa v. Duleshwar Barik, 2017 (I) OLR 824 
150. State of Orissa v. Padmalochan Panda, AIR 1975 Ori 41 
151. State Of Punjab v. Madan Mohan Lal Verma, AIR 2013 SC 3368 
152. State of Rajasthan v. Netrapal, (2007) 4 SCC 45 
153. State of Rajasthan v. Shera Ram, AIR 2012 SC 1 
154. State of Rajasthan v. Vidyawati Mst., AIR 1962 SC 933. 
155. State of Uttar Pradesh v. Nawab Singh, AIR 2004 SC 1511 
156. State of Uttar Pradesh v. Premi, AIR 2003 SC 1750 
157. State v. Bala Prasad, AIR 1952 Raj 142 
158. State v. Mohd. Naushad & Ors., Delhi High Court Order dated 22 
November 2012 in Criminal Appeal Nos. 948, 949, 950 and 951 of 
2010. 
159. State v. Saqib Rehman & Ors., Unique Case ID 02405R1310232005 
160. State v. T. Venkatesh Murthy, AIR 2004 SC 5117 
161. Sube Singh v. State of Haryana, (2006) 3 SCC 178. 
162. Subramanian Swamy v. Manmohan Singh & Anr. (2012) 3 SCC 64. 
163. Sunita v. State of National Capital Territory of Delhi,  151 (2008) DLT 
192. 
164. Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee Representing Undertrial 
Prisoners v. Union of India and Ors., (1994) 6 SCC 731 
165. Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee Representing Undertrial 
Prisoners v. Union of India and Ors. (1994) 6 SCC 731 
166. T. N. Dhakkal v. James Basnett & Anr. (2001) 10 SCC 419. 
167. T.K. Appu Nair v. Earnest & Ors., AIR 1967 Mad 262. 
168. Tasleema v. State (NCT of Delhi), 161 (2009) DLT 660. 
169. Thakur Tewary, (1900) 4 CWN 347. 
170. Thana Singh v. Central Bureau of Narcotics, (2013) 2 SCC 590 
171. The 'Ad Hoc' Committee, the Indian Insurance Company  Association 
Pool v. Smt. Radhabai, AIR 1976 MP 164 
172. The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohammad Naim, AIR 1964 SC 703. 
173. U.P. State Road Transport Corporation  v. State of U.P. , 2000 All 
LJ 1461. 
174. Union of India v. Ibrahim Uddin & Anr., (2012) 8 SCC 148. 
175. Uttarakhand Sangharsh Samiti v. State of U.P., (1996) 1 UPLBEC 461 
176. Vibin P.V. v. State of Kerela, AIR 2013 Ker 67 
177. Vidya Charan Shukla v. Purshottam Lal Kaushik, AIR 1981 SC 547 
178. Woodfall (1770) 5 Burr. 2661. 
 