.rair? Ti{
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
USAGE OF THE LAW OF SEDITION
Report No. 279
April,2023


The 22nd Law Commission was constituted by Gazette Notification for a period ofthree
years vide Order No. FNo. 45021/l /2018-Admn-lll(LA) dated 2 l" February, 2020 issued
by the Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs,
New Delhi. The term ofthe 22nd Law Commission was extended vide Order No. FA No.
60011/225/2022-Admn.lll(LA) dated 22"d February, 2023.
The Law Commission consists of a Chairperson, three full-time Members, Member
Secretary, two ex-olficio Members and two Part-time Members.
Chairperson
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Full-time Members
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Prof. (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Prof. D.P. Verma
Mcmbcr SccretarY
Dr. Niten Chandra
Ex-oflicio Members
Dr. Niten Chandra, S€cretary, Department of Legal Affairs
Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Secretary, Legislative Department
Part-time Members
Shri M. Karunanithi
Prof. (Dr.) Raka Arya
Law Officers
Smt. Varsha Chandrd
Shri Atul Kumar Gupta
: Joint Secretary & Law Officer
: Deputy Law Officer
l,cgalConsultants
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Caurav Yadav
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Shri Davinder Singh
The Law Commission is located at:
2nd and 41h Floor, 'B' Wing
Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market
New Delhi- l l0 003.
The text ofthis Report is available on the Website at
www.lawcommissionofi ndia.nic.in
@ Government of India
Law Commission of India


Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former ChielJustice of High Coud of Kamataka)
Chairperson
22^o Law Commission of lndia
qrq{tr zg rrs q**fr
ffir-gd gq qlsyr, o-<iro va <n-a{
SIEIET
trrrd d 22d frE sTrdFT
s m dtrd
Trog
3IIfrI{lar
qqa q-dRE
Date: 24rh May.2023
*r:Ll. s; 11",^-P-r^^ n.rt*.r-l p- P.7'*:*-s*l
I am pleased to forward you Report No, 279 of the Law Commission of India on "Usage of
the Law of Sedition". The Law Commission received a reference from the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Govemment of India, vide letter dated 29s March,2016, addressed to the Department
oflegal Affairs, Ministry oflaw & Justice, for a study ofthe usage ofthe provision ofSection
124A ofthe Indian Penal Code, 1860 (lPC) and suggest amendments, ifany.
The constitutionality of Section l24A of IPC was challenged before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in S.G. Vombatkere v. Union of India [(2022) 7 SCC 433]. The Union of India assured
the Hon'ble Supreme Court that it was re-examining Section l24A and the Court may not
invest its valuable time in doing the same. Pursuant to the same and vide order passed on I lrh
May,2022, the Hon'ble Supreme Court directed the Central Govemment and all the State
Covemments to refrain from registering any FIR or taking any coercive measures. while
suspending all continuing investigations in relation to Section 124A. Further, it also directed
that all pending trials, appeals, and proceedings be kept in abeyance.
The 22nd Law Commission, after the appointment of the Chairperson and other Members vrTe
notification dated 7th November, 2022, immediately took up this reference and is submitting
this final Repo( lor your kind consideration. We undertook a comprehensive study of the law
relating to sedition and its usage in India, tracing its genesis and development. The Commission
also analysed the history ofsedition, both in colonial and independent India, the law on sedition
in various jurisdictions, and the various pronouncements of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and
the Hon'ble High Courts on the subject-matter.
Consequently, the Law Commission is of the considered view that Section l24A needs to be
retained in the Indian Penal Code, though certain amendments, as suggested, may be introduced
in it by incorporating the rotio decidendi of Kedar Nath Singh v. State of Bihar [AIR 1962 SC
9551 so as to bring about greater clarity regarding the usage of the provision. We further
recommend that the scheme of punishment provided under the said section be amended to
ensure that it is brought in parity with the other offences under Chapter VI of IPC. Moreover,
cognizant of the views regarding the misuse of Section 124A,lhe Commission recommends
that model guidelines curbing the same be issued by the Central Govemment. In this context,
it is also altematively suggested that a provision analogous to Section 196(3) of the Code of
orqf-+q qar
Oftca Address
o.ryr ;i. nos, Tg{ ra, t' fifq, eiqt nr46' qrFr, sFr qrtr-c, cg ftd-trooos
Room No.405,4th Ftoo( 'B'Wng, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New D6lhl-ilOOO3
3rrsrfrq Irtfr : .irrdr i. e, dfs wfifr qr4, c-€ m-rroott
Rosid€nca : Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Marg, Now Delhl_1iOO11
emall : rituraj.awasthi@goyin Tet. : 011-24654951 (O), 243!;0202, 243/,O2O3
D.o. No. 6(3)/302/201 6-LC(LS)
frr--


Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
{Former Chief Justice of High Court of Kamalaka)
Chairperson
22^o Law Commission of lndia
qrqtr{ xg rrs <m-sft
ffit5a5e qrq${, o-cL6 Ea qmdq)
qqa
arrfr A 22d frfu orrdl'r
r.om rad
Trag
3ll-W-dlar .3qa r5rm+
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) may be incorporated as a proviso to Section 154 ofCrPC,
which would provide the requisite procedural safeguard before filing of a FIR with respect to
an oflence under Section l24A of IPC.
The reasons leading upto these recommendations have been deliberated over in detail in the
enclosed Report and the Commission is olthe firm belief that incorporating the same would
go a long way in addressing the concems associated with the usage ofthis provision.
With warmest regards,
Yours sincerely,
2- tf .9 )n9
(Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi)
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (lndependent Charge)
Ministry of Law & Justice
Government of lndia
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi -1 10001.
orqftrq qirT : oq{r i. +os, vgri n-a, fr' fifq, dt6 nrq6 q?t"r, ErFr qrfrr-c, Ti ftld-t I ooog
Oltca Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Mar*et, New Delhi-110003
eirerfrq qtrr: {rp6r;1. a. d-s qfifi qrrf, r$ ftd-rroorr
Residanco : Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Marg, N€w Delhi-l100'l'l
email ; rituraj.awasthi@gov.in Tol. : 0'11-24654951 (Ol, 24U0202, 243/,0203


Upon receiving the terms of reference for the subject-matter of this Report, the Law
Commission held extensive deliberations with all the relevant stakeholders, scholars,
academicians, intellectuals, etc. Pursuant to the preliminary research conducted on this subject,
the Law Commission floated a Consultation Paper on "Sedition" on its website, inviting views
and suggestions from the concemed intelligentsia and the public in general. We are much
thankful to all the people who took out their valuable time to fumish their comments and
submissions on the law relating to sedition.
Having taken into consideration the suggestions so fumished, the Commission held further
consultations with professors and academic experts to unravel the intricacies of the subject-
matter. We express our heartfelt thanks to all such individuals. In particular, we would like to
express our gratitude to Prof. (Dr.) Anurag Deep, Indian Law lnstitute, New Delhi, for holding
in-depth discussions with us on the subject at hand. His insightful inputs have helped us
navigate through complex legal frameworks with ease.
The Commission gratefully acknowledges the commendable assistance rendered in the
preparation of this Report by Mr. Rishi Mishra, Mr. Gaurav Yadav and Mr. Shubhang
Chaturvedi, who worked as Consultants. We place on record our deepest adulation for their
painstaking efforts in research and drafting of this Report.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT


A. Terms of Reference
B. Genesis and Development of the Concept of Sedition
C. Origin and Development of the Law of Sedition in India
2. PREVIOUS REPORTS OF THE COMMISSION
1
4
8
3. CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES ON SEDITION ll
4. JUDICIAL INTERPRETATION OF SECTION 124A OF IPC 21
A. Judicial Decisions on Sedition Prior to Independence 2\
B. Judicial Decisions on Sedition After the Enactment of the Constitution.26
1. Rulings on Sedition Prior to Kedar Nath Singft Judgment 26
3. Rulings Post Kedar Nary'r Judgment 34
5. SEDITION VIS-A-VIS FREE SPEECH 38
6. THREATS TO INDIA'S INTERNAL SECURITY... .............44
A. Maoist Extremism 45
B. Militancy and Ethnic ConJlict in the Northeast 47
C. Terrorism in Jammu & Kashmir 50
D. Secessionist Activities in Other Parts of the Country..............................52
7. ALLEGED MISUSE OF SECTION I24A OF IPC 55
8. SEDITION LAWS IN OTHER COLINTRIES ........................57
A. United Kingdom 57
B. United States of America 60
C. Australia 66
D. Canada 67
9. CONCLUSION:GROUNDS FOR RETENTION OF SECTION 124A.......70
A. To Safeguard the Unity and lntegrity of lndia 70
B. Sedilion is a Reasonable Restriction under Article l9(2) 71
C. Existence of Counter-Terror Legislations does not Obviate the Need for
TABLE OF CONTENTS


Section l24A 73
D. Sedition being a Colonial Legacy is not a Valid Groundfor its RepealT4
E. Realities Dffir in Every Jurisdiction................ ................75
10. RECOMMENDATIONS 77
A. Incorporation of Ratio of Kedar Nath Judgment in Section l24A of
IPC ...............
B. Procedural Guidelines for Preventing any Alleged Misuse of Section
l24A of IPC...
C. Removal of the Oddity in Punishment Prescribedfor Section l24A of
IPC ...............
77
77
D. Proposal for Amendment in Section 124A of IPC
78
79
II


USAGE OF THE LAW OF SEDITION
I.INTRODUCTION
A. Terms of Reference
1.1 The Law Commission received a reference from the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Govemmentof India, vide letter dated 291h March, 2016,
addressed to the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice,
with a copy to the Law Commission of India, for a study of the usages of
the provision of Section l24A of the Indian Penal Code and suggest
amendments, if any. The said letter also mentioned that since the Law
Commission is already undertaking a comprehensive review of the
Criminal Laws, it may also look into the issues relating to Section l24A
of the IPC during the course of such review. Here, it is also pointed out
that vide letter dated 7th July, 2010, the then Home Minister made a
reference to the then Law Minister for a comprehensive review of the
Criminal Laws by the Law Commission of India and accordingly, the
Department of Legal Affairs sent this reference to the Law Commission
vide lelter dated l4th June, 2013 for a comprehensive review of the
Criminal Laws.
1.2 As far as the comprehensive review of the Criminal Laws is concemed,
it is pertinent to note that the 2l't Law Commission started working on
this proj ect in piecemeal and submitted six Reports, namely, Report Nos.
264, 267 ,268, 27 I , 273 and,277 , covering various aspects relating to the
Criminal Justice System.
The22nd Law Commission, in its first meeting held on 17'h January,2023
discussed this issue of usage of the law of sedition and was of the
r.3
h-


considered view that it requires a detailed examination, keeping in mind
the various developments in the recent past. In this regard, the
Commission requested the Ministry of Home Affairs vide letter dated 16th
January, 2023 to furnish their comments. Reminder letters were also
issued by the Commission. However, looking into the urgency of the
matter, the Commission has discussed this issue with various
stakeholders and scholars and made a detailed research on the subject-
matter, thus finalising this Report.
B. Genesis and Development of the Concepl of Sedition
1.4 The origin of the law on sedition can be traced back to the English Law.
In feudal England, 'sedition' comprised those libels and slanders that
would alienate the rulers from their subjects.r Traditionally, the legal
elements of 'sedition' were obscure and thus, failed to provide a precise
definition. The offences which would now be classified as 'sedition' were
prosecuted under 'treason' or under scandalum magnatum or even under
martial law.2
1.5 At the end of the sixteenth century, a newer connotation for the term
'sedition' began to emerge - the notion of inciting by words or writings,
disaffection towards the state or its constituted authority.r This secondary
definition gave rise to an understanding of 'sedition' as being distinct
from treason and not necessarily entailing direct involvement in violent
actions, but rather serving as potential triggers for such acts.
I Roger B. Manning, "The Origins of the Doctrine of Sedition" 12 Albion: A Quarterly Journal Concerned with
Btitish Studies 100 (1980).
2 Australian Law Reform Commission, *lo4u Repon on Fighting Words: A Review of Sedition Laws in
Australia" 5l (July 2006) (hereinafter "Report on Fighting Words").
3 Id- at 3.
:


1.6 In I 606, the Court of Star Chamb er in de Libellis Famosis,a outlined the
essential elements of seditious libel, thus laying down the foundation of
the offence of 'seditious libel' in the United Kingdom.s The Chamber
defined 'sedition' as speaking of inflammatory words, publishing certain
libels, and conspiring with others to incite hatred or contempt for persons
in authority in which the truth and falsity of libel was immaterial.6 This
doctrine of seditious libel persisted even after the Court of Star
Chamber's abolition in 1641 and influenced common law libel and
slander doctrines for over two centuries. It emphasised that it was the
mere tendency of criticism to undermine the govemment that rendered
the conduct a criminal offence.
1.7 The classic definition of 'seditious intention' is found in Sir James
1.8
Stephen's Digest of the Criminal Law, published in 1887:
"A seditious intention is an intention to bring into hatred or
contempt, or to excite disaffection against the person of, Her
Majesty, her heirs or successors, or the government and
constitution of the United Kingdom, as by law established, or
either House of Parliament, or the administration ofjustice, or to
excite Her Majesty's subjects to attempt, otherwise than by lawful
means, the alteration of any matter in Church or State by law
established, or to incite any person to commit any crime in
disturbance of the peace, or to raise discontent or disaffection
amongst Her Majesty's subjects, or to promote feelings of ill-will
and hostility between dffirent classes of such subjects. "T
Keeping sedition in mind, Stephen classified three types of conduct. One,
crime of treason; two, that penal conduct which involves force or
violence; and third, the conduct which fell in between the two. This
conduct, which falls short of treason, and on the other hand, does not
a 77 Eng Rep 250 (KB 1606).
5 William T. Mayon, "Seditious Libel and the Lost Guarantee ofa Freedom ofSpeech" 84 Columbia Lqw Review
l0s (1984).
6 Anushka Singh, Se dition in Liberql Democracies 75 (Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 2018)
7 James F. Stephen, ,4 Digest of the Crininal L&! 66 (MacMillan, London, 4th edn, 1887).
h,


involve the use of force or violence was intended to be the offence of
'sedition'.8 Thus, sedition came to be interpreted as words that fell short
of treason and did not directly involve, although they might lead to, acts
of violence.e
Stephen's definition makes sedition a conduct crime as well as a
consequence crime. When the conduct is unlawful display of
dissatisfaction with the govemment, it amounts to sedition. At the same
time, if the conduct by itself is not culpable, however,, the natural
consequence of the conduct is dissatisfaction with the govemment, it also
amounts to sedition.ro
C. Origin and Development of the Law of Sedition in lndia
1.10 The law of sedition has a very chequered history in India. Macaulay's
Draft Penal Code ( I 83 7- 1 839) provided for a Clause which incorporated
the offence of sedition as follows:
"Section I l3: Whoever by words either spoken on intended to be
read, or by signs or by visible representations, attempts to excite
feelings of disaffection to the Government established by law in
the territories of the East India Company among any class of
people who live under that Government, shall be punished with
banishment for life orfor any term, from the territories of the East
India Company, to which fine may be added, or with simple
imprisonmentfor a term which may extend to three years, to which
fine may be added or withJine.
Explanation. Such a disapprobation of the measures of the
Government as is compatible with a disposition to render
obedience to the lawful authority of the Government against
unlawful attempts to subvert or resist that authority is not
8 H.J. Stephen & L. Crispin Warmington (eds.), Mtephen Commentaries on the Laws of Englond 141
(Butterworth & Co., London, 2l'r edn, 1950)
e tbid.
to lhid.
{
1.9
V


1.11
disaffection. Therefore, the making of comments on the measures
of the Government, with the intention of exciting only this species
of disapprobation is not an offence within this clause. " | |
Ten years after the first draft, the Second Report on the Indian Penal Code
was presented by the Law Commission in 1846. Even though there was
opposition to the provision, the majority in the Law Commission did not
accept the objections as, in comparison to documented writing, the
influence of a speech by an expert speaker is easy, sudden and more
dangerous.l2
1.12 Sir John Romilly, the Chairman of the Second Pre-Independence Law
Commission commented upon the quantum of the punishment proposed
for sedition on the ground that in England the maximum punishment had
been three years, thereby suggesting that in India it should not be more
than five years.13
L13 However, when the Macaulay's draft received its final shape in the form
of enactment of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter "IPC") in 1860, this
section was not included. This was surprising for many. Mr. James
Stephens, when asked about this omission, referred to the letter written
by Sir Barnes Peacock to Mr. Maine, wherein he had remarked:
"l have looked into my notes and I think the omission of a section
in lieu of section I l3 of the original Penal Code must have been
through mistake [...] I feel however that it was an oversight on
the part of the committee not to substitute for section I I 3 ".tJ
rrA Penal Code prepared by the Indian Law Commissioners and published by the command ofthe Govemor
General of India in Council (Bengal Military Orphan Press, Calcutta, 1837) avoilable ot:
https://play.google.com/books/reader?id=QjBAAAAYAAJ&pg=GBS.RA I -PA l2&hl:en (last visited on Feb.
16,2023).
I2 A Chandrachud, Republic of Rhetoric: Free Speech and the Constilulion of lndra 5 (Penguin, 2017).
13 Hari Singh Gour, ll Penal Law of lndia 1232 (Law Publishers (lndia) Pvt. Ltd., Allahabad, I I'h edn., 201 I ).
ra Arvind Ganachari, Nationalism and Sociul Reforn in a Colonial Situation 55 (Kalpaz, Delhi, 2005).
aV,


1.14 Mr. James Stephen, thereafter, set out to rectifu this omission.
Consequently, sedition was included as an offence under Section 124A
of IPC through the Special Act XVII of 1870. This section was in line
with the Treason Felony Act, 1848 that penalised seditious expressions.r5
One of the reasons cited by Stephen for introducing this section was that
in the absence ofsuch provision, this offence would be penalised under
the more severe common law of England.r6 Therefore, the adoption of
this section was projected as an obvious choice for protecting freedom of
expression from the stricter common law. According to Stephen, the
adopted clause was "much more compressed, much more distinctly
expressed, and freed from great amount of obscurity and vagueness with
which the law of England was hampered".rT The intent of the section was
to punish an act of exciting feelings of disaffection towards the
government, but this disaffection was to be distinguished from
disapprobation. Thus, people were free to voice their feelings against the
government as long as they projected a will to obey its lawful authority.rs
15 Treason Felony Act, 1848, ovailable a/ https://www.legislation.gov.ukiukp galYictl l l-12/12/section/3 (last
visited on Feb 16,2023). Section 3 ofthe Act stipulated that:
" lf any person whalsoeyer shall, within the United Kingdom or without, compqss, imagine, inyenl, deyise,
or intend to deprive or depose our Most Gracious Lady the Queen, from the style, honour, or royal nane of
lhe imperial crown ofthe United Kingdom, or ofany other ofher Mqjesty's dominions and countries, or to
levy war against her Majesty, within qny part of the United Kingdom, in order by force or constrqint to
compel her to change her ueqsures or counsels, or in order to put qny force or constrqint apon or in order
to intimidqle or overcwe both Houses or eilher House of Parliament, or to moye or stir any foreigner or
strunger wilh force to invade the United Kingdom or any olher of her Mojesty's dominions or countries
under the obeisance of her Mqjesty, and such compassings, ima&inqtions, inyenlions, deyices, or intentions,
or ony ofthem, shall express, utter, or declare, by publishing any printing or writing or by dny overt act or
deed, every person so ofending shctll be guilry of.felony, and being convicted thereof sholl be liqble to be
transported beyond the seqs for the term of his or her natural life."
t6 
Queen Emperor v. Jogendra Chunder Bose, (1892) l9 ILR Cal 35.
17 W.R. Donogh, ,4 Treatise on the L@e of Sedition and Cogndte Offences in British tndiq 2 (Thacker, Spink and
Co., Calcutta, l91l) availoble at:http://archive.org/stream/onlawofsedition00dono#page/2/mode/2up (last visited
on Feb. 16,2023).
tt lbid-
6
1.15 Section l24Aof IPC was amended in 1898 by the Indian Penal Code
(Amendment) Act, 1898 (Act V of 1898), providing for punishment of
V


'transportation for life' or any shorter term. While the former section
defined sedition as exciting or attempting to excite feelings of disaffection
to the Government established by law, the amended section also made
bringing or attempting to bring in hatred or contempt towards the
Govemment established by law, punishable. re The provision was
amended by Act No. 26 of 1955, substituting the punishment as
'imprisonment for life and/or with fine or imprisonment for three years
and/or with fine'.
1.17 The Prevention of Seditious Meetings Act, 1911, repealed the Act of
1907. Section 5 thereof enabled the statutory authorities to prohibit a
public meeting in case such a meeting was likely to provoke sedition or
disaffection or to cause disturbance ofpublic tranquillity. Violation ofthe
provisions of the Act was made punishable with imprisonment for a term,
which could extend to six months or fine or both. The said Act of 1911
stood repealed vide Repealing and Amending (Second) Act (Act No. IV
of 2018).
re K.l. Vibhute, P.S. A. Pilloi's Criminal Law 335 (Lexis Nexis Butterwonhs, Nagpur,20l2)
,7
I . 16 The Westminster Parliament enacted the Prevention of Seditious
Meetings Act, 1907, in order to prevent public meetings likely to lead to
the offence of sedition or to cause disturbance as in many parts of India,
meetings were held against the British rule, with the main objective of
overthrowing the Government.
\-


2.1 The Law Commission has previously dealt with the issue of 'sedition'. In
its 39th Report (1968) titled "The Punishment of Imprisonment for Life
under the Indian Penal Code", the Law Commission recommended that
offences like sedition should be punishable either with imprisonment for
life or with rigorous or simple imprisonment which may extend to three
years, but not more.2o
2.2
"6. 16. The elements mentioned in this article which are relevant
to the offence of sedition are integrity of India, security of the State
and public order. The section has been found to be defective
because "the pernicious tendency or intention" underlying the
seditious utterance has not been expressly related to the interests
of integrity or security of lndia or of public order. Ilefeel that this
defect should be removed by expressing the mens rea as
" intending or knowing it to be likely to endanger the integrity or
security of India or ofany State or to cause public disorder.
6.17. Another defect noticed in the definition of sedition is that it
does not take into account disaffection towards (a) the
Constitution, (b) the Legislature, and (c) the administration of
justice, all of which would be as disastrous to the security of the
State as disaffection towards the executive Government. These
aspects are rightly emphasised in defining sedition in other Codes
and we feel that Section I 24A should be revised to take them in.
6.18. The punishment providedfor the offence is very odd. It could
be imprisonment of lde, or else, imprisonment upto three years
20 Law Commission of tndia, "39s Report on The Punishment of Imprisonment for Life under the Indian Penal
Code" (July, I968).
2r Law Commission of Indi4 "42"d Report on the Indian Penal Code" (June, l97l).
li
2. PREVIOUS REPORTS OF THE COMMISSION
The issue of sedition was further considered by the Law Commission in
its 42nd Repon (1971) titled "lndian Penal Code", wherein the
Commission undertook a holistic review of Section l24A.2t The Law
Commission recommended that:
)^
\$r/


:.J
2.4
22 ld. at 149.
23lbid.
2a Law Commission oflndia, "43'd Report on Offences Against the National Security" (Aug., l97l )
only, but nothing in between. The Legislature should, we think,
give afirmer indication to the Courts of the gravity of the offence
by fixing the maximum punishment at seven years' rigorous
imprisonment and fine. " 2 )
The Law Commission, thus, recommended that Section l24A of IPC be
revised as follows:
" 124A. Sedition - Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or
by signs, or by visible representation, or other-wise, excites, or
attempts to excite, disaf.fection towards the Constitution, or the
Government or Parliament of India, or the Government or
Legislature ofany State, or the administration ofjustice, as by low
established, intending or lcnowing it to be likely thereby to
endanger the integrity or security of lndia or of any State, or to
cause public disorder, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable tofine.
Explanation I: The expression "disaffection" includesfeelings of
enmity, hatred or contempt.
Explanation 2: Comments expressing disapprobation of the
provisions of the Constitution, or of the actions of the
Government, or of the measures of Parliament or a State
Legislature, or of the provisions for the administration ofjustice,
with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means without
exciting or attempting to excite disaffection, do not constitute an
offence under this section. "23
The 43rd Report of the Law Commission on "Offences Against the
National Security" ( 1971 ), also dealt with 'sedition' as part of the
National Security Bill, 1971. Section 39 of this Bill dealt with 'Sedition',
which was merely a reiteration of the revised section as proposed by the
42nd Report.2a
h"


2.5 The 267th Report of the Law Commission on "Hate Speech" (2017),
distinguished between 'sedition' and 'hate speech', providing that the
offence of hate speech affects the State indirectly by disturbing public
tranquillity, while sedition is directly an offence against the State.25 The
Report adds, that to qualifo as sedition, the impugned expression must
threaten the sovereignty and integrity of India and the security of the
state.26
25 Law Commission ofIndi4 "267h Report on Hate Speech" (Mar..2017).
26 ld. at 45-
I0
u


3. CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES ON SEDITION
3.1 Even though the rights to be included in the Constitution were considered
to be fundamental and enforceable by the courts, the Constituent
Assembly members very well realized that these rights cannot be
absolute.2T The two strongest advocates of the limitation of fundamental
rights were Shri A. K. Ayyar and Shri K. M. Munshi. With one or two
exceptions, their fellow members supported them in this endeavour.2s
Vehemently arguing his case for restricting the fundamental rights while
referring to the then unrest in Assam and Bengal, and to the communal
riots in the Punjab and NWFP, Shri Ayyar in one of his letters to Sir B.N.
Rau, remarked:
"The recent happenings in dffirent parts of lndia have convinced
me more than ever that all the Fundamental Rights guaranteed
under the Constitution must be subject to public order, security,
and safety, though such a provision may to some extent neutralize
the effect of the rights guaranteed under the Constitution. "2e
J.: It has been at times perceived in certain quarters that the offence of
sedition is at loggerheads with the express intent of the framers of the
Constitution, on account ofbeing violative ofthe freedom ofspeech and
expression under Article l9( I )(a) of the Constitution. Therefore, it is
imperative for us to revisit the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly
and the deliberations held therein regarding sedition. On 24'h January,
1947,the Constituent Assembly voted to create an 'Advisory Committee'
to prepare a report on fundamental rights. Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel, the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee, presented the 'lnterim Report of
the Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights to the Constituent
27 Granville Austin, The lndian Corctitution: Cornerstone ofa Nqtion 68 (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1966).
28 ld- at 69.
2e ld. at7o.
ht


Assembly of India' on 29'h April, 1947.30 Clause 8(a) of this Interim
Report provided for the fieedom ofspeech and expression.The proviso
to this clause containing "publication or utterance of seditious matter",
was made one of the grounds to restrict the freedom of speech and
expression. The proviso lo Clause 8(a) read as follows:
(a)The right of every citizen to freedom of speech and expression:
...provision may be made by law to make the publication or
utterance of seditious, obscene, blasphemous, slanderous,
libellous or defomatory matter actionable or punishable.3l
3.3 The aforesaid proviso to Clause 8(a) ofthe Interim Report corresponds
to Article l3(2) of the Draft Constitution presented before the Constituent
Assembly on 21't February,1948. Thus, in the first reading of the Draft
Constitution, sedition was provided as one of the restrictions on the
fundamental right to free speech and expression. The said Clause 2 of
draft Article 13 read as follows:
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (l) of this article shall
affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from
making any law, relating to libel, slander, defamation, sedition or
any other matter which offends against decency or morality or
undermines the authority or foundation of the State.
3.4
said:
r0 lnterim reporl ofthe Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights to the Constituent Assembly oflndia, 1947;
See lll Constituent Assembly Debates, 399.
1t ld. at i.
12 Vll Constituent Asseubly Debates, 4O.
l2
Dr B.R. Ambedkar, the Chairman of the Drafting Committee, while
introducing the Draft Constitution, highlighted the nature of fundamental
rights that were to be enshrined in the Indian Constitution and also those
provided in the Constitution of the United States. During the discussion,
Dr Ambedkar asserted that the fundamental rights in the US Constitution
were not absolute and were subject to restrictions on the basis ofvarious
doctrines propounded by the US Supreme Court time and again.32 He
t
ffi-


"Dr B.R. Ambedkar:
I am sorry to say that the whole of the criticism aboutfundamental
rights is based upon a misconception. In the first place, the
criticism in so far as it seel<s to distinguish fundamental rights
from non-fundamental rights is not sound. It is incorrect to say
that fundamental rights are absolute while non-fundamental
rights are not absolute. The real distinction between the two is
that non-fundamental rights are created by agreement between
parties while fundamental rights are the gtft of the law. Because
fundamental rights are the gtft ofthe State it does notfollow that
the State cannot qualify them.
In the second place, it is wrong to say that fundamental rights in
America are absolute. The dffirence between the position under
the American Constitution and the Draft Constitution is one of
form and not ofsubstance. That thefundamental rights in America
are not absolute rights is beyond dispute. ln support of every
exception to the fundamental rights set out in the Draft
Constitution one can refer to at least one judgment of the United
States Supreme Court. It would be sufrcient to quote one such
judgment of the Supreme Court in justification of the limitation on
the right offree speech contained in Article 13 of the Draft
Constitution. In Gitlow Vs. New York in which the issue was the
constitutionality of a New York "criminal anarchy " law which
purported to punish utterances calculated to bring about violent
change, the Supreme Court said:
"lt is a fundamental principle, long established, that the
freedom of speech and of the press, which the Constitution
secures, does not confer an absolute right to speak or
publish, without responsibility, whatever one may choose, or
an unrestricted and unbridled license that gives immunity for
every possible use of language and prevents the punishment
of those who abuse this freedom."
It is therefore wrong to say that the fundamental rights in America
are absolute, while those in the Draft Constitution are not.
In America, thefundamental rights as enacted by the Constitution
were no doubt absolute. Congress, however, soon found that it
was absolutely essential to qualify these fundamental rights by
l3 A\-


limitations. ll'hen the question arose as to the constitutionality of
these limitations before the Supreme Court, it was contended that
the Constitution gave no power to the United States Congress to
impose such limitation, the Supreme Court invented the doctrine
ofpolice power and refuted the advocates ofabsolute fundamental
rights by the argument that every state has inherent in it police
power which is not required to be conferred on it expressly by the
Constitution. To use the language of the Supreme Court in the
case I have already referred to, it said:
" That a State in the exercise of its police power may punish
those who abuse this freedom by utterances inimical to the
public welfare, tending to corrupt public morals, incite to
crime or disturb the public peace, is not open to question. . .
3.5
What the Draft Constitution has done is that instead of
formulating fundamental rights in absolute terms and depending
upon our Supreme Court to come to the rescue of Parliament by
inventing the doctrine of police power, it permits the State directly
to impose limitations upon the fundamental rights. There is really
no dffirence in the result. What one does directly the other does
indirectly. In both cases, thefundamental rights are not absolute. "
In the second reading of the Draft Constitution, the Constituent Assembly
on l't December, 1948, again debated the draft Article 13.33 Shri
Damodar Swarup Seth, criticizing the draft Article to have been clumsily
drafted, said:
"Damodar S. Seth: Sir, this article 13 guarantees freedom of
speech and expression, freedom to assemble peaceably and
without arms, to form association and unions, to move freely
throughout the territory of India, to sojourn and settle in any
territory, to acquire and hold and dispose of property, and to
practice any profession or trade or business. While the article
guarantees all these freedoms, the guarantee is not to affect the
operation of any existing law or prevent the State from making
any law in the general interests of the public. Indeed, Sir, the
guarantee of freedom of speech and expression which has been
given in this article, is actually not to affect the operation of any
existing law or prevent the State from making any law relating to
libel, slander, defamation, sedition and other matters which
31 ld. at'7ll
t-1
\
q,.


offend the decency or morality of the State or undermine the
authority orfoundation ofthe State. It is therefore clear. Sir, that
the rights guaranteed in article 13 are cancelled by that very
section and placed at the mercy or the high-handedness of the
legislature. These guarantees are also cancelled, Sir, when it is
stated that, to safeguard against the offences relating to decenry
and morality and the undermining of the authority or foundation
of the State, the existing law shall operate. This is provided for in
very wide terms. So, while certain kinds of freedom have been
allowed on the one hand, on the other hand, they have been taken
away by the same article as I have just mentioned. To safeguard
against " undermining the authority or foundation of the State" is
a tall order and makes the fundamental right with regard to
freedom of speech and expression virtually ineffectual. It is
therefore clear that under the Draft Constitution, we will not have
any greaterfreedom of the press than we enjoyed under the cursed
foreign regime and citizens will have no means of getting a
sedition law invalidated, however /lagrantly such a law may
violate their civil rights. Then, Sir, the expression 'in the interests
of general public' is also very wide and will enable the legislative
and the executive authority to act in their own way. Very rightly,
Sir, Shri S. K. Vaze of the Servants of India Society while
criticising this article has pointed out that if the malafides of
Government are not proved--and they certainly cannot be proved-
-then the Supreme Court will have no alternative but to uphold the
restrictive legislation. The Draft Constitution further empowers
the President, Sir, to issue proclamations of emergency whenever
he thinks that the security of India is in danger or is threatened by
an apprehension ofwar or domestic violence. The President under
such circumstances has the power to suspend civil liberty. Now,
Sir, to suspend civil liberties is tantamount to a declaration of
martial law. Even in the United States, civil liberties are never
suspended. l{hat is suspended there, in cases of invasion or
rebellion, is only the habeas corpus writ. Though individual
freedom is secured in this article, it is at the same time restricted
by the will of the legislature and the executive which has powers
to issue ordinances between the sessions of the legislature almost
freely, unrestricted by any constitutional provision. Fundamental
rights, therefore, ought to be placed absolutely outside the
jurisdiction, not only of the legislature but also of the executive.
The Honourable Dr Ambedkar, Sir, while justifying the limitations
on civil liberties, has maintained that what the Drafting
Committee has done is that, instead of formulating civil liberties
li h,


3.6
in absolute terms and depending on the aid of the Supreme Court
to invent the doctrine or theory of police powers, they have
permitted the State to limit civil liberties directly.
Now, if we carefully study the Law of Police Powers in the United
States, il will be clearly seen that the limitations embodied in the
Draft Constitution are far wider than those provided in the United
States. Under the Draft Constitution the Law of Sedition, the
Official Secrets Act and many other laws ofa repressive character
will remain intact just as they are. If full civil liberties subject to
Police Powers, are to be allowed to the people of this country, all
laws of a repressive character including the Law of Sedition will
have either to go or to be altered radically and part of the Oficial
Secrets Actwill also have to go. I therefore submit that this article
should be radically altered and substituted by the addenda I have
suggested. I hope, Sir, the House will seriously consider this
proposal of mine. If whatever fundamental rights we get from this
Draft Constitution are tempered here and there and if full civil
liberties are not allowed to the people, then I submit, Sir, that the
boon of fundamental rights is still beyond our reach and the
making of this Constitution will prove to be of little value to this
country. "31
Shri Mahboob Ali Baig Sahib Bahadur moved the amendment for the
deletion of Clauses (2) to (6) fiom the Draft Article 13 and to add a single
proviso lo Clause (1), which read, "provided, however that no citizen in
the exercise of the said right, shall endanger the security of the State,
promote ill-will between the communities or do anything to disturb peace
and tranquillity in the country. "rr While introducing this amendment, he
said:
"Mahboob Ali Boig Sahib Bahadur: "Mr. Vice-President, Sir, to
me it loolrs as if thefundamental rights are listed in clause (l) only
to be deprived of under clauses (2) to (6), for in the first place,
these fundamental rights are subject to the existing laws. If in the
past the laws in force, the law-less laws as I would call them, the
repressive laws, laws which were enacted for depriving the
citizens of their human rights, if they have deprived the citizens of
these rights under the provisions under clauses (2) to (6), they will
)1 ld. at'712-13
15 ld. at 725.
a?
I6


3.7
3.8
continue to do so. The laws that I might refer to as such are the
Criminal Law Amendment Acts. the Press Acts and the several
Security Acts that have been enacted in the Provinces. And these
clauses (2) to (6) further say that if the existing laws are not
rigorous, repressive and wide enough to annihilate these rights,
the States as defined in article 7 which covers not only
legislatures, executive Governments and also the local bodies,
nay, even the local authorities can complete the havoc. I am not
indulging in hyperbole or exaggeration. I shall presently show
that there is not an iota of sentiment or exaggeration in making
this criticism. Fundamental rights are fundamental, permanent,
sacred and ought to be guaranteed against coercive powers ofa
State by excluding the jurisdiction of the executive and the
legislature. If the jurisdiction of the executive and the legislature
is not excluded, these fundamental rights will be reduced to
ordinary rights and cease to be fundamental. That is the import,
t he s ignifi c anc e of fundamental r i ghts. "36
Amongst these concerns, Shri K.M. Munshi proposed an amendment to
Clause (2) of the draft Article 13. The said amendment read as:
"(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (l) of this article shall
affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State from
making any law relating to libel, slander, defamation, or any
matter which offends against decency or morality or which
undermines the security of, or tends to overthrow, the State. "31
Through this amendment, Shri K.M. Munshi sought to omit the word
'sedition' and substitute it with 'which undermines the security of, or
tends to overthrow, the State'. He stated that the object of the amendment
was to remove the word 'sedition', which was of doubtful and varying
import and to introduce words which constituted the crux of an offence
against the State. Thus, it can be safely concluded that Shri Munshi, while
introducing this amendment, was expressly mindful of the origins of
Section l24A and the judicial pronouncements by the Courts which had
36 ld. at728
11 ld. at'131
t1
v


watered down the ambit of Section 124A. lt is relevant to quote the
observations made my Shri Munshi in toto for lhe present discussion:
"K.M. Munshi: Sir, the importance of this amendment is that it
seeks to delete the word 'sedition' and uses o much better
phraseologt, viz. "which undermines the security of, or tends to
overthrow, the State. " The object is to remove the word 'sedition'
which is of doubful and varying import and to introduce words
which are now considered to be the gist of an offence against the
State.
I was pointing out that the word 'sedition' has been a word of
varying import and has created considerable doubt in the minds
of not only the members of this House but of Courts of Law all
over the world. Its definition has been very simple and given so
far back in 1868. It says "sedition embraces all those practices
whether by word or deed or writing which are calculated to
disturb the tranquility of the State and lead ignorant persons to
subvert the Government". But in practice it has had a curious
fortune. A hundred and fifty years ago in England, holding a
meeting or conducting a procession was considered sedition.
Even holding an opinion against, whichwill bring ill-will towards
the Government, was considered sedition once. Our notorious
Section 124A of Penal Code was sometimes construed so widely
that I remember in a case a criticism of a District Magistrate was
urged to be covered by Section 124A. But the public opinion has
changed considerably since and now that we have a democratic
Government a line must be drawn between criticism of
Government which should be welcome and incitement which
would undermine the security or order on which civilized life is
based, or which is calculated to overthrow the State. Therefore
the word 'sedition' has been omitted. As a matter of fact the
essence of democracy is Crilicism of Government. The party
system which necessarily involves an advocacy of the replacement
of one Government by another is its only bulwark; the advocacy
of a different system of Government should be welcome because
that gives vitality to a democracy. The object therefore of this
amendment is to make a distinction between the two positions.
Our Federal Court also in the case of Niharendu Dutt Majumdar
Vs King, in lll and IV Federal Court Reports, has made a
distinction between what Sedition meant when the Indian Penal
Code was enacted and Sedition as understood in 1942. A passage
from the judgement of the Chief Justice of India would make the
l
L
V


3.9
position, as to what is an offence against the State at present,
clear. It says at page 50:
"This (sedition) is not made an offence in order to minister
to the wounded vanity of Governments but because where
Government and the law ceases to be obeyed because no
respect is felt any longer for them, only anarchy can follow.
Public disorder, or the reasonable anticipation or likelihood
ofpublic disorder is thus the gist ofthe offence. The acts or
words complained of must either incite to disorder or must
be such as to satisfy reasonable men that that is their
intention or tendency. "
This amendment, therefore, seeks to use words which properly
answer to the implication of the word 'Sedition' as understood by
the present generation in a democracy and therefore there is no
substantial change; the equivocal word sedition only is sought to
be deleted from the article. Otherwise an eruoneous impression
would be created that we want to perpetuate l24A of the I.P.C. or
its meaning which was considered good law in earlier days. Sir,
with these words, I move this amendment. "38
Thus, a nuanced reading of the debates paints a clear picture that the
rationale for the deletion of the word 'sedition' from Clause (2) of the
draft Article 13 was that the founding fathers sought to employ words
which in their understanding, properly incorporated the meaning of the
offence of sedition in accordance with its correct interpretation rendered
by the Federal Court in the case of Niharendu Dutt Majumdar v. King3e .
The mere deletion of the word'sedition' brought no concrete change in
the reasonable restrictions sought to be imposed on the freedom ofspeech
and expression. The term 'sedition' was omitted from Article 19(2)
because the framers of the Constitution had included terms with wider
connotations, which very much included the offence of sedition along
with other subversive activities which were detrimental to the security of
the State. On 2nd December, 1948, Shri Munshi's amendment was
38 lbid.
3,38 FcR [19421.
t9
h"


adopted by the Constituent Assembty. This draft Article l3 ultimately
materialised into Article 19 of the Constitution.
l0
q-


4.1
4.2
4. JUDICIAL INTERPRETATION OF SECTION I24A OF IPC
A. Judicial Decisions on Sedilion Prior to Independence
Before independence,, Section 124A of IPC was extensively employed by
the British to suppress the Indian nationalist movement. ln Jogendra
Chunder Bose.r0 the accused was charged with sedition for criticising the
Age of Consent Bill and the negative economic impact of British
colonialism. While directing the jury on the case, the Court distinguished
sedition as was understood under the law of England at that time, from
Section 124A of IPC. It was observed that the offence stipulated under
Section 124A of IPC was milder, as in England any overt act in
consequence ofa seditious feeling was penalised, however, in India only
those acts that were done with an 'intention to resist by force or an attempt
to excite resistance by force' fell under this section.
It was opined that Section l24A of IPC penalised disaffection and not
disapprobation. Disaffection was defined as a feeling contrary to
affection; like dislike or hatred and disapprobation as merely disapproval.
The following interpretation was ascribed to the term 'disaffection' under
Section 124A of IPC:
"lf a person uses either spoken or written words calculated to
create in the minds of the persons to whom they are addressed a
disposition not to obey the lawful authority of the Government, or
to subvert or resist that authority, if and when occasion should
arise, and if he does so with the intention of creating such a
disposition in his hearers or readers, he will be guilty of the
ofence of attempting to excite disaffection within the meaning of
the section, though no disturbance is brought about by his words
or anyfeeling of disaffection, infact, produced by them."
No verdict was announced as thejury did not reach a unanimous decision.
2t
ao 
Queen-Empress v. Jogendra Chunder Bose, (1892) l9 ILR Cal 35.
W,/


4.3
4.4
4.5
4t lbid.
a'1lLR (t898) 22 Bom I 12.
43 K.l. Vibhute, P.s. A. Pillai's Criminal Law 335 (Lexis Nexis Butterworths, Nagpur, 2012).
{ 77 Eng Rep 250 (KB 1606).
45 ILR 1898 22 Bom 152.
Later, the case was withdrawn aller Bose had tendered an apology.rr
ln Queen Empress v. Bal Gangadhar Tilak,a2 the defendant was accused
of sedition for publishing an article in the newspaper Kesari, invoking the
example of the Maratha warrior Chhatrapati Shivaji to incite overthrow
of British rule in India. In this case, Justice Strachey placed relevant
materials before thejury for interpreting'disaffection' by saying:
"It means hatred, enmity, dislike, hostility, contempt and every
form of ill-will to the Government. 'Disloyalty' is perhaps the best
general term, comprehending every possible form of bad feeling
to the Government. That is what the law means by the disaffection
which a man must not excite or attempt to excite: he must not make
or try to make others feel enmity of any kind towards the
Government ...the amount or intensity of the disaffection is
absolutely immaterial ... if a man excites or attempts to excite
feelings of disaffection, great or small, he is guilty under the
section. In the next place it is absolutely immaterial whether any
feelings ofdisaffection have been excited or not by the publication
in question... the section places absolutely on the same footing the
successful exciting offeelings ofdisaffection and the unsuccessful
attempt to excite them..."
The interpretation that only acts that suggested rebellion or forced
resistance to the Govemment should be given to this section was
expressly rejected by the Court.a3 This judgment influenced the 1989
amendment to Section l24A of IPC, wherein the added explanation
defined disaffection to include disloyalty and feelings of enmity.aa
Two important decisions pursuant to the Bal Gangadhar Tilak jtdgment
were Queen Empress v. Ramchandra Narayan,a5 and Queen Empress v.
1','
q,,,


4.6
Amba Prasad.ab ln Ramchandra Narayan, attempt to excite feelings of
disaffection towards the Govemment was defined as, "equivalent to an
attempt to produce hatred towards the Government as established by law,
to excite political discontent, and alienate the people from their
allegiance."aT However, it was clarified that every act of disapprobation
of Govemment did not amount to disaffection under Section 124A of IPC,
provided the person accused under this section is loyal at heart and is
"ready to obey and support the Government".a8
A similar interpretation was given to disapprobation in Amba Prasad,
wherein the accused had been booked under Section l24A of IPC, for
publishing an article in a newspaper called Jami-ul-ulam. The Court, after
analysing the meaning of disaffection, held that any disapprobation will
only be protected as free speech if it did not lead to disloyalty or
subverting the lawful authority of the State. The Court remarked:
" ... the disapprobation must be 'compatible' with a disposition to
render obedience to the lawful authority of the Government and
to support the lawful authority of the Government against
unlawful attempts to subvert or resist that authority. "
Following the literal interpretation of Section 124A of IPC, the Court
categorically held that it is not necessary that an actual rebellion or mutiny
or forcible resistance to the Govemment or any sort of actual disturbance
was caused by the act in question. ae Stressing this point, the Court
remarked:
" (Sedition) makes the exciting or attempting to excite certain
feelings, and not the inducing or attempting to induce to any
course of action, such as rebellion or forcible resistance, the test
2l
4.7
46 ILR (1897) 20 All 55.
41 lbid.4 Queen Empress v- Ramchondro Narayan,lLR 1898 22 Bom 152.
4e lbid.
e-


of guilt. "50
4.8 These cases brought to light the ambiguity being created by the
explanation in interpreting the term disaffection. In order to remove any
further misconception in interpreting Section 124A, the legislature
introduced Explanation III to the section, which excluded 'comments
expressing disapprobation' of the action of the Government but not
intending to lead to an offence under the section. The main intention
behind adding another explanation was to make the law more precise. The
Select Committee, while considering the law of sedition, explained this
addition in the following words:
"We have added afurther explanation to clause 124A. The second
explanation was intended to protect fair and honest criticism
which hadfor its object the alteration ofthe policy pursued by the
Government in any particular case. Some people were
apprehensive that the express declaration of this principle might
be held impliedly to negative the right of people to criticise
Government action when that criticism could not lead to a
reversal of such action; for instance criticism on past expenditure,
or criticism on an appointment which the critic may think
objectionable. I thinkthis apprehensionwas quite unfounded, but
in order to allay it we have introduced the third explanation. "sl
4.9 The discussions of the Select Committee indicate that the British
Govemment was not keen on granting freedom of expression to Indians
to the extent enjoyed in England. The British found it difficult to limit the
scope of sedition to direct incitement to violence or to commit rebellion
in view ofthe fact that the landscape was under foreign rule and inhabited
by many races, with diverse customs and conflicting creeds.52
4. l0 While the British Government was justifuing enlarging the ambit of laws
2.1
50 lbid
5r K.l, Vibhute, PS. A. Pill(ri's Criminal Zaw 65 (Lexis Nexis Butterworths, Nagpur, 2012).
52 ld. at 66.
h-


4.1 1
4.12
on sedition, the Court in Kamal Krishna Sircar v. Emperor,s3 refused to
term seditious a speech that condemned Govemment legislation declaring
the Communist Party of India and various trade unions and labour
organisations illegal. It was opined by the Court that imputing seditious
intent to such a kind of speech would completely suppress freedom of
speech and expression in India. It was observed that:
"To suggest some other form of government is not necessarily to
bring the present Government into hatred or contempt... That does
not mean that one may not make speeches of this kind. I do not
like quite a lot ofthings the people do constantlyfrom day to day.
That is no reason for suggesting that those people are guilty of
sedition or of attempting to bring the Government into hatred or
contempt. "
The aforesaid case reflects the tendency of the British govemment to use
sedition to suppress any kind of criticism. Recognising this aspect of
Section l24A of IPC, in Niharendu Dutt Majumdar v. the King
Emperor5a, the Court digressed from the literal interpretation given to
Section l24Ain Bal Gangadhar Tilak. The Court held that the offence of
sedition was linked to disruption of public order and prevention of
anarchy and until and unless the speech leads to public disorder or a
reasonable anticipation or likelihood of it, it cannot be termed seditious.55
Thus, the crux of the defence argument in Bal Gangadhar Tilak was
affirmed. The appellant was consequently acquitted by the Federal Court,
with the Court opining that all unpleasant words cannot be regarded
'actionable'.
Later on, this definition was ovemrled in the case of King Emperor v.
Sadashiv Narayan Bhalerao.56 In this case, the reading of 'public order'
53 AIR 1935 cal 636
54 AtR 1942 Fc 22.
5s lbid.
56 AIR 1947 pc 84.
ti
I\&,


in Section l24A of IPC in Niharendu Dutt Majumdar was not accepted
and the literal interpretation in Bal Gangadhar Tilak, and later in
Ramchandra Narayan, and Amba Prasad, was upheld.
B. Judicisl Decisions on Sedition After the Enoclment of the Constitulion
l. Rulings on Sedition Prior to Kedar Nath Sizgl, Judgment
4.13 After independence, although certain observations were made by the
Court in Romesh Thapar v. State of Madras5T and Brij Bhushan v. State
of Delhis8,, the question of constitutionality of Section 124,,4, did not
directly arise before the Supreme Court until 1962. The judgments in both
Romesh Thapar and Brij Bhushan were delivered on the same day. The
majority in Romesh Thapar held that unless a law restricting freedom of
speech and expression is directed solely against the undermining of the
security of the state or the overthrow of it, any such law restricting the
same cannot fall within the reservations under Article 19(2).
4.14 The same majority in Brij Bhushan relied upon its decision in Romesh
Thapar and struck down Section 9(1-A) of the Madras Maintenance of
the Public Order Act, 1949, which had authorised the imposition of
restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression for preventing or
combating any activity prejudicial to the public safety or the maintenance
of public order. The majority held that the impugned provisions were in
excess of the powers conferred on the legislatureby Clause (2) of Article
l9 of the Constitution. However, Fazl Ali, J. while writing a dissenting
opinion in both ofthese cases, delved into the nature and scope of the law
of sedition and explained the rationale for not including the term
'sedition' in Article 19(2) of the Constitution. While quoting Stephen's
57 AtR 1950 SC t24
58 AIR l95o sc t29
l6
w,


4.15
Criminal Law of England, Fazl Ali, J. held that:
"This passage brings out two matters with remarkable clarity. It
shows firstly that sedition is essentially an offence against public
tranquillity and secondly that broadly speaking there are two
classes of offences against public tranquillity: (a) those
accompanied by violence including disorders which affect
tranquillity of a considerable number of persons or an extensive
local area, and (b) those not accompanied by violence but tending
to cause it, such as seditious utterances, seditious conspiracies,
etc. Both these classes of offences are such as will undermine the
security of the State or tend to overthrow it rf l"ft unchecked, and,
as I have tried to point out, there is a good deal of authoritative
opinion in favour of the view that the gravity ascribed to sedition
is due to the fact that it tends to seriously affect the tranquillity
and security of the State. In principle, then, it would not have
been logical to refer to sedition in clause (2) of Article 19 and
omit matters which are no less gruve snd which have equal
potenliality for undermining the security of the Stote. It oppears
that theframers of the Constitution preferred to adopl the logical
course and have used the more general and basic words which
are opt to cover sedition os well as other motters which are as
detrimenlal to the security of the State as sedilion."se
Thus, Fazl Ali, J. held that there were various degrees of gravity in the
offence of sedition. The reasoning for the omission of 'sedition' from
Article 19(2) according to him was the intent of the framers of the
Constitution to include terms of wider connotation which included the
activity of sedition along with other activities 'which are detrimental to
the security ofthe State as sedition'.
The Punjab High Court in Tara Singh Gopi Chand v. The State,60 while
relying upon the majority opinion tn Romesh Thapar, declared Section
l24A unconstitutional, reasoning that it contravenes the right offreedom
of speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution. The Court held:
21
5e ld. at 133.
@ AIR 195 I Punj 27.


"It is true that the framers of the Constitution have not adopted
the limitations which the Federal Court desired to lay down. It
maybe they did not consider it proper to go sofar. The limitation
placed by Clause (2) of Article l9upon interference with the
freedom of Speech, however, is real and substantial. The
unsuccessful attempt to excite badfeelings is an offence within the
ambit of Section I 24A. In some instances at least the unsuccessful
attempt will not undermine or tend to overthrow the State. It is
enough if one instance appears of the possible application of the
section to curtailment of the freedom of speech and expression in
a manner not permitted by the constitution. "
4.16 The Parliament by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951
amended Clause (2) of Article I 9 and insened two additional restrictions
- namely, 'friendly relations with foreign State' and 'public order'. The
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Constitution (First Amendment)
Act, 195 I provided as follows:
"During the lastfifteen months of the working of the Constitution,
certain dfficulties have been brought to light by judicial decisions
and pronouncements specially in regard to the chapter on
fundamental rights. The citizen's right to freedom of speech and
expression guaranteed by article 19(1)(a) has been held by some
courts to be so comprehensive as not to render a person culpable
even if he advocates murder and other crimes of violence. "
Thus, the Parliament took note of the reasoning of the majority opinion
in Romesh Thapar,which had held that freedom ofspeech and expression
could be restricted on the grounds of threat to national security and for
'serious aggravated forms of public disorder that endanger national
security' and not 'relatively minor breaches of peace of a purely local
significance'. The Amendment echoed the statement of law as laid down
in the dissenting opinion of Fazl Ali, J. in Brij Bhushan.bl
4.17 Subsequent to the enactment of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act,
6r Hari Singh Cour, ll Penal Law of lndio 1224 (Law Publishers (lndia) P\.t. Ltd., Allahabad, I l'h edn.. 201 I ).
l{t
O/


1951, the Patna High Court in Devi Soren v. State of Bihar62, dealt with
the validity of the Section 124A. While upholding its validity, the High
Court held that the scope of Article 1 9(2) has now been widened after the
addition of in the interest of public order' as a reasonable restriction on
freedom of speech and expression. The Court, while distinguishing the
terms 'public order' and 'in the interest of public order', held that while
the term 'public order' simpliciter might need evidence of incitement of
violence or tendency ofviolence, the expression 'in the interest of public
order' is wide enough to cover mere bad feelings without any proof of
tendency to violence or disorder.6r
6r ILR (1953) 32 Pat I104
6i/latlll9.
61 1957 SCR 860.
l9
4.18 The Constitution bench of the Supreme Court in Ramji Lal Modi v. State
of Uttar Pradesh6a, dealt with the scope of words 'in the interests of
public order' in Article 19(2). It was argued that Section 295,{ of the IPC
covers both varieties of insults, i.e. those which may lead to public
disorders as well as those which may not. It was argued that the law
insofar as it covers the first variety may be said to have been enacted in
the interests of public order within the meaning of Clause (2) of Article
19, but insofar as it covers the remaining variety, it will not fall within
that clause. It was, thus, argued that since the provision covers speech that
doesn't create public disorder, it should be held to be unconstitutional and
void. The Court, while declining to accept the argument, held that the
phrase 'in the interests of public order', is of much wider connotation than
'for maintenance of public order'. The Court held that if, therefore,
certain activities have a tendency to cause public disorder, a law
penalizing such activities as an offence cannot but be held to be a law
\..\
W,.-


imposing reasonable restriction "in the interests of public order",
although in some cases those activities may not actually lead to a breach
of public order. The Court further held that Section 2954. punishes only
the aggravated form of insult to religion when it is perpetrated with the
deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings of
that class. The calculated tendency of this aggravated form of insult is
clearly to disrupt the public order and the section, which penalises such
activities, is well within the protection of Clause (2) of Article 19. Thus,
the Court introduced two tests: 'aggravated form', which defines the
criteria for what counts as an insult, and the 'calculated tendency' ofthe
insult to disrupt the public order.65
4.19 The full bench of the Allahabad High Court in Ram Nandany. State66
dealt with the constitutionality of Secti on 124A. While declaring Section
1244, unconstitutional, the Court held that Section 124A deals notjust
with the aggravated form of disaffection, but even for the mildest variety
of hatred, contempt or disaffection. There could be instances where
speech would contain the germs of an incitement to violence, and
instances where it would not. Thus, even a mildest form of disaffection
could be caught by Section 124A which would go against the scheme of
Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
4.20 In 1960, the Constitution bench of the Supreme Court in Supdt., Cennal
Prison v. Dr Ram Manohar Lohia67, had the occasion to interpret the
words 'in the interest of public order' in Article 19(2) of the Constitution.
65 Lawrence Liang, "Free Speech and Expression", in Sujit Choudhry, Madhav Khosla, and Pratap Bhanu Mehta
(eds.), The O4ford Handboolt of the Indian ConstitutionS2T (Oxford University Press, 2016), ovqilable at
6 t 958 SCC Onl-ine A I t7.
67 ( 1960) 2 SCR E2l.
l{)
e/


After considering different judicial opinion, the court summarized the
phrase in the following words:
"The foregoing discussion yields the following results : (l)
" Public order" is synonymous with public safety and tranquillity:
it is the absence of disorder involving breaches of local
significance in contradistinction to national upheavals, such as
revolution, civil strife, war, affecting the security of the State; (2)
there must be proximate and reasonable nexus between the speech
and the public order; (3) Section 3, as it now stands, does not
establish in most of the cases comprehended by it any such nexus;
(4) there is a conflict ofdecision on the question of severability in
the context of an offending provision the language whereof is wide
enough to cover restrictions both within and without the limits of
constitutionally permissible legislation; one view is that it cannot
be split up ifthere is possibility ofits being appliedfor purposes
not sanctioned by the Constitution and the other view is that such
a provision is valid if it is severable in its application to an object
which is clearly demarcatedfrom other object or objects falling
outside the limits of constitutionally permissible legislation; and
(5) the provisions of the section are so inextricably mixed up that
it is not possible to apply the doctrine of severability so as to
enable us to afirm the validity of a part of it and reject the rest."
2. Kedar Nath Srttsr, Judsment
The challenge to the constitutionality of Section 124A came directly
before the Supreme Court for the first time in Kedar Nath Singh v. State
of Bihafs. The Constitution bench instituted for deciding the same upheld
the validity of Section 1244. The Court, after taking a detailed account
ofthe history ofSection 124A, explicitly recognized that the State needs
protection from the forces who seek tojeopardize the safety and stability
of the State. The Court made the following observation:
"This offence, which is generally known as the offence of Sedition,
occurs in Chapter VI of the Indian Penal Code, headed "Of
Ofences against the State" This species of offence against the
state was not an invention of the British Government in India, but
4.21
]I
68 1962 Supp (2) SCR 769; AIR 1962 SC 955.
A'
w/


4.22
has been known in England for centuries. Every State, whatever
its form of government has to be armed with the power to punish
those who, by their conduct, jeopardise the safety and stability of
the State, or disseminate such feelings of disloyalty as have the
tendency to lead to the disruption of the State or to public
disorder. "6e
While distinguishing the phrase 'the Govemment established by law'
from the persons for the time being engaged in carrying on the
administration, the Court observed that:
"Government established by low" is the visible symbol of the
State. The very existence of the State will be in jeopardy if the
Government established by law is subverted. Hence, the continued
existence of the Government established by law is an essential
condition of the stability of the State. That is why 'sedition', as the
offence in Section 124A has been characterised, comes, under
Chapter VI relating to offences againsl the State. Hence any acts
within the meaning of Section l24A which have the effect of
subverting the Government by bringing that Government into
contempt or hatred, or creating disaffection against it, would be
within the penal statute because the feeling of disloyalty to the
Government established by law or enmity to it imports the idea of
tendency to public disorder by the use of actual violence or
incitement to violence. ln other words, any written or spoken
words, etc., which have implicit in them the idea of subverting
Government by violent means, which are compendiously included
in the term 'revolution', have been made penal by the section in
question. But the section has taken care to indicate clearly that
strong words used to express disapprobation of the measures of
Government with a view to their improvement or alteration by
lawful means would not come within the section. Similarly,
comments, however strongly worded, expres s ing disapprobation
of actions of the Government, without exciting those feelings
which generate the inclination to cause public disorder by acts of
violence, would not be penal. In other words, disloyalty to
Government established by law is not the same thing as
commenting in strong terms upon the measures or acts of
Government, or its agencies, .so as to ameliorate the condition of
the people or to secure the cancellation or alteration of those acts
6e Kedar Noth Singh y. State of Bihor AIR 1962 SC 955
.l2
N/


4.23
4.24
or measures by lawful means, that is to say, without exciting those
feelings of enmity and disloyalty which imply excitement to public
disorder or the use of violence. "70
The Court, hence, struck a balance between the right to free speech and
expression and the power of the legislature to restrict such right by
observing thus:
" ...the security of the State, which depends upon the maintenance
of law and order is the very basic consideration upon which
legislation, with view to punishing offences against the State, is
undertaken. Such a legislation has, on the one hand, fully to
protect and guarantee the freedom of speech and expression,
which is the sine qua non of a democratic form of Government
that our Constitution has established. ... But the freedom has to
be guarded against becoming a licence for vilification and
condemnation of the Government established by law, in words,
which incite violence or have the tendency to creale public
disorder. A citizen has a right to say or write whatever he likes
about the Government, or its measures, by way of criticism or
comment, so long os he does nol incile people to violence against
the Government estoblished by law or with lhe intention of
crealing public disorder. "7|
The Supreme Court in Kedar Nath Singh took note of its earlier decision
in Ramji Lal Modi to observe that the latter judgment throws a good deal
of light upon the ambit of the power of legislature to impose a reasonable
restriction on the exercise of the fundamental right to freedom of speech
and expression. The Supreme Court took note of the strict test of
proximity as laid down in Ramji Lal Modi and reinterpreted in Ram
Manohar Lohia. Thus, while laying down the test for sedition, the Court
held that unless the words used or the actions in question do not threaten
the security of the State or of the public or lead to any sort of public
disorder which is grave in nature, the act would not fall within the ambit
10 lbid.
1t lbid.
ll
V
of Section l24A of IPC.


4.25 It is pertinent to note that as per the Kedar Nath Singh ludgment, proof of
violence is not essential for establishing the offence of sedition. As to the
nature of test laid down in this case for determining the threat to violence,
Kedar Nath Singh indeed approved the "tendency test" of the UK rather
than relying on the "imminent danger test" of the USA.72 This is so
because throughout the judgment, focus is on the tendency or incitement
to violence or disorder rather than actual violence or imminent threat of
violence. That the accused Kedar Nath Singh was convicted and punished
for his speech without any proof of direct incitement of violence or any
imminent danger of public disorder is further testimony to the Court
adopting the "tendency test" for interpreting Section 124A ofIPC.73 This
objective test of tendency applied by the Court entails examination of
alleged seditious material present before the Court, the circumstances and
the conduct ofthe accused. This test need not necessarily inquire into the
consequences of the alleged seditious expression like actual violence or
real impact of the disputed material. If the speech or expression is
deliberately made and the content is pernicious enough, there is no
requirement of proof of any overt conduct to establish tendency of
violence. In the absence of such an inference, the Supreme Court could
never have upheld the conviction of Kedar Nath Singh.Ta
3. Rulines Post Kedar Nall Judgment
4.26 After the pronouncement in the case of Kedar Nath Singh by the Supreme
Court, public disorder has been considered to be a necessary ingredient
of Section l24A of IPC by the courts. The courts have been categorical
in expressing that every criticism of the government does not amount to
7r Manoj Kumar Sinha & Anurag Deep, Law ofsedition in India and Freedou ofExpression24S (The Indian
Law Institute, New Delhi, 2018).
13 lbid.
14 tbid.
3.1
a,,


sedition and the real intent of the speech must be considered before
imputing seditious intent to an act. The Supreme Court, in the case of
Raghubir Singh v. State of Bihar 75, held that in order to constitute an
offence of conspiracy and sedition, it is not necessary that the accused
himself should author the seditious material or should have actually
attempted hatred, contempt or disaffection.
4.27 In the case of Balwant Singh v. State of Punjab76, the Court held that mere
casual raising of slogans a few times against the State without any overt
act, which neither evoked any response nor any reaction from anyone in
the public, does not attract the provisions of Section l24A of IPC.
4.28 Briefly touching upon the issue of freedom of expression and its conflict
with reasonable restrictions enumerated in Anicle l9(2), the Supreme
Court in S. Rangarajan v. P. Jagiivan RamTT,held that there has to be a
balance between free speech and restrictions for special interest as the
two cannot be balanced as though they were of equal weight. While
invoking the analogy of 'spark in a powder keg', the Court held that
exceptions have to be construed precisely as deviations from the norm
that free speech should prevail except in exceptional circumstances.T8 The
Court observed:
"There does indeed have to be a compromise between the interest
of freedom of expression and special interests. But we cannot
simply balance the two interests as if they are of equal weight. Our
commitment of freedom of expression demands that it cannot be
suppressed unless the situations created by allowing the freedom
are pressing and the community interest is endangered. The
anticipated danger should not be remote, conjectural or far-
75 AIR t987 sc 149.
76 (1995) 3 scc 2t4.
7? (1989) 2 SCC 574.
7E Lawrence Liang, 'Free Speech and Expression', in Sujit Choudhry, Madhav Khosla, and Pratap Bhanu Mehta
(eds), The Oxford Handbook ofthe lndian Constitution 828 (Oxford University Press, 2016).
-15
\


fetched. It should have proximate and direct nexus with the
expression. The expression of thought should be intrinsically
dangerous to the public interest. In other words, the expression
should be inseparably locked up with the action contemplated like
the equivalent of a 'spark in a power keg'."
4.29 ln Bilal Ahmed Kaloo v. State ofAndhra Pradesh 7e, the Court quashed
the charges under the said section, as it was not established before the
Court that the appellant had done any'thing which would threaten the
existence of the Govemment established by law or might cause public
disorder. ln Nazir Khan v. State of Delhi,8o the court reiterated this
principle by stating:
"Sedition has been described as disloyalty in action, and the law
considers as sedition all those practices which have for their
object to excite discontent or dissatisfaction, to create public
disturbance, or to lead to civil war; to bring into hatred or
contempt the Sovereign or the Government, the laws or
constitutions of the realm, and generally all endeavours to
promote public disorder. "
4.30 A prayer was made in the case of Common Cause v. lJnion of Indidt , to
issue directions for review of pending cases of sedition in various courts,
where a superior police officer may certifu that the 'seditious act' either
led to the incitement of violence or had the tendency or the intention to
create public disorder. The court granted the prayer and directed the
authorities that while dealing with Section l24A of IPC, they are to be
guided by the principles laid down in Kedar Nath Singh.
4.31 ln Vinod Dua v. {Jnion of Indid2 , affirming the law laid down in Kedar
Nath Singh, the Court held that a citizen has a right to criticize or
i6
7' AIR I997 SC 343E,
80 AIR 2003 sc 4427.
8r (2016) l5 scc 269.
8'1 2021 SCC Online 414.
U


comment upon the measures undertaken by the Government and its
functionaries so long as he does not incite people to violence against the
Government established by law or with the intention of creating public
disorder; and that it is only when the words or expressions have a
pemicious tendency or intention of creating public disorder or
disturbance oflaw and orderthat Sections l24Acanbe invoked.s3
4.32 In its order dated May 11,2023, the Supreme Court in S.G. Vombatkere
v. [Jnion of Indiasa, directed all the State Govemments and the Central
Govemment to keep all pending trials, appeals and proceedings arising
out ofa charge fiamed under Section l24Ato be kept in abeyance. The
Court in its prima facie observation, opined that the rigours of Section
l24A of IPC were not in tune with the current social milieu, and were
intended for a time when this country was under the colonial regime.ss
E3 lbid-
u (2022) 7 scc 433.
It ld- at 436.
37
U


5. SEDITION VIS-A-VIS FREE SPEECH
5.1
5.2 However, reasonable restrictions can always be imposed on this right in
order to ensure its responsible exercise and to ensure that it is equally
available to all citizens. According to Article l9(3) of the Intemational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 (ICCPR), this freedom may
be subjected to restrictions, provided they are 'prescribed by law and are
necessary for respecting the rights or reputation of others' or for the
'protection of national security, public order, public health or morals'.87
5.3 Similarly, Article I 9( I )(a) of the Constitution of India guarantees
freedom ofspeech and expression to all citizens. However, Article l9(2)
provides for certain restrictions to which this freedom can be subjected
to, namely, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security ofthe State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or
86 Stephen Schmidt & Mack C. Shelly et. ol. American Government and Politics Today ll (Cengage Leaming,
usA,2014).
8TArticle 19 of the Inlemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 99 U.N.T.S. l7l (1966)readsas:
"The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 ofthis article cqrries with it special duties and
responsibilities. lt may therefore be subject lo cerlqin rcslriclions, butthese shall only be such qs qre
provided by low and are necessary:
(a)For respect of the rights or reputotions ofothers;
b) For the protection ofnationql security or ofpublic order (order public), or ofpublic heahh or morqls. "
3li
Free speech is a hallmark ofdemocracy. The purpose ofthis freedom is
to allow an individual to attain self-fulfilment, assist in the discovery of
truth, strengthen the capacity ofa person to take decisions and facilitate
a balance between stability and social change.86 It finds mention in the
Preamble and Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
1948, (UDHR).
u,


incitement to an offence.
5.4 The relevance ofthe offence ofsedition provided under Section l24Aof
IPC is a subject of continuous and ceaseless debate. Those opposing it
see this provision as a relic of India's colonial past. On the other hand, it
is argued that amidst growing concems of national security, this provision
provides a reasonable restriction on utterances that are inimical to the
security and integrity of the nation. Balancing freedom of expression with
collective national interest is one of the key ingredients of this law.
Indeed, dissent with the sole objective to unseat a government strengthens
the democratic fabric so long as it does not use mischievous propaganda
of extreme form or lead to tendency of violence or disorder or support
disintegration of the country.88 The purpose of sedition was not only to
check the threat against the safety and stability of the State but also to
ensure that valid criticism of the govemment was not eclipsed at the same
time.se
5.5 As long as the means adopted by the protesting voices are constitutional
and legal, criticism of the govemment would merely be disapprobation
and not disaffection. However, the moment such disapprobation leads to
incitement of violence or suggests incitement of violence as the only
recourse available, the offence of sedition becomes operative.e0
5.6 It is worthwhile to note that even in a state like the United States of
America which proscribes the State from enacting any legislation
curtailing the first amendment - right to free speech and expression, the
E8 Manoj Kumar Sinha & Anurag Deep, Law of Sedition in India and Freedom of Expression 188 (The Indian
Law Institute, New Delhi, 201 8).
8e ld. at 6.q Kedqr Nath Singh y. Stqte ofBihar, AIR 1962 SC 955.
l9
Ah/


judiciary has invented the Doctrine of Police Power to protect laws made
by the Congress. Thus, even in a State that follows the 'absolutism' model
of'freedom ofspeech', the said right is not absolute.
5.7 Further, the Constitution framers, while deliberating over what model to
keep, ultimately decided to reject the 'absolutist' model and instead
decided to adopt the 'expressly restrictive' model.er Dr Ambedkar noted:
"Wat the Draft Constitution has done is that instead of
formulating fundamental rights in absolute terms and depending
upon our Supreme Court to come to the rescue of Parliament by
inventing the doctrine of police power, it permits the State directly
to impose limitations upon the fundamental rights. There is really
no difference in the result, what one does directly, the other does
indirectly. In both cases, the fundamental rights are not
absolute. "e2
5.8 The fundamental right to speech and expression in India is not only
subject to the eight reasonable restrictions stipulated under Article l9(2),
but it can also be suspended during emergency under Article 358 ofthe
Constitution of India.e3 The intention of the Constituent Assembly and
the Parliament was not just to distinguish it from the US model but also
to keep it sufficiently away from it because of strong disintegrating and
separatist tendencies.ea
5.9 Article l9(l)(a) in the original Constitution guaranteed the fundamental
right to 'freedom of speech and expression' subject to the qualifiers in
Clause (2), t.e. the government's authority to legislate conceming libel,
ef Dr. Ambedkar, Motion Re Draft Constitution, Vll CAD 4'h November 1948, ovailable at:
https://www.constitutionofindia.neVconstitution_assembly_debates/volume/?/1948-l I -04 (last visited on Mar.
0r,2023).
e2 lbid.
t3 The Constitution of India. Article 358.
e' Manoj Kumar Sinha & Anurag Deep, Law ofsedition in lndia and Freedom of Expression 2M-2O5 (The Indian
Law lnstitute, New Delhi, 2018).
.10
E


slander, defamation, contempt of court, any matter offending decency or
morality, or which undermines the security of or tends to overthrow, the
State. Upset at a series ofjudgmentses rendered by the Supreme Court and
certain High Courts, Pt. Nehru wrote to Dr Ambedkar, expressing the
view that the Constitution's provisions pertaining to law and order and
subversive activities needed to be amended.e6
5. 10 Consequent to Dr Ambedkar's acquiescence, Prime Minister Nehru
introduced the draft of the First Amendment in the Lok Sabha on the 12th
of May, 1 95 I . As to the inclusion of 'public order' and 'incitement to an
offence' as grounds for restricting free speech, Pt. Nehru exclaimed that
a Constitution should 'not limit the power of Parliament to face a
situation'. e7 He further maintained that the 'concept of individual
freedom has to be balanced with social freedom and the relations ofthe
individual with the social group'.e8 Finally after its passage, the First
amendmentee retrospectively as well as prospectively empowered the
government to impose 'reasonable restrictions' on the freedom of
expression "in the interests of the security of the State (replacing the
words 'tends to overthrow the State'), friendly relations with foreign
States, public order, decency or morality or in relation to contempt of
court, defamation (replacing the words 'libel' and 'slander'), or
incitement to an offence."loo
e5 Stare olBihar v. Shailabqla Devi 1952 (3) SCR 65ai In re Bhorati Press AIR l95l Patna2l; Romesh Thapar
v. Store of Madras 1950 (l ) SCR 602.
% Granville Avslin, Working A Democratic Constitution: The Indian Experience 42 (Oxford University Press,
New Delhi, 1999).
e1 Id. at 46.q l2 Parliamentary Debates, part 2, cols. 6E l5-32 ( l6 May, l95l I Parliamentary Debates was the designation for
Lok Sabha debates during the 'Provisional Parliament').
s The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951.
r@ Granville A\stttr, Working A Democratic Constitution: The Indian Experience 49 (Oxford University Press,
New Delhi, 1999).
.lt
L
w.


5.t I The Sixteenth Constitutional Amendment, 1963, funher strengthened the
reasonable restrictions on free speech by adding the expression 'the
sovereignty and integrity of India' to Article 19(2).'01 The reasons for the
same were many, with the most predominant one being the Chinese
incursions on Indian territory ultimately culminating in the Indo-China
War of 1962. Master Tara Singh's long fast for a Sikh state, Punjabi Suba,
during mid-1961 and the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam's (DMK) call for
an entity separate from India called Dravidanad, comprising Madras,
Mysore, Kerala, and Andhra, were issues of funher concem.r02
5.12 Faced with the Sikh agitation and aware of the DMK's proclivities, the
Chief Ministers' Conference in August, 1961, unanimously
recommended that advocacy of secession be made a penal offence.
Accordingly, a National lntegration Council was established. The
Council's report recommended that any "demand for secession from the
Centre be made unconstitutional."r0r The then Law Minister, Ashoke
Kumar Sen, while introducing the Sixteenth Amendment Bill in the Lok
Sabha on the 21't of January, 1963, said that its purpose was to give
'appropriate powers to impose restrictions against those individuals or
organizations who want to make secession from India or disintegration of
India as political purposes for fighting elections'. The amendment was
passed unanimously. It was hailed as a great achievement by many,
especially keeping in view the drastic change in DMK's stance as a result
of the amendment when, later in that year, the DMK's senior figure, Dr
Annadurai, 'unequivocally declared that the DMK once and for all gave
ror The Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963.
r02 This was stated in the DMK'S election manifesto for the 1962 general elections, adopted in Coimbatore in
December 1961.
r03 Granville Austin, llorking A Democrolic Constitution: The lndian Experience 5 I-52 (Oxford University Press,
New Delhi, 1999).
{:


up the demand for Dravida Nadu and henceforth solidly and sincerely
stood for the sovereignty and unity of India.'r0l
5.13 Thus, the entire objective of imposing one after another reasonable
restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression, as is evident from
the discussions held in the Constituent Assembly and the debates and
deliberations preceding the First and Sixteenth Amendment to the
Constitution, was to primarily safeguard the sovereignfy, territorial
integrity and security of India as well as securing the interest of public
order. It is in this context that it becomes crucial to understand the true
import of the offence of sedition in India. It is important to contextualise
the need for the offence ofsedition with the stark ground realities that are
still existent. An attempt for the same is made in the next chapter.
&,
t@ ld. at 52
.l-'j


6. THREATS TO INDIA'S INTERNAL SECURITY
6.1
6.2 Further, any attack on the former is essentially an attack on the latter.loT
In a pluralistic society like India, with multiple religious, ethnic, regional,
and linguistic identities and a unique geopolitical position in the
subcontinent, internal security is a sine qua non for the nation's very
existence.r0s The National Security Advisor (NSA), Mr. Ajit Doval, noted
in his address to the 2014 Batch of Indian Police Services probation
officers:
" l{e are now in the phase offourth generation warfare, a dfficult
war against an invisible army, whether it is organised crime,
terrorism, insurgency or foreign powers trying to meddle into our
internal affairs. "toe
6.3 Stressing on the increased focus on maintaining intemal security, Shri
Doval, in another address, commented:
"Wars ceased to become effective instrument to achieve political
and military objectives. They are too expensive, unaffordable, and
there's uncertainty about their outcome. It is the civil society that
r0r Social and Political Research Foundation, "Challenges to Intemal Security in India" | (New Delhi, 2019)
(hereinafter "SPRF").
16 S.M. Makinda, 'sovereignty and Clobal Security" 2g(3) Security Dialogue 281 292 (1998).
to1 lbid.
r08 Sumit Canguly, et al. (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of lndia's Nationql Securily (Oxford University Press.
2018).
roe Press Trust of India, "lntemal security going to be a big challenge for India: NSA Ajil Doval" ( l3 July, 2018),
ovailable at https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/intemal-security-going-to-be-a-big-challenge-
for-india-nsa-ajit-
doval/anicleshoW4960946l.cms?utm source:contentofinterest&utm mediumnext&utm_campaign=cppst (last
visited Mar. 10,2023).
1l
Intemal security of a country can be understood as securing the
apparatuses involved in safeguarding its territorial boundaries and
protecting its sovereignty. r05 The link between intemal security and
sovereignty is well established.l06 It is imperative that a country's internal
security be shielded in order to enable it to exercise its sovereignty and
protect its territorial integrity.
w/


can be subverted, divided and manipulated to hurt the interest of
the nation. "tto
6.4 The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) in its Annual Report of 2021-22
has recognised Maoist extremism in certain areas, insurgency in the
North-East, terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) and in the hinterland
of the country, as prominent challenges for India's intemal security
establishment.r I I
A. Maoist Extremism
6.5 The Maoist insurgency led by the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-
Maoist) as well as various other such banned outfits is arguably the largest
intemal security threat in India as once declared by the former Prime
Minister of India, Dr Manmohan Singh. ll2 Having its genesis in the
Naxalbari areas of West Bengal state in 1967 , the Maoist insurgency has
evolved through various forms and shades.rrs
6.6 The Maoists' objective is to seize political power and herald a 'New
Democracy' through a protracted armed struggle. In doing so, they reject
the parliamentary and democratic forms of governance in India by
terming them to be a sham. It is through these ideological orientations and
the romanticisation of 'revolutionary violence' that the Maoists, in their
movement in last five decades, have been able to establish their presence
rr0Times News Network, Prorec, lntlia from subversive .forces, sqls NSA Ajit Doval to IPS Oflicers (13 Nov.,
202\) @qilable at'.
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/anicleshowlST6'14496.crns?utm source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=tex
t&utm_campaign=cppst (last visited Mar. 1 0, 2023).
rrr Ministry of Home Affairs, "Annual Repon 202l-2022" 6 (Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of lndia
(2022) (hereinafter "MHA Report 2021-22").
II2 Anshuman Behera, "From Mao to Maoism: The Indian Path", in Narendar Pani and Anshuman Behera (eds.)
Reasoning Indian Politics: Philosopher Politicians to Politiciqns Seeking Philosophy 182-204 (Routledge,
London, 2018)
ttl lbid-
1a w/


6.7
over I 80 districts in ten States.
For over more than five decades of their existence, the MaoistsA{axalites,
in the garb of advocating liberty and seltdetermination, demolish
hospitals, burn schools, damage roads and kill people participating in
electoral process. The real and imminent threat from these groups has
resulted in mass scale violence, rape, targeted killings, etc. The following
table offers testimony to this.
Table l: Fatalities in Maoist Violence: 2004-2021
Year Incidents Deaths
2004 r 533
2005 1608 679
2006 1509 678
2007 1565 696
2008 I 591 72t
2009 22s8 908
201 0 22t3 1005
2011 1760 611
2012 1415
20t3 I 136 397
2014 1091 310
20t5 1089 230
2016 278
2017 908 263
201 8 833 240
20t9 670 202
2020 665 183
16
s66
415
1048
V


2021 509 147
Total 23401 8529
Source: Ministry of Home Affairsrra
6.8
6.9
By rejecting democracy and the constitutionally established form of
govemance, they have challenged the sovereignty ofthe Indian state. The
brutal killings of civilians, govemment officials and the security forces
by the Maoists reflect on this aspect of the security threat. Legitimising
violence by non-state actors is another serious threat that the Maoists and
their over-ground supporters pose to the Indian society and polity.
As one can observe a substantial fall in the Maoist related violent
incidents over the course of past years, several leaders of the movement
have been either neutralised or arrested. Even though the threat perception
emanating from the Maoist insurgency has been contained to a significant
extent, it refuses to die down altogether.
B. Militancy and Ethnic ConJlict in the Northeast
6. l0 The long-standing militancy and violent ethnic conflicts in some of the
North-eastern states have been a serious internal security concern for the
country. Contrary to a separatist position that conceptualises the violence
and conflicts as 'freedom struggle' against the 'homogenizing state',r15
most of these conflicts are often guided by distorted sentiments emerging
from certain vested interests, overshadowing the realistic issues. The
MHA has put these conflicts in three broad categories, namely, separatist
insurgencies demanding independence; autonomist insurgencies
rr1 Ministry of Home Affairs, "Annual Reports" (Ministry of Home Affairs, Govemment of India, New Delhi.
lndia) avoilable at: hnps://www.mha.gov.in/en/documents/annual-reports (last visited on Mar.25,2023).
I 15 Ajai Sahni, "survey of Conflicts and Resolution in lndia's Northeast", 12 Faultlines (2002) avoilable at:
https://www.satp.org/satporgtp/publication/fauhlines/volume I 2/article3.htm (last visited on F eb. 22, 2023).
!7
tu,


asserting sub-regional aspirations; and intra-ethnic conflicts among
dominant and smaller tribal groups.rr6 The table below illustrates the
profile of violence in the North-east.
Table 2: Profile of Violence in North-East20l4-2021t17
r16 Rajya Sabh4 "Security Situation in the North Eastem States of India", Two Hundred Thirteenth Report l-2
(Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs. Rajya Sabha, l9 July,20l8).
r17 MHA Reporr 2021-22. at 18.
Years Incidents Extremists
Killed
Extremists
Arrested
Security
Forces
Killed
Civilians
Killed
Persons
Kidnapped/
Abducted
2004 1234 1099 il0 414 225
2005 406 1498 70 393 239
2006 1366 39s 1406 76 309 306
2007 t491 514 1837 79 498 292
2008 1 561 640 2566 46 466 416
2009 1297 571 2162 42 264 230
201 0 773 247 20 94 214
201I 627 t14 2141 32 70 250
2012 1025 222 2145 t4 97 329
201 3 732 138 t7 t2 l8 t07 307
2014 824 l8l 1934 20 212 369
20t5 574 149 1900 46 46 267
2016 484 87 1202 t7 48 r68
2017 308 57 995 t2 37 102
2018 252 34 804 t4 :) tt7
2019 936 04 2t r08
2020 163 21 646 05 03 69
2021 209 40 686 08 23 94
{lt
382
1332
2213
223 12
hv


6.1 I The Ministry of Home Affairs has observed that insurgency related
incidents have declined in the North-east and that the overall security
situation has improved, with a reduction of 83oh in civilian deaths and
40Yo in security forces casualties in 201 7, compared to 2014.
6.12 Despite marked reduction in these activities over the course ofpast years,
a complete wipe-out has not been achieved till date. The region has
witnessed ethnic secessionist movements along with tribal and ethno-
linguistic separatist conflicts. Nagaland, then part of Assam, was the first
to experience militancy and soon similar movements in Mizoram,
Tripura, Assam and Manipur followed.rrs
6. 13 Moreover, the internal conflicts between the dominant and the minority
groups often blame the Indian state as a common enemy and hold the
latter responsible. lle Apart from these, the extemal factors and their
implications on the internal conflicts and militancy, in terms of sustaining
them and providing them safe houses in their territories, have been
instrumental in the survival of these subversive movements.
ttE lbid.
rre Anshuman Behera, "lndia's Intemal Security: Threat Perception and Way Forward" l5(2) CLAIVS Journal35
(Winter, 2021).
I20 Surinder Kumar Sharma & Anshuman Beher4 Militant Groups in Sourh lsrc 90 (New Delhi: IDSA-Pentagon
Press, 2014).
tzt ld. at 97.
{9
6.14 Separatist militant groups and terrorist organisations like the National
Socialist Council of Nagalim (Khaplang) [NSCN/K]r20 in Nagaland, the
United Liberation Front (UNLF)r2r in Manipur, United Liberation Front
of Assam (ULFA) in Assam, Garo National Liberation Army (GNLA) in
Meghalaya, All Tripura Tiger Force (ATTF) in Tripura, etc. continue to
challenge the sovereignty, unity and integrity of the nation. The sub-
regional aspirations leading to violent conflicts among the ethnic groups
V


further dilutes the democratic and constitutional ethos of India.
6. 15 Kashmir continues to be a flashpoint on India's security agenda. The
complexity of the situation, exacerbated by social and political fractures
engendered by Pakistan through fanning radicalisation and facilitating
terror has led to the gravest security threat being faced by India since
independence.
6.16 The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), in its Annual Report 2021-22,
notes that Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) has been affected by terrorist and
secessionist violence, sponsored and supported from across the border,
for more than three decades.l22
6.17 The trends of terrorist violence in J&K are shown in the table given
below.
Table 3: Fatalities in Jammu & Kashmir 2004-2021123
r22 MHA Report 2021-22, at2l8.
r23 Ministry of Home Affairs, "Annual Reports" (Ministry of Home Affairs, Govemment of lndia, New Delhi,
lndia) ovailable ot https://www.mha.gov.in/en/documents/annual-reports (last visited on Mar.25,2023).
Year Civilians
Killed
Total Terrorists
Killed
2004 707 281 988 976
2005 557 189 746 917
2006 389 l5r 540 59t
158 ll0 268 472
2008 91 75 166 339
50
C. Terrorism in Jammu & Kashmir
Security
Forces Killed
2007
U


2009 78 64 142 239
2010 47 69 I l6 232
20t1 3l JJ 64 100
2012 38 49 50
2013 l5 53 68 67
2014 28 47 lr0
201 5 t7 39 56 108
20t6 l5 82 150
20t7 40 80 120 213
2018 39 9t 130 257
20t9 39 80 l19 157
2020 5/ 62 99 221
2021 41 42 83 180
6.18 The ongoing militancy in Jammu and Kashmir is linked with infiltration
ofterrorists from across the border, both from the "lntemational Border"
as well as the "Line of Control" in J&K.
6.19 The issues of separatism and terrorism in the state of J&K blur the
distinction between extemal and intemal aspects of security threats. The
external dimension emanates from the direct involvement of Pakistan in
harbouring and supporting the terrorist groups in its territory and
supporting terrorist activities in J&K through direct funding and training.
The intemal dimension of the security threat can be linked to the religious
radicalisation wrapped with fig leaf of Kashmir nationalism asserting for
separate statehood. This complex interplay of several interconnected
5l
l1
75
97
&,


issues makes it difficult for the Indian state to deal with the security
situation effectively. | 21
6.20 Apart from Pakistan, the role of China in sustaining these conflicts and
violence cannot be ruled out. The episodes of the Chinese state issuing
loose visas to the people of J&K can be seen as sinister attempts to dilute
the sovereignty of India.r25 The recent tension and skirmishes at the Indo-
China Border and the Line of Actual Control in the past few years further
signals towards the Chinese hand in posing internal security challenges to
India in J&K.
D. Secessionisl Activities in Other Parts of the Country
6.21 Apart from the aforementioned threats to internal security, secessionist
tendencies continue to be roused in different parts of the country.
Amongst these, the movement for 'Khalistan', or a separate state for
Sikhs is a prominent one. Over the years, multiple organisations have
been at the forefront in the demand for a separate Sikh state. The
inflection point came in 1984, post which, the movement eventually lost
the already scant local support and was quelled in the 1990s. However,
organisations spread across the Indian diasporas in Canada, Australia,
United Kingdom, United State of America, etc. have been involved in
mobilising it again. r26
6.22 These organisations have time and again attempted to subvert the
r24 Abdul Hameed Khan, Changed Security Situqlion in Jqmmu qnd Kashmir: The Road Ahead 7 (IDSA
Monograph Series No.61,2017) available at:
https://w\,!''r.idsa.in/system/files/monograph/monograph6l.pdf(lastvisitedonMar.02.2023).
rr5 Prashant Kumar Singh, "Revisiting China's Kashmir Policy", /D.Sl Comment (l Nov., 2010) available at:
hftps://www.idsa.in/idsacomments/ RevisitingChinasKashmirPolicy pksingh 0l I I l0 (last visited on Mar. 02,
2023\.
r26 Prema Kurien, "Shifling U.S. Racial and Ethnic Identities and Sikh American Activism", 4(5) RSF. The Russell
Soge Foundation Journal of the Social Sciezrces 8l 9E (201 8).
52
A"


sovereignty and territorial integrity oflndia. In 2015, influenced by the
Scottish independence referendum of the previous year, an organization
known as Sikhs for Justice (SFJ), launched a Referendum 2020
movement, seeking to build support from Sikhs around the world for
"India-occupied Punjab" to become an independent country. r27
Unofficial referendums seeking support for the creation ofa separate state
have been organised in Scotland, Australia, England, Canada, United
States of America, etc. Taking note of its secessionist objectives, the
Indian government classified SFJ as an unlawful association in 2019 and
banned it accordingly.r28
6.23 Similar subversive movements have been given air by different
organisations across the country. Banned organisations like the Students
Islamic Movement of India (SIMI), Jamat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh
(JMB), Popular Front of India (PFI), Rehab India Foundation (RIF),
Campus Front of India (CFI), All India Imams Council (AIIC), National
Confederation of Human Rights Organisation (NCHRO), National
Women's Front, Junior Front, Empower India Foundation and Rehab
Foundation, Kerala, Indian Mujahideen (an offshoot of SIMI) etc. have
been found to be involved in fomenting anti-national leanings within
certain sections ofthe lndian populace and indulging in terrorist activities.
ln 2017, the SIMI chief along with ten other members, was convicted
under Sections I 24A, 122, 1 53 A of the IPC, and other relevant provisions
of the UAPA.r2e
rr7 Curpreet Singh Nibber, "Referendum 2020? Khalistan Divides, Unites, Sikhs Abroad", Hinduslan Tines (4
Aug.,2015) available at: https://www.hindustantimes.com/punjab/referendum-202O-khalistan-divides-unites-
sikhs-abroad/story-QBlfntRdW0zFTkVp\a9XgmN.html (last visited on Mar.23,2023).
r28 Gazene of India ( l0 July,2019) available at:
https://www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/SikhsForJustice_l 1092019_0.pdf(last visited Mar.23,2023).
I2e Press Trust of India, "Simi Chief, Ten Others get Life Sentence in Sedition" qvqilqble at:
https://www.livemint.com,/Politics/vFhiSVwjfunWPPFcD9iNTK/Simi-chief+en-others-get-life-sentence-in-
sedition-case.html (last visited on Mar. 26,2023).
5l
}-
s}-


6.24 Working either covenly or overtly towards the avowed goal of altering
the constitutional framework of the country in accordance with their
radical agenda and extremist ideology, umpteen groups and organisations
such as these continue to pose herculean challenges for India's security
establishment.
5l
\-


7 ALLEGED MISUSE OF SECTION I24A OF IPC
7.1 It is often alleged that Section l24A of IPC is misused by the
govemmental authorities to quell political dissent. The provision has
invited stringent criticism on account of being invoked by various State
Govemments against activists, detractors, writers, joumalists, etc.,
seeking to silence political opposition by accusing the dissenters of
promoting disaffection. One of the major grounds of objection to Section
124Ais that a forceful censure of govemment policies and personalities
and stinging denunciation of an unresponsive or insensitive
administration are in all likelihood wrongfully treated to be seditious.
7.2 As per the data furnished by the National Crime Records Bureau
(NCRB)r30, 399 sedition cases have been filed across the country,
including a high of 93 in 2019, 73 in 2020 and 76 in 2021. Of the 322
cases filed between 2016 and 2020, chargesheets were filed in 144 of
them, with as many as 23 cases being found to be false or a mistake of
law and 58 cases having been closed for lack ofevidence. Over the years,
the conviction rate in sedition cases has fluctuated between 3%o and
33o/o.t3t
7.3 While the political class may be accused of misusing the sedition law, the
root of the problem lies in the complicity of the police. Sometimes, in an
overzeal to please the political masters, the police action in this regard
becomes partisan and not as per the law. Further, the erroneous
rr0 Ministry of Home Affairs, "Crime in lndia202l" 442-446 (NationalCrime Records Bureau, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Govemment of lndia (2022) ovailable at: https,'l/ncrb.gov.in/en/Crime-in-lndia-2021 (last visited on Mar.
20,2023).
r3rDeeptiman Tiwary, "399 sedition cases since 2014, pendency high" The lndiqn Erpress, May 31,2022
qvailable at: https://indianexpress.com/anic le/explained/sedition-cases-pendency-explained-79 123 I I / (last
visited on Mat. 20, 2023).
55


7.4
interpretation of the law on sedition by the police authorities is also what
leads to its misuse. The invocation of Section 124A of IPC in any case
very much depends on how the police whimsically interprets the language
of this provision and the bearing that the alleged committed act has on
public order. When a FIR regarding Section 124A is registered at a police
station, as to how the concerned police officer apprehends a situation and
imputes a law is entirely dependent on his own interpretation of the
provision. This interpretation may further vary depending on whether the
police officer incharge is a lower level or high-ranking officer.
Even though, in our considered opinion, it is imperative to lay down
certain procedural guidelines for curbing any misuse ofSection l24A of
IPC by the law enforcement authorities, any allegation of misuse of this
provision does not by implication warrant a call for its repeal. There are
plethora of examples of various laws being misused by ill-intentioned
individuals only to settle their scores in cases of personal rivalries and
vested interests, with even the Supreme Court recognising the same in a
number ofdecisions. Never has there been any plausible demand to repeal
any such laws merely on the ground that they are being misused by a
section of the populace. This is so because for every abuser of that law,
there might be ten other genuine victims of any offence who direly need
the protection of such a law. What is then required in such cases is only
to introduce legal ways and means to prevent the misuse of such a law. In
the same vein, while any alleged misuse of Section 1244. of IPC can be
reined in by laying down adequate procedural safeguards, repealing the
provision altogether can have serious adverse ramifications for the
security and integrity of the country, with the subversive forces getting a
free hand to further their sinister agenda as a consequence.
56
h,


8 SEDITION LAWS IN OTHER COUNTRIES
A. United Kingdom
The offence of sedition can be traced to the Statute of Westminster, 1275,
when the King was considered the holder of Divine right.r32 In order to
prove the commission of sedition, not only the truth of the speech but also
intention was considered. The offence of sedition was initially created to
prevent speeches 'inimical to a necessary respect required to be paid to
the govemment'.rr3 The De Libellis Famosis,t3l case was one of the
earliest cases wherein 'seditious libel, whether 'true or false was made
punishable'. This case firmly established seditious libel in United
Kingdom.r35 The rationale of this judgment was that a true criticism of
govemment has a greater capacity to vilifu the respect commanded by the
govemment and cause disorder, and therefore needs a higher degree of
prohibition.
8.2 Sedition was defined by Fitzgerald J. in R. v. Sullivan,t36 as
" Sedition is a crime against society, nearly allied to that of
treason, and it frequently preceded treason by a short interval.
Sedition in itself is a comprehensive term and it embraces all those
practices, whether by word, deed or writing, which are calculated
to disturb the tranquillity of the State, and lead ignorant persons
to endeavour to subvert the Government and the laws of the
Empire. The objects of sedition generally are to induce discontent
rrz English PEN, A Briefing on the Abolition of Seditious Libel and Criminal Libel (30 June, 2009) ovailable at:
hftps://issuu.corn/englishpen/docs/englishpen_seditiouslibel_2009 (last visited on Jan. 10,2023).
rrr William T. Mayton, "seditious Libel and the Lost Cuarantee ofa Freedom of Sp eech" S4 Colum. L. Rey.9l
( 1984).
'r1 77 Eng Rep 250 (KB 1606).
rrt William T. MaFon, "Seditious Libel and the Lost Guarantee ofa Freedom ofSpeech" 84 Colun. L. Rev.9l
( 1984).
136 R v..S!//rvan (1868) I I Cox C.C.44, cited in United Kingdom Law Commission, "Codification ofthe Criminal
Law: Treason, Sedition and Allied Offences", Working Paper No. 72, at 4, available at:
http://www.lawcom.gov.uk/wp-contenvuploads/2016/08/No.072-Codificarion-of-the-Criminal-Law-Treason-
Sedition-and-Allied-Offences.pdf(last visited on Jan. 10, 2023) (hereinafter "Working Paper No. 72").
u
57
8.1


8.3
8.4
r37 Working Paper No. 72.
r38 95ll 2 DLR 369.
r3e Working Paper No. 72.
rao European Convention on Human Rights, 1950,213 U.N.T.S.22l
and insurrection and to stir up opposition to the Government, and
bring the administration of justice into contempt; and the very
tendency of sedition is to incite the people to insunection and
rebellion. "
The United Kingdom Law Commission while examining the need of law
on seditious libel in modern democracy, 131 in 1977 referred to the
judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Boucher,r38 wherein it
was opined that only those act that incited violence and caused public
order or disturbance with intention of disturbing constitutional authority
could be considered seditious.l3e The Commission, in its working paper
remarked:
"Apartfrom the consideration that there is likely to be a sfficient
range of other offences covering conduct amounting to sedition,
we think that it is better in principle to rely on these ordinary
statutory and common law offences than to have resort to an
offence which has the implication that the conduct in question is
'political'. Our provisional view, therefore, is that there is no need
for an offence of sedition in the criminal code. "
This marked the beginning of the movement to abolish seditious libel in
United Kingdom. With the enactment ofthe Human Rights Act, 1998, the
existence of seditious libel, started being considered in contravention to
the tenets of the Act and the European Convention on Human Rights.r40
The global trend has largely been against sedition and in favour of free
speech. While abolishing sedition as an offence in 2009, the then
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State at the Ministry of Justice of the
United Kingdom reasoned that:
"Sedition and seditious and defamatory libel are arcane offences
- from a bygone era when freedom of expression wasn't seen as
the right it is today... The existence of these obsolete offences in
58
6,


this country had been used by other countries as justification for
the retention of similar laws which have been actively used to
suppress political dissent and restrict press freedom... Abolishing
these offences will allow the UK to take a lead in challenging
similar laws in other countries, where they are used to suppress
free speech. "1al
Finally, the seditious libel was deleted by Section 73 of the Coroners and
Justice Act, 2009.142 One of the reasons given for abolishing seditious
libel was:
" Having an unnecessary and overbroad common latu offence of
sedition, when the same matters are dealt with under other
legislation, is not only confusing and unnecessary, it may have a
chilling effect onfreedom ofspeech and sends the wrong signal to
other countries which maintain and actually use sedition offences
as a means of limiting political debate. "1a3
8.6 Both the 1977 recommendation of the UK Law Commission to repeal the
law on sedition and its final abolition in 2009 is based on two predominant
reasons. The first being that there are 'sufficient range ofother offences'
to deal with sedition like offences and the second reason being the
political nature of the offence of sedition.raa What is most pertinent to
note is that the UK abolished the offence of sedition more than three
decades after it was recommended by the UK Law Commission, perhaps
only after the threat of secessionist subversive activities from the Irish
I4r PA Media Lawyer, "Criminal Libeland Sedition Offences Abolished", Press Gazette (JaL 13,2010) nailable
ar. https://pressgazette.co.uk/publishers/broadcasVcriminal-libel-and-sedition-offences-abolished/ (last visiled on
Jan.20,2023).
ta? Section 73: Abolition ofcommon law libel oflbnces etc.
The following ofences under lhe common law of Englond and l ales ond the common lqw of Northern lreland
are qbolished-
(a)the ofences ofsedition and seditious libel;
(b)the ofence of defanatory libel:
(c)lhe ofence ofobscene libel.
r1r Liberty's Report Stage Briefing and Amendments on the Coroners and Justice Bill in the House ofCommons
(March, 2009) qvailable at: https://www.libeny-human-rights.org.uVsites/default/files/liberty-s-coroners-and-
justice-repon-briefing-excluding-secret- inquests-.pdf (last visited on Jan. 25,2023).
raa Manoj Kumar Sinha & Anurag Deep, Law of Sedition in lndia and Freedon of Expression 222 (The Indian
Law Institute, New Delhi,20l8).
59
8.5
T
\,


8.7
Republican Army (lRA) ceased to exist pursuant to the signing of the
Good Friday Agreement in 1998 between the British and Irish
Govemments as well as most of the political parties in Nonhem lreland.
Further, even before repealing the offence of sedition, the UK, from 2000
onwards, has passed numerous enactments dealing with seditious and
secessionist elements, such as The Terrorism Act, 2000; The Anti-
Terrorism, Crime and Security Act, 2001; Prevention of Terrorism Act,
2005; Terrorism Act, 2006; The Terrorism (United Nations Measures)
Order,2006 and2009; The Counter-Terrorism Act,2008; The Coroners
and Justice Act, 2009; The Terrorist Asset-Freezing (Temporary
Provisions) Act, 20 1 0; The Justice and Security Act, 20 I 3; The Counter-
Terrorism and Security Act, 2015, etc. Sections 57 and 58 of the
Terrorism Act, 2000 are comprehensive enough to punish the possession
of any document or material which may be practically useful for any
terrorist activity. There is no need for any other oveft actus reus. There is
no requirement of proving incitement of or tendency of violence or
disorder. The only protection provided to the accused is a defence to
establish his bona fides ofsuch possession.ra5 Thus, even though the UK
may have abolished the traditionally existent offence of sedition, the
current scheme of their laws is well adept to safeguard the security and
integrity of the State, comprehensively covering any offence that has
seditious undertones.
B. United States of America
8.8 The Constitution of the United States of America proscribes the State
from enacting any legislation curtailing the first amendment - right to
tlt td. at 223
60
h"


expression. There has been a debate among the jurists whether first
amendment guarantee was aimed at eliminating seditious libel.146 It is
argued by many that this doctrine 'lends a juristic mask to political
repression'.r47 Despite the conflicting views and the attempts by courts to
narrow the scope of sedition, it survives as an offence in the United States,
though it is very narrowly construed and can even be said to have fallen
in disuse.ra8
8.9 It is generally contended that the US Constitution follows the
"absolutism" model of freedom of speech as there is no mention of any
express restriction on this freedom in the US Constitution. It was argued
by many that the first amendment aimed at abolishing seditious libel.rae
However, this view has been opposed on grounds that the first
amendment does not protect speech of all kind; therefore, suggesting that
law on sedition was abolished by it would amount to interpreting history
through one's own civic sensibilities.ls0 Speech is free but not absolute in
nature as the judiciary has protected the laws made by the Congress from
the first amendment of the Constitution by inventing the Doctrine of
Police Power.l5l
ra6 William T. Mayton, "Seditious Libel and the Lost Guarantee of a Freedom of Speech" 84 Colum. L. Rev. 9l
(1984).
'47 Judith S. KofTler & Bennett L. Gershman, "New Seditious Libel" 69 Cornell L. Rev. 816 (1984).
ra8 Centre for the Study of Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy, National Law School of lndia University,
Bangalore and Alternative Law Forum, Bangalore, Sedition Laws and Deqth of Free Speech in lndia qvailable
ar: hftps://www.nls.ac.in/resourceVcsseip/Files/SeditionLaws cover Final.pdf(last visited on Jan.30,2023).
r4e Wilfiam T. Mayton, "Seditious Libel and the Lost Guarantee ofa Freedom ofSpeech" 84 Colum. L. Rev.9l,
at 4-8 ( 1984).
t5o ld. at 6-8.
r5r Manoj Kumar Sinha & Anurag Deep, Law of Sedition in lndia and Freedom of Expression 204 (The Indian
Law lnstitute, New Delhi, 2018).
rt: Section 2 ofthe Sedition Act, 1798 defines sedition as:
"To write, print, utter or publish, or cause it to be done, or qtsist in it, anyfalse, scondalous, qnd mqlicious
8. 10 Sedition was made a punishable offence in the United States through the
Sedition Act of 1798.r52 This Act was repealed in 1820. In 1918, Sedition
h,,


Act was again enacted by the U.S. Congress to protect American interests
in the First World War. ls3 The Espionage Act, 1917 contained many
provisions similar to those of the Sedition Act, 1798. It became illegal to
utter or print any profane language that interfered with the operation or
success of the US military or criticized the Govemment or the
Constitution with punishments of twenty years in prison. The US Courts
have gone to the extent of declaring that a demand of referendum to
participate in the war or not, cannot be protected under free speech at war
time.r5a ln Earnest v. Staru, a mob aggressively told E.V. Starr to kiss the
US flag. He refused to do so by saying, "What is this thing anyway?
Nothing but a piece of cotton with a little paint on it and some marks in
the corner there. I will not kiss that thing. It might be covered with
microbes." He was convicted by the Federal Court under Montana
Sedition Law for the "contemptuous and slurring language about the flag'
and "language calculated to bring the flag into contempt and
disrepute."lss The Court further observed that "patriotism is the cement
that binds the foundation and superstructure ofthe State. The safety ofthe
latter depends upon the integrity of the former. Like religion, patriotism
is a virtue so indispensable and exalted, its excesses pass with little
censure."l56
8.1 1 ln Schenck v. (Jnited States,r5T the Court led unanimously by Holmes J.,
writing qgqinst the govetnment of the United States, or either House of Congress, or the Presidenl, with
inlent to defqme, or bring either inlo conlempl or disrepule, or lo excite against either the hated of the
people ofthe United Stales, ot to stir up sedilion, or lo excite unlawful combinations qgqinsl lhe goverument,
or to resist it, or to aid or encourage hostile designs offoreign nations."
rs3 This Act was a set ofamendments to enlarge Espionage Act, 1917.
l5a Anushka Singh, Sedition in Liberql Democracies 102 (Oxford University Press, New Delhi,20l8).
155 Michael Welch, F/4g Burning: Moral Panic and the Criminalization of Protest (Aldine de Gruyter, New York,
2000); see Manoj Kumar Sinha & AnuraB Deep, Law ofSedition in lndia and Freedom of Expression 208 (The
Indian Law Institute, New Delhi,20l8).
156 Clemens P. Work, Darkest Before Dswn: Sedition and Free Speech in the Arnericqn ,/es, I l8 (The UniveBity
ofNew Mexico Press, 2006).
'57 249 US 47 (1919).
U
62


while adjudging the validity of Sedition Act 1918, laid down the "clear
and present danger" test for restricting freedom of expression:
"Words which, ordinarily and in many places, would be within
the freedom of speech protected by the First Amendment may
become subject to prohibition when of such a nature and used in
such circumstances as to create a clear and present danger that
they will bring about the substantive evils which Congress has a
right to prevent. "
8.12 The US Supreme Court in Abrams v. United States,tss held that
distribution of circulars appealing for strike in factories to stop
manufacturing of machineries to be used to crush Russian revolutionaries
could not be protected under the First Amendment. Justice Holmes'
dissenting opinion, however championed the wide ambit of free speech
liberty in United States. He remarked:
"It is only the present danger of immediate evil or an intent to
bring it about that warrants Congress in setting a limit to the
expression of opinion where private rights are not concerned."
8. 13 ln Gitlow v. New York,tse the accused printed 'Left Wing Manifesto' in
his newspaper 'The Revolutionary Age' that advocated the violent
overthrow of the US Govemment. Gitlow argued that "no violent action
was precipitated by the article." He was duly convicted under the New
York state law. Both his conviction and the law criminalizing such
advocacy were challenged in the US Supreme Court, which therein
invented the "bad (or dangerous) tendency" test and rejected the
precedent of"clear and present danger" test established in Schenck v. US:
"The State cannot reasonably be required to defer the adoption of
measures for its own peace and safety until the revolutionary
utterances lead to actual disturbances of the public peace or
imminent and immediate danger of its own destruction; but it may,
in the exercise of its judgment, suppress the threatened danger in
rs8 250 US 616 (1919).
t5e 268 US 652 (1925).
63
A*


its incipiency. "
8.14 Sedition was also brought as an offence under Alien Registration Act,
1940 (also known as Smith Act) which penalized advocacy of violent
overthrow of the govemment. The constitutional validity of this Act was
challenged in Dennis v. IJnited States.t60 Again applying the clear and
present danger test, the court upheld the conviction on the grounds that:
"...the words [of the actJ cannot mean that, before the
Government may act, it must wait until the putsch is about to be
executed, the plans have been laid and the signal is awaited. If
Government is aware that a group aiming at its overthrow is
attempting to indoctrinate its members and to commit them to a
course whereby they will strike when the leaders feel the
circumstances permit, action by the Government is required. The
argument that there is no need for Government to concern itself,
for Government is strong, it possesses ample powers to put down
a rebellion, it may defeat the revolution with ease needs no
answer. For that is not the question. Certainly, an attempt to
overthrow the Government byforce, even though doomedfrom the
outset because of inadequate numbers or power of the
revolutionists, is a sfficient evil for Congress to prevent. The
damage which such attempts create both physically and
politically to a nation makes it impossible to measure the validity
in terms of the probability of success, or the immediacy of a
successful attempt. "
8.15 The restriction on free speech has, however, been narrowly construed in
subsequent cases. In Yates v. United States.r6r the Supreme Court
distinguished 'advocacy to overthrow' as an abstract doctrine from an
'advocacy to action'.r62 It was reasoned that the Smith Act did not
penalise advocacy of abstract overthrow of the govemment and the
Dennis did not in any way blur this distinction. It was held that the
difference between these two forms of advocacy is that 'those to whom
160 341 US 494
161 354 US 298
t62 lbid.
r95r)
r957)
61
h,


the advocacy is addressed must be urged to do something, now or in the
future, rather than merely to believe in something'.
8.16 ln New York Times v. Sullivan,r63 the Supreme Court remarked that
speech must be allowed a breathing space in a democracy and govemment
must not be allowed to suppress what it thinks is 'unwise, false or
malicious'.
8.17 ln Whitney v. California,r6a the Supreme Court had held that "to
knowingly be or become a member of or assist in organising an
association to advocate, teach or aid and abet the commission of crimes
or unlawful acts of force, violence or terrorism as a means of
accomplishing industrial or political changes involves such danger to the
public peace and the security of the State, that these acts should be
penalised in the exercise of its police power." Legislations penalising
such acts were not considered an arbitrary and unreasonable exercise of
State power.
8.18 Whitney case was ovemrled by Brandenburg v. Ohiot65, wherein the
Supreme Court categorically held that "freedoms of speech and press do
not permit a State to forbid advocacy ofthe use offorce or of law violation
except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent
lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such action."
8.19 The ratio laid down in the Brandenburg case was that "mere abstract
teaching of the moral propriety or even moral necessity for a resort to
163 376 tJS 254,273-76 (t964)
tu 2i4 us 35't (192't).
165 395 US ,144 (1969).
6i
{p,


force and violence is not the same as preparing a group for violent action."
Pursuant to this case, restrictions on expression are subject to intense
scrutiny. Thus, criticism or advocacy must lead to incitement of
immediate lawless action in order to qualiff for reasonable restriction
under the first amendment.
8.20 The U.S. Constitution though forbids apparent restrictions on speech,
there are various doctrines that are practised to avert hate speech. The
doctrines such as "reasonable listeners test", 'present danger test',
"fighting words" arejust examples. The chilling effect concept had been
recognised most frequently and articulated most clearly in decisions
chiefly concemed with the procedural aspects offree speech adjudication.
C. Austrolia
8.21 The first comprehensive legislation that contained the offence of sedition
was the Crime Act, 1920. The provisions on sedition in this Act were
broader than the common law definition as subjective intention and
incitement to violence or public disturbance were not the sine qua non for
conviction under these provisions. The Hope Commission constituted in
1984 recommended that the Australian definition of sedition should be
aligned with the Commonwealth definition. 166 Subsequently, the
provisions on sedition were again reviewed by the Gibbs Committee in
1991. It was suggested that while the offence of sedition should be
retained and convictions should be limited to acts that incited violence for
the purpose of disturbing or overthrowing constitutional authority. In
2005, amendments were made in Schedule 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Act
(No. 2) 2005, including in the sedition as an offence and defences in
rG Royal Commission on Australia's Security and Intelligence Agencies, "Report on the Australian Security
lntelligence Organization" (1985), cited in Repon on Fighting Words.
U


Sections 80.2 and 80.3 of the Criminal Code Act, 1995. The Australian
Law Reform Commission (hereinafter, ALRC) reviewed whether the use
of the term sedition was appropriate to define the offences mentioned
under the 2005 amendment. After a detailed study the ALRC Report
suggested that'16?
"The Australian Government should remove the term 'sedition'
from federal criminal law. To this end, the headings of Part 5.1
and Division 80 of the Criminal Code (Cth) should be changed to
'Treason and urging political or inter-group force or violence',
and the heading of s 80.2 should be changed to 'Urging political
or inter-group force or violence. "
8.22 The Recommendation of the ALRC was implemented in the National
Security Legislation Amendment Act, 2010, wherein the term sedition
was removed and replaced with references to 'urging violence offences'.
Someone commits an urging violence offence if they intentionally urge
another person or group to use force or violence to: a). overthrow the
Constitution, govemment or lawful authority; or b). against a group, or
members of a group, that is distinguished by race, religion, nationality,
national or ethnic origin or political opinion. Hence, even though the
nomenclature ofthe new offence may have been changed but its essence
more or less remains the same as sedition.
D. Canoda
8.23 The English common law sedition offences in Canada had their origins in
the Court of Star Chamber. The most important of these, seditious libel,
was largely developed later by courts to limit civil liberties flowing from
the Revolution Settlement.168 Another offence related to criticism of
16' Repon on Fighting words.
r68 The Settlement of 1688-89 formally ended the English revolution and had at its core the Declaration of Rights
which stated the terms on which the Crown was offered and accepted, established the supremacy of the acts of
Parliament, as well as the liberties ofthe subjects as represented by Parliament. including fieedom ofspeech. The
67 k\"


authorities was scandalum magnatum, which permitted truth as a defence.
However, no such defence was available to the defendant charged with
sedition.r6e The said offence only entailed criticism that "scandalized" the
govemment or brought the authorities into "disesteem." No proof of
actions against the state was required. What is required was merely proof
ofan expression through spoken words, conspiracy, or written publication
(libel), the nature of which was deemed to foster disaffection and the
potential disturbance ofthe public peace.r70 Over the course ofcenturies,
the law on sedition developed in accordance with the times.
8.24 Sedition, in modern day Canada, is the use of speech or words to incite
others to rebel against the govemment or governing authority. According
toSec.5gof theCriminal Code of CanadarTr, it is a crime to speak
seditious words, publish a seditious libel, or be part of a seditious
conspiracy. The Supreme Court of Canada,in Boucher v. The KingtT2,has
defined sedition as "any practice whether by word, deed or in writing -
calculated to disturb the tranquillity of the State, and lead ignorant
persons to endeavour to subvert the Government and the laws of the
empire. " The Court added that the objective of sedition is to induce
discontent and insurrection and bring the administration of justice into
contempt.
8.25 As per Sec. 59(1) of the Criminal Code, 'seditious words' are those that
"express a seditious intention." r7l The Supreme Court has ruled that
settlement did not resolve all issues between the executive and legislature, giving rise to very different
interpretations of its application. ln this context, indirect limitations on criticism of the state emerged through
executive control.
r6e Barry Wright, "Sedition in Upper Canada: Contested Legality" 29 Lqbour/Le Trqvail l4 (Spring, 1992).
r70 J.F. Stephen, IL4 History ofCriminal rsl, 29E (London, 1883); T.A. Green, Verdict According to Conscience:
Perspectives on the English Crininal Trial Jury 319 (Chicago, 1985).
r7r Criminal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C46) wailqble at: https://lawsJoisjustice.gc.ca./eng/acts/c-46lsection-
5g.html (last visited on Mar. 10, 2023).
r?2 1950 CanLII 2 (SCC); [ 951] SCR 265.
r7r Criminal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C46) wailable qr. https://laws-loisjustice.gc.ca,/eng/acts/c-46lsection-
59.html (last visited on Mar. 10, 2023).
68
)-
w.


anyone can "freely criticize the proceedings of courts ofjustice and of
individual judges - in a free, and fair, and liberal spirit. But it must be
without malignity, and not imputing corrupt or malicious motives."
8.26 Sec. 59(2) of the Criminal Code defines 'seditious libel' as one "that
expresses a seditious intention."r7a It has been stated by the Supreme
Court to be a libel that "brings into hatred or contempt, or excites
disaffection" with the govemment or the Crown through unlawful means.
8.27 A 'seditious conspiracy' is further defined in Sec. 59(3) of the Criminal
Code as "an agreement between two or more persons to carry out a
seditious intention."rT5 According to the Supreme Court, this occurs when
people work together to "raise discontent and disaffection and stir up
jealousies, hatred and ill-will" against the govemment. A 'seditious
intention', though not defined exhaustively in the Code, but section 59(4)
establishes a presumption ofseditious intention when anyone "(a) teaches
or advocates, or (b) publishes or circulates any writing that advocates the
use, without the authority of law, of force as a means of accomplishing a
govemmental change within Canada". 176
8.28 Sedition is treated as an indictable offence punishable by a maximum of
l4 years imprisonment, as per Sec. 61 of the Criminal Code. However,
peaceful and lawful protests against the govemment or its policies are not
considered sedition.
t74 lbid.
115 Ibid.
t16 Ibid.
h-
69


9 CONCLUSION: GROUNDS FOR RETENTION OF SECTION l24A
Having discussed the nuances ofthe law of sedition in India extensively,
the Law Commission is of the considered opinion that Section l24A of
IPC should be retained. The reasons for the same are summarised
hereunder:
9.2 As discussed at length in aforementioned Chapter 6, myriad threats to
India's internal security exist. The Federal Court in Niharendu Dutt
Majumdar observed that "the right of every organised society to protect
itself against attempts to overthrow is beyond denial. "t17 Fitzgerald states
that "the fundamental requirement of any society is the ability to protect
itself against annihilation or subjection; and the chief duty of any
government is to safeguard the State and its institutions against external
and internal attack."t7q He further observes that the precondition of
enjoying freedom is to ensure the security of State because "without such
guarantee of stability the rest of the law, both civil and criminal, is for
most part infficacious. "/7e As B.P. Sinha, C.J., observes in Kedar Nath
Singh : " Every State, whatever its form of Government, has to be armed
with the power to punish those who, by their conduct, jeopardise the
safety and stability of the State, or disseminate suchfeelings of disloyalty
as have the tendency to lead to the disruption of the State or to public
disorder. "
9.3 Even though there are Central and State laws to deal with terror cases
r?? AIR 1942 FC 22, at 48.
r78 P.J. Fitzg€rald, Criminal Law and Punishment 83 (Oxford Univenity Press, I962)
t1e lbid.
?0
9.1
A. To Safegusrd the Unily and Integrity of India
6,


(like the Unalwful Activities Prevention Act, 1967 and the Maharashtra
Control of Organised Crimes Act, 1999,etc.), Section 124A of IPC serves
to be the traditional penal mechanism to address the issue. Prompt and
effective suppression of disintegrating tendencies is in the immediate
interest ofthe nation. As Shri Soli J. Sorabjee once remarked in reference
to Section 124A, "The provision properly interpreted and correctly
applied protects and preserves the integrity of the lndian State and is also
a deterrent for persons who are minded to commit acts of incitement to
violence and acts which cause disturbance of public order.'i80 The ever
proliferating role of social media in propagating radicalisation against
India and bringing the Govemment into hatred, many a times at the
initiation and facilitation by adversarial foreign powers, all the more
requires such a provision to be present in the statute. Section I 24A of IPC
has its utility in combating anti-national and secessionist elements as it
seeks to protect the elected government from attempts to overthrow it
through violent and illegal means. The continued existence of the
govemment established by law is an essential condition for the security
and stability of the State. In this context, it becomes imperative to retain
Section l24A and ensure that all such subversive activities are nipped in
their incipiency.
B. Sedition is a Reasonable Restriction under Article 19(2)
9.4 The contention that Section 124A is violative of Article 19(l)(a) of the
Constitution does not hold any ground because of multiple reasons. First,
as stated earlier in Chapter 3 of this Report, a perusal of the Constituent
Assembly Debates shows that the Constituent Assembly substituted
'e Soli J. Sorabjee, "The Limits of Freedom" lndian Express (Jan. 30, 2Ol8) qvqilable
https://indianexpress.cor/anicle/opinion/columns/sedition-law-constitution-law-freedom-of-speech-5044091/
(last visited on Mar. 15, 2023).
?l
\^
w,


'sedition' with 'which undermines the security of, or tends to overthrow,
the State', as it considered the latter phrase to be of wider import and more
expansive. Second, the first Amendment of the Constitution incorporated
the words 'public order', 'friendly relations with foreign states', and
'incitement to an offence' as further restrictions on Article 19(1)(a). The
Supreme Court while dealing with the constitutionality of Section l24A
in Kedar Nath Singh, held that Section 124,4. was constitutional as the
restriction it sought to impose on the freedom of speech and expression
was a reasonable restriction under Article 19(2). Third, as held by the
Supreme Court in a catena of decisions, where two interpretations of a
legal provision are possible, one which renders the concemed provision
constitutional, and the other, which renders it unconstitutional, the former
construction should prevail over the latter. The Supreme Court's
observations regarding the same in Janhit Abhiyan v. (Jnion of Indiatgl,
are reproduced below:
"610. The doctrine ofreading down, has been employed by this
court, in the past, in numerous cases; however, in each instance,
it has been clarified that it is to be used sparingly, and in limited
circumstances. Additionally, it is clear from the jurisprudence of
this court that the act of reading down a provision, must be
undertaken only if doing so, can keep the operation of the statute
"within the purpose of the Act and constitutionally valid". In
Delhi Transport Corporation v. DTC Mazdoor Congress Sawant,
J recounted the position on this doctrine succinctly:
"255. h is thus clear that the doctrine ofreading down or of
recasting the statute can be applied in limited situations. It
is essentially used, firstly, for saving a statute from being
struck down on account of its unconstitutionality. It is an
extension of the principle that when two interprctotions are
possible rendering it constitutional and the other
making il unconstitutional, theformer should be prefened.
The unconstitutionality may spring from either the
incompetence of the legislature to enact the statute or from
its violation of any of the provisions of the Constitution. The
18' 2022 SCC Ont-ine t540.
12
w


second situation which summons its aid is where the
provisions of the statute are vague and ambiguous and it is
possible to gather the intentions of the legislature from the
subject of the statute, the context in which the provision
occurs and the purpose for which it is made. .... "
C. Existence of Counter-Terror Legislations does nol Obviate lhe Need for
Section l24A
9.5 The Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967 (UAPA) was enacted in
view of various resolutions passed by the Security Council ofthe United
Nations to prevent terrorist activities and to freeze the assets and other
economic resources belonging to terrorists. The objective behind the
same as explained in the Statement of Objects and Reasons had been to
enable the State authorities to deal with subversive activities directed
against the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India. The Act also
deals with the demands/assertions of "cession of a part of territory of
India from the Union."r82
9.6 UAPA, 1967 was amended in 2004,r83 whereby certain provisions of
Prevention of Terrorism Act,2002 (POTA) were incorporated therein. In
2008, UAPA was further amendedrsa, whereby certain other provisions
of POTA, and Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act, 1987 (TADA)
were added. UAPA was also amended in 2012, r85 removing the
vagueness in the definition of 'terrorist act' to include offences which
may threaten the economic security of the nation. Similarly, the National
Security Act (NSA) was enacted in 1980 with the stated objective of
providing a law for preventive detention.
r82 The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, s.2(i).
r8r The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) (Amendment) Ac|,2004 (29 of 2004)
r61 The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) (Amendment) Act.2008 (35 of2008)
r85 The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) (Amendment) Act,20l2 (3 of20l3).
L
SV
'73


9.7 While UAPA is a special law dealing with activities of a terrorist or
subversive nature, NSA is a law only dealing with preventive detention.
Generally speaking, special laws and anti-terror legislations dealing with
national security such as these seek to prevent or punish the commission
ofoffences targeted towards the State. On the other hand, Section l24A
of IPC seeks to prevent the violent, illegal, and unconstitutional
overthrow of a democratically elected govemment established by law.
Hence, the existence of the former does not by implication cover all
elements ofthe offence envisaged under Section 124A oflPC.
Further, in the absence of a provision like Section 124A of IPC, any
expression that incites violence against the Government would invariably
be tried under the special laws and counter terror legislations, which
contain much more stringent provisions to deal with the accused.
D. Sedition being a Colonial Legacy is not a Valid Ground for its Repeal
9.9 It is often said that the offence ofsedition is a colonial legacy based on
the era in which it was enacted, especially given its history of usage
against India's freedom fighters. However, going by that virtue, the entire
framework of the Indian legal system is a colonial legacy. The Police
force and the idea of an All India Civil Service are also temporal remnants
of the British era. Merely ascribing the term 'colonial' to a law or
institution does not by itself ascribe to it an idea of anachronism.l86The
colonial origins of a law are by themselves normatively neutral.l8T The
mere fact that a particular legal provision is colonial in its origin does not
ipso facto validate the case for its repeal. The requirement of any such
legal provision in the light ofpresent state of circumstances is what needs
r& A Barra. "What is "Colonial" About Colonial Laws?" 3l(2) American Llniversity lnlernational Law Review
(2016).
t87 lbid.
ll
9.8
W,


to be critically analysed.
E. Realities Dffir in Every Jurisdiction
9.t I Each country's legal system grapples with its own different set of
realities. Repealing Section 124A of IPC on the mere basis that certain
countries have done so is essentially tuming a blind eye to the glaring
ground realities existing in India. Further, as is pointed out by the
comparative study of sedition laws in other jurisdictions, undertaken in
Chapter 8 of this Report, it is evident that even in some of the most
advanced democracies around the world, mere cosmetic changes have
been affected in the law of sedition, without taking away the core
substance of the offence. These comparative jurisdictions like the US,
UK, etc. have their own history, geography, population, diversity, laws,
etc. which are not comparable to Indian circumstances. Despite this, what
r88 Manoj Kumar Sinha & Anurag Deep, Luw ofsedition in India qnd Freedom of Expression I 87-l 88 (The
Indian Law Institute, New Delhi, 2018).
75
9.10 Further, a colonial government is essentially a foreign one, where the
relationship between the ruler and the ruled is that of a master and servant.
Contrarily, a democratic form of Government is based on the will of the
people, wherein the ruler is only a servant of the people as it is the people
who elect the ruler to his/trer position.r88 Bereft of any altemative to their
form of govemment, the colonial rulers had no choice but to penalise even
harmless criticism of their government only to secure their own interests.
However, people are at liberty to indulge in healthy and constructive
criticism of their govemment in a democratic set-up. What Section l24A
of IPC seeks to penalise is only the pemicious tendency to incite violence
or cause public disorder in the guise of exercising right to freedom of
speech and expression.
U


some of these countries have actually done is that they have merged their
sedition law with counter terror legislations.
U


10 RECOMMENDATIONS
A. Incorporation of Ratio of Kedar Nath Judgmenl in Section l24A of IPC
10.1 The test laid down by the Supreme Court in Kedar Nath Singh is a settled
proposition of law. Unless the words used or the actions in question do
not tend to incite violence or cause public disorder or cause disturbance
to public peace, the act would not fall within the ambit of Section l24A
of IPC. However, in the absence of any such express indication, a plain
reading of Section 124A may seem to be vague and confusing, resulting
in its misinterpretation and misapplication by the concemed authorities.
Consequently, we recommend that the ratio of Kedar Nath Singh may be
incorporated in the phraseology of Section 124,{ so as to bring about
more clarity in the interpretation, understanding and usage of the
provision.
B. Procedural Guidelines for Preventing any Alleged Misuse of Section I24A
of IPC
10.2 In our considered opinion, to prevent any alleged misuse of Section 124A
of IPC, it is suggested that a mandatory recourse similar to as provided
under Section 196(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC)
should be undertaken prior to registration of a FIR with respect to
commission of an offence under this section. This can be achieved by
introducing certain procedural safeguards that can be laid down by the
Central Govemment through issuance of model guidelines in this regard.
Altematively, an amendment may be introduced in Section 1 54 of CrPC
by incorporating a proviso in the following manner:
" Providedfurther that no First Information Report for an offence
11
q/


under section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 shall be
registered unless a police fficer, not below the rank of Inspector,
conducts a preliminary inquiry and on the basis of the report
made by the said police fficer the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be, grants permission for
registering a First Information Report. "
10.3 The said police officer, not below the rank of Inspector, shall conduct a
preliminary inquiry within seven days for the limited purpose of
ascertaining as to whether a primafacie case is made out and some cogent
evidence exists. The said police officer shall record the reasons for the
same in writing and only thereafter, permission shall be granted under the
aforesaid proposed provrso. This safeguard is being recommended by the
Law Commission taking into consideration the observations made by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in S.G. Vombatkere v. (Jnion of India.tse
C. Removal of the Oddity in Punishment Prescribed for Seclion l24A of IPC
10.4 The 42nd Report of the Law Commission termed the punishment for
Section l24Ato be very 'odd'. It could be either imprisonment for life or
imprisonment up to three years only, but nothing in between, with the
minimum punishment being only fine. A comparison of the sentences as
provided for the offences in Chapter VI ofthe IPC suggests that there is
a glaring disparity in the punishment prescribed for Section 124A. It is,
therefore, suggested that the provision be revised to bring it in consonance
with the scheme of punishment provided for other offences under Chapter
VI. This would allow the Courts greater room to award punishment for a
case of sedition in accordance with the scale and gravity of the act
committed.
t8e (2022) 7 SCC 433. See para. 4.32 ofthis Report
78
w-


D. Proposal for Amendment in Section I 24A of I PC
10.5 The current Section 124A oflPC reads as follows:
124A. Sedition.-Vlhoever by words, either spoken or written, or
by signs, or by visible representation, or otherwise, brings or
attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts
to excite disaffection towards, the Government established by law
in lndia, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, to which
fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may extend to
three years, to whichfine may be added, or withfine.
Explanation 1.-The expression "disaffection" includes
disloyalty and all feelings of enmity.
Explanation 2.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the
measures of the Government with a view to obtain their alteration
by lawful means, without exciting or attempting to excite hatred,
contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this
section.
Explanation 3.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the
administrative or other action of the Government without exciting
or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not
constitute an offence under this section.
10.6 In accordance with the aforesaid, we propose that Section 124A be
amended as follows:
124A. Sedition.-Vl/hoever by words, either spoken or written, or
by signs, or by visible representation, or otherwise, brings or
attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts
to excite disaffection towards, the Government established by law
in lndia, with a lendency to incite violence or cause public
disorder shall be punished with imprisonment for ltfe, to which
Jine may be added, or with imprisonment of either descriplion
for o term which moy erlend to seven years, to which fine may
be added, or wilh fine.
Explanation 1.-The expression "disaffection" includes
disloyalty and all feelings of enmity.
),,t$\r/
79


Explanation 2.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the
measures of the Government with a view to obtain their alteration
by lawful means, without exciting or attempting to excite hatred,
contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this
section.
Explanation 3.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the
administrative or other action of the Government without exciting
or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not
constitute an offence under this section.
Explanalion 4.-The expression "lendency" meons mere
inclination lo incite violence or cause public disorder rather
than proof of actual violence or imminent threal to violence.
The Commission recommends accordingly.
----xxx----
8{J
V


[Justice K.T. Sankaranl [Prof.
Member
[Justice Ritu Raj Awasthil
Chairperson
.) Anand Paliwall
Member
2<
IProf. D.P. Vermal
Member
-Vr-^+
[Dr. Reeta Vasishta]
Member (Ex-Officio)
IL
IDr. Niten Chandral
Member Secretary/Member (Ex- Offi c io)
8l
