LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT

(THE INDIAN OATHS ACT, 1873)

MAY, 1965

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW
33 M, of Law--1 :


CHAIRMAN,

LAW COMMISSION,

5, Jor Bagh, New Delhi-3,
Dated the 28th May, 1065.

Shri Asoke Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My DER MINISTER,

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Twenty-
eighth Report of the Law Commission on the Indian Oaths Act,
1873.

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission in
1962. A draft Report on the subject was discussed at the 47th
meeting of the Commission held on the 31st August, 1963.
The draft Report was revised in the light of the discussion at
that meeting, and circulated to State Governments, High Courts
and other interested persons and bodies for comments.

3. The comments received on the draft Report were consi-
dered at the 65th meeting of the Commission held from the
15th to 18th February, 1965 and at the 66th meeting held on
the xoth and 13th March, 1955. The draft Report, as revised
in the light of the decisions taken at these meetings, was again
considered at the 57ih meeting of the Commission held from
the 19th to 24th April, 1965. The Report was finalised at the
68th meeting of the Commission held on the 2st May, 7965.

4. I wish to add that in the preparation of this Report the
Commission received a great deal of help and assistance from
Mr. 7, M. Bakshi, Joint Secretary & Draftsman. He also help-
ed us in making a research into a number of old Regulations
and Laws, some of which were difficult even to Jocate.

‘ Yours sincerely,
ये. L. KAPUR.


CONTENTS

Fup ‘SUBJECT-MATTER Pace
c Why the Act has been taken up for revision. . . . 1
2 Historical backgrount © eee ee 1
3 Analysis of the Act wk  + +« - 2
4 Law io Engtand . . . . ‘ + . . . 2

4,6 MeaningofQath .  . - - |. - . - - 3
7 Definition by Bentham , . . . . . . . 3
8 Oath as security for ensuring veraity of evidence... 3
9 10 Oaths in ancient India . . . . . . . . 4
yr Oaths in Mustim aw... St . 5
32 Sanction behind oath—fear of God—Bentham’s view . . 5
13 Feat of divine punishment and forms of oaths . . . 5
34 15 Utility of oath—criticism of Bentham and others . &-7
16 Contrary view 88 10 utility 5 . . . . ‘ 4
17, 18 Should oaths be abolished? . ye kee 8
1g9—22 Form of oath according to conscience. पु . . . 8-9
23 Form of ogth-—other suggestions . . . . . 9
2g Form prescribed by High Courts. www, 10
25 Oaths to be administered by the Judge . . . . . 10
26 Special oaths . . 4 4 न ‘ नि n

27 Question of retention of special oaths considered =. .



(1)

रा ‘SUBJECT-MATTER PAGE
3a Arguments in favour of special oaths . . . . . “
aH Argumeats against special oaths - . . + > . q2-13
32-36 Harm caused by special oaths—Privy Council cue . . ड्ड्न्य्ड
37. 33 Special कतार end ~wager of lrw—-Dackory and suppletory omths THANG
B Fundamental objections 10 special oaths. . . . पु 15

40—44 Freedom of contract gonsidered . . : . . Ig—ty

45 Recommendation for omitting special oaths = . . . 18
46 Sections examined. ५... ५ +  + ४ 5 | 15]

बा Preamble . . पु . . . . + + न 38
का. Defwitonofosth. ५. ५» ५» ५ «४ -४ -+ ह 3
4 Section 3 and courts-martial . पु . पु पु पु . B
x Section 4 and other laws पु . . . . . पु ccs
st Section 4 and affidavits . . . . . . . ‘ 1g
52--34 Section ¢ aad powers of commanding officers . too +t Tg-20
35 Section 5 and obEgation co muske oath =. . . . . 2b
3 Section 5 and oath by eccused examined as a witness . पु 2
57 Section 5-—cther polite . . - ‘ . . . . 2
55 Section 6—principle 4 . - . . न . न 20
39. “Section G—otber sugesstions ५. ५». ५ ४5४ + | डा
60 Section 7—form of oath . . . . पु + पु ca
ce Seg pin onan oie mowing ला.

oz Section 7—holding af book . . पु . + . पु 21
63 Section 7—who shoald administer oath . . . . . 22
64 Sections 8—1z {special oaths) + . . ” - ‘ 22

65 Seuizn IZ. . . . . so: woof - Fd



(ili

pe

Para.
No.

67
68

SusysCT-MATTEE

Pace

Section 14—obligation to state the truth—significance . .

Section 14—when applics . . . . . . .

Schedule (new) . . . . . . . .

Other changes. न मम 1

Appendices . . . . . . . . . .
APPENDICES

APPENDIX I.—Showing the recommendstions in the form of a draft

APPENDIX 2.—Notes on Clauses . . . . . .
AppENDIx 3.——Recommendations in respect of other Acts .

APPENDIX 4.—Comparative Table .  .  . 6 5

22

23

23

23

27

34



REPORT ON OATHS ACT

1. One of the functions of the Law Commission is to Why the
revise Central Acts of general application and importance. Act hes
The Indian Oaths Act, 1873, falls in this category. It is a been cokes
short Act, consisting of 14 sections only. But it is an im- revision,
portant Act. The obligation of witnesses to state the truth
arises from this Act. Section 14 of the Act requires a per-
son giving evidence before any Court or person authorised
by the Act to administer oaths and affirmations, to state the
truth on the subject on which he is giving evidence*-*

The administration of oath to witnesses is one of the secu-
rities devised’ for ensuring their trustworthiness. We
have, therefore, taken up the revision of this Act of our
own motion, without any reference from the Government.

2. The Indian Oaths Act, 1873, did not enact any new Flistorical
laws. It merely consolidated*-° the law on the subject backgror
which was contained in some old Regulations and in Act 5
of 1840.

Act 5 of 1840 was an important Act. It appears®, that
before this Act was passed some old Regulations of - the
Government of the Bast India Company required that
Muhammadans were to be sworn on the Quran and the
Hindus on the water of the Ganges. Act 5 of 1840 abolished
these forms of cath, and enabled Hindus and Muhamma-
dans to give evidence on solemn affirmation.

The provisions of Act 5 of 1840 were extended by section
9 of Act 18 of 1863 to the High Cotirts. Then came Act 6 of
1872. The substance of that Act:can best be given in the
wards of Lord Hobhouse, who was then the Law Member—

“That Act introduced two very important altera-
_ tions. One was this, that every witness who objected
to take an oath might, instead, make a simple affirma-
tion; and the other was that, notwithstanding any
irregularity in the administration. of any oath, or any
irregularity in the making of an affirmation, or, in
fact, any irregularity in the form or method of taking
evidence, the proceedings should be valid.”.

For punishment for false evidence, see sections 179, 181 and 191, Indian
Penal Code.
3562 also para. 66, infra.

‘See fhe Gas 72 1872), Supplet dated 3-8-1872, page 88
ee tte 0) ia 72), Supplement, dat |-8-1872, pay
wander ** Oaths and . foe Bae , ४७0७0

*[t appears that before the Act, the provisions were scattered in «four
Acta, seven Statuces and frégments of resolutions”. For a dewiled review
of the scatrered statutory provisions existing at that time, see Gaxette of India,
Maer ‘Supplement, dated r$-2-1873, pages 23s—24r,, particularly page 237;

‘or history of the present ‘Act, see 2.8. v, Maru (1888), LL.R. 10 AiL
2075-93, 219." ° a

33 M. of Law—2


2

The Act of 1872 was repealed by the Act of 1873, which
contains the existing law on the subject.

3. A brief analysis of the Indian Oaths Act, (873, is
given below:

Section 1 is a formal section containing the short title,
ftoclt repeated’ ty the Repealing Act of 1813" (12 of 1873).
itself repeated: b e i 01 of .
Section 3 excludes from the purview of the Act procredings.
before Courts Martial. Section 4 enumerates the persons
who are authorised to administer oaths and affirmations.
Section 5 provides that all witnesses, interpreters and
jurors shall make caths or affirmations, Section 6 enacts
that Hindus, Muhammadans and other persons who have

“an objection to making an oath may, instead, mske an

affirmation. Section 7 empowers the High Courts to pres-
cribe the forms of oaths and affirmations. Sections § to 12
relate to what are commonly known as “special oaths”.

. Section 13 enacts, that an omission to take an oath or make

an affirmation shall not invalidate any proceedings, etc.
Section 14 requires every person giving evidence on any
subject before any court or person authorised to administer
oaths or affirmations to state the truth on such subject.

4, In Engtand the law on oaths and affirmations is to
be found in the common law and in certain statutes. The
power to administer oaths is contained in section 16 of the
Evidence Act, 1851!. The liberty to substitute, affirmation
for an oath and the form of such affirmation are topics dealt
with in the Caths Act, 18882, The Oaths Act, 1909%, pres~
cribes the form of oath and the procedure for administer-
ing it. Under the Oaths Act, 1961*, the provisions of the
1888 Act are made applicable to a person to whom it is not
reasonably practicable to administer an oath in the manner
appropriate to his religious belief.

The Perjuny Act, 19116, makes certain saving provisions
regarding irregularities in the form and ceremony of ad-
ministering an oath’. Finally, the Oaths and Evidence
(Overseas Authorities and Countries) Act, 1963,° deals
with oaths to be administered in England for obtaining
evidence for use in a country outside England and vice
versa’,

4Bvidence Act, 1851 (14 and 15 Vict. 2. 99).

*Oaths Act, 1888 (51 and 52 Vict. ०, 46).

*Oaths Act, 1909 (9 Edward 7 ० 39).

“Oaths Act, 1961 (9 and 10 Eliz. 2 ७, 21).

"For position before 1961, see R. v. Pritam Singh (1 WLR. 1.
and Cob ToR ore 961, imgh (1958), 1 45

‘Perjury Act, 1911 (71 and 2 Geo. 5 ७ 6).

7As to Commissioners for Oaths, see Acts of 1889 and 1898 (sa and 53
Vict. c. 10; §4 and $5 Vict. ०. 50).

*Oaths and Evidence, etc., Act, 1963 (chap. 27).

*See a discussion of this Act in (1964) Modern Law Review 333.



3

5. Coke! has defined an dath as.an-affirmation or denial Mesning of
by any Christian of anything before one or more persons
who have authority to administer the same, for the disco-
very and advancement of truth and right, calling God to
witness that the testimony is true. In the leading case of
Omychund v. Barker*, it was, however, said that oaths are
as old as creation; and their-essence is an appeal to the Sup.
reme Being as thinking Him the rewarder of truth and
avenger of falsehood, and that Lord Coke was the गाए
writer who had grefted the word “Christian” into an oath.

6. Taylor’, after referring to the ordinary definition of
oath, namely “a religious asseveration by which a person
renounces the mercy and imprecates the vengeance of
Heaven, if he do not speak the truth*’, goes on to say—

“The definition may be open to comment, since the
design of the oath is not to call the attention of God
to man, but the attention of man to
God, not to call upon Him fo punish the
wrong-doer, but on the witness to remember that
He will assuredly do-so; still, it must be admitted that,
by thus laying hold of the conscience of the witness,
the law best insures the utterance of truth.”.

7. Bentham has defined “oath®” as follows: — Rein
“By the term oath. taken in the largest sense, is हु
universally understood a ceremony composed of
words and gestures, by which the Almighty is engaged
eventually to inflict on the taker of the oath, or
swearer, as he is called, punishment in quantity and
quality liquidated, or more commonly unliquidated,
in the event of his doing something which he, the
swearer, at the same time and thereby engages not to
do, or omitting te do something which he in like
Tanner engages to do,” पु

8. The municipal laws of various countries have devised Osths as
Several securities for ensuring veracity and completeness security fo.
of evidence given in courts of justice. These securities Soman’ of
vary in different countries and with the system of law to evidence.
which they are attached. Some of these prevalent in the
system of Anglo-Saxon law and other systems based upon

- Anglo-Saxon law, are, the publicity of judicial proceedings,
the compulsory presence of witnesses jn open court, the

Coke, 3 Inst. 164, cited in Boland and Sayer’s 08७७७ and Affirmations
(7967), page 1.

‘Omychund ९, Barker, Chancery, 1744 tT Atk 25 5 Wille BS
7 Wils, K.B. 84 5 26 E.R. £5, pet Willes 0.1 § sce Cockle, Gases and Statutes
on Evidence, (1963), pages 279-280,

*Taylor, Evidence (7937) Vol. 2, page 872, pare. 1382,

4R. v. White (1786) 1 Lea. oe 3 en! 820) RR. 662,
‘See Best on Evidence (1922), page 43. 2:72 cas (7890), 23 RR, 663

"Bentham, Works, Vol. IIT, page 191.



‘Oaths in
ancient

4

tight of cross-examination of witnesses, and the punish-
ment ‘for perjury! - To these securities be added
anothen very remarkable one which consists in requiring
evidence in courts. of justice to he given on oath—accord-
ing to the. maxim’—In judicio non creditur wisi juratis®
(In fiidicial proceedings, testimony is not believed unless
given upon.oath). As Best has said‘, “However abused or
pervarted by ignorance and superstition, an oath has in
every age been found to supply the strangest hold on the
conscience of men either as a pledge of future conduct or
as a guarantee for the veracity of narration.”,

9. Oaths existed in ancient India, both under the Hindu
and under the Muhammadan Law. Dr, K. P. Jayaswal,
states**:—

“Oaths which have been treated by Hindu lawyers
as a species of ordeal came under the province of the
Dharma thinkers. They recommend its application to
all witnesses.in the King’s courts, and Apastamba
prescribes special formulae to be administered. (II,
11, 29. 7-10). :

10. Mahamahopadhyaya Kane, after a review of anci-
ent texts, observes?:—

“The oath consisted of two parts, viz.—
(1) the requirement to tell the truth, and

(2) the exhortatery and imprecatory part.
Both were administered by the presiding judge.”

The learned author refers to the verses from Gau-
tama, Manu, Vishnu and WNarada* and says
that the “contain very Ioqng  exhorta-
tions addressed. by the judge to the
witnesses relating to the importance and high worth

> of truth, stating how the conscience of a man pricks
him, what rewards await the truthful witness here and
in the next world, and what sin and terrible torments
in hell are the lot of an untruthful witness, what evil
befalls even the deceased ancestors of an untruthful
Wines and how he is liable to be punished by the
ing.”

‘Best On Evidence (1922), pages 40-41, paras. 54-55.

*Best on Evidence (1922), page 42, para. 56,

45 to-this maxim, see Best on Bvidence (1922), paras. 1380 and 1378.

‘4Best on Evidence (1922), page 42, para. 56. .
K.P. Jayaswal, “Manu and Yajnavalkya” (Tagore Law Lectures

a
3997), 999० Bdn.), page 12, para. 18.

‘As to the Arthashastra School, see Dr. Jayaswal, ibid, page 133.

_ Kane, “History of Dbarmashgstras” (1946), Vol. 3, page 343,
*Kane, ibid, pages 1008 and 10०9. givés the texts from Nerads in

‘Sanskrit,


Law cunipicedaie
31 Se जाओ
1 Dlawan

8. New Delhi-d

1.. In pure Muslim law, the practice of administering Oaths 17,
onthe waa well vecognised. “Lian” in Muslim Jaw was ‘Moolim law,
testimony confirmed by oath+ and accompanied with im-
precation, The Quran says*;—

“Violate not your oaths, since ye have made God
a witness over you.....-". .

42, Apart fromm punishment for perjury, the main Sanction
sanction. Behind ap eth is the tear of God. Bentham has behind ar
staieP— Sod

“Pear of eventual punishment in most cases—feax few. मे
of eventual sheme in all cases—fear of punishment at ©
the hand of the Almighty—these are the springs of
action that have been brought to view in the character
of improbity—restraining forces in general, and
mendacity—restraining forces in particular.”.

13, That fear of divine punishment is the sanction be- Fear of
hind an oath is well illustrated by the form in which an divine

oath is taken in some countries*— Punihment

“Phe Chinese are usually sworn? hy the ceremony नि ths

of breaking a saucer, with the admonition: ‘You shail
tell the truth and the whole truth; the saucer is crack-
ed, and if you do not tell the truth your soul will be
cracked like the saucer” Another form js for the wit-
ness to write sacred characters upon paper, which he
burns, praying that his soul may be similarly burnt if
he swears falsely, while the . mest binding of all is
said to consist in thé witness cutting off a cock’s head
with a like invocation.”,

‘Ty Japan a witness unable to say what form was
binding: as oaths are unknown in Japan, was directed
to snuff a lighted candle declaring that if speaking

falsely his soul will he extinguished like the flame.”.

In Siberia, in law suits between the Russians and
the wild Ostiaks it was usual to bring into court the
head of a bear, the Ostiak making the gesture of eat-
ing and calling on the bear te devour in like manner if
he .does not tell the truth. Among the Nagas of

Mulla, Mahomedan Law (1961), page 277.

va, tats Chapter XVI 3 ste Best on Evidence (1922), page 10, para.
"Works af Jeremy Beatham, (1808), Vol. ILL, part V, page 196.
व ae ce etal wat

Evidence (7963), page 1497,

"See Bneyclopacdia Britannica (New Edn), Vol. 16, article on “* eath?”,


Utilit

ility of
cathe
criticism by
Bentham

others.

Assam, men will lay hold of a dog or a fowl by the
head and feet, which is then chopped in two with a
single blow of the dao, this being emblematic of the
fate expected to béfall the perjurer. Or a man will
take hold of a barrel of a gun, a spearhead or a tiger’s
tooth and solemnly declare “If I do not faithfully per-
form this my promise, may I fall by this’.” Similar
oaths are sworn on the head or skin of a tiger by the
Santhals and other indigenous tribes of India.

14. Bentham thought that all oaths were useless: He
has stated—

“The oath is taken by everybody, everybody
violates the oath 80 taken, nobody is even punished for
violating it, nobody is ever put to shame by the viola-
tion of it. And such, then, is the ground of the
inferenee,—viz., that, to whatsoever object direct,
whether to the prevention of transgression in any other
shape, or to the prevention of transgression in the
particular shape of mendacity, the instrument in
question, the ceremony of oath, is inefficient and
useless?.”, है

* . * *

“Consistently with. the op inion so generally enter-
tained by unreflecting prejudice, a place upon the ligt
af securities for the trustworthiness of testimony, and
thence against deception, and consequent misdecision
and injustice, could not be refused to the ceremony of
an oat But, whether principle or experience be re-
garded, it will be found in the hands of justice an
altogether useless instrument; in the hands of-injustice.
a deplorably serviceable one®.”

* . * *

“Jnefficacious as is the ceremony of an oath to all
good, purposes, it is by no means inefficacious to bad
ones".

The same view was expressed by Bentham in his supple-
mentary work entitled “Swear Not At All”, which contains
“an exposure of the needlessness and mischievousness as
well as anti-Christianity of the ceremony of an oath’”.

15. The utility of oaths in any form has also been
doubted by other people of eminence.

1848 Encyclopaedia Britannica (New Edn.), Vol. 16. article on “Both”,

sWorks of Jereny Bentham (1808), Vol. III, Part V, page 196.

“rbid, Vol. VI, Part XI, page 309.

‘Ibid, page 375.

"See Holdsworth, * History of English Law” (1952), Vol. ‘x,
page 83.


_ Thus “JM. wrote in 1874—

“Profoundly convinced ‘by a long judicial expe-
Tience of the general wortblessness of oaths, I have
become an advocate for the abolition of oaths as a test
of truth?.”.

16. On the other hand, there are equally eminent autho- Goavtary
rities who have taken « contrary view. Kant! Van.™ °
regards the taking of an oath as a security for ensuring the

trustworthiness of testimony.

Wigmore‘ after observing that the theory of oath in
modern common law is a subjective one, states that the
oat

“is a method of reminding the witness strongly of the

Divine punishment somewhere in store for false swear-

ing. and thus of putting him in a frame of mind
culated to speak only the truth as he saw it.” .

17. It has been argued, that the good man speaks the should
truth without an oath, while a bad man mocks at its obli- oaths be
gation. Oaths, however, do serve some useful purpose. abolished?
The ease in favour of oaths can best be put in the following
words": ~

“It must be owned great numbers will certainly '
speak truth without an oath; and too many will not
speak it with one. But the generality of mankind
are Of middle sort,—neither so virtuous as to be safely
trusted, in case of. importance, on their. bare word; nor
yet so abandotied as to violate 2. more solemn engage-
ment. Accordingly, we find by experience that many
will boldly say what they will by no means venture to

. | Swear; and the difference which they make between
“"these two things is often indeed much greater than
they should; but still it shows the need of insisting on
the strongest security. When once men are under
that awful tie, and, as the Scripture phrase is, have
bound their souls with a bond (Numb, xxx. 2), it
composes their passions, counterbalances their pre-
judices and interests, makes them mindful of what they
promise, and careful of what they assert; puts them
upon exactness in every circumstance: and circum-
stances are often very material things. Even the gecd

iBelieved to have been Mellor J.

3Cited in Best on Evidence (1922), page 159, foot-note (g).

‘Kant, “Philosophy of Law” ; Dr. W. Hastie’s translation (1887),
at pages 151-152. .
are ere Evidence (2nd Bdition) (1923),2Vol. III, page 857, para.
‘Archbishop Secker, quoted io Best on Evidence (1922), pages 44-45.



might be too negligent, aid the bad would frequently
have no concern at all, about their words, if it were not
for the solemnity of this religious act.”

The same view has been. expressed by Wigmare, who

says

‘The class of persons whose belief makes them

capable of being influenced by the prospect implied in

an oath is decidedly the immense mass of the commu-

nity, Furthermore, in practice these persons are appa-

rently, for the most part, actually influenced fc- the

better, in their mental operations on the witness-stand,

by the imposition of the oath, There appears,

therefore, in the present conditions, looked at as-2

whole, no reason to call. for the abandonment cf the

oath for those persons whose belief makes them
susceptible to its sanction.”.

18. The practice of taking an oath has been in existence
in this country since ancient times, and the Indian Caths
Act, 1873, itseif is nearly a century old. Oaths have also
been recognised in our Constitution: ‘ [Articles 60, 69, 99,
12408), 148(2), 159, 188 and 209.) Taking थी the cireum~
stances into consideration, we would not recommend the
abolition of oaths.

19. In the case of Omychund v. Barker’, Lord Hardwicke,
L. C. abserved—

“The next thing. is the form of oath. ......1t
is laid down by all writers that the outwand act is not
essential to-the ogth All that is necessary appesrs

in the present-case; an external act wea done td make it
-a corps) ral act. .. This falls in. exactly with what
Lord Stair, Puffendorf, etc., say that it has been the wis~
+ dom of ail nations to administer such oaths, as are
agreeable to.the notion of the. person taking, and does
not at all affect the conscience of the person adminis-
tering, nor does it in any respect adopt such religion.

20. According to Halsbury*—

. “At comtton law,.the form of the oath is imma-
terial,’ provided that it is binding on the witness's
conscience, whether he is of the Christian religion or
not.

“ea; moe ०० Evidence (2nd Ban. (1923), Vol. 171, page 876, para,
1827 (7).

*Omychund v. Barker, Chancery, 1744, 7 Atk 2x 5 Wiles 538; 1 Wits
है. BER 26 BR zy 3500 Cockle, Cases snd Sratutes ot Evidence (963,
pages 280-281,

tHslebury, Laws of Gapland (3rd Edi}, Vol. rs, page 436,


9
In an American ease’, Reynolds Cc. J. said:

“The pure principle of the common law is that
oaths are to be administered to all persons according
410 their own opinions, and as it most affects their
consciences.”.

21. A suggestion has been made that in order that the
oath shall bind the conscience of the people, it should be
based on religion. .In other words, the oath should be taken
on the appropriate religious scripture. It appears that
the practice adopted by Muhammadan judges before
the advent of the British rule required that Muhamma-
dans were to be sworn on. the Quran and Hindus on the
water of the Ganga”. This practice was, however, altered
by section 5 of Act 5 of 1840, which was in the following
terms:

“Whereas obstruction to justice and other incon-
yeniences have arisen in consequence of persons of the
Hindu and Muhammadan persuasion being compelled
to swear by the water of the Ganges, or upon the
Quran, or according to other forms which are repugn-
ant to their consciences or feelings: It is hereby
enacted, that except as hereinafter provid-
ed, instead of any oath or declaration now
authorised or required by law, every individual of the
classes aforesaid within the territories of the Fast
India Company shall make an affirmation ५० the follow-
ing effect:

‘I solemnly affirm, in the presence of Almighty

God, that what I shall state shall be the truth, the

whole truth, and nothing but the truth’ ”.

22, Thus, the practice of taking the oath upon a holy
book or upon the water of Ganga was abandoned’ as far
pack as 1840. Tt is not likely to succeed if it is revived
now. Since 1840, society has become 17076 sophisticated.
In our opinion, there should be a uniform form of oath
which should apply to all persons alike.* Any person may,
however, with the permission of the Court, swear an oath
in any other form*-*,

23. It has been argued, that the Act does not lay down
a well-worded, rational or true form of oath, and therefore
the deponents do not clearly understand the implications
of the oath. The object of oath, it is stated, is to call the

1GHi v, Caldwell (1822), 1 Illinois $3, referred to by Wigmore, Evidence
(1923), page 862, para. 1818.

356९ Q. E. v. Mare (1888), LL.R. 10 All. 207, आ4 (Mahmood J).

*Para, 21, supra.

*App. 1, Schedule.

Sapp. 1, clause 6.

*See para, 61, infra.

33 M. of Law—3

Form of
oath—other
suggestions.


wo

attention of the witness to God, so that he must have the
{dea that there will be super-human retributian for talas-
hood; but, it is argued, if a person does not believe in God
as Separate from himself and ag the rewarder of truth and
avenger of falsehood, the love or fear of God cannos act op
him. 1६ is also argued, that people believe in different
Gods, and their variety of belief affects their conduet, so
that they do not in reality feel any obligation to state the
truth. Tne word “God” in an oath, it is contended, refers
to the Incorporeal Supreme Soul and not to an¥ Corporeal
Deity. Having regard to these Teasons, it is suggested, the
words “Supreme and Divine Justice’ and the word “In-
corporeal” should form part of the oath. Particular farms
of oaths have also been suggested. A metaphysical discus~
sion about the nature of God and about the constituent
ingredients of that concept: is, however, outside the scope
of the Act with which we are dealing. The invocation of a
super-human power to reinforce the moral obligation to
state the truth may be of the essence of an oath in the name
of God; but it is hardly appropriate to elaborate that aspect
waile laying down the form of oath in a statute.

24. (a) Most High Courts have prescribed the following
form of oath: —

“T do swear in the name of God that what I shall
state shall be the truth, the whole truth and nething
but the truth.”

The oath is taken in the name of God, like the oath
taken under the Constitution by high dignitaries of the
State such as the President, Governor, ete.

(b) In our opinion, the form of oath which is being used
at present, does not require any change. Jt is a general
form which will apply in most cases. The Court should,
however, have power to permit any person who does not
like this form, te take an oath in any other form®. We re-
commend‘, that this form of oath should be specified in a
Schedule to the Act, so that there should be 70 room for
dite: ent forms of oath being prescribed by different High

‘ourts.

25, The oath, as administered by Courts in this country,

administered has become a mere formal ritual; it is generally administered

by a member of the ministerial staff, sometimes even by a
peon of the Court. Administered in this manner, the oath
loses all its sanctity. In order that the oath may be adgain-
istered with due solemnity, we recommend’, that eacept in

307 slight variations thertof; See Beotra: Oaths Act (1964), pages 74-—94.
१8९८ the forms of oaths in the Third Schedule to the Constitution.
"Para. 61, infra.

4See Appendix [, Schedule.

“Appendix 1, clause 6.



41

the case of the Supreme Court and High Courts, it should
be administered by the Judge himself.

26. The Indian Oaths Act, 1873, provides aisc for what Specia!
are pomnmonly known es “special oaths”. Section 8 of that oaths.
Act allows any party to, or witness in, any judicial proceed-
ing to give evidence on oath or solemn affirmation in any
form eoramon amongst or held binding by Peers of the
tace or persuasion (0 which he belongs, ar not repugnant.
to justice or decency and not purporting to affect any third
person, Sections 9 and 10 then provide, that if any party
to any judicial proceeding offers to be hound by any such
oath or solemn affirmation if it is made by the ciber party
to or by any witness in such proceeding, the court may ask
such other perty or witness whether of not he will make
suck special oath or solemn affizmation. If such other party
or witness agrees to make and makes such special oath 97
solemn affirmation, then under section 11, the evidence
given on such special oath or solemn affirmation is, as
against the party who offered to be bound shereby, conclu
sive proof of the matter stated’.

27. The question for consideration, is, whether the provi- Question
sions relating to special oaths’ and the conclusive nature of retention
of the evidence given on special osth 2s contained in sec- Gabe cor-
tions 8 to 12 of the Indian Oaths Act, 1873, should be retain~ sided
ed crrepealed. Argumenis may ke advanced fcr the reten-
tion as well as for the repeal of these provisions On 8
careful consideration of the arguments for and against
these provisions, we are of the opinion, that the provisions
relating to special oaths should be omitted from our statute
bask,

98. One important argument in favour of the tetention Acmunents
of the provisions with respect to special oaths is that the tn four of
special oath is an institution of long standing; it was recog- gaths.
nised in ancient Hindu texts and commentaries’; it was
secognised in the Old Regulations®*, it has been recognised
in the Indian Gaths Act, 1873; and it is still in existence.
परंपरा टी ----++7++--++

S$ection 12 deals with refusal to take the special तथा...

*Para. 26, supra.

*Kane, History of Dharmeshastras (1946), Vol. 3, Page 357, boitorn,
358, 359, 360. ed

4Before the Indian Caths Act, 1873 wes passed, provisions regarding

inl oaths were conteined in Madras Regulations No. 3 of 1802, No. 40k
re 16 and No, 6 of 1876, which were in force वन टला कप of the country.
Sub-section (2) of section 14 of Madras Regulation 4 of 1816 (80 faz as it
related to speciai-caths} wes in the following terms ©

ant Sher pe is sill tn les the cape be series ae the vath of
snot, che ida scasaait shall give his decision to such

“The relevant portion of scetian 27 OF Madzas Regulation 6 of 1816
was 03 follows ३-०
रू [f either party agrees in writing oo let rhe cayse to be settled by the
oath of the arher, without appeal, the District Muusif shell give his de-
cision according to such osth.””.


12

An institution of such long standing, it is contended, should
not, therefore, be abolished.

The argument is prima facie, attractive. But if it can
be shown that. special oaths—and jeularly the binding
and conclusive nature of the evi pan given om special
oaths—are intrinsically opposed.to sound juristic principles,
and, instead of subserving any common good, have an
inherent tendency, having regard to the frailties of man,
to do harm and ‘mischief, then, the mere ancient. origin of
special oaths canr.ot be a strong ground for their retention.

feguments 29. First, in the present-day India, our system of law

eel hardiy contains any precepts or injunctions laid down in

Kaen our ancient codes and shastras. Neither in the field of
eubstantive law, nor in the field of adjective law, are we
governed today by the ancient texts or the commentaries
thereon. A special oath is in the nature of an ordeal, and
any ordeal, whether it be an ordeal by fire or an ordeal by
water or an ordeal in any cther form, ceased to be a part
of our living law, long long age.

30. In the next place, though special oaths might have
been in vogue in Hindu India under the Dharmasustra
School, it may be mentioned that in earlier times under
the Arthasastra School, it was not necessary to administer
oaths in many cases’.

31. It is, no doubt, true that in some of the old Regula-
tions there were provisions similar to those contained in
sections 8 to 12 of the Indian Oaths Act, 1873. Thus, provi-
sions regarding special oaths similar in substance to those
under discussion, were contained in Madras Regulations No.
3 of 1802, No. 4 of 1816 and No. 6 of 18167. But we find, that
even at that distance of time the Sudder Court took excep-
tion to these provisions, as is clear from the observations
which Muthusami Ayyar, J. made* with reference to sec-
tion 3 of Regulation 3 of 1802—

“It is to be observed that by this Regulation the
decision of a suit by the oath of one of the parties was
expressly recognised if the other party consented to
that mode of decision. In their proceedings of the 14th
December, 1816, the late Sudder Court deprecated the
___ Principle of the Regulation and ptiled that according of the Regulation and ytiled that according to

tPara, 28, mpra. हि

"See Dr. K. 9, Jayaswal, ‘Manu snd Yajnavatkya* —(T.L.L., १977)
(1930 Edition), page 133, para. 9.

*See para. 28, supra.

‘Vasudeva Shanbhog v. Naraina Rai (1879), LL.R. 2, Mad..336.


13
its true ednifieuetion, a court cannot decide a suit simply

upon the oath of one party, even though the other
consented to that mode of decision.”.
fi

It is significant, that as early as 150 years ago the Madras
Sudder Court deprecated the principle underlying the pro-
‘*fisions relating to-special oaths and the binding nature of
the evidence given thereon.

32. Let us, then, examine the claim made on behaly of Harm
special oaths that there is no evidence to show that special
oaths have done any harm. This claim does not appear to oaths—
be well-founded. In this connection, attention may be Privy Coun-
drawn to the Privy Council case of Inder Prasad y, थीं case.
Jagmohan Des’. The facts of that case, as stated in the
judgment of the Privy Council delivered by Lord Blanes-
burgh, made some startling revelations. In a partition suit
between the plaintiff, Inder. Prasad, and the defendant,
Jagmohan Das, the disputes as to the immovable preperties
were amicably settled. But with regard to the movables,
the disputes became highly embittered. After several
years of protracted litigation, both the plaintiff and the
defendant came to some amicable settlement even with re-
gard to the movables, and, in pursuance of the agreement
of both the parties which was recorded by the court, several
lists of movable properties were filed by the plaintiff.
Under the agreement as recorded by the court. these lists
would have secured for the plaintiff a decree for practically
the whole of his claim, and there would have been due to
him from the defendant a sum exceeding two lakhs of
rupees.

33. Bul then suddenly a strange thing happened. The
whole situation cannot be better described than in the
words of Lord Blanesburgh himself. His Lordship in the
course of his judgment observed— .

“But, then, a strange thing happened. For some
reason unknown—the Subordinate Judge describes it
as ‘a fit of responsive generosity’ on the part of the first
plaintiff, he on the 30th March, 1922, when filing his
lists, made in the court, in the presence of the first
defendant, the offer on which everything new turns. It
is thus recorded by the Subordinate Judge--

‘Lala Inder Prasad says he will give up out of his
lists such items as Jagmohan Das denies before the
Deity Lachmi Narsinghi. Jagmohan Das accepts
this’.”

34, In pursuance of this offer, Jagmohan Das, the defen-
dant, took a special oath before the Deity and gave his

Under Prasad v. fagmohan Das (1927), 54 1.0 301 ; LL.R. = .
306 1 2 जी To RR 20 कट), हुए BT दान, 3 Luck


Special
oaths and
law.
Decisory
and sup-

M4 पु

evidence, the effect of which may best be stated in. the
words of the Privy Council— 3

“By admitting...... practically all the items which
involved any liability on the part of the first plaintiff,
and denying practically all the items which involved
any lability on his own, the first defendant had trans-
formed the lists which disclosed an indebtedness of over
two lakhs of rupees from him to the plaintiff into a bill
ultimately adjusted at Rs. 93,672-15-3 due by the
plaintiff to himself and his son.”.

35. The plaintiff, thereafter, being thoroughly alarmed
at this, protested to the Subordinate Judge about the pro-
ceedings, and the matter came ultimately to the Privy
Council. Relying, upon the language used in sections 8 to
12 of the Oaths Act, 1873, their Lordships of the Privy
‘Council dismissed the appeal of the plaintiff with २0505, But
it will appear from the judgment of the Privy Council, that
in more places than one the Privy Council stated that they
were constrained to adhere to the view of the agreement
taken by the courts below. Thus, their Lordships stated —

“But on full consideration, their Lordships are in
this matter constrained to adhere to the view of the
agreement taken by the Courts below.”.

Again, their Lordships observed*—

“For all these reasons, their Lordships dealing on
this branch of the appeal..........are constrained to
agree with both courts in India that the statements
made by the first defendant in the presence of the
family Deity and before the Commissioners were con-
clusive upon the plaintiff.”.

36. A study of the facts of this case leaves no room for
doubt that a great mischief and harm was done to the
plaintiff in this case, because the courts, including the Privy
Council, had no other alternative than 10 give effect to the
mandatory provisions of sections 8 to 11 of the Indian Oaths
Act, 1873. But it is clear from the judgment of the Privy
Council, that the Privy Council was not at all satisfied with
the result of the appeal; otherwise their Lordships would
not have used the word ‘constrained’ more than once in the
course of their judgment.

37. The conclusive character of the evidence given on
special oath makes it look like a wager of the law. As
us stated by Best®,—

“Qne of the greatest of these (abuses) is the
investing of oaths with a conclusive effect,—where the
jaw announces to a person whose life, liberty or pro-

331 C.W.N. 1053, 1058 ; right hand, in Wr दम 1053, 1058 j tight hand, in ALR, 1927, P.G. 165, 168.
331 T.W.N. 1053, 1062 5 right hand, in ALR. 1927, P.C. 165, 172.
3Best on Evidence, (1922), pages 45-46, para. 59.


15

perty is in jeopardy, that in order to save it he bas
only to swear to a certam indic: faet. This was
precisely the case of the wager Siew anciently used
in England, and the system of purgation undes the
non law. So, in the civil law, either of the litigant
parties might.in many cases tender an oath, called
‘the decisory oath’, te the other; who was beund,
under peril of losing his cause, either to take it, in
which case he obtained judgment without further
trouble, or refer it back to his adversary, who then
refused it at the like peril, or took it with the prospect
of advantage. The Judge also...... had a discre-
tionary power of deciding doubtful cases by means of
another oath, called the ‘suppletory oath’, administered
by him to either of the parties.

With reference to these, ome of the greatest
foreign authorities (Pothier), who to the learning of a
jurist added the practical experience of a judge, ex-
pressed himself as follows :—

‘I would advise the judges to be rather sparing
in the use of these precautions, which oecasion
many perjuries. A man of integrity does not
require the obligation ef an oath to prevent his
demanding what is not due to him, or disputing
the payment of what he owes; and a dishonest
than is not afraid of incurring the guilt of perjury.
In the exercise of my profession for more than
forty years, I have often seen the oath deferred;
and I have not more than twice known a party
réstrained by the sanctity of the oath from persist-
ing in what he had before asserted’!.”

38. Partaking of the nature of wager of the law*, the
provisions relating to the conclusive and binding nature
of the evidence? given on special oaths appear to be op
posed to sound public policy.

39, The provisions relating to special oaths are open: te Fundamental
more fundamental objections. According to the norrsal objections
judicial process, every dispute which comes before a court togpecial
should be decided according to the evidence adduced in “™*
accordance with law by the parties to the dispute. But,
in the case of a special oath, a dispute is settled on the
mere statement of the adversary or any witness.

40. But, then, it is contended that the freedom of choice Freedom
of a person should not be interfered with. If a person of contract
out of his own free will offers himself to be bound by the Considered,
testimony of his adversary, then the law should not stand
in his way. The argument is specious, and does not stand

12 By, Poth, article 831.
“Pura. 37, supra.

aBxisting section वा,


16

close scrutiny. It may for the sake of argument, be
conceded that a man may out of his free will agree to
settle his dispute in any Way he likes, so long as he does
not bring his dispute within the seisin and cognizance of
the court. The moment he does so, he is bound by the
rules which govern and regulate all judicial process.
Even in the compromise or adjustment of a suit, it is
expressly required by the Code of Civil Procedure’ that it
must be proved to the satisfaction of the court that the
suit has been adjusted wholly or in part by a lawful agree-
ment or compromise, and it is only after the court has been
so satisfied that the court can pass a decree in accordance
with such agreement or compromise and not otherwise.
And what is a “lawful” agreement is to be determined by
reference to the provisions of the Indian Contract Act,
1872, specially these contained in Chapter II (sections 10
to 30) of that Act. But in the case of a decision of a dis-
pute by special oath, the court is a passive spectator, and
the statement of the adversary is given the character of
conclusive evidence as against the other party. It is not
desirable that the court should become a powerless and
silent spectator and be constrained to accept the evidence
sworn to on special oath as conclusive, whatever may be
its own view on such evidence. The court cannot be made
to abdicate its own judicial functions in this way.

41, Then, the so-called freedom of choice or agreement
or will may turn out on ultimate analysis to be a complete
negation of freedom, because the parties to a dispute may
not be in a position of real equality. One may be a simple,
illiterate gullible person having implicit faith in his ad-
versary, specially when he is making a statement in the
name of religion cr God orin the presence of some
teligious symbol. The adversary, on the other hand, may
be a cunning person or a person having no moraij scruples
or religious fear or qualms of conscience. He may not
hesitate to wtter a downright and deliberate falsehood or
to perpetrate’ any other dishonest or corrupt act for the
achievement of his selfish ends. To him, the touching of
a copy of the Gita or the Quran or a pot of water of the
Ganga may mean no more than touching a few pages of
paper or a pot containing some liquid substance.

42, १६ may, perhaps, be safely asserted that, by and
large, man has not reached that stage of moral stature
or spiritual illumination wherefrom he does not hesitate
at all to give up and forsake his self-interest for the sake
of truth and dharma. When that stage will be reached
among mankind, the necessity for law as an instrument
of social control will perhaps no more be. But, as long as
that stage is not reached, courts and laws are necessary
for the settlement of antagonistic jural relations among
the members of the society. The oft-quoted saying of

1Order 23, rule 3, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.



1१६

Sir Henry Maine. that the movement of’ society has been:
from status to contract!no longer lidlds good in its entirety.
The law now steps-in 60 tegulate human relations at every:
stage, and does not allow them to be governed by agree-
ments and free will, bécause it has been. found by bitter
experience that freedom! of ‘contract and will in many
fields of human relations instead of subserving the. ends.
‘of social justice, brings about glaring injustice and un-
fairness in relations between man and man.’ Therefore,
thé central point in a:modern developed system of law,
specially in systems ba ed upon the Anglo-Saxon juris-
prudence and common law, is not will, but relation:

43. The law is not so much concerned with the agree.
ments and stipulations. which brought a relation into-.
existence, as with the legal rights, duties and obligations
involved in that relation. This relational aspect of the
law was noted by. Brett. J.. in the well-known case of
Heaven v. Pender? as early as the eighties of the last .
century. He observed— .

“The. questions which we have: to solve. in this:
case are—what is the proper definition of the relation
ketween two persons other than the relation establish-
ed by the contract or fraud which imposes on, the one
of them a duty towards the other to observe, with
regard to the person. or property of such other, such
ordinary care or skill as may be necessary to prevent
injury to his person or property.”

44. Reference: may be|.made in this connection also to:
the well-known: observations of Lord.Atkin in the famous.
case of Donoghue y.. Stevenson’. We:need..not- dilate. on
this. point. है glance at ‘the modern statute book of any:
country will .provide. inn apumerapte instances ‘of statutory
relations which have supplanted purely contractual : rela-
tions. ‘The doctrine of laissez faire or naked individualism
of the eighteenth or early nineteenth century, is a far. cry
from the social and juristic. philosophy of the second haif~
of the twentieth century, The moment a person appears
before the court as.a plaintiff and drags the other party>
before the court as a defendant, that very moment the two
stand to each other in the relation of plaintiff and defen-
dant, and the court becomes the arbiter of their disputes.
The court is bound, therefore, to decide the dispute accord-
ing to known and well-established rules of judicial proce-
dure. After that relati¢nship has been established, the
decision of: the dispute shauld not be left to the mere
statement of the person: taking the special oath.

41Mai aMaine, Ancient Law (Pollock's Edn), pane 18). See दा) MMOna.
‘Maine, Ancient Law (P: ‘ollpck's Edn. 182, See Gray «Move- -
ment from ‘Status to Conteaces (1947) Re 267. ४०४० “Move
‘Heaven v. Pender, (7883) 41 Q.B.D. 5०3.
"Donoghue ¥. Stevenson, (1932) A.C. $62, 579-584.


38
. In view pt the above considerations!, we recommend

Recommen-
Sica for that the provisions contained -in sections 8 to: 12 of the
special oaths, Indian Oaths Act, 1873, should be omitted.

Sections
examined,

Preamble,

“Section 4
other

;

46, Having made these general observations, we now
proceed to deal with the important points that seem to
arise on a study of the various sections of the Act.

47. A suggestion bas been made that the preamble
should be amended so as to bring forth the impact of the
Act in the ethical sense, to emphasise the correct concept
of the oath and the consequences flowing. from false
swearing, and 40 lay down a uniform system of oath. We
do not purpose that it is necessary to amend the preamble
for this p ‘ particularly when it is not the usual
practice in mpdern Acts of Parliament to have a
preamble? हि

48, The Act does not contain any definition of ‘oath’.
The ex pression th’ is defined in section 3(37). of the
General Clauses Act, 1897, as includ an. ‘affirmation’,
and this definition applies to all end Acts made after
the 3rd January, 1868-*. It is, however, not necessary to
rely upon this définition, because, wherever the expression
‘oath’ is used in the Indian Oaths Act, 1873, the expression
‘affirmation’ is also mentioned. हु

49. Section 3 of the Act excludes from its operation
pr befpre courts-martial, as these courts have
power tp administer oaths under the various-statutes relat-
ing to armed forces. [See section 130 of the Air Force
Act, 1950, section 131 of the Army Act, 1950 and section
11001) of the Navy Act, 1957. There are also. . provisions
in sections Hod arid 109 of the Navy Act, 1957,..negarding -
oaths and jong to be administered to interpreters
and shorthand wiitera. The section does not require any
change in this respect.

50. Section 4 enumerates the persons authorised to
administer caths. As the Act is confined to judicial caths,
the section does not mention persons who have power ta
administer oaths for purposes other than judicial proceed-
ingr. Thus, it does not mention—

(i) ‘Notaries Public; [section 8(i)(e) of the Nota-
ries Act, 1952,|authorises a notary public to administer
oaths}; :

(४) Diplomatic officers; [See the Diplomatic and
‘Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948};

*Pyras. 26--449 supra. .
*The Bill proposed (Appendix 1) has no preamble.
8ce section 4 (1), General Clauses Act, 1897.
“See also section 57, Indian Penal Code.


’ 18

(iii) Persons before whom affidavits may be
sworn for the purposes of: civil and criminal proceed-
ings; [See section 189, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
and sections 539 and 539AA, Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1898];

(iv) Oath Commissioners, mentioned in  secti

539, Code of Crimina! Procedure, 1898, and cent:
pleted in section 139(b), Code of Civil Procedure,
13908.

51. At present there is no specific provision for the Section 4and
administration of oaths for the purpose of affidavits, affidavits,
While the provisions in section 4 of the Oaths Act and in
section 139 of the Code. of Civil Procedure, 1908, and
sections 539 and 539AA of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1898 are adequate for certain situations, there is no com-
prehensivd provigion on the subject. Heving regard to
the fact that affidavits may be required not only in con-
nection with judicial proceedings but also for other pur-
poses, we think that a specific and comprehensive provision
on the subject would be helpful. We have, accordingly,

ropesed an amendment! in section 4, under which the

igh Court or the Government, as ibe case may be, can
empower any court, fee, Ma Magistrate or other person to
administer oaths or tions for the purpose of
affidavits for all purposes.

52. Under section 4(b), proviso (2), the power of a Section 4
Commanding Officer to administer an oath or affirmation and powers
is restricted by two conditions; firstly, that the oath, etc., ee
is administered within the limits- of his station, and Gicere
secondly, that. the oath, etc., is such as a Justice of the

Peace is competent to administer. Now, the second condi-

tion is lightly obscure, for the reason that the oath or
affirmation which a Justice of the Peace is competent to
administer in India cannot be ascertained.

The sections in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
which deal with Justices of the Peace (sections 22 to 25)
do not lay down the oath or affirmation which a Justice
of the Peace is competent to administer.

53. In England, under section 16 of the Evidence Act,
18517, every court, Justice, etc. having, by law or by con-
sent of the parties, authority to hear, receive and examine
evidence is empowered to administer oath to all such
witnesses ag ste legally called before them respectively.*

1See Appendix 3, clause 3.

*Bvidence Act, 7887 (14 and 13, Vic. ० 99).

*The Act of 1857 is not one of the British Stauates which was applicable
to India. For a list of such British Statutes, see sth Report of the Law
Commission (British Statutes Applicable to India), pagt 9 e¢ seg. See also
the Britisn Statutes, etc. Repealing Act 57 of 1960).


Section 5—
Obligation
to make
oath,

Section
and oath by
accused.

8 witness.

Seetion 5—

other points,

Section 6—
Principic.

20

54. It would appear from the proceedings in the
Governor-General’s Council (at the time when the Bill
‘which led to the existing Act was discussed), that there
was an old Act—Act 9 of 1836—relating to the Command-
ing Officer’s power to administer oath, and that Act was
being repealed by the Bill and the provision contained
therein was proposed to be re-enacted in the Bill. As the
power of a Justice of the Peace to administer an oath is
obscure so far as India is concerned, this part of the
proviso should now be omitted?

55. Section 5 provides that oaths or affirmations “shalt
‘be made” by certain persons.. Failure to make an oath
or affirmation would attract the provisions of section 178
of the Indian Penal Code. under which any person who
refuses to bind himself by. an oath or affirmation to state
the truth commits an offence.

56. It has been suggested, that in section’ 5, last para-
graph, for the words “unless he is examined as a witness
for the defence”, the words “unless he voluntarily offers
himself as a witness for defence” should be substituted,
This provision is to be read along .with: section 342A,
proviso (8), of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
under which the accused is a competent -but not a com-
pellable witness. No such change in the section is, there-
fore, necessary. है

57. A few other points regarding section 5 are dealt
with separately!

58. Section 6 provides that where the witness, etc, is
a Hindu or Muslim or has an objection to making an oath,
he can make an affirmation. But in every other case the
witness, etc, shall make an oath, Thus, the liberiy of
substituting an affirmation for an oath is dependent on
the community to which the deponent belongs or on his
raising an objection to making an oath. We think, that
every witness, itrespective of the community to which he
belongs, and whether or not he raises a formal objection
to taking an oath, should have an absolute and uncondi-
tional right to make an affirmation instead of an oath.
Te may be noticed, that the Constitution gives such a

Gazette of India, (1873), Supplement 2, para. 238.

"See App. 1, clause 4.
“See App. 2, Notes on Clauses, clause 4.



21

liberty to holders of certain offices who are required to
take an oath on assumption of office'-’.

We, therefore, recommend; that the section be amended
so as to give absolute liberty to a witness to affirm instead
of making an oath,

59. The change proposed by us in section 6* will, Section 6—
incidentally, obviate the criticism that the section, by other
expressly exempting Hindus and others from making an suggetions.
oath, encourages them to make a solemn affirmation,

60. The form in which an oath should be taken has Section एन
been discussed elsewhere’. Form

61. We are of the opinion, that while ordinarily the Section 7
general form of oath or affirmation’” should be adhered and permis-
to, the court should have a power to permit a witness to Hon fo to
take the oath, etc. in another form which is regarded as take on
binding by the class of persons to which he belongs. We oath in a
have, accordingly, proposed a suitable provision® on the particular
‘subject, on the lines of existing section 8. orm.

62. A suggestion has been made that, while taking Section 7—
an oath the deponent should hold in his hand the reli- Holding of
gious scripture in which he believes, eg., the Gita or 7
the Quran. This aspect of the matter has been discussed
elsewhere?

JaAsticle GO. . न . . President ;
Article 69 . . . . Vice-President ;
Article 990. . ‘ . . Members of Parliament ;
Article 1245)... Judges of the Supreme Court;
Adticle 148) 9... + ++ Comptroller and Auditor
1 General ;
Article r59 - . . . « Governors 5
Article 188. . . . . Members of the State Legisla-
tures 5
Article 219. . न . . Judges of High Courts.

*Article 75 (gelation to Ministers of the Union, and article- 164 (3)
relating 20 State Ministers, "pee eak of oaths of office and secrecy without men-
tioning “ affismation ? ; but the forms given in the Third Schedule (forms J,
II, Vand VI) allow affirmation without any condition.

*Appendix -I, clause 5.

“See para, 58, supra.

* SPara, 24 (6), supra.

*App. 1, Schedule,

*Para. 22, supra, -

‘App. 7, clause 6.

*Pare. 21; supra.


22

Section 7— 63. Tt has also been suggested that the oath should
who should he administered by the. presiding officer of the Court,
omth, We have accepted the suggestion, for the reason stated
elsewhere’. है
Sectiom 8-12, 64, Sections 8--12 are proposed to be deleted, in view
Special of our recomimendation? to abolish special oaths.
Section 13. 65. Section 13 provides that an omission to take an
oath, ete., or any irregularity therein shall not—
(i) invalidate the proceedings;
(ii) render inadmissible any evidence;
Gii) affect the obligation to state the truth.

A suggestion has been made to limit the saving ig to छा
only. We are not. inclined to accept the suggestion.

Section 4— gg Section 14 provides that every person giving

obligation t
atate the ° evidence on any subject before any court or person
trath— “hereby. authorised” to administer oaths and affirmations

significance. gyal] be bound to state the truth on such subject. The
significance of this section can be best understood by a
reference to the relevant provisions of the Indian Penal
Code. Thus, under section 179 of the Code, whoever,
being “legally bound” to state the truth on any subject
to any public servant, refuses to answer any question
demanded of him touching that subject by such public
servant in the exercise of the legal powers of such public
servant, is punishable with the punishment provided in
the section. Similarly, under section 181 of that Code,
a person so legally bound is punishable if he makes a
faise statement. Lastly, under section 191 of that Code,
whoever being legally bound by an oath or by an express
provision of law to state the truth makes a false state-
ment, is said to give false evidence and punishable under
section 193.

Section, 4 67. It may be noted, that the taking of an oath is not
plies. "a condition precedent to the obligation to state the truth
flowing from section 14. All that section 14 requires is,
that the Court or other person should have power to,
administer oath in order that the evidence given before
the court or other officer may become subject to the obli-
gation to state the truth. The decision ina Calcutta
case’, to the effect that the offence of intentionally giving
false evidence under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code
(which applies to false evidence in a stage of judicial pro-
ceeding and also to false evidence in other cases) may be
coromitted although the person giving evidence has nei-
ther been sworn nor affirmed, can be said to be based on
this reasoning. [The judgment does not give the reasons

Past 42. supra, reganding special oath
: 4 5 8.
Gobind Chandra v. Q. 5.3 (7892), LL.R. 19 Cai. 355 358.


23

and is a very short one, out the ‘arguments of Mr, Kilby,
who appeared for the Crown, may be seen.]

68. We have proposed a Schedule which contains the Schedule
form of oath’. (New),

69. The important changes which we have recommen- Other
ded have been discussed above, The other points on which changes.
we have recommended changes in the law will appear
from the notes on clauses®.

70. In order to give a concrete shape to our recomen- Appendices
dations, we have, in Appendix 1, put them in the form
of a draft Bill,

Appendix 2, contains notes on clauses, explaining, with
reference to each clause in Appendix 1, puints that might
need elucidation.

Appendix 3 summarises our recommendations in res-
pect of other Acts.

Appendix 4 contains a comparative table, showing the
section in the existing Act and the corresponding clause,
if any, in Appendix 1. हे

1, J. 1.. KAPUR—Chairman.

2, K. G. DATAR.

3. 5. K. HIRANANDANI.

4. 8, P. SEN VARMA. ‘Members:
5. T. छू, TOPE.

6. R. P. MOOKERJEE.

P. M. BAKSHI,
Joint Secretary and Draftsman.

New Deva,
The 22nd May, 1965.

See a. 24 Oh supra. :
See App 22 1100, ०० Clauses,



Short tithe
and extent.
Sy

Saving of
certain
oaths and

affirmations,

CS. 3)

Authority to

administer

oaths.
S.4)

24
APPENDIX 1
PROPOSALS AS SHOWN IN THE FORM OF A pRarT Brn

(This is a tentative draft only)
INDEX TO THE BILL

~Clause Subject-matter

r Short title and extent.
2 Saving of certain oaths and affirmations.
Authority to administer oaths,

4 Oaths or affirmations to be made by witnesses, jurors and interpre-
ters.

Affirmation by persons desiring to affirm,
6 Forms of oaths and affirmations.

7 Proceedings and evidence not invalidated by omission of oath
or irregularity.

8, Persons giving evidence bound to state the truth,
9 Repeal.

ScHEDULE—ForMs oF OaTHS

THE OATHS BILL, 196....

A Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to
judicial oaths and for certain other purposes.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the .......... Year of
the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Oaths Act, 196—.

(2) Tt extends to the whole of. India except the State
of Jammu and Kashmir.

2, Nothing herein contained applies to proceedings be-
fore Courts Martial or to oaths, affirmations or declara-
tions prescribed by the Central Government with respect
to members of the Armed Forces of the Union.

3. (1) The following courts and persons are authorised
to administer, by themselves or, subject to the provisions
of sub-section (2) of section 6, by an officer empowered by
them in this behalf, oaths and affirmations in discharge of
the duties or in exercise of the powers imposed or con-
ferred upon them respectively by law, namely—

(a) all courts and persons having by law or con-
sent of parties authority to receive evidence;


28

(2) the Commanding Officer of any military, naval,
or air force station or ship occupied by the armed
forces of. the Union; provided the oath or affirmation
be administered within the limits of the station.

(2) Without prejudice to the powers conferred by
sub-section (1) or by or under any other law for the
time being in: force! any court, Judge, Magistrate or
person may administer oaths and affirmations for the
purpose of affidavits, if empowered in this behalf—

(a) by the High Court, in respect of affidavits for
the purpose of judicial proceedings; or

(8) by the State Government, in respect of other

affidavits.
4. (7) Oaths or affirmations shall be made by the Caths or
following persons, namely:— affirmations

to be made
(a) all witnesses, that is to say, all persons who bY witnesses,
may lawfully be examined, or give, or be required to ieee ters.
give, evidence by or béfore any court or person having (S. 5
by law or consent of parties authority to examine such
persons or to receive evidence;

(0७) interpreters of questions put to, and evidence
given by, witnesses; and

(ce) jurors:

Provided that where the witness is a child under tweive
years of age, and the court or person having authority to
examine such witness is of opinion that, though he under-
stands the duty of speaking the truth, he does not under-
stand the nature of an oath or affirmation, the foregoing
Provisions of this section and the provisions of section 5
shall not apply to such witness, but in any such case the
absence of an oath or affirmation shall not tender
inadmissible any evidence given by such witness nor
affect the’ obligation of the witness to state the truth.

(2) Nothing herein contained shall render it lawful to
administer, in a criminal proceeding: an oath or affirmation
to the accused person, unless he is examined as a witness
for the defence, or necessary to administer to the official
interpreter of any court, after he has entered on the execu-
ticn of the duties of his office, an oath or affirmation that he
will faithfully discharge those duties,

5. A witness, interpreter or juror may, instead of mak- Admmation

ing an oath, make an affirmation. by peesons
_ offen.
1 Alternative Draft of clause 3.(2) २ (5. &)

The High Court, in the case of affidavits for the purposes of judicial
Proceedings, and the State Government, in the case of other affidavits, may
empower any court, Judge, Magistra (te oF person to administer oaths and
affirmations for the purpose of such affidavits,


6

Forms of 6. (2) All oaths and affirmations made under section 3

Saths ara, Shall be administered according to such one of the forms

S72 given in the Schedule as may be appropriate to the
5 circumstances of the case:

Provided that if a witness in any judicial proceeding
desires to give evidence on oath or solemn affirmation in
any form common amongst, or held binding by, persons of
the class to which he belongs, and not repugnant to justice
or decency, and not purporting to affect any third person,
the court may, if it thinks fit, notwithstanding anything
hereinbefore contained, allow him to give evidence on such
oath or affirmation.

(2) All such oaths and affirmations shall, in the case of
all courts other than the छाए? Court and the High
Courts, be administered by the presiding officer of the
Courts himself, or, in the case of a Bench of Judges or
Magistrates, by any one of them.

Proceedings बे, No omission to take any oath or make any affirmation,
and evidence no substitution of any one for any other of them, and no
कल हक नल irregularity whatever in the form in which any one cf them
‘Son of oath 18 administered, shall invalidate any proceeding or render
‘or itregs- inadmissible any evidence whatever, in or in respect of
larity. which such omission, substitution or irregularity took place,
G. 13) or shall affect the obligation of a witness to state the truth.

Persons 8. Every person giving evidence on any subject before
sire any court or person hereby authorised to administer oaths

founito and affirmations shall be bound to state the truth on such
state the = subject.

4. (7) The Indian Oaths Act, 1873, is hereby repealed. ro of 1873.

{2) Where, in any proceeding pending at the commence-
ment of thie Act, the parties have agreed to be bound by
any such oath or affirmation as is specified in section 8 of
the said Act, then, notwithstanding the repeal of the said
Act, the provisions of sections 9 to 12 of the said Act shall
continue to apply in relation to such agreement as if this
Act had not been passed.

SCHEDULE
[See section 6]
Form oF OaTus
{ New] Form No. 1 (Witnesses): —

swear in the name of God
that what I shall state

I do
solemnly affirm पु
shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth.


१21

Form No. 2 (Jurors): ~
swear in the name of God
that I will well and truly

Ido +

solemnly affirm |

try and true deliverance make between the State and the

prisoner(s) at the bat, whom I shall have in charge, and a
true verdict give according to the evidence.

Form No, 3 (Interpreters): —

swear in the name of God

I do that I will well and truly

solemnly affirm

interpret and explain all questions put to and evidence
given by witnesses and translate correctly and accurately
all documents given to me for translation.

Form No. 4 (Affidavits) :—

swear in the name of God
that this is my name and

Ido
solemnly effirm

signature {or mark) and that the contents of this my
affidavit are true.

APPENDIX 2
Notss on CLAUSES

Clause 1
. (Existing 6. 1) :
The word “Indian” hgs been omitted, in conformity
with recent legislative practice. .
Clause 2
(Existing s. 3)
No changes are propased in existing section 3.
Clouse 3
(Existing 5. 4)
Since a provision abqut administration of oaths by the
presiding g offices himself (except in certain casts) is pro- |
posed, this section has been made subject to that provision.

In patagraph (0), the words “troops in the service of
Government” have been replaced by the phraseology
अप हे 5

"See clause 6.


8

“armed forces of the Union”, in accordance. with modern
usage.

The requirement that the oath, ete. administered 8
Commanding Officer should be the same as that which, a
Justice of the Peace can administer, has been omitted.*

A provision regarding affidavits is added.*
A tew other points have already been dealt with.*

Clause 4
(Existing s. 5)

i. No changes are recommended in section 5. Certain
points relating to the section have been dealt with’

2. As to the admissibility of unsworn testimony of a
child witness, the existing proviso makes the position quite
clear. In a Privy Council case,’ from Somaliland, (where
the Indian Evidence Act and Oaths Act applied), reliance
was placed on section 13 to support the conclusion that
such unsworn testimony of a girl of 10 years is admissible,
and that corroboration goes only to weight and value.

Before the proviso was inserted, there was some eontro-
versy as 10 the value of the unsworn evidence of a
child" That cannot survive now.

3. Paragraph (०) of section 5 requires oaths to be Made
by Jurors. Tf and when the provisions regardin: ey. in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, are deleted,® conse-
quentia] changes may become necessary in this part of the
section. In the meantime, the provision may stand.

4, Section 5, last paragraph, provides that “nothing
herein contained shall render it jJawful to administer in a
criminal proceeding oath or affirmation to an accused
person......." It has been held,” that the expression “cri.
minal proceeding” denotes a proceeding before a eriminal
court, and dees not mean a proceeding relating to a case
pending in a criminal court; accordingly, it was decided
that वा फ्रप्र & confession made under section 164, Code of Criminal

agee the body tthe Report, paras. 52-54.

*§ee the body of the Report, para. 51:

Sec the ००49 of the Report, para. 50.

4See the body of the Report, pars. $5736.

‘Makomed Sugal ए- The King, ALR. 1946 PC. 3.

3868 Queen Empress v. Mara, (1888) LL.R, to All. 207.

"Queen Empress v- Lal Sahat, LLR. 17 Ail. 183; also see LL.R. 16 Mad..~

105.

39७७ ulso Ab Pubr v. Emp., ALR. 1939 Rangoon 402.

vThe question of amendments to the Gods of Criminal Procedure for
abolition of the Jury system is under ideration of the Law Commission.
‘See also the 14th Report of che Law ‘Cogamisaion, Vol. 2, page $73, para. 18.

Karam Taki प्र. Kmperor, AIR. 1947 Lah, 92, 96, para, 17 (0.8.).-


29

Procedure, 1898, cannot be recorded on oath. (However,
applying section 5370 the Code of Criminal Procedure, the
court admitted the confession in evidence on the ground
that no failure of justice had been occasioned.) .No change
need be made in this respect.

5. The question how far section 5 of the Oaths. Act Section 5 snd
nN empowers Magistrates acting under section 164, the Code statements
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 to administer oaths is one on Uasey section
which uncertainty now prevails. A recent decision of’ the Procedure
Allahabad High Court’, ‘holds, that a Magistrate has no Code.
jurisdiction to administer oath to a person before recording
his statement under section 164. Such Magistrate, it was
stated. was not authorised by law to take “evidence”, be-
cause he is not charged with the duty of deciding any case,
and there is no matter to be “proved” or “disproved” before
him. The matter (it was held) stood at the stage of inves-
tigation, during which no authority had been conferred
upon any court to “redeive evidence”, and, therefore, an
oath could not be administered. The Magistrate is not a
“court”. He does not record any “evidence”, and the per-
s0n examined is not a “witness”, The procceding is not a
“judicial proceeding”.

Decisions of the Madras,’ Bombay* and Andhra Pradesh*
High Courts to the contrary were dissented from, on the
ground, that they did not give any detailed reasons for
holding that investigation is a stage of “judicial proceeding”,
and also on the ground that when a person makes a state-
mer.t under section 164, he has not the status of a “witness”
{that is, a person who may lawfully be examined or he
required to give evidence). The statement of such a person
is made voluntarily, and he may refuse to be examined or
to make a statement. It was also pointed out, that the
Magistrate is not a “court”*, and that such statement is not
“evidence” in a stage of “judicial proceeding”.’

1As to witnesses whose statements are recorded under section 164, Cr. P.C*
see Appendix 2, Notes on Clauses, section $ and statements under s. 1645
€r. 9. ८.

39960 Raj प्र. The State, A.I.R. 1964 All. 294, paragraph 8 (F.B.) (July

1964).
N *Queen Empress v. Alagu Kone, (1898) I.L.R. 16 Mad. 421 (The word
“Court” includes all Magistrates, and section 164 “permits” the statement
नि by a witness ; the person examined is a “witness”? within section 5, Oaths

Act.) Suppa v. Emp., (1906). LL.R. 29 Mad. 86.
‘Emp v. Vishwanath, (1906) 8 Bom. L.R., 589.

"Public Prosecutor v. Nagalinga Reddi, LR. 1958 AP. 614 5 ALR
1959 Andhra ‘Pradesh 350." ,

P. Relying on Nazir Ahmed v. King Emperor, 63 1.8. 372 ; AJR. 1936,

.C. 253. हु हु

8 ‘Citing Emperor v, Parshottam, L.L,R. 45 Bom. 834 ; ALR. 1921
om, 3.



‘30
. In the yndermentioned decisions’ however, the
power ts administer cath in such cases was assumed, and
a persor.making a false statemént under section 164 was

held guilty under sections 191 and 193 (second para.) LP.C.
of giving false “evidence”,

7. The offence would not, perhaps, amount to giving
false evidence in a “judicial proceeding”+.

8. The question of inserting a provision on the subject.
in the Oaths Act has been considered’,

. It is, however, felt that the matter should be consi-
dered when the Code of Criminal Procedure is revised.

Clause 5
(Existing 5. 6)
1. The change mad,

le in the: principle of th, existin,
Section has been already explained P ° ड़

2. The mention of jurors has to be retained so long as.
the jury is retained in the Criminal Procedure Code,

Clause 6
(Existing 5. 7)

1. The forms have been laid down in the Schedule to
the Act, instead of being left to be prescribed by rules as
at present,’ .

2. The court has, however, been given power fo permit:
a witness to take the oath in a different form.*

3. It has been provided that the oath should be adminis—
tered by the presiding officer, except in the case of certain.
courts, हु

| ऋक v, Pamanan पड ah 7 उतर 7] v. Parmanand, LL.R. 14 Lah. 5०7 3 ALR, 1933- Lah, 321,
*A. T. Krishnamachari, ALR. 1933 Med. 767. .
*Rambharose, A.LR. 1944 Nag. 105, 112, 119.

© ‘Sajamal ४, Erhp., ALR. 1932 Lah, 254.
5A tentative draf{ would be— _

teétording #1 of rs Setio:
the Gate af Groninal Procedure, Tash, eel be See काट 364 of

within the preaning मै of section 4, and the person whose Statement is.
$9 rucordad shall be damed 40 87 ० खाद्य within the sacs oe
Section 5.५

See the body of the Report, para. 58.

‘For reasons, see the body of the Report, Paras, 24 (8) and 60,
"Por reasons see the body of the Réport, para. 61. '

१86४ the body of the Report, paras, 25 and 63.


31
4, The forms of 08183 ih Etigland are as follows:—
Witnessés in England: —

, Jn England? the standard form of oath now is that Pres- Practice
cribed by section 2 of the Oaths Act, 1909, which provides in England.
that the person taking the oath shall hold the New Testa-
ment (or, in the case of a Jew, the Old Testament) in his
uplifted hand and shall say or repeat after the officer ad-
ministering the odth the words “I swear by Almighty God
that .... (followed by the words of the oath prescribed by
law)”,

A person who objects to being sworn has, under section
1 of the Oaths Act, 1888, the option to make a solemn
affirmation (see also the Oath Act, 1961). The form of
such solemn affirmation under section 2 of that Act is—

“I, A. B, do solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and
affirm”—then proceeding with the oath prescribed by law,.
omitting any words of imprecation or ealling to witness.

For Quakers and Moravians a solemn affirmation or
declaration instead of oath is expressly allowed by the:
Quakers and Moravians Act, 18332.

Subject to these rules, the actual form of oath in crimi-
nal cases in England i8 as follows?:—

“I swear by the Almighty God (or I do solemnly,
sincerely and truly declare and affirm) that the evi-.
dence I shall give to the court and jury sworn between:
our sovereign lady the Queen and the prisoner (s) at the
bar झा be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but:

e truth.”

Jurors in England—

In England, the oath for jurors in criminal cases is in
the following form*:—

“I swear by almighty God (or I do solemnly, since-
rely and truly declare and affirm) that I will faithfully
try the several fssues joined between our sovereign.
lady the Queen and the risoner({s) at the bar and.
give a true verdict accor: ding to the evidence.”,

._...1Ror details, see Boland and Sayér’s Oaths and Affirmations, (196
Pages 23-24 and page 106, et seq.
*Quakers and Moravians Act, 1833 (3 and 4 Will. IV, ०. 49).
*Archbold, Criminal Pleadings, ctc. (1962), paragraph 548.
‘Archbold, Criminal Pleadings, etc. (1962), paragraph 524,


32
Forms _ of As an example of forms of oaths in use in India, we may

“Outh—India refer to the Bombay High Court Rules on the Original
Side, 1957, under which the forms are as follows':-—

“Witnesses” Oaths (Form No. 88)—Bombay High
Court.

Christian, (on New Testament)—

I swear that what I shall state shall be the truth, the
whole truth and nothing but the truth. So help me God,
{In case of Quaker substitute, for ‘swear’ “being one of the

people called Quakers do solemnly, sincerely and truly
declare and affirm.”

Jew (on the Hebrew Testament) —

I swear that what I shall state shall be the truth, the
whole truth and nothing but the truth. So help me God.

Parsi—

[The witness with his shoes on and placing his
right hand on the open Zend Avesta, shall say]—-

I swear in the presence of Almighty God that what I
shail state shall be the truth, the whole truh and nothing
but the truth. Manashi, Gavasni, Kunasni.

Hindu and Muhammadan—

I solomnly affirm in the presence of Almighty God that
what I shall state shall be the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth.

Jurors Oaths (Form No. 89)—Bombay High Court,

I.

do swear in the name of Almighty God
olemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm
that I will well and truly try and true deliverance make
between the State and the prisoner (5) at the bar, whom 1
shall have in charge and a true verdict give aceerding to
‘the evidence.

Interpreter’s Oath (Rule 37)—Bombay High Court

Every Interpreter and Translator before his admission
to office shall take an oath or solemn affirmation that he
will well and truly interpret and explain all questions put
to and evidence given by witnesses, and translate correctly
and accurately all documents given to him for translation.

+For Oaths by witnesses, etc., before Commissioners, see Bombay High
Court 0.8. Rutes (1957) Form No. 85, end.


33

Clause 7
(Existing 8. 13)

No changes are proposed in existing section 13. As to
the wide ambit of this section, the under-mentioned deci-
sions may be seen'-?.

The scope of section 13 has been discussed elaborately
in a recent case*, which points out, that section 13 cures
three kinds of disobedience to the Provisions of the Act:—

{i) disobedience by omission to administer either
an oath or an affirmation;

Gi) disobedience by swbstituting an oath, where
an affirmation had to be administered;

(ili) disobedience committeed by the adoption of
a wrong form of an oath or affirmation, when such oath
or affirmation is, in fact, administered and there has
been no omission to administer it, Each one is a
distinet category of disobedience. (The third category
has no association with the first two. The third cate-
fory refers only to cases in which there has been an
administration of oath or affirmation, but it was not
administered in the form prescribed for that purpose.)

Clause 8
(Existing 5. 14)
No changes are proposed in existing section 14.

1. The Schedule is new, and gives the forms of oath
for witnesses, jurors, interpreters, etc‘.

2. As to the form of oath for affidavits, compare the

undermentioned precedents °-°-7-". A simple form has been
adopted, after a study of the various precedents,

‘Mahomed Sugel v. King, A.LR. 1946 P.C, 3.
SLalaran ¥. State, ALR, 1960 M.P. 59, holding that the section is not
confined to cases where the omission to give oath is accidental.
'G.K. Chandrasekhariak and anather v. State of Mysore and another
ALR. 1963 Mysore 232.
‘See notes to clause 6.
‘Bombay High Court O,S. Rules, (1957), Form No, 19.
‘Boland and Sayer’s Oaths and Affirmations (1961), Forms at page 100
at seq.
‘Civil Procedure Code, First Schedule, Appendix C, Forms Nos, 3 end
5
8Form prescribed by Madras High Court—~see Beotra: Oaths Act, (1964),
age 79.

33 M. of Law—4


इक
APPENDIX 3

Recommendations in respect of other Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898:

“The “question ‘whether an oath can bé adinin istered

where the statement of a witness is recorded’ under’ se

164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure should be considered

when that Code is revised’.

| APPENDIX 4
Comparative Table

+

Showing the provision in the existing Act, and

responding pro’

the cor-

ion, if any, in the Bill in Appendix I.

Provision in the existing Act Provision in Appendix 1;
Setiont 1५ | - eg Clause 1.
Section 2 (Repealed) - . we
Section 3 6,0. 091 Clowes 2.
Section 4: . . Clause 3.
Sectins . . . + + -+ + Clause 4.
Section 6 Clause 5,
Section 7 Clause 6.
Sections 8 to 12 Omitted,
Section 13 Clause 7.
Section 14 Clause 8.

tN.
1808 Apptiidit! 4, Notes on Clauses, Clatise 4.

GMGBP Minto Road ND—TS Wing—33 M of Law (1$13)~22-10-1965—1,60.