n'{rt
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
THE ON ADVERSE PO ESSION
Report No. 280
Muy,2023


The 22d Law Commission was constituted by Gazette Notification for a period of three
years vide Order No. FNo. 45021/l/201S-Admn-lll(LA) dated 2l$ February, 2020 issued
by the Goveinment of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs,
New Delhi. The term of the 22nd Law Commission was extended vide Order No. FA No.
600 I | 1225 I 2022-Admn. I I I(LA) dated 22nd February, 2023.
The Law Commission consists of a Chairperson, three full-time Members, Member
Secretary, two ex-fficio Members and two Part-time Members.
Chairperson
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Full-time Members
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Prof. (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Prof. D.P. Verma
Member Secretary
Shri K. Biswal
Ex-officio Members
Dr. Niten Chandra, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Secretary, Legislative Department
Part-time Members
ShriM. Karunanithi
Prof. (Dr.) Raka Arya
Law Officers
Smt. Varsha Chandra
Shri Atul Kumar Gupta
: Joint Secretary &Law Officer
: Deputy Law Officer
Lesal Consultants
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Gaurav Yadav
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Shri Davinder Singh
The Law Commission is located at:
2d and 4th Floor, 'B' Wing
Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market
New Delhi-l l0 003.
The text of this Report is available on the Website at:
u'rr rv.lau conr nr issiorroll nilia.n ic. in
@ Government of India
Law Commission of India


Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former Chief Justice of High Court of Karnataka)
Chairperson
22^o Law Gommission of lndia
qrq1 *!I rrq sfiQft
fffittil Ig qrqfr{r, oqk6 vq qrqf,q)
3lszlril
qr<r * zzd frfu srrdrrr
szufo q{i
7*
cll-flI-ti+r -
sr{d rrdlHqDO No. 6(3)I50/2009-LC(LS) Date: 24th May,2023
H€r^Ll- 9; h"r P"r- N-d^r"tild
Na*'-a,**s* I
I am pleased to forward you Report No. 280 of the Law Commission of India on "The Law
on Adverse Possession."
The concept of adverse possession has been a part of Indian legal framework since a very
long time. It is rooted in the idea that land must not be left vacant and instead be put to
judicious use. The law on adverse possession underwent a significant change post the
enactment of the Limitation Act of 1963. By virtue of the said change, the position of the true
owner was fortified as he had to merely prove his title, while the burden of proof of adverse
possession shifted on the person claiming so.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Hemaji Waghaji Jat v. Bhikhabhoi Khengarbhai Horijan
and Others [(2009) 16 SCC 517] and State of Haryona v. Mukesh Kumor and Others
[(2011) 10 SCC 404], observed that there is a need to have a fresh look at the law of adverse
possession and recommended that the Union of India seriously consider the issue and make
suitable changes, wherever necessary. Pursuant to this, a reference was made to the Law
Commission by the Ministry of Law & Justice vide letter dated lgth December, 2008, thereby
requesting the Commission to examine and undertake a study in the matter and fumish a
report on the same.
Consequently, the lgth Law Commission prepared a Consultation Paper-cum-Questionnaire
and post receiving the responses to the same, the Commission opined that the present
provisions afforded sufficient protection to the true owner of land and there was no need to
make any amendments in the law. However, a final report on the subject could not be
submitted then.
Bearing in mind the relevance and importance of the subject and the fact that this reference
had been pending since 2008, the 22d Law Commission considered it expedient to deliberate
afresh over the subject. After undertaking extensive consultations and conducting an in-depth
study of the matter, the Commission has finalized this Report. It is to bring on record that in
the full quorum meeting of the Law Commission held on llth May,2023, all the Members,
including Ex-fficio Member Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Legislative Secretary, had signed the Report
after being in full agreement with it. On the said date, Ex-fficio Member Dr. Niten Chandra,
orqfdq sot: e-rrqr d. +os, z-gri ilf,, -fr'frf.r, do qrco qFI, sr;T qlfrfu, r$ ffi-trooos
Ofiice Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B'Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New Delhi-110003
eTrErfrq tror : drran =i. e, dfs cri-{ft qr.f. c-{ ftd-rroorr
Residence : Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Marg, New Delhi-l10011
email : rituraj.awasthi@gov.in Tel. : 01'l-24654951 (D), 243/,0202, 2434,0203


Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former Chief Justice of High Court of Karnataka)
Chairperson
22^o Law Commission of lndia
irrq[ffi xEl lTq €ffieft
ftqTPrEer gw <mftr, ocle6 sa <nrou)
3IEZIfl
rrrftr d zzd frfu errdFr
>5
sat{q a-qd
vlv-qrwft;.,
3IEKT q6TRIZ[
Law Secretary, did not sign the Report 8s he ivas in a hurry to attend some urgent meeting.
Subsequently, vide letter dated l6th May, 2023, Dr. Niten Chandra informed this office
regarding his concern on certain issues relating to the recommendations put forth in this
Report, which were duly addressed by me vide my letter dated l8th May, 2023. Later, at the
request of Dr. Niten Chandra, a meeting of the Law Commission was called for today, i.e.,
24th May, 2023 to further discuss our Report. Again, all the Members of the Law
Commission present in the said meeting as well as the Part-time Members, who were
contacted by me on telephone, informed that they fully agree with our final Report.
Accordingly, it was decided that this Report shall be released without any further delay, with
liberty to Dr. Niten Chandra to give his dissent note. At this stage, Dr. Reeta Vasisht4 on an
after-thought, informed the House that she will also send her dissent.
The Commission is of the considered view that there is no justification for introducing any
change in the law relating to adverse possession. Accordingly, this Report is being submitted
for your kind perusal.
With warmest regards,
Yours sincerely,
r.Y
(Justice Ritu Raj i)
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (Independent Charge)
Ministry of Law & Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi -110001.
tD-rqkq qflT : ?E{ttt d. aos, rgei aa, -fi' ftf.r, fro qrco rt+c, 1EFI qrfrfu, r$ ftd-rrooos
Ofiice Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B'Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New Delhi-110003
eTrsr€rq qcr : d.rsr =i. a, d-s q-r-{tl qr.f, q-$ ftd-rtoorr
Residence : Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Marg, New Delhi-110011
email : rituraj.awasthi@gov.in Tel. : 011 -24654951 (D), 2434,0202, 24UO2O3


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Upon receiving the reference for the subject-matter of this Report from the
Ministry of Law & Justice pursuant to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Hemaji Waghaji Jat v. Bhikhabhai Khengarbhai Harijan & Others,the
Law Commission held deliberations with all the relevant stakeholders, scholars,
academicians, intellectuals, etc. In keeping with the preliminary research
conducted on this subject, the 19th Law Commission released a Consultation
Paper-cum-Questionnaire on "Adverse Possession of Land/Immovable Property"
on its website, inviting views and suggestions from the concerned intelligentsia
and the public in general. We are much thankful to all the people who took out
their valuable time to furnish their comments and submissions on the law relating
to adverse possession.
After taking into consideration the suggestions so furnished, the Commission held
further consultations with lawyers, professors and academic experts to have better
hold of the issues relating to the subject-matter. We express our heartfelt thanks
to all such individuals.
The Commission gratefully acknowledges the laudable assistance rendered in the
preparation of this Report by Mr. Rishi Mishra, Mr. Gaurav Yadav, Mr.
Shubhang Chaturvedi, and Mr. Davinder Singh, who worked as Consultants.
We place on record our fervent approbation for their assiduous efforts in
conducting research and aid in drafting of this Report.
eh-


TABLE O,F CONTENTS
REFERENCE TO THE COMMISSION II
2
J
INTRODUCTION aJ
HISTORICAL BACKGROI-IND OF ADVERSE POSSESSION..... 4
4. PREVIOUS REPORTS OF THE LAW COMMISSION 7
5. THE DECISIONS OF THE SUPREME COURT SUGGESTING
CHANGE IN THE LAW OF ADVERSE POSSESSION......................I4
6. RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS 2l
Scope of the Limitation Act, 1963 26
7. BROAD ASPECTS RELATING TO ADVERSE POSSESSION..2T
8. CHANGES MADE IN THE LAW RELATING TO ADVERSE
POSSESSTON ........... ..........35
9. ADVERSE POSSESSION VIS.A.VIS MORALITY .....................46
10. THE LIMITATION ACT, T963 IN RESPECT OF ADVERSE
POSSESSION: WHETHER ANY AMENDMENT IS NECESSARY? 5I
Regarding the Questions posed by the Law Commission in the
Consultation Paper 55
11. RECOMMENDATTONS ..............s9
ANNEXURE - I 6r
il


I. REFERENCE TO THE COMMISSION
1.1 This matter has come up for consideration of the Commission
pursuant to the order dated 23.d September., 2008 of the Hon,ble
Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 1196 of 2007 in the case of
Hemaji l(aghaji Jat v. Bhikhabhai Khengarbhai Harijan and Others.
1.2. In this case, while dealing with Article 65 of the Schedule of the
Limitation Act, 1963, the Hon'ble Court observed that:
"34. Before parting with this case, we deem it appropriate to
observe that the law of adverse possession which ousts an
owner on the basis of inaction within limitation is irrational,
illogical and wholly disproportionate. The law as it exists is
extremely harsh for the true owner and a windfall for a
dishonest person who has illegalll, taken possession of the
property of the true owner. The law ought not to bene/it or give
seal of approval to the illegal action or activities of a rank
trespasser or who had wrongfully taken possession of the
property of the true owner.
35. We fail to comprehend why the law should place premium
on dishonesty by legitimizing possession of a rank frespasser
and compelling the owner to lose its possession only because of
his inaction in taking back the possession within limitation.
THE LAW ONADVERSE POSSESSION
fu.-


36. In our considered view, there is an urgent need of fresh
look regarding the law on adverse possession. l(e recommend
the Union of India to seriously consider and make suitable
changes in the law of adverse possession. A copy of this
judgment be sent to the Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice,
Department of Legal Affairs, Government of India for taking
appropriate steps in accordance u)ith law. "
1.3. In view of the observation made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the
Ministry of Law & Justice vide letter dated l9'h December, 2008
referred the matter to the Law Commission of Indi4 thereby
requesting the Commission to undertake the study in the matter and
fumish a report.
2
kr-


2. INTRODUCTION
2.1. The Supreme court of India opined in Hemoji waghaji Jat v.
Bhikhabhai Khengarbhai Harijan and othersl and state of Haryana
v. Mukesh Kumar and Others2 that there is an urgent need for a fresh
look regarding the law of adverse possession. The Supreme Court did
not approve the theory of a trespasser being able to perfect title by
adverse possession. The apex Court also recommended the Union of
India to seriously consider and make suitable changes in the law of
adverse possession.
2.2. The lgth Law commission considered the matter and issued a
Consultation Paper-cum-Questionnaire which is attached to this report
as "Annexure - r". After receiving the responses, the commission
prepared a paper dated 3 I't August, 2013, in which it was opined thus:
"The commission is of the vieu, that existence of limitation
period of 12 years for taking action for recovery of land is a
sfficient protection accorded to the real owner. The doctrine
of adverse possession should be retained to enable a person
who has ocquired the possession to title bonafidely to keep his
possession. Such a limitation gives a legitimate right to the real
owner to reclaim his possession. It is a fair balance created by
the statute. Moreover, proving ownership on the basis of
adverse possession is not easy."
2.3. rt would appear that, thereafter, the lgth Law commission did not
submit the final Report and Recommendations.
w,"
r(2009) l6 scc 517.
2 Q}ll) r0 scc 404.
J


3. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF ADVERSE POSSESSION
3.1. Going back into history briefly, the rudimentary form of adverse
possession can be found as early as 2000 B.c. in the code of
Hammurabi, of which Law 30 specifically dealt with the concept of
adverse possession.3 Law 30 of the Code provided that:
"If a chieftain or a man leqves his house, garden, and field and
hires it out, and someone else takes possession of his house,
garden, and field and uses it for three years: if the first owner
returns and claims his house, garden, and field, it shall not be
given to him, but he who has taken possession of it and used it
shall continue to use it."
3.2. The academic scholarship on adverse possession traces its evolution
in the English jurisprudence. The sole historical basis of title by
adverse possession is the development of statutes of limitation on
actions for the recovery of land in England. The Statute of
Westminster, 1275 was the first such statute which limited actions for
the recovery of land by precluding a suitor from alleging dated
claims. This statute and its immediate successors functioned in an era
of property law in which ownership stemmed from the concept of
seisin.a with the passage of time, the English law gradually separated
ownership from possession, thus in turn, the rationale behind
statutory enactment also shifted. with the importance of seisin
declining, possession no longer conferred ownership; instead, it only
3 See Chilperic Edwards (ed.),The Hammurabi Code and the Sinaitic Legislation 32-33 (1904);
Also see J.G. Sprankling, "An Environmental Critique of Adverse Posseision" 79 Corneil Law
\eview 816-884 (1994). The phrase "adverse possession" was apparently coined in a 1757
English decision in Taylor d. Atkyns v. Horde.4 J.G. Sprankling, "An Environmental Critique of Adverse Possession" 79 Cornell Law Review
821 (1994).
4


served as tangible evidence of the occupant's entitlement to
ownership.5
3'3. Finally, the English Statute of 1623 formed the basis of limitation
statutes throughout the common law world. In the opening words, it
recited that these limits were necessary for..quieting men,s estates,
and avoiding of suits',. The Statute prescribed three basic periods
which can be described broadly as twenty years for land actions, six
years for contract and some tort actions and four years for to(s
affecting the person.
3.4. The Statute of 1623, however, did no more than bar or take away the
right of entry and ejectment after twenty years, but left open the real
action by writ of right for forty years more. Consequently, it was held
in England that the right of entry and the remedy by ejectment, might
be barred, but that the 'mere right' itself was left outstanding.6 Thus,
to remedy this, the Statute of 1833 was enacted, which not only
barred the remedy of ejectment but expressly abolished real actions
and extinguished the former title after twenty years. By the Real
Properly Limitation Act of 1874, the period of limitation was reduced
to twelve years from the time the cause of action first accrued. The
groundwork for the limitations model, inherited by colonial India,
was thus, put in place.
3.5. The Supreme Court of India,,in Ravinder Kaur Grewal and Others v.
Manj it Kaur and Others, traced the history of adverse possession and
stated thus:
5
5 J.G. Sprankling, "An Environmental Critique of Adverse possession,, 79 Cornelt Lq,,e Reyiew
821 ( 1994).
6 Truslees of Dundee Harbor v. Dougall (t852) I Macqueen 317.
q/


"...The concept of adverse possession has a root in the aspect
that it awards ownership of tand to the person who makes the
best or highest use of the land. The land, which is being wed is
more yaluable than idle land, is the concept of utilitarianism.
The concept thus, allows the society as a whole to benefit from
the land being held adversely but allows a sfficient period for
the "true owner" to recover the land. The adverse possession
statutes permit rapid development of ,,wild,, lands with the weak
or indeterminate title. It helps in the Doctrine of Administration
also as it can be an ffictive and eficient way to remove or
cure clouds of title which with memories grow dim and
eyidence becomes unclear. The possessor who maintains and
improves the land has a more valid claim to the land than the
owner who never visits or cares for the land and uses it, is of no
utility. If a former owner neglects and allows the gradual
dissociation between himself and what he is claiming and he
knows that someone else is caring by doing acts, the attachment
which one develops by caring cannot be easily parted with. The
bundle of ingredients constitutes adverse possession. "7
6
7 (2019) I SCC 729
h'-


4. PREVIOUS REPORTS OF THE LAW COMMISSION
4.1. The Law commission has also previously dealt with the subject-
matter of adverse possession. The commission, in its 3'd Report on
Limitation Act, 1908, recommended that in order to avoid injustice
and inequity to the true owner and to simpliff the law, the then
Article 142 must be restricted in its application only to suits based on
possessory title and the owner of the property should not lose his
right to it unless the defendant in possession is able to establish
adverse possession. The relevant paragraphs of 3.d Report on
Limitation Act, 1908 are quoted below:
"132. Article 142 and 144 have introduced a good deal of
confusion in the law relating to suit for possession by owners of
property. The law as it stands whether in suit under section 9 of
the specific Relief Act or in one covered by Article 142 seems
to favour a tresposser as ogainst an owner. The anomaly is due
to the decisions which have held that in an ejectment action by
the owner of properQ it is not sfficientfor him to establish his
title but if he has averued in his plaint original possession and
subsequent dispossession or dtscontinuance of possession, he
should go further and establish that his title was subsisting at
the date of suit, in the sense that he was in possession of the
property within l2 years before the date of the institution of the
suit. That Article 142 applies to a suit by the owner of the
property as well as a person suing merely on the basis of a
possessory title is the view taken by some courts [vide the Full
Bench decisions in official Receiver, E. Godavari y.
7
N/


Govindaraju,s and Bindhyacval Chand v. Ram Gharib,el white
others restrict its applicability to a suit based on a possessory
tttle alone [vide jaichond Bahadur v. Girwor Singh,to Mt.
Jijibai v. Zabutt; qnd Kanhaiyalal v. Girwar,rJ. A person who
is the owner of the property when he sues for recovery of
possession has thus to establish not only his title but also that
he was in possession of the property within 12 years ,f h,
frames his plaint os one for possession after dispossession.
135. In our opinion, Article 142 must be restricted in its
applicotion only to suits based on possessory title. The plaintiff
in such a suit seel<s protection of his previous possession which
falls short of the statutory period of prescription, to recover
possession from another trespasser. The plaintiff's prior
possession no doubt entitles him to protection against o
trespasser though not against the true owner. The trt/e owner's
entry would be a rightful entry and would interrupt adverse
possession. But f the defendant trespasser is a person who
wishes to oust the plaintiff who was himself a prior trespasser
or a person who did not come into possession as a trespasser
but conttnued to hold it as such, in order to enabre him to
acquire a title by adverse possession, the law must undoubtedly
step in and give relief to the plaintrff, As against the true owner
8lLR 1940 Mad 1953.
e 57 A|278.
r0 4l All 669.
rr l50 IC 679 (Nag).
12 5l Alt 1042.
8


a person who is in possession for a length of time short of the
statutory period is not entitled to any protection but the net
result of the decisions under Article 142 is that the true owner
must prove that he had a subsisting title on the date of suit. l{e,
therefore, suggest that in order to avoid injustice and inequity
to the true owner and to simplify the law, Article 142 should be
restricted to suits based on possessory title and the owner ofthe
owner of the property should not lose his right to it unless the
defendant in possession is able to establish adverse possession.
Article 142 may, therefore, be amended asfollows:
"For possession of immovable property based on
possessory title when the plaintiff while in possession of the
property has been dispossessed - l2 years from the date of
dispossession. "
4.2. The Law Commission again undertook a comprehensive review of
the Limitation Act, 1963. In its 89th Report titled ,.The Limitation
Act, 1963", the Commission took note of the criticism of some jurists
regarding adverse possession; however, it recommended that the
doctrine deserves not to be disturbed in its essence. The relevant
paragraphs are quoted below:
"35.14, The position ofthe illegal occupant. - The doctrine of
acquisition of title by adverse possession is deeply rooted in
our system of jurisprudence. The doctrine is derived from the
Roman Law concept of usucapio and longi temporis
praescriptio, but in Roman Law, there was an added
requirement that the possession must be bonafide andfor justa
causa. English law has not insisted on the doctrine by
9
v


35.17. Low Commission's Reporl. - Reverting, to the text of
Article 65, the articles relating to possession were examined in
great detail by the Law Commission in its Report on the Act of
1908. There was a preliminary obseryation that Articles 142
and 144 had introduced a good deal of confusion in the law
relating to suit for possession by the owners of property. The
law Commission also discussed the Privy Council case on the
subject, which had settled the proposition that the rule of
prescription should be applied not to cases of want of actual
possession by the plaintiff, but to cases where the plaintiffhad
been out of possession and another person was in possession
for the prescribed time. The Commission then made the
following recommendation on the subject:
"In our opinion, Article 142 must be restricted in its
application only to suits based on possessory title. The
l0
obseming that "certainty of title to land is a social need and
occupation of land which has long been unchallenged should
not be disturbed. " Thus, the English version is just the opposite
of the Roman concept.
In the registration systems of certain Commonwealth countries,
a distinction is made between the acquisition of title by an
adverse possession to registered land and unregistered land,
with the result that a rank trespasser or a squatter is not able to
extinguish the title ofa registered proprietor.
v


plaintiff in such a suit seel<s protection of his previous
possession which falls short of the statutory period of
prescription, to recover possession from another trespasser.
The plaintiff's prior possession no doubt entitles him to
protection against a trespasser, though not against the true
owner. The true owner's entry would be a righ{ul entry and
would interrupt.
35.18. Law Commission's recommendation. - For these
reasons, the Law Commission (in that Report) recommended a
re-draft ofArticle 142 as under: -
"For possession of immovable property based on
possessory title where the plaintiff while in possession of
the property has been dispossessed - 12 years from the date
of dispossession. "
A new article was to govern suits based on title - 12 years'
period to be counted from the time when possession becomes
adverse.
35.19. Summury of the position in Sapreme Court judgment -
The amended article, though phrased somewhat dffirently has
not given rise to any serious controversy and the Supreme
Court in a recent judgment on the subject, has succinctly
summarized the law on adverse possession or hostile title thus:
"Adverse possession or hostile title must be established by
a consistent course of conduct and it cannot be shown by a
stray or sporadic act of possession. However, all that the
law requires is that the possession must be open and
il e\,/


without any attempt at concealment. It is not necessary that
the possession must be so effective so as to bring it to the
specific knowledge of the owner. Such a requirement may
be insisted on, where an ouster of title is pleaded but that is
not the case here. One of the important facts, which clearly
proves adverse possession, may be that the possessor had
let out the land for cultivator purposes and used it himself
from time to time without any protest from the owner or any
serious attempt by the owner to evict the possessor,
knowing full well that he was asserting hostile title in
respect of the land. If a person asserts a hostile title even to
a tank which, as claimed in the present caste by the owner,
i.e. the municipality, belonged to it and despite the hostile
assertion of title no steps were taken by the owner, to evict
the trespasser, his title by prescription would he complete
after thirty years. "
35.24. No change needed, - ll/e have made a passing reference
to the fact that like many other well established legal doctrines,
the doctrine oJ' adverse possession has also attracted the
adverse notice of some jurists. However, as stated above, the
philosophy underlying the same has become an integral part of
our jurisprudence. Both on the merits and on the ground just
now mentioned, the doctrine deserves not to be disturbed in its
essence.
We have also referred to the developments in England as a
matter of interest. In India, these controversies have not arisen.
t2
hr,-'


Accordingly, we do not recommend any change in the
article. "
4.3. The 193'd Report of Law Commission briefly discussed the subject of
adverse possession. It stated that as per Article 65 of the Schedule to
the 1963 Act, a person in adverse possession of immovable property
acquires title to the property. Such possession must be open and
continuous and in defiance of the title of the real owner for twelve
years so that the person can prescribe title by adverse possession. So
far as Government property is concerned, Article I I 2 prescribes a
requirement of thirfy years for according title by adverse possession.
The Report further stated that the principles of law evolved by the
Courts also permit acquisition of limited rights by adverse
possession.
t3
u.


5. THE DECISIONS OF THE SUPREME COURT SUGGESTING
CHANGE IN THE LAW OF ADVERSE POSSESSION
5.1. The Supreme Court, in Hemaji t(aghaji Jat v. Bhikhabhai
Khengarbhai Harijan and Otherst3, held:
"34. Before parting with this cose, we deem it appropriate to
observe that the law of adverse possession which ousts an
owner on the basis of inaction within limitation is irrational,
illogical and wholly disproportionate. The law as it exists is
extremely harsh for the true owner and a windfall ft, ,
dishonest person who has illegally taken possession of the
properQ of the true owner. The law ought not to benefit or give
seal of approval to the illegal action or activities of a rank
trespasser or who had wron{"lly taken possession of the
property of the true owner.
35. We fail to comprehend why the law should place premium
on dishonesty by legitimizing possession of a rank trespasser
and compelling the owner to lose its possession only because of
his inaction in taking back the possession within limitation.
36. In our considered view, there is an urgent need offresh look
regarding the law on adverse possession. We recommend the
(Jnion of India to seriously consider and make suitable changes
in the law of adverse possession. A copy of this judgment be
sent to the Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department
rr (2009) l6 scc 5 r 7
l4
hr--


of Legal Affairs, Government of India for taking appropriate
steps in accordance with law. "
5.2. In the aforementioned case, the trial court decreed the suit for
declaration and injunction. The trial court held that the plaintiff
purchased the land in question several yeils ago. It was also held
that the plaintiff perfected the title by adverse possession. In fact,
there was no pleading in the case in support of adverse possession.
The first appellate court reversed the judgment of the trial court. The
High court in second appeal upheld the decision of the appellate
court. The plaintiff then approached the Supreme court. The
Supreme Court held that the plaintiff did not prove title to the
property. The Supreme Court also held that there was no pleading or
proof for adverse possession. Thus, the apex court dismissed the
appeal of the plaintiff.
5.3. ln state of Haryana v. Mukesh Kumqr and othersta, a similar
question was considered by the Supreme court. The relevant
observations and findings for the purpose are quoted below:
"Fifth Amendment of the US Constitution - a principle of a
civilised society.
40. Another important development tn the protection of
property rights was the Frfth Amendment. James Madison was
the drafter and key supporter for the Fifth Amendment. The
Frfth Amendment states: 'nor shall private property be taken
for public use, without just compensation'. The main issue is to
14(201t) l0scc404
l5 ty


pay just compensation for acquiring the property. There are
primarily two situations when a landowner may obtain
compensation for land fficially transferred to or depreciated
by the government. First, an owner may be entitled to
compensation when a governmental entity intentionally
acquires private property through a formal condemnation
proceeding and without the owner,s consent. The State,s power
to take property is considered inherent through its eminent
domain powers as a sovereign. Through the condemnation
proceedings, the government obtains the necessary interest in
the land, and the Fifth Amendment requires that the property
otttner be compensated for this loss.
41. The second situation requiring compensation under Fifth
Amendment occurs when the government has not officially
acquired private property through a formal condemnation
proceeding, but 'nonetheless takes property by physically
invading or appropriating it,. (Jnder this scenario, the property
owner, at the point in which a tfikingt has occurred, has lhe
option offiling a claim against the government actor to recover
just compensation for the loss. When the landowner sues the
government seeking compensation for a taking, it is considered
an inyerse condemnation proceeding, because the landowner
and not the government is bringing the cause of action.
42. We
British.
adverse
inherited this law of adverse possession from the
The Parliament may consider abolishing the law of
possession or at least amending and making
t6
N"


substantial changes in law in the larger public interest. The
Government instrumentalities - including the police - in the
instant case have attempted to possess land adversely. This, in
our opinion, is a testament to the absurdity of the law and a
black mark upon the justice system's legitimacy. The
Goyernment should protect the property ofa citizen - not steal
it. And yet, as the law currently stands, they may do just that. If
this law is to be retained, according to the wisdom of the
Parliament, then at least the law must require those who
adversely possess land to compensate title owners according to
the prettalent market rate of the land or property in question.
This alternative would provide some semblance of justice to
those who have done nothing other than sitting on their rights
for the statutory period, while allowing the adverse possessor
to remain on property. While it may be indefensible to require
all adverse possessors - some of whom may be poor - to pay
market rates for the land they po,sses.s, perhaps some lesser
amount would be realistic in most of the cases. The Parliament
may eitherfx a set range of rates or to leave it to the judiciary
with the option of choosing from within a set range of rates so
as to tailor the compensation to the equities ofa given case.
43. The Parliament must seriously consider at least to abolish
'bad faith' adverse possession, i.e., adverse possession achieved
through intentional trespassing, actually believing it to be their
own could receive title through adverse possession sends a
wrong signal to the society at large. Such a change would
t7 \,


ensure that only those who had established attachments to the
land through honest means would be entitled to legal relief.
44. In case, the Parliament decides to retain the law of adverse
possession, the Parliament might simply require adverse
possession claimants to possess the property in question for a
period of 30 to 50 years, rather than a mere 12. Such an
extension would help to ensure that successful claimants have
lived on the land for generations, and are therefore less likely
to be individually culpable for the trespass (although their
forebears might). A longer statutory period would also
decrease the frequency of adverse possession suits and ensure
that only those claimants most intimately connected with the
land acquire it, while only the most passive and unprotective
owners lose title.
45. Reverting to the facts of this case, if the Police department
ofthe Stote with all ils might is bent upon taking possession of
any land or building in a clandestine manner, then, perhaps no
one would be able to effectively prevent them.
46. It is our bounden duty and obligation to ascertain the
intention of the Parliament while interpreting the law. Law and
Justice, more often than not, happily coincide only rarely we
find serious con/lict. The archaic law of adverse possession is
one such. A serious re - look is absolutely imperative in the
larger interest of the people.
l8
hr/


47. Adverse possession allows a trespasser - a person guilty of
a tort, or eyen a crime, in the eyes of law - to gain legal title to
land which he has illegally possessed for 12 years. How 12
years of illegality can suddenly be conyerted to legal title is,
logically and morally speaking, baffling This outmoded law
essentially asks the judiciary to place its stamp of approval
upon conduct that the ordinary Indian citizen would find
reprehensible.
48. The doctrine of adverse possession has troubled a great
many legal minds. We are clearly of the opinion that time has
come for change.
49. If the protectors of law become the grabbers of the property
(land and building), then, people will be lefi with no protection
and there would be a total anarchy in the entire country. It is
indeed a very disturbing and dangerous trend. In our
considered viev), it must be arrested without further loss of time
in the larger public interest. No Goyernment Department,
Public Undertaking, and much less the Police Department
should be permitted to perfect the title of the land or building
by invoking the provisions of adverse possession and grab the
proper| of its own citizens in the manner that has been done in
this case.
51. In our considered view, there is an urgent need for a fresh
look of the entire law on adverse possession. Il'e recommend
the Union of India to immediately consider and seriously
deliberate either abolition of the law of adverse possession and
l9
V


5.4. In respect of land reserved for public utility, the Supreme Court
observed in Ravinder Kaur Grewal v. Manjit Kaurlr as follows:
"When we consider the law of adverse possession as has
developed vis-a-vis to property dedicated to public use, courts
have been loath to confer the right by adverse possession.
There are instances when such properties are encroached upon
and then a plea of adverse possession is raised. In such cases,
on the land reserved for public utility, it is desirable that rights
should not accrue. The law of adverse possession may cause
harsh consequences, hence, we are constrained to observe that
it would be advisable that concerning such properties dedicated
to public cause, it is made clear in the statute of limitation that
no rights can accrue by adverse possession. "
r5 (2019) 8 SCC 729.
20
in the alternate to make suitable amendments in the law of
adverse possession. A copy of this judgment be sent to the
Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal
Affairs, Government of India for taking appropriate steps in
occordance with law."
h,-


6.1. The Limitation Act, 1963 contains 3l sections and the Schedule. The
Schedule is divided into three Divisions, namely, Suits (Articles I to
113 in Parts divided as I to X), Appeals (Articles 114 to 117) and
Applications (Articles 118 to 137 in Parts I and II).
6.3. Section 3: Section 3 provides that subject to the provisions contained
in sections 4 to 24 (inclusive), every suit instituted, appeal preferred,
and application made after the prescribed period shall be dismissed,
although limitation has not been set up as a defence.
6.4. Sections 4 to 24 deal with various situations which may arise in the
matter of computation of the period of limitation. These sections are
mentioned hereunder briefly.
6.5. Section 4 deals with expiry ofprescribed period when court is closed.
Section 5 provides for extension of the prescribed period. Sections 6,
7 and 8 deal with legal disabitity and speak of providing for further
time to the person under disability or his legal representatives, as the
case may be, for instituting a suit or making an application for
execution of a decree after the disability ceases. Section 9 provides
2t
6. RELEVANTSTATUTORYPROVISIONS
6.2. Section 2 (i) defines "period of limitation" as under: "period of
limitation" means the period of limitation prescribed for any suit,
appeal or application by the Schedule, and "prescribed period" means
the period of limitation computed in accordance with the provisions
of this Act."


that once time has begun to run, no subsequent disability or inability
to institute a suit or make an application stops it, together with the
exception to the general rule. Section l0 provides for suits against
trustees and their representatives and it says that no suit within the
ambit of Section l0 shall be barred by any length of time. Section ll
provides for suits on contracts entered into outside the territories to
which the Limitation Act extends. Sections 12 to 15 provide for
exclusion of time in computing the period of limitation for suits,
appeals or applications, as the case may be. Sections l2 to l5 contain
a scheme under which in certain circumstances, certain specified
period could be excluded in computing the period of limitation.
Section 16 states what is the effect of death ofa person on or before
the accrual of the right to sue and also for computation of the period
of limitation in those contingencies. Section 17 states what is the
effect of fraud or mistake in the case of a suit or application. Sections
l8 and l9 provide for computing a fresh period of limitation in the
case of an 'acknowledgement' and 'payment' respectively. Section
20 provides for effect of 'acknowledgement' or 'payment' by another
person. Section 2l provides for substitution or addition of a new
plaintiff or defendant. Section 22 speaks of continuous breaches and
torts. Section 23 provides for compensation for acts which are not
actionable without special damage. Section 24 says that all
instruments shall, for the purposes of the Limitation Act, be deemed
to be made with reference to the Gregorian Calendar.
6.6. Section 25 provides for acquisition of easement by prescription and
Section 26 deals with exclusion of certain periods pertaining to
acquisition of easements. However, Sections 25 and Section 26 and
22
h.,,,


the definition of easement in Section 2 shall not apply to cases arising
in the tenitories to which the Indian Easement Act, 1882, may for the
time being extend, as provided in Section 29(4).
6.7. Section 27 deals with extinguishment of right to property. It lays
down that the determination of the period hereby limited to any
person for instituting a suit for possession of any property, his right to
such property shall be extinguished.
6.8. Section 29 provides for savings. Section 30 provides for suits, etc,
for which the prescribed period is shorter than the period prescribed
by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908. Section 3l deals with provisions
as to barred or pending suits, etc.
6.9. The Schedule of the Limitation Act, 1963 contains three columns,
namely, "description of suit", "period of limitation" and "time from
which period begins to run". The period of limitation for a suit,
appeal or application is computed with reference to the entries in the
aforesaid three columns.
23
6.10. Part V of the Schedule of the Limitation Act deals with "Suits
Relating to Immovable Property. Part V contains Articles 6I to 67 .
Of these, Articles 61, 63, 64, 65, 66 and 67 speak of suits for
possession in different contingencies. Part IX deals with suits
relating to Miscellaneous matters. Articles 1 I 0, I 1 I and 1 12 of Part
IX are relevant for the purpose. The aforesaid articles have close
nexus with Section 27. \
w/


6.1 l. For the purpose of the discussion on the subject, it is expedient to
quote below Articles 64,65,1 10, I 1l and I l2:
Description of suit Period of
limitation
Time from
which period
begins to run
64. For possession of immovable
properly based on previous possession
and not on title, when the plaintiff while
in possession of the property has been
dispossessed.
Twelve
years
The date of
dispossession.
65. For possession of immovable
property or any interest therein based on
title.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this
article- (a) where the suit is by a
remainderman, a reversioner (other than
a landlord) or a devisee, the possession
of the defendant shall be deemed to
become adverse only when the estate of
the remainderman, reversioner or
devisee, as the case may be, falls into
possession;
(b) where the suit is by a Hindu or
Muslim entitled to the possession of
Twelve
years
When the
possession of
the defendant
becomes
adverse to the
plaintiff.
24 N/


immovable property on the death of a
Hindu or Muslim female, the possession
of the defendant shall be deemed to
become adverse only when the female
dies;
(c) where the suit is by a purchaser at a
sale in execution of a decree when the
judgment-debtor was out of possession
at the date of the sale, the purchaser
shall be deemed to be a representative
of the judgment-debtor who was out of
possession.
1 10. By a person excluded from a joint
family property to enforce a right to
share therein.
Twelve
years
When the
exclusion
becomes
known to the
plaintiff.
111. By or on behalf of any local
authority for possession of any public
street or road or any part thereof from
which it has been dispossessed or of
which it has discontinued the
possession.
Thirty
years
The date of
dispossession
or
discontinuance.
112. Any suit (except a suit before the
Supreme Court in the exercise of its
original jurisdiction) by or on behalf of
Thirry
years
When
period
limitation
the
of
25 \,


the Central Government or any State
Government, including the Government
of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
would begin to
run under this
Act against a
like suit by a
private person.
6.12. The Limitation Act applies to courts and not to quasi-judicial bodies
or Tribunals.16 Generally speaking, the Limitation Act only bars the
remedy but doesn't destroy the right to which the remedy relates to.
The exception to the general rule is contained in Section 27 of the
Limitation Act, 1963.
6.13. Though the period of limitation prescribed in the Limitation Act
precludes a plaintiff from bringing a suit which is baned by
limitation, there is no such limitation so far as any defence is
concemed.
The rationale behind the law of limitation is that it is founded on
public policy. The concept of adverse possession is based on the legal
maxim 'vigilantibus non-dormientibus subvenit /ex' which means
that the law favours only the vigilant and not the sleepy - only the
active citizen and not those who are dormant or in other words those
who are not concemed about their rights.
6.14.
16 See L.S. Synthelics lld. v. Fairgrowlh Financiql Semices Ltd. and Anolher AIR 2005 SC 1209
(2004) I I SCC 456; M.P. Steel Corporation v. Commission ofCentral Excise (2015) 7 SCC 582.
26
Scope of the Limitation Act, 1963
\",


7, BROAD ASPECTS RELATING TO ADVERSE POSSESSION
7.1. The Limitation Act is an Act of repose. "Adverse possession statutes,
like other statutes of limitation, rest on a public policy that do not
promote litigation and aim at the repose of conditions that the parties
have suffered to remain unquestioned long enough to indicate their
acquiescence."lT
7.2. Possession and adverse possession are not the same thing. The
classical requirement of Adverse Possession is that the possession
must be nec yi nec clam nec precario, i.e to say, the possession
required must be adequate in continuity, in publicity and in extent.
However, it is sufficient that the possession be overt and without any
attempt at concealment so that the person against whom time is
running out, if he exercises due vigilance, can be aware of what is
happening.rB
7.3. A person pleading adverse possession has no equities in his favour.
"Physical fact of exclusive possession and the animus
possidendi to hold as owner in exclusion to the actual owner
are the most important factors that are to be accounted in cases
of this nature. Plea of odverse possession is not a pure
question oflaw but a blended one offact and law. Therefore, a
person who claims adyerse possession should show: (a) on
lTSeeP?l Munichikkanna Retldy and others v. Reyamma end others (2007) 6 SCC 59: AtR2007
sc 1753.
t8 See Lqkshmi Reddy v. Lakshni Reddy AIR 1957 SC 314; Secretary of Slale lor lndia v.
Debandra Lal Khen AIR 1934 PC 23' Kqrnataka Board rf ll'akf v. Governmenl of lndia ond ors.
(2004) l0 SCC 779; Rovinder Kaur Grewal v. Mqnjit Kqur (2019) 8 SCC 729; S.,{!. Kqrim y. Bibi
Sa&,ina ( 1964) 6 SCR 780: AIR 1964 SC 1254i Balkrishan v. Saryaprakash (2001) 2 SCC 498).
27
h-/


what date he came into possession, (b) what was the nature of
his possession, (c) whether the factum of possession was known
to the other party, (d) how long his possession has continued,
and (e) his possession was open and undisturbed. A person
pleading adverse possession has no equities in his favour.
Since he is trying to defeat the rights of the true owner, it is for
him to clearly plead and establish all facts necessary to
establish his adverse possession. "te
7.4. Possession is never considered adverse if it is referable to a lawful
title. Adverse possession is commenced in wrong and is aimed
against right. A person is said to hold the property adversely to the
real owner when that person in denial of the owner's right excluded
him from the enjoyment of his properfy.
7.5. Possession must be open and without any attempt at concealment. It
is, however, not necessary that possession must be so effective as to
bring it to the specific knowledge of the owner (except ouster).
7.6. Possession must be hostile, actual, open, notorious, exclusive and
continuous, continued for the required period of time.
7.7. Mere sporadic acts of possession exercised from time to time would
not be sufficient for the acquisition of title by adverse possession.
re See P.I Munichikkanna Recldy qnd others v. Reyammq and others (2007) 6 SCC 59: AIR 2007
sc t753.
78
G/


"Adverse possession or hostile title must be established by a
consistent course of conduct and it cannot be shown by a stray
or sporadic act of possession. However, all that the low
requires is that the possession must be open and without any
attempt at concealment. It is not necessary that the possession
must be so effective so as to bring it to the specific knowledge
of the owner. Such a requirement may be insisted on, where an
ouster of title is pleaded...
7.8. Adverse possession depends on the intention of the occupant to claim
and hold the land in opposition to the whole world. Adverse
possession consists of actual possession with intent to hold the
property solely by the possessor to the exclusion of all others.
7.9. Possession implies dominion and control and consciousness in the
mind of the person having dominion -- as distinguished from
occupation which only implies bare use of the land without any right
to retain it.
7.10. Possession need not in all cases be actual physical possession.
Constructive possession is enough. For example, the property in the
possession of tenants. "The manner of possession depends upon the
kind of possession which the particular property is susceptible. That
possession to the extent to which it is capable of demonstration must
29
20 Kshirish Chandra Bose v. Commissioner of Ranchi (1981) 2 SCC 103. \--,


be hostile and exclusive and will cover only to the extent of the
owner's possession."2 I
7 .ll. Mere continuance of unauthorised possession for a period of more
than twelve years is not enough.22
".... thot mere termination of a licence of a licensee does not
enable the licensee to claim adverse possession, unless and
until he sets up a title hostile to that of the licensor after
termination of his licence. It is not merely unauthorised
possession on termination of his licence that enables the
licensee to claim title by adverse possession but there must be
some overt act on the part of the licensee to show that he is
claiming qdverse title. It is possible that the licensor may not
file an action for the purpose of recovering possession of the
premises from the licensee after terminating his licence but that
by itself cannot enable the licensee to claim title by adverse
possession. There must be some overt act on the part of the
licensee indicating assertion of hostile title. Mere continuance
of unauthorised possession even .fo, a period of more than I2
yeors is not enough."
"It is well recognised proposition in law that mere possession
however long does not necessarily mean that it is adverse to the
true owner. Adverse possession really means the hostile
possession which is expressly or impliedly in denial of title of
the true owner and in order to constitute adverse possession the
2r See Srzl. Chandrakantaben J Modi and Nqrendra Jayanti Lal Modi v. Vadilal Bapalal Modi and
Others AIR 1989 SC 1269.
22 Gaya Prasad Dikshit v. Dr. Nirmal Chander AIR 1984 SC 930: (1984)2 SCC 286
30 s/


possession proved must be adequate in continuity, in publicity
and in extent so as to show that it is adverse to the true owner.
The classical requirements of acquisition of title by adyerse
possession are that such possession in denial of the true
owner's title must be peaceful, open and continuous. The
possession must be open and hostile enough to be capable of
being known by the parties interested in the property, though it
is not necessaty that there should be evidence of the adverse
possessor octually informing the real owner of the former,s
hostile action. "23
7.12. As against co-owners, the co-owner who claims adverse possession
has to plead and prove ouster also. The co-heir/co-owner in
possession cannot render his possession adverse to the other co-heir/
co-owner not in possession merely by any secret hostile animus. It is
well settled that in order to establish adverse possession of one co-
owner as against another it is not enough to show that one out of
them is in sole possession and enjoyment of the profits of the
properties. Ouster of the non-possessing co-heir by the co-heir in
possession who claims his possession to be adverse, should be made
out. The possession of one co-heir is considered, in law, as
possession of all co-heirs. When one co-heir is found to be in
possession of the properties it is presumed to be on the basis ofjoint
title. The co-heir in possession cannot render his possession adverse
to the other co-heir not in possession merely by any secret hostile
animus on his own part in derogation of the other co-heir's title. It is
well settled that mere non-participation in the rent and profits of the
21 See T. Anjanappa and others v. Somalingappo ond another (2006) 7 SCC 570.
3l
A\",


land of a co-sharer does not amount to an ouster so as to give title by
adverse possession to the other co-sharer in possession.2a
7.13. Permissive possession does not constitute adverse possession. A
permissive possession cannot be converted into an adverse possession
unless it is proved that the person in possession asserted an adverse
title to the property to the knowledge of true owners for a period of
twelve years or more.25
7.14. Possession referable to a contract or to an agreement or to a mortgage
cannot be adverse. When the commencement and continuance of
possession is legal and proper, referable to a contract, it cannot be
adverse. If a person has come into possession under colour of title, he
can plead adverse possession only on disclaiming his title and
pleading hostile claim to the knowledge of the title holder.26
7.15. A question arose whether a person who has perfected title by adverse
possession can file a suit for declaration of title. The Supreme Court
ln Gurudwara Sahib v. Gram Panchayat Village Sirthala2T, State of
2a See Coriea v. Appuhamy l9l2 AC 230; Lakshmi Reddy v. Lakshmi Reddy AIR 1957 SC 3 14;
Maharajadhiraj of Burdwan Udaychand Mahatab Chand v. Subodh Gopal Bose and Others AIR
l97l SC 376: (1970) 3 SCC 681; Shambhu Prasad Singhv. Phool Kumari and Others AIR l97l
SC 1337: (1971) 2 SCC 28); Syed Shah Gulam Ghouse Mohiuddin and Others v. Syed Shah
AhmedMohiuddinKamisul QadriAlP. l97l SC2184:(1971) I SCC597; BhubneshwarPrasad
Narain Singh and Others v. Sidheshwar Mukherjee and Others AIR I 971 SC 2251: ( l97l ) I SCC
556; Mohd. Zainulabudeen v. Sayed Ahmed Mohideen and Others AIR 1990 SC 507: (1990) I
SCC 345; Karbalai Begum v. Mohd Sayeed and Another AIR l98l SC 77: (1980) 4 SCC 396.2s See State Bank of Trqvancore v. Arvindan Kunju Panicker and Others AIR l97l SC 996:
(1972) 4 SCC 274.
26 See Padma l'ithoba Chakkayya v. Mohd. Multani and Another AIR 1963 SC 70; Achal Reddy v.
Ramal<rtshna Reddiar and Others AIR 1990 SC 553: (1990) 4 SCC 706; Mool Chand Bakhru and
Another v. Rohan and Others AIR 2002 SC 812: (2002\ 2 SCC 612; Mohan Lal Kachru and
Others v. Mirza Abdul Gaffar and Another AIR 1996 SC 910: (1996) I SCC 639; R.
Chandevarappav. State of Karnataka (1995) 6 SCC 309
?7 (2014\ I SCC 669.
32 \-,


[]ttarakhand v. Mandir Sri Laxman Sidh Maharaj2s and Dharampal
v. Punjab Walcf Board2e, held that adverse possession cannot be used
as a sword but it can be used as a defence, i.e., as a shield. A three-
judge bench of the Supreme Court in Rayinder Kaur Grewal v.
Manjit Kaur overruled these decisions and held that adverse
possession can be used as a sword and a suit for declaration can be
filed by a person who perfected the title by adverse possession. The
Supreme Court held:
"The plea of acquisition of title by adverse possession can be
taken by the plaintiffunder Article 65 of the Limitation Act and
there is no bar under the Limitation Act, 1963 to sue on the
aforesaid basis in case of infringement of any rights of a
plaintiff. "
7.17. The expression "title" would include the title acquired by the plaintiff
by way of adverse possession. It was held in Ravinder Kaur Grewal
v. Manjit Kaulo thus:
"58. ....Section 27 of the Limitation AcL 1963 provides for
extinguishment of right on the lapse of limitation fixed to
institute a suit for possession of any property, the right to such
,3 (2017) 9 SCC 579.
,, (20 t8) I I SCC 449
ro (2019) 8 SCC 729.
33
7.16. Once title is acquired by prescription under Article 65 read with
Section 27 of the Limitation Act, 1963, the person who has perfected
title by adverse possession would get all the rights which the title
holder ofa land has.
fr\,


property shall stand extinguished. The concept of adverse
possession as evolved goes beyond it on completion of period
and extinguishment of right confers the same right on the
possessor, which has been extinguished and not more than
that.... "
"Adverse possession is heritable and there can be tacking of
adverse possession by two or more person as the right is
transmissible. "In our opinion, it confers a perfected right
which cannot be defeated on re-entry except as provided in
Article 65 itself. Tacking is based on the fulfilment of certain
conditions, tacking may be by possession by the purchaser,
legatee or assignee, etc. so as to constitute continuity of
possession, that person must be claiming through whom it is
tacked, and would depend on the identity ofthe same property
under the same right. Two distinct trespassers cannot tack
their possession to constitute conferral of right by adverse
possession for the prescribed period. "31
7. 18. Once a suit for recovery of possession is instituted against the
defendant in adverse possession, his adverse possession does not
continue thereafter. In other words, the running of time for acquiring
title by adverse possession gets arrested.32
1t See Rovinder Kaur Grewal y. Manjit Kaur (2019) E SCC 729.
t2 See Babu Kh(u and others v. Nazim Khqn (deqd) by LRs. qnd others (2001) 5 SCC 375: AIR
2001 sc t740.
34 S'/


CHANGES MADE IN THE LAW RELATING TO ADVERSE
POSSESSION
8.1. Article 64 of the Limitation Act, 1963 corresponds to Article 142 of
the Indian Limitation Act, 1908. Articles 142 of the 1908 Act and
Article 64 of the 1963 Act are extracted below for easy comparison:
1908 Act:
142. For possession of
immovable property when the
plaintiff, while in possession of
the property, has been
dispossessed or has
discontinued the possession.
Twelve
years
The date of the
dispossession or
discontinuance.
I963 Act:
64. For possession of
immovable properfy based on
previous possession and not on
title, when the plaintiff while in
possession of the properfy has
been dispossessed.
Twelve
years
The date
dispossession.
of
8.2. The period of limitation under Article 142 of the 1908 Act and
Article 64 of the 1963 Act is the same. But the language and scope of
the said Articles underwent substantial change. Under the first
column, namely, description of suit, the words "based on previous
35
8.
V


possession and not on title" were added in Article 64 of the 1963 Act.
The words "or has discontinued the possession" occurring in the first
column and the words "or discontinuance" in the third column in
Article 142 were omiffed in Article 64. The new Article 64 is
restricted to suit based on possessory title so that the owner of the
property does not lose his right to the property unless the defendant
in possession is able to prove adverse possession.
8.3. Article 64 of the new Act is applicable to suits for possession based
on previous possession but not on title of immovable property, when
the plaintiff while in possession of the properfy, has been
dispossessed. Such a suit must be brought within twelve years of the
date of dispossession. The conditions necessary to attract Article 64
are: (a) the suit should be one for possession of immovable property
based on previous possession and not on title and (b) the plaintiff,
while in possession ofthe property, was dispossessed. The burden of
proving the date of dispossession lies on the plaintiff. The plaintiff
has to show that the dispossession was within twelve years prior to
the date of filing of the suit.
8.4. Article 65 of 1963 Act corresponds mainly to Articles 144, 140, 141,
138 and 137 ofthe 1908 Act, which are extracted for easy reference.
1908 Act:
Description of suit Period of
limitation
Time from which
period begins to
run.
144. For possession of immoveable
properfy or any interest therein not
Twelve
years.
When the
possession of the
36


hereby otherwise specifically
provided for.
defendant
becomes adverse
to the plaintiff.
140. By a remainderman, a
reversioner (other than landlord) or
a devisee, for possession of
immoveable property.
Twelve
years.
When the estate
falls into
possession.
141. Like suit by a Hindu or
Muhammadan entitled to the
possession of immoveable property
on the death of a Hindu or
Mohammadan female.
Twelve
years.
When the female
dies.
138. Like suit by a purchaser at a
sale in execution of a decree when
the judgment-debtor was in
possession at the date ofthe sale.
Twelve
years.
The date when
the sale becomes
absolute.
137. Like suit by a purchaser at a
sale in execution of a decree, when
the juddgment-debtol was out of
possession at the date ofthe sale.
Twelve
years.
When the
judgment-debtor
is first entitled to
possession.
65. For possession of immovable Twelve When the
1963 Act:
37 \/


property or any interest therein based
on title.
Explanation.-For the purposes of
this article- (a) where the suit is by
a remainderrnan, a reversioner (other
than a landlord) or a devisee, the
possession of the defendant shall be
deemed to become adverse only
when the estate of the
remainderman, reversioner or
devisee, as the case may be, falls
into possession;
(b) where the suit is by a Hindu or
Muslim entitled to the possession of
immovable properly on the death of
a Hindu or Muslim female, the
possession of the defendant shall be
deemed to become adverse only
when the female dies;
(c) where the suit is by a purchaser at
a sale in execution of a decree when
the judgment-debtor was out of
possession at the date of the sale, the
purchaser shall be deemed to be a
representative of the judgment-
years. possession of the
defendant
becomes adverse
to the plaintiff.
38
v/


debtor who was out of possession.
8.5. Article 65 of the 1963 Act has made drastic changes in the
corresponding articles under the 1908 Act. The words "for possession
of immoveable property or any interest therein based on title"
occurring the column of description of suit in Article 65 of the 1963
Act are similar to the words occuring in Article 144 of the 1908 Act,
with some changes. Article 140 of the old Act corresponds to
Explanation (a) of Article 65 of the new Act. Article 141 of the otd
Act corresponds, with some changes, to Explanation (b) of Article 65
of the new Act. Articles 137 and 138 of the old Act, with some
changes, have been incorporated in Explanation (c) of Article 65 of
the new Act. The period of limitation was twelve years under Articles
137,138.,140,141 and 144 of the old Act. Under Article 65 of the
present Act also, the period of limitation is twelve years. The
expression "when the possession ofthe defendant becomes adverse to
the plaintiff in the third column of Article 65 of the newAct is the
same as that in Article 144 of the old Act.
8.6. Under the 1963 Act, all suits for possession of immovable property
have been brought under two categories, namely, (a) suit based on
previous possession and not on proprietary title and (b) suit based on
proprietary title. Suit based on previous possession is govemed by
Article 64, while suit based on proprietary title is governed by Article
65. Under Article 64, the starting point of limitation is the date of
dispossession. Under Article 65, the starting point of limitation is
39 \/


"when the possession of the defendant becomes adverse to the
plaintiff'.
8.7. The reasons for the change brought about by Articles 64 and 65 are
seen in the 3'd Report of the Law Commission of India. The
recommendation of the Law Commission was as follows:
"lf the defendant want to defeat the right of the plaintffi he
must establish the adverse possession for over twelve years
which has the ffict of extinguishing the title of the owner by
operation of Section 28 of the Limitation Act (Section 27 of the
1963 Act), read with Art. 144. (Article 65 of the 1963 Act). If he
fails to do so, there is no reason for non-suiting the plaintiff
merely because he was not able to proye possession within
twelve years..... In our opinion, Art. 142 must be restricted in
its application only to suits based on possessory title. The
plaintiff in such a suit seelc protection of his previous
possession which falls short of the statutory period of
prescription, to recover possession from another trespasser.
The plaintiff's prior possession no doubt entitles him to
protection against a trespasser though not against the true
owner. The true owner's entry would be a rightful entry and
would interrupt adverse possession. But if the defendant
trespasser is a person who wishes to oust the plaintiffwho was
himself a prior trespasser or a person who did not come into
possession as a trespasser but continued to hold it as such, in
order to enable the plaintiff to continue his wrongful possession
without disturbance and to enable him to acquire a title by
40
\/


adverse possession, the law must undoubtedly step in and give
relief to the plaintiff As against the true owner a person who is
in possession for a length of time short of the statutory period is
not entitled to any protection but the net result of the decisions
under article 142 is that the true owner must proye that he has
a subsisting title on the date of the suit. We, therefore, suggest
that in order to ayoid injustice and inequity to the true owner
and to simplify the law, article 142 should be restricted to suits
based on possessory title and the owner of the property should
not lose his right to it unless the defendant in possession is able
to establish adverse possession. Article 142, may, therefore, be
amended as follows:
"For possession of immovable property based on
possessory title when the plaintiff while in possession of the
property has been dispossessed - l2 years from the date of
dispossession. " "
8.8. Pursuant to the opinion expressed by the Law Commission, the
Parliament appropriately enacted Articles 64 and 65 in the 1963 Act.
There is a clear distinction between suits based on prior possession
(under Article 64) and suits based on title (under Article 65). Suits
under Article 64 are maintainable at the instance of a person in
possession as against the whole world except the true owner. Suits
under Article 65 are maintainable at the instance of a person who has
perfected title by adverse possession, even against the true owner.
8.9. Both articles now constitute independent provisions relating to suits
for possession brought under different situations. They do not overlap
4t
\-,


notwithstanding that both provide a period of 12 years limitation.
They stand distinguished from each other in a number of respects.
Article 64 is restricted to suits for possession or dispossession or
discontinuance of possession. In order to bring the suit within that
article, it must be shown that the suit is in terms as well as in
substance based on the allegation of the plaintiff having been in
possession and having subsequently lost the possession either by
dispossession or discontinuance.33 Article 65 on the other hand, is a
residuary article to suits for possession not otherwise provided for
suits based on plaintiff title in which there is no allegation of prior
possession and subsequent dispossession alone can fall within Article
65.34 Article 64 does not apply for suits for possession based on title
and has now been restricted to suits based on possessory title. Article
65 of the Limitation Act applies to suits based on title. It is not
necessary for a plaintiff to prove his possession within twelve years,
in suits for possession based on title. A suit can fail only if the
defendant is able to prove adverse possession for over twelve years.35
But where suit is based on title, plaintiff having failed to prove the
same, a finding on adverse possession is not necessary.36 Two articles
have been engrafted, whereunder a suit for possession based on title
is taken out of the preview of article 64, even though the plaintiff
being in possession has been dispossessed. Article 65 applies under
which the limitation runs from the time when the defendants'
possession became adverse to the plaintiff and not from the time
3r S.A. Kader,ll U.N. Mitra's Law of Limitation and Prescription 1383 (Lexis Nexis Butterworths
Wadhwa, Nagpur, l3'h edn., 201 I ).
3a Ramiah v. N. Narayana Reddy (dead) by LRs (2004) 7 SCC 54 I : AIR 2004 SC 426 l.
3s Bhushan Lal (deceased) by LRs v. Suresh Kumar and Others AIR 1987 All25.
36 Ranjit Kumar Bhowmikv. Subodh Kumar Roy (2004) I WBLR 228 : (2004) 2 CHN 180.
42
V


when the plaintiff was dispossessed as under Article 64.37 Article 64
governs suits for possession based on previous possession and not on
title. Article 65 controls suits for possession based on title. Under
Article 64, the burden lies on the plaintiff to prove his former
possession and subsequent dispossession within 12 years prior to the
suit and it is unnecessary to inquire whether the defendant's
possession was adverse or when it became adverse to the plaintiff.38
Article 64 has no application where the suit is not based on the
ground that the plaintiff has been dispossessed by the defendant.3e
When a suit is based only on previous possession, and for recovery,
Article 64 applies and the plaintiff can succeed only if it is proved
that he was in possession within twelve years prior to suit and he was
dispossessed by defendant. If the suit is based on title, even if
dispossession is also alleged the defendant can succeed only if he
proves his possession became adverse to the plaintiff beyond twelve
years of the suit. The plaintiff need only to prove his title and not
reqr.rired to show that he was in possession within twelve prior to the
suit.ao Under Article 65 the burden lies on the defendant to show that
he or predecessor-in-interest had been in continuous adverse
possession for over 12 years.at Under Article 64 the nature of the
plaintiffs possession is not material. Under Article 65, however, the
question whether possession has become adverse to the plaintiff is
relevant. Article 65 specifically refers to "immovable property or any
interest therein" whereas Article 64 mentions only "immovable
property" affording room for argument that interest in immovable
31 Jagannath Garnaik v. Sankar Samal AtR 1990 Ori 124.
18 lltthamnad Amanullah v. Bqdan Singh (1889) ILR l7 Cal 137 (PC)
'e Tribeni v. Soaroop AIR 1911 Raj 232.
!0 State of Orissa,t Jhtnjhuntallo 1986 CLT 55.
at See Manihala Rao v. Nqrasimhq$ram, AIR 1996 SC 470.
+)
S*/


properfy stands outside the scope of that article. Finally, while the
starting point of limitation under Article 64 is the date of the
dispossession, under Article 65 it is the date when the possession of
the defendant became adverse to the plaintiff.a2
8.10. Where the suit is brought on plaintiffs prior possession and
dispossession by defendant, the suit can be brought within 12 years
from the date of dispossession.a3 Both Articles 64 and 65 are rules of
limitation, the only difference being that in former, onus lies on the
plaintiff to prove his possession within l2 years, while in the latter, it
is for the defendant to prove when his possession became adverse.
The possession to become adverse must be actual, visible, exclusive
hostile and continued during the time necessary to create abar under
the statute of limitation.aa
8. 1 I . Under the 1908 Act, a plaintiff suing on title had to prove that he was
in possession within 12 years before the filing of the suit. Very often
suits filed by title holder were being dismissed on the ground that
they failed to prove possession within 12 years. Under Article 65 of
the Limitation Act,1963,the title holder/plaintiff need only prove title
to the property and he need not prove that he was in possession of the
properly within 12 years. Once the title of the plaintiff is either
admitted or proved, the entire burden of proof would be on the
defendant to prove adverse possession.as
42 S.A. Kader,ll U.N. l,n[itra's Law of Limitation and Prescription 1384 (Lexis Nexis Butterworths
Wadhwa, Nagpur, l3th edn., 201 I ).
at Amar Kaur v. Hardev Sirgi AIR 1992P&H205.
aa Nirakar Das v. Gourhari Das AIR I 995 Ori 290.
a5 See P.71 Munichikkanna Reddy and Others v. Revamma and Others (2007) 6 SCC 59: AIR
2007 SC 1753; Saroop Singhv. Banto and Others (2005) 8 SCC 330).
44 6*/


8. 12. Under the 1908 Act, the maximum period of limitation provided was
60 years. Under the present Act, the maximum period of limitation is
30 years for certain types of cases.
45
\,


9. ADVERSE POSSESSION VIS-A-VIS MORALITY
9. 1. For understanding the role of adverse possessor from the perspective
of the morality of adverse possession, one needs to adopt a new
analogy that views such an adverse possessor not as a land thief nor
as a deserving labourer, but rather as something akin to the leader of
a bloodless coup d'dtat.a6 An adverse possessor who is successful at
his endeavour, assumes the mantle of ownership for quite the same
reasons that a successful coup d'dtat produces a govemment whose
legitimacy and authority to rule is unabridged by the initial illegality
of its means to attain power. The existence of social order
necessitates that someone wield the authority of ownership in the
former case, and public authority in the latter. Thus, in a way, adverse
possession solves the moral problem of agenda-less objects, i.e.,
owner-less property, just as the recognition of the existing
government, howsoever it may have originated, solves the moral
problem of people who may be rendered state-less otherwise.aT
9.2. Since an adverse possessor is generally viewed as an immoral
squatter, a question arises as to on what basis can we justiff the
transformation of squatters into owners? It is required that proper
analogy be employed to understand the moral underpinnings of
adverse possession. It is often observed that much of the moral
analysis visualises adverse possessors as essentially land grabbers.
Hence, it becomes all the more imperative to distinguish between an
act of robbery or thievery and that of adverse possession. The
a6 Larissa Katz, "The Moral Paradox of Adverse Possession: Sovereignty and Revolution in
Property Law" 55 McGill Law Journal4T (2010\
41 lbid.
46 q./


characteristic modus operandi of a thief is that he achieves his goal of
permanent control of someone else's property either by force or by
stealth.as This method adopted by the thief indicates towards the
character of his claim to the object of theft. The thief takes physical
possession of the object in question with the intent of depriving the
owner permanently of possession without allowing him to make a
counterclaim of authority. The thief does not contest the owner's
legitimacy of authority over the object, but rather, asserts his control
in spite of his recognition of the owner's superior authority over the
object. This is quite evident from the thief s resort to force, stealth or
secrecy. It is significant to highlight that the thief does not invite an
evaluation of a competing claim to his authority over the object nor is
his demand to be judged the owner as a consequence of his actions.
Rather, the thiefs ultimate aim is to dupe the society into thinking
that he is the owner of the object, which is inherently different from
attempting to extract a judgment that he is in fact the owner.ae
9.3. The nature of the thiels claims is in stark contrast with the nature of
the adverse possessor's claims. The adverse possessor demands
public recognition of his authority as owner, which he is able to
achieve only where he has evident authority over the land in place of
the real owner. Thus, adverse possession of any property can be
successful only where it is peaceful, open and notorious.so The
adverse possessor's claims get eroded by force or stealth. This is so
because by surreptitiously moving in or forcibly removing the
as George P. Fletcher, Rethinking Criminal Law 38 (Little, Brown and Co., Boston, 1978).
an Larissa Katz, "The Moral Paradox of Adverse Possession: Sovereignty and Revolution in
Property Law" 55 McGill Lav Journal 47 (2010).
so sherren v. Pearson, [887] l4 S.C.R. 581 at 585; Potyell v. McFarlane (1979),38 P. & C.R.
452 (Ch. D.) at 478.
47 V


original owner, he eventually ends up unveiling that he himself lacks
effective authority. 5 I
9.4. In order to claim adverse possession of any property, the squatter
must prove that the owner lacks effective authority since day one. In
spite of being able to establish so, the adverse possessor however,
must still wait out for the time period set by the statutory period of
limitation before the law accords recognition that he has taken over
from the original owner.52 This period of limitation is necessary to
determine whether the original owner has in fact failed to exert
effective authority over the properfy in question from day one. The
loss of authority cannot be, as H.L.A. Hart put it, ,,verified or falsified
... in short spaces of time."s3
9.5. The ownership authority of the adverse possessor is conclusive and
not provisional as the same is evident from the retrospective
characteristic of adverse possession. During the statutory period of
limitation, the adverse possessor's de facto authority over the
properfy is not in contest with the owner's de jure authority. Rather,
once the statutory waiting period is over, it is confirmed that there
was all along but a single person, namely the adverse possessor,
whose decisions about the properfy in question were authoritative.5a
The retroactive nature of adverse possession also helps in explaining
as to why a successful adverse possessor, very much like the leaders
sr Larissa Katz, "The Moral Paradox of Adverse Possession: Sovereignty and Revolution in
Property Law" 55 McGill Law Journal 47 (2OlO).
s2 lbid.
53 H.L.A. Hart, The Concept of Law I l8 (Clarendon press, Oxford, 2d edn., 1994).sa Larissa Katz. "The Moral Paradox of Adverse Possession: Sovereignty and Revolution in
Property Law" 55 McGill Law Journal 47 (2010\.
48


of a successful coup d'dtat, cannot be held Iiable for wrongdoing.
Right since day one the adverse possessor is recognized as owner
despite the fact that had he not succeeded in his endeavour, he would
have been liable for trespass, just as the leaders of a failed coup d'dtat
would have been liable for treason.5s
9.6. The moral dilemma surrounding adverse possession can thus be
justified on analogous grounds. The moral significance of adverse
possession hence entails the role of ensuring that ownership serves its
primary function.56 The predominant function of the owner of a
property is to take charge of the property by setting the agenda for it.
Hence, in a situation when there is no one clearly incharge of a
property, avoidance of any potential conflict among the users of that
properfy can only be ensured through ownership generated agenda-
setting authority. Authoritative resolution of questions regarding the
use of any property cannot be ensured if the original owner lacks
effective authority over that property and the squatter is also denied
de jure authority over such property on account of adverse
possession. Thus in such a case, the primary function of ownership to
enable use of any property would remain unfulfilled. If no one has
effective authority over a property, there arises a vacancy in the
position of owner of that property. Such a vacancy results in
destabilizing the other peoples' relations with respect to that
properfy.sT In such a circumstance, the law of adverse possession
ss Beaulane Properties Limitedv. Palmer [2005] EWHC 817 (Ch.) atTO-71.s6 Eduardo Moises Penalver, "The Illusory Right to Abandon" Cornell Legal Studies Research
Paper No. 09-015 (July l, 2009) available at: htlps:l/ssrn.com/abstract=14rl1l7 (last accessed
May 01,2023).
57 Larissa Katz, "The Moral Paradox of Adverse Possession: Sovereignty and Revolution in
Property Law" 55 McGill Law Journal 47 (2010).
49


ensures that there is always someone in charge of that property in the
eyes of the law, and hence no unsettling vacancies. This is precisely
the reason why the [aw validates the claim of adverse possession
made by the squatter only when the owner can be shown to have lost
effective authority. This is also the rationale behind the owner being
able to defeat the adverse possessor's claims by showing that he
continues to be in charge of the property. Ultimately, the concept of
adverse possession addresses the law's most pressing concern which
is not who is owner but rather that the ofI'ice of owner is filled instead
of lying vacant.58
58 Larissa Katz, "Exclusion and Exclusivity in Property Law" 58 University oJ Toronto Lqw
Journal 27 5 , 306 (2008).
50
q-'


10. THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963 IN RESPECT OF ADVERSE
POSSESSION: WHETHER ANY AMENDMENT Is
NECESSARY?
10.1. Under the Limitation Act, l90g the title holder had to prove
possession within 12 years of the date of filing of the suit. This
created difficulty for the owners of immovable property, who on
many occasions failed to prove possession and, on that ground, lost
their cases before court. But after the commencement of the
Limitation Act, 1963, once a plaintiff proves his title, the entire
burden is on the defendant to prove that he has perfected title by
adverse possession. This makes the position of the plaintiff better
than it was under the 1908 Act.
10.3. Article 112 of the Limitation Act, 1963 provides for any suit by or on
behalf of the Central Govemment or any State Government. The
period of limitation is thirty years. The time for computing the period
of limitation begins to run '.when the period of limitation would
begin to run under this Act against a like suit by a private person."
Article I 12 would take in a suit filed by the Government for
possession of immovable properry based on previous possession
5l
10.2. lt is relevant to note here that the period of timitation provided was
twelve years in Articles 137,138, l4O, 141 and, 144 of the old Act,
even when the maximum period of limitation under the old Act was
sixty years. Under the new Act, the maximum period of limitation
has been reduced to thirty years. However, the period for prescribing
title by adverse possession under Articles 64 and 65 of the new Act
continues to be twelve vears.
e*/


(under Article 64) as well as a suit for possession of immovable
property or any interest therein based on title (under Article 65).
Thus, if the Government files the suit either under Article 64 or 65,
they would get thirty years' period to file the same, while in similar
circumstances, a private person would get only twelve years, period.
10.4. Title to immovable property can be acquired by adverse possession
against the Government in the same way as title can be acquired
against a private person. But the person claiming prescriptive title by
adverse possession against the Government must prove adverse
possession for a period of thirty years under Article 112 of the 1963
Act. The same would be the position whether the suit is filed by the
Government or against the Government. Therefore, where a private
person sues the Government for a declaration that he acquired title
against the Government by his adverse possession, he must prove that
his adverse possession was for a continuous period of thirty years.
The burden of proof would be on such private person claiming title
by adverse possession against the Government to prove that he was in
possession of the property with all the incidents of adverse
possession for a period of thirfy years. Proof of adverse possession
for a shorter period will not shift the onus of proof to the Government
to show that the said possession did not continue for the full period of
thirfy years (sixty years under the old Act).5e
seSeeAIR 1924PC 150;(1892) 19cal3l2: lglndApp6g(PC); AtP.tg2T Madrasa56;(r905)
28Madrasl30:32lndapp53(PC);AIRl964orissa233; AIRlgl6pC2l:39Madras617:43
Ind App 192; AIR 1964 orissa233; AIR l949Nagpur403; AIR l92t Bombay 177; AIRt926
Madras 125; AIR 1940 Nagpur 49; AIR 1944 Nagpur 201; AIR 1925 Madras 780; AIR 1929
Madras 441; AIR l94l Lahore 241. [See V.R. Manohar & W.W. Chitaley AIR Commentaries on
Limitation Acl 596 (All India Reporter, Nagpur, 6th edn., l99l ).
52 \r/


10'5. Article 112 of the 1963 Act corresponds to Article r49 of the l90g
Act and the period of limitation provided therein was sixty years.
When the 1963 Act came into force, the maximum period of
limitation was reduced to thirty years. Accordingly, in Article l l2,
the period of limitation has been fixed at thirfy years.
10.6. By interpretation of Articles 64, 65 and 112 of the Limitation Act,
there cannot be any doubt that a private person would be able to
prescribe title by adverse possession against the Government only on
the expiry of thirty years. In Nay Rattanmal v. State of Rajasthan60,
the Supreme Court held that the period that is allowed to the
Government to file a suit, is a matter of legislative policy and cannot
be brought within the scope or purview of a challenge under Article
l4 or under any other Article of the Constitution of India. It was held
that there is a rational basis for granting the Government as regards
the period, within which claims might be put in suit between the
Government on the one hand and private individuals on the other.
10.7. The constitutional validity of Article 149 of the 190g Act (Article
112 of the 1963 Act) was challenged before the Supreme Court in
Nav Rattanmal v. State of Rajasthan on the ground that providing a
longer period of limitation under Article 149 for suits by on or behalf
of the Government than the period available to private individuals,
would violate Article l4 of the Constitution of India. The Supreme
Court rejected this contention and held that the generally accepted
basis that statutes of limitation are designed to effectuate a beneficent
public purpose does not militate against there being a rational basis
6{) AIR t96t SC 1704.
53
q'"/


for a distinction being drawn between the claims of the State and the
claims of the individuals.
10.8. It is apposite to note here that in Hemaji waghaji Jat v. Bhikhabhai
Khengarbhai Harijan and Others, State of Haryana v. Mukesh
Kumar and Others and Ravinder Kaur Grewal and Others v. Manjit
Kaur and Others, the Supreme Court did not refer to Article 111 and
112 of the Limitation Act.
10.9. Providing the maximum period of thirty years under the Limitation
Act for a suit under Articles I I I and 112 of the Limitation Act, 1963
would dispel the possible difflrculty that may arise for recovering
possession of lands belonging to the local authorities and the
Government, which were encroached upon or otherwise came into
the possession of private individuals, to the extent dealt with under
Articles lll and ll2.It is not advisable to change the provisions of
the Limitation Act to the extent of taking away the provisions relating
to adverse possession in respect of lands belonging to the local
authorities and the Government, in view of the clear language
employed in Section 27 rcad with Articles 64,65, lll and ll2. The
apprehension voiced rn Ravinder Kaur Grewal v. Manjit Kaur, is to a
great extent, dispelled by Article 11 l. The fundamental principles on
which the Limitation Act is based and the fact that the Limitation Act
is an act of repose, as well as the settled principles of law over the
years, would lead us to arrive at the above conclusion and opinion.
54
eh,


10.10. There cannot be any justification for taking the view that adverse
possession should not be made available to those who dishonestly
enter the land with full consciousness that they were trespassing into
another's land. It is also not just and proper to deny the plea of
adverse possession to a naked trespasser entering the land without
good faith. Articles 64 and 65 of the Limitation Act do not make a
distinction between a trespasser and a person who got possession on
the discontinuance of possession by the owner. Under Article 65 of
the Limitation Act of 1963, the date of dispossession of the owner is
not relevant. The date of dispossession is relevant only under Article
64 of the 1963 Act. Under Article 65 of the 1963 Act, the owner who
was dispossessed need prove his titte only and he need not prove
dispossession or discontinuance ofpossession since the thrust is on
the proof of adverse possession. This itself is a sufficient protection
for the owner (when compared with the 1908 Act) when he sues on
title. There cannot also be any distinction between a trespasser and
bonafide purchaser from such trespasser. If the nature of
dispossession is made a subject ofenquiry in a case, the owner ofthe
land would be put to much prejudice and the required object of
protecting the owner of the land would not be achieved. Such an
enquiry would be a boon to the persons claiming adverse possession.
Even if the entry into the land by the person claiming adverse
possession was bonafide, so long as the owner sues for possession
under Article 65, the owner would not be deprived of his right and he
would not be put to plead or defend any fact other than title; and the
55
Regarding the Questions posed by the Law Commission in the
Consultation Paper
\,,,,.-


person claiming adverse possession would not get any benefit based
on any bonafides.
10.11. The Limitation Act,l963 does not contemplate any compensation
being paid to a trespasser making improvements in the property.
Making such a provision in the law would be detrimental to the
interests of the owner. Ifa trespasser is to be paid compensation for
the improvements made by him, that will result in depriving the
legitimate rights of the true owner since he would be made liable to
pay huge compensation for extensive improvements made by a
powerful trespasser. That would result in defeating the legitimate
rights of the owner to recover possession of his land.
10.12. There cannot also be any distinction between an owner who did not
evince interest in the land or the other way about, since an owner
who did not take care of his land at one point of time may do
otherwise at a later point of time. The owner can sell the land to a
person interested in the land for a good price. Sometimes, the legal
representatives of the owner may be inclined to properly take care of
the land and improve it.
10.13. It is also not advisable to make any provision for compensating the
owner by the adverse possessor. After coming into wrongful
possession, the adverse possessor may be interested to retain the land
even after paying compensation to the owner. The process of fixing
compensation may provide an opportunity to him to question the
quantum of compensation and to protract the litigation to the
56 kt",


prejudice of the owner who lost possession and who wants to recover
possession of his land.
10.14. There is also no justification to enlarge the period of 12 years under
Articles 64, 65, 11 I or I 12. Under the I 90g Act also, the period of
limitation was l2 years for a suit under Article 142 (Article 64 of the
1963 Act) and Article 144 (Article 65 of the 1963 Act). The period
of limitation under the 1908 Act was 60 years under Article 146_,4.
(Article 111 of the 1963 Act) and Article 149 (Article ll2 of the
1963 Act) and it was reduced to 30 years, consequent on the policy
decision to reduce the maximum period of 60 years for several
articles to 30 years for all of them. Under the 1963 Act, the
maximum period for any suit is not more than 30 years.
10.15' The well settled principle over decades is that there can be adverse
possession even in respect of the property belonging to the
Government. When a private individual gets a period of 12 years
under Articles 64 or 65 to file a suit for possession, the Govemment
would get 30 years, in view of Article 112. The Government, with its
machinery, would be able to protect their property in a better rnanner
than the private individual. The Government cannot be extended with
any premium for their laxity, if any, in bringing a suit for possession
even within the larger period of 30 years. There is also no
justification for abolition of adverse possession in relation to
Govemment property. There cannot be any greater leniency in favour
of the Government than that is provided under Article 112 of the
Limitation Act, 1963.
57
V


10.16. In respect ofNon-Resident Indians, no special safeguard is required
in the matter of adverse possession, for filing a suit under Article 64
or Article 65. There are ways and means for Non-Resident Indians to
protect their property. The technological development, to a great
extent, would be a beneficial factor in favour ofthem too.
10.17. Section I of the Limitation Act provides for the short title, extent
and commencement. Sub section (2) of Section I of the Limitation
Act was as follows: .,It extends to the whole of India except, the State
of Jammu and Kashmir.,, The words .,except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir" were omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation
Act, 2019 (34 of2019). Therefore, it is expedient to delete the words
"including the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir,'
from Article I 12.
58


II. RECOMMENDATIONS
I 1.1. The Law Commission is of the considered view that there is no
reason or justification to enlarge the period of limitation provided
under Articles 64,,65,11 I or I12.
I 1.2. However, it is expedient to delete the words ,.including the
Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir,, from Article I12,
in view of the omission of the words..except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir" from sub-section (2) of section I of the Limitation Act,
1963 by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of
2019).
The Commission recommends accordingly.
----xxx----
59
q"--


@-
%
[Justice K.T. Sankaran]'
Member
[Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi]
Chairperson
[Prof. (Dr.) Anand Paliwall
Member
[Dr. Niten Chandra]
Member (Ex-Officio)
[Prof. D.P. Vermal
Member
4>
[Mr. K. BisFaI[-
Member Secretary
rruj,
lDr. Reeta Vasishtal
Member (Ex-O./Jicio)
M. Karunanithil
Part-time Member
IProf. (Dr.) Raka Aryal
Part-tirne Member
60
&*air*-t A4W2
(\u/


Consultation Paper-cum-Questionnaire on
Adverse Possession of Land/Imnovable PropcrB
The claim to rights and interests in relation to propcrty on the basis of possession has
bcen recognized in all legal systems. Unintemrpted and uncontested possession for a specified
period, hostile to the rights and interests of true owner, is considered to be cne of the legally
recognized modes of acquisition of ownership. The presuiption of periods of linritations for
recovering possession or fbr negation of the rights and interests of true owner is the core and
essence of the law of adverse pr:ssessian. Right to access to Courts is barred by law on effluxion
of prescribed time. The conditions necessary for the acceptance ol' a claim i:ased on adverse
possession have been laid down basically by way of Judge-rxade I*w. Several exceptions to the
concept of adverse possession based on legal relationship lretwc,;n tht title holder and the person
in actual possession as well as the character of land ale also recognized by law. Permissive
possession or possession rvithout a cluar int*ntion to qxcrcisc exclusive rights over the property
is not considered as adverse possessinn.
2, The legal position and prix*iples gtverning adverse possession.
2.1 As observed by the Supreme Court of India in the case af Kctmatako Board aJ'WalrJ'Vs.
GAI\,in the eye of litrv, an r)wner would be deemed to be in possession of a property so long as
there is no intrusion. N*n-use of the property by the owner even for a long time won't atTect his
titlc. But the position will be altered when another person takes possession of the property and
assefis rights over it and the person &ar,ing title amits or negLects to take l*gal action against
such person for years together( emphasts supplied). "Thc proccss of acquisition of title by
adverse possession springs into action essentially by det'ault or inaction of the owner".? The
r( 2004) l0 scc 779
2 Amrendra Pratap Singh vs. Tej Bahadur Prajapati. (2t)04) l0 SCC 65
61
ANNEXURE - I


essential requisites to establish adverse possession are that the possession of the adverse
possessor nrust be neither by tbrce nor by stsalth nor under the license ol the owner. It must be
adequate in continuity, in publicity and in extent to shnw that the possession is adverse to the
paper owner.
2.2 The law on adverse possession is contained in the Indian Limitation Act. Article 65,
Scheciule I of The Limitation Act prescribes a limitarion of l2 years for a suit for possession of
immovable property or any interest therein based on title. It is important to note that the starting
point of lirnitation of 12 years is counted from the point of time '.wlten lli* possession of the
defendants becomes adverse to the plaintiff'. Article 65 is an irrtl*pender:t Article applicable to
all suits for possession of immovable property based on title i.c., proprittary title as distinct fiom
possessory title. Article 64 governs suits for posscssion hrsed on possessory right. l2 years
from the date of dispossession is the starting point of limitation under Article 64. Article 65 as
well as Article 64 shall bc read with Seqtii:n 27 wl:ich bears the heading - "Extinguishment of
right to property". [t lays down:
"At the cletcrminatign ttl'tltc ltr,riod herebl, limite$ to alry! person/br institttting
the suit lfor po.rsc,.rsjln of' an1 propert"v, his right to ,such propert), shall be
extingxkhed."
That means, where a cause of action exists to file a suit fr:r possession and if the suit is not filed
within the period of limitation prescribed, then, not only the period of limitation comes to an end,
but the right based on title or possession, &s the case may be, will be extinguished. The section
assists the person in possession to acquire prescriptive title by adverse possession3. When the
title to property of the previous owner is extinguished, it passes on to the possessor and the
3 U.N. Mitr.a's Larv of Limiration & Prescription. l3't'edition, 3011. Vol. I, revised by Justice S A Kader, P.73?
62


possessory right gets transformed into ownership. [Section 27] is an exception to the well
accepted rule that limitation bars only the remedy and does not extinguish the title. It lays down
a rule of substantive law by declaring that after the lapse of the period. the title ceasss to exist
and not merely the remedya. It means that since the person who had a right to possession has
allowed his right to be extinguished by his inaction, he cannot recover the property from the
person in adverse possession and as a necessary corollary thereto, the person in adverse
possession is enabled to hold on to his possession as against the owner not in possession.
2.3 As far as the Government (Central or State) propefiy is concenrcd, thc period of limitation
for any suit (except a suit before the Supreme Court) is 30 3.c*rs and the starling point of
Iimitationisthesameasinthecaseofasuitbyaprivateperon(vide Article ll2,Schcdulelof
Limitation Act). Acquisition of easements by 1:rrescription is provided for by Section 25 of The
Limitation Act.
2.4 The legal position as regards thc ircquisitiorr ot'title to land by adverse possession has
bcen succinctly stated by the Judicial Committce of the Priv1, Q6u,rc:il in Perry vs. Clissold:
'*lt cannot he disputed that u persort tnpossesslr:n oJ' lantl in the assurned
charaeter of owner $fid {xercising yteaceably the ardinary rights q{awnership has a
perfectly good title aguix.rt all the world but the rightlut owner And il'the rightlul
owner does nol come Jbr*,ard antl ossert his fifle h), the process o.f law within the
periad prescribed hy the provisions o.f the statule aJ'Limitation applicahle to the
case, his right is for ever extinguished and tke possessoty owner acquires an
absolute title. "
4 Valliamma Champaka vs Sivathanu Pillai (1964) I MLJ, 16l (FB)
5 (190?)AC 73. at79 *
63


2.5 This statement of law has been accepted by the Supreme Court of [ndia in the case of
Nair Sentice Saciet_v Ltd. vs. K.C. Alexander$. The Bench consisting of three Judges obserued
thus:
"The cases of the Judicial Committee are nat binding on us. But we
approve o.f the clirlum in ]907 AC 73. No.:ul:sr'"quent cilse has been
brought ta aur notict departing.fram tlzat vtew. No doubt, a grcal
controversy exists over the tw,o cases aJ'( 1849) I 3 QB 945 and ( 1865)
I QB l. But it must be t*ken to beJinally resolved by 1907 AC 7j. A
stmilar vietv has been cetrsistently taken in India *nd tht, amexdment
,s.{ the Indian Limitatbn Act hus given apprtrllrJ Jo tit* prcpo.sition
accepted in l9A7 AC 73 and ma,- bc taken to be e{eclqrata,? of the
lar in India."
2.6 It was clarified by a three-Judge Rench ol'llre Supreme Court in K.r/ntr.rA Chandra Bose
v. Cornmissioner afRanchi,1 "All that thc leru; recluiru.y is thut l&cposse.ssion must be open and
without ilny ottetfipt at concetrltnelrt. fl ,.s,,$rrreceJsttrl; that fltepo,rsession must be sa elfuclive
so as to bring it ta tlte spocific knovtledge af the owner Such a requirement may be insisted on
where an ouster of titlt i.s pleatled, but that is not the c:ase here. " It was also clarified in a series
of decisions that while possession shall be open and exclusive and in assertion of one's own
right, the fact that the possessor did not know who the real owner was, will not make his
possession any the less adverse. There are certain passing observations in some judgments of the
Supreme Court rendered by two leamed Judges that the plea of adverse possession is not
6 AtR 1968 SC I165
TAIR 1981 SC 707
64


available if the adverse possessor does not know who the ffue owner is; but, the law declared by
the larger Bench decisions of the Suprerne Court obviously prevails.
2.7 The intenticn to exclude others fiorn the control of property is an essential element of
factual possession. The intention to possess the property exclusively implies the intention to
exclude. all olhers including the true owner whether known or unknown to the advsrse po$sessor.
In an article written by Justice (retd.) S.A. Kader - "Law of Adverse Possession in India *
Recent Trends Unsettling the Law"x the learned author pointed ollt that the attempted distinction
made in PT Munichikkanna Recldv vs. Revamman between the 'intention to possess' and
'intention to dispossess'is not in conformity with the settled l*rv and that buth these concepts
are correlative to each r:ther. The following statenrent ol' larv by lilade, J on "intention to
possess" has been approved by House of Lords in JA Pye (Oxford) Ltd. Vs. Gmhamr0:
"What is really fiteent, in my judgntent, is tltst the animus possidendi involves
the inte.ntion, in oneb otvn nam€ and otr orls! 61,.'11 beha$, to exclude the world at
large, inclading the own€r x'ith the {ffper title i{ he be not himseff'the possc.t'so4 so far
as is reasonably prac:ricuhle tuttlso-.lit:'cs t$eproce.s ses o./'the law,will crllow,."
2.8 ln The Secr4'tdt'.r' ,st Statv vs. Wra Rayantt, a Division Benclr of Madras High Court
rightly pointed out that ttrre ignorance nf the orvner will not prevent the accrual of a title by
prescription. The possession must be open and hostile enough to be capable of being known by
the parties interested in the property {vide T Anianappa vs. Somalingapp!.tz ln other words,
SAnnexure II to Volume II of U.N. Mitra's Law of Limitation, l3'h Edn.
9 (2007) 6 SCC 59
l0 2003 IAC 419
ll ILR9Mad. 175
r2 2006 7 SCC 570
65


the possession to become adverse to the owner must be so overt and open that the person against
whom time runs, can, r,vith exercise of reasonable diligence, be aware of what is happening.
3. Justification for adverse possession.
3.1 The rationale tbr adverse possession rests broadly on the considerations that title to land
should not long be in doubt, the society will benefit from son:e one making use of land the owner
leaves idle and that thet persons who come to regard thc occrpant as ownsr may be protected.13
The maxim that law and equity does not help those who sleep over their rights is invoked in
support of prescription of title by adverse possession. ln other wor{Js, thc original title holder
rvho neglected to entbrce his rights over the land cannot be pernritted ru re-enrer the land after a
long passage of time. A situation lasting tbr a long period L:rertes c*rtain expectations and it
would be unjust to disappoint those who tmst on them.
3,2 Thc 'great'puryose of adverse possession as clescribed by a jurist Henry W. Ballantine in
his article "\itle by Adver.r;ePo.r.se.vsion, "r' "is automatically to quiet alt titles which are openly
and consistently asserted, to prr:vide prout' of meritorious titles and correct errors in
conveyancing". Another justilication for tirc law of advcrsc possession is captured in the quote
that possession is "tiir"t* points of the law". The rnoral justification of the law of adverse
possession was graphira!ly stated by Justice O.W Holmes who said "rran like a tree in the cleft
o{a ruck, gradaally sh*pe"s his roots lo the surroundings, cnd when the rcots have grou'n to a
certain size, can't be displaced without cutting at his life,".
4. Criticism of adverse possession and the pleri to have a fresh look,
4.1 Some legal scholars in foreign countries have pleaded for abolition of adverse possession
describing it as legalized land theft and a rneans of unjust enrichment. It has also been pointed
13 William B Stoebuck, "The Law ol'Adverse Prrs.*ession in Washington", $960) 35 l4'ash. L rteu J.l,
14 33 HLR t35
66


out that there is no certainty in the law ofadverse possession and the courts in several cases have
wrestled with the meaning of the expressions - actual, continuous, open, hostile and exclusive
possesslon.
4.2 The Supreme Court of India, has in two recent decisions, nan'rely, Hemaji Wagkaji vs.
Bkikhabhai Khengarbhairs and State of'Har!-ana Vs. Mukesh Kumart6, has pointed outthe need
to have a fresh look at the law of adverse possession. Borrowing the language from the
judgment of the High Court (Chancery Division) ol' England in J,A. Pye (Oxford) Ltd. vs.
GrahamrT, the Supreme Court in the former case, described the lau, of aclverse possession as
irrational, illogical and wholly disproportionate and extremely lrursh tirr the true owner "and a
windfall for dishonest person who had illegally taken possession uf the property". The Supreme
Court, after extensivcly quoting from P. T. tr{uni*hikkanna Reddy v.s. Revamma (supra, 9)
reiterated the observation therein that "with the exl:rrnding jurisprudence of ths European Courl
of Human Rights, the Court has taken an u*kind vicrv to the concept of adverse possession in the
recent judgment of J.A. Pye (Oxfoltt) Vs. United Kingdom". The Courl was not aware that the
said judgment of ECHR has not been appruved by the Orand Chamber consisting of a larg*r
Bench, on a referen** r::ade to it in the same case.
4.3 In Hemaji Waghigi's case, the Supreme Court held on the facts that the appellant had
miserably failed to prov* adverse possession. However. the Court went further and made the
following observations at paragraphs 34 to 36 (of AIR).
"34. Before parting with this cuse, rve tleem it appropriate to observe
that the law o.f adverse possessian whir:h austs an awner ctn the basis of
l5 AIR 2009 SC 103,
r6 20t l(10) scc 404
l7 (2000) 3 wLR 24?
67


inaction within linritation is iruational, illogical and wholly disproportionate.
The law as it exists is extreme$t harsh for the true awner and a windfall for a
dishonest person who had illegally tuken passion of the property of the true
owner The law ought nat to benefit a person who h clandestine manner takes
pos.r*sion ol' the propert.y o.f the owner in rontravenlion of' law. This in
substance woald mean that the law gives seal afapproval to the illegal actian
or activities of'a rank trespiareser or vho had wronglully t*ken possessian rf the
property af the true owner.
35. We fail to comprehend why the law ,r&ou&/ p/*r:r premium on
dishonesty by legitintizing possession oJ'a rank trvspts.rs*r and compelling the
owner trt lose rils pr.r.s.yes'sirsn only b*tuuse q{ his i*action tn taking back the
possess ion w ith in I i mitat io n.
36. In our considered view', therc i.t an urycnt need oJ'.fresh look regarding the
{aw on adverse po.rsassion. We recomntend the Union of India lo seriously
consider and make suit*ble chunges in the lau,ofadverse possession. A copy of
this judgmet$ lse ,>*t'rtt to llut Secretary, Ministr? of Lav, and Justice, Department
af Legat Alfitirs, Government c{ India for taking appropriate steps in
accardance with l*w."
5. Thc two dccisions of Supreme Court - critical analysis and claser look.
5.1 lrr Hemaji Waghaji co,te, the court eKtensively referred to the earlier decision in P.T.
Munichikkanna Reddy vs. Revamma (supra,9J and placed heavy reliance on ECHR decision in
J.A. Pye Oxford Vs. United Kingdom. Practically, the rvords employed by the learned rrial
Judge Neuberger, J in J.A. Pye (Oxfbrd) vs. Crahamsrs and the European Court of Human
r8(2000) 3 wLR 242
68


Rights (ECHR) in J.A. Pye (Oxford) Ltd. vs. United Kingdcmre have been repeated ln the
concluding paragraph. The fact that by the time Hentaji Waghajik c(Lre was decided, the Crand
Chamber of ECHR delivered its judgment on 30'h August, 2007 disapproving the ratio of the
2005 decision of ECI{R in the case between the same parties was not brought to the notice of the
learned Judges of Supreme Court. The Crand Charnber of the ECHR examined the legislation
relating to adverse possession fronr the point of view of the ob.iective of the law, the principles
of proportionality and lair balance and held that the existence of the linritation period for actions
for recovery of land as such pursues a legitimate aim and that thc fair balane c required by Article
l, Protocol No. I to the Convention was not upset by the larv de*lir,g with adverse possession.
5.2 Another aspect which needs to be mentioned in this c*ntcxt is tlrat it is not clear from the
decision of the Supreme C'ourt in Revamma and Hamaji as to what diffbrence u,ould it make if
the right to property is corrsiderecl to be human right epart lrorn being a constitutional or statutory
right. In Revamnra, it was merely {riariiied thut property dispute issues including adverse
pr:ssession is being exarnined by th* Europeat Human Rights Courts on the premise that it is a
human right. The ultirnate <lccision in hnth the cases clecidecl by the Supreme Court turned on
the facts of the casr i.c., lvhether tirere was enough evidence to substantiate the plea of adverse
possession and that w.i:i auswersd in the negative.
5.3 It is interesting to note that the Northern Ireland Larv Commission in its Report on Land
Law [NILC8 (2010] had expressed the view that in the light of the decision of the Crand
Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights in the case af J"A. Pye {Oxford) Ltd. Vs. U.K.,
the human rights issues relating to the doctrine of adverse possession have been put to rest fbr
the time being and should not he pursued further. The consultees were unanimously in
r I (2005) 49 ERC 90
69


agreement with the Law Commission that the doctrine of adverse possession should be reained to
enable a squatter to acquire the title of a dispossessed owner after the expiration of the specilied
period of limitation.
5.4 On a close and tair reading of the-iudgment in Hemajiit case and even the latter case in
State af Haryana Ys. Mukesh Kurnar {gupr*, 16), it is fairly clear that the Court deprecated the
law in so far as it benefits a rank trespasssr who had wrongfully taken possession of the property
belonging to another. The observations in para 35 reinforces this viciv point quite clearly. A
rank trespasser is thus frorvned upon. So, it needs to be seriously extmined rvhether the
protection should be extended to a naked ancl dishonest trespa$su-r and to lhttse who may have
purchased the property tionr such trespasser. While claims based on adverse possession may
deserve to be recognized, it can still be cnsuret-! that thc ptrssession r:riginating fiom dishonesty
and foul means does not receive the same recognition in law.
5.5 ln the latest case of .ftate o/'H*rye;rts Ys. hll'kesh Ktmsr {supra, /6), there is a trenchant
criticisrn of the doctrine of adverss possessirn. The same learned Judge who authored the
judgment in Hemaiiir c:nse reit*'ateti what u,as said earlier aller referring to the English cases and
made cerlain important *hservati*ns rvhich nsed to be taken note ofL That was a case in which
the State of Haryana (Police Dcparrment) set up the plea of adverse possession which was not
accepted by the trial court and appellate cuurt on a review of evidence. The learned Judge
Dalveer Bhandari, J speaking for the Bench, described the law ol'adverse possession as archaic
and "needs a serious relook" in the larger interest of the people. It was observed: "Adverse
posse.rsion allows a trespc$ser - a person guilty of a tort, or e't en a crime, in the eye of the law *
to gain legal title ta land which he has illegal4,\ pctssesserl for 12 yeers. How 12 years of
illegalittt can sudden{y he converted to legal title i,s, logically and morally speaking, baffling.
70


This outmoded law essentially aslts the judiciary to place its stamp of approval upon conduct
that the ordinary Indian citizen would "find reprehen.rible. The doctrine of adverse posses,rion
has troubled a great many legal mtnds. We are clearly r>J- the opinion that time has come.for
change." The learned Judge posed a question: "How 12 years oJ illegality,can suddenly- be
tonverted to legal title is, logicall;t and morally speaking, ba.ffiing" and then obserued "We are
clearly of the opini*n that time has come.for change". The observations madr earlier at
paragraph 39 are also relevanl. "The Govemment instrumentalities -- including Police * in the
instant case have attempted to possess land adversellt. This, in our o\sinion, is a teslament lo the
absurulity tdthe lau,ancl a black mark upon the justice.rysren i:; t*gitirn*r.v". Then, it was said
"if this law is to be relainecl according to the wisdom af Purliafiwn4 then at kust the law must
reqaire those who adversely pos.$a.r.r lctnd trt contStensalc the lille or\rners according to lhe
prevalent market rate o.l'the land or propert.v." "l-hen at paragraph 40, it was obser:ved that
Padiament must seriously consider at lei{sl to abolish "bad f'aith" adverse possession i.e., adverse
possession achieved through intentional trespassing. At paragraph 41, it was also observed that
if the Parliament decides to rctuin thc law oi'adverse possession, the duration of possession (i.e.,
limitarion period) und*r the law ol'Limitatinn should be extended to 30 to 50 years, "rather than
amere 12". It was ptlint*d out that "a longer sldlulory period would decrease the.frequency of
adverse possessiou suits *nd ensure that anly those claintants fitost intimutely connected with
the land acquire it, while only the rnos/ 7:assive and unprotectiv€ owners ksse title." In the
penultimats paragraph, the Court saitl "Nra recommend the. Unitsn a/' Indfu ta iilxmedi.alely
consider a seriausly deliberate either abolitien qf law of adverse pos.res.sion and in the alternate,
to make suitable ame.ndmenls in the law oJ'*dverse passession".
6. Fositisn in other qoJntries
71


6.1 The acquisition of land under the doctrine of adverse possession is recognized in all the
civil and common law jurisdictions. The concept and elements of adverse possession are almost
the same. Horvever, there is no clear pattern as regards the length of limitation periods. The
period after which the real owner may no longer bring an action to rcpossess her land varies from
10 years to 30 years. In the case of claims by the Crown (Stats) in most of the countries. it is 60
years. Proof of good laith on the part oi the possessor of the land will significantly reduce the
limitation period in some jurisdictions such as France, Spain, The Netherlands and Poland. For
instance, French law per:nits the acquisition of title to land by prescription over a 30-year period
if the possessior: is continuous, uninternrpted, peaceful, publi* and unequivocal. A reduced
prescription period of ten years is provided if the possasst'rr ITad acted in gc;od llith and in
genuine belief of the existence of a just title. Ilowever. if tl:* true owner does not live within the
district of the Court of Appeal, then the period is extended by twice the number of years i.e., 20
years. In some countries, e.g.. Hungary {iernrany, l!'fassachusetts/US, the evidence of good laith
is not a relevant consideration. The application of the doctrine of adverse possession as wcll as
the duration of possession also depclils oir rvhether the land is registered or not. Significant
diff*rences in the *.n:pii*ation o1'ndverse possession arise where the States have adopted the
system of land registrzui*u. Wlrere the title to land is registered, some States have abolished the
capacity to acquire land by prescription (e.g., Canada) while rctaining the right in respect of
unregistered land. This difference retlects the policy that the uncertainty of ascertaining
ownership is eliminated by a system of registration so that the rationale for the doctrine of
adverse possession is thereby weakened.20 Most counlries do maintain the doctrine of adverse
possession in respect of registered land. (e.g., UK, Australia, US and Newzealand) and Courts
?0See Report of the British Institute of International and Cr;mparative Larv for IIsr Majesty's Court Ser.rices
(Septernber 2006)^
72


continue to recognize the public policy value of extinguishing title to registered property after a
certain period. (supra, 20)
6.2 In UK, the acquisition of land by adverse possession is govemed by the Limitation Act of
1980 and the Land Registration Act of 2002 which repealed the earlier Act of 1925. The
Limitation Act of 1980 provides that no action shall be brought by any person to recover any
land after the expiration of twelve ( l2) years fiom the date on which the right of action accrued
to him. The right of action shall be treated as having accrued on the date of dispossession or
discontinuance. It made no distinction between registered and unregistered land. S.l7 of the said
Actprovided that on the expiry of Iimitation regulating tL,.1gspr:cry ol'1nnd. tire title of the paper
own$r was cxtinguished. Section 75{ I } of Land Registratir:n Act. 1925 however, provided that on
the expiry of the lirnitation period, the title u.as not extinguished, but the registered proprietor
was deemcd to hold the land thereafter in trust for the squatter. The Land Registration Act of
2002 (which repealed the 1925 Act) n,*ile a nunrher of changes to the lar,v as it related to
registered land. It provided that adverse posscssion for howevet" long would not of itself bar the
owner's title to a registered laud. llr)rvr.\'cr, a squatter is cntitled to apply to be registered as
proprietor after ten ( l0) y,cars an<l a procedure is prescribed for dealing with such application.
6.3 In US, all Stat*s rvithin the Fedcration recognize title acquired by adverse possession
after limitation periods ranging frorn 5 to 40 years. In addition to varying timc limitations, there
are differences among the States as to the role of good laith as & nscgssary condition for adverse
possession and as to certain categories of land type and use. Most of the jurisdictions in US do
not require an element of good faith in cases of actual and uninterrupted possession. (.supra, 20)
7. Abolition of adverse possession * pros and cons
t5


7.1 One view point which has considerable rnerit is that the wholesale abolition of adverse
possession would trigger practical problerns afTecting common people and bona fide possessors
of property who may have no title documents. Multitude of people especially those in rural areas
belonging to agriculturist fbmilies renrain in possession since long whether by virrue of
inheritance. purchase sr otherwise without having valid dnd legally recognized title deeds. The
laek of a legal regime undeluvhich the titles are registered and the shoddy rnarlrler in which the
land records are maintained by the concerned Departments of Govenunent has made it difficult
to those entering into land deals to know even through reasonable riiligenec the true owner of
land and the history of ownership. People in rural areas live in their lncestral lrouses or enjoy
posssssory rights over parcels of land from times inrmenrori*1, hilna llde belicving that thcy or
their ancestors are the true owncrs of land. There is no mcons of knowing whether the land in
question is Government land or thc land over which the Government has a right of resumption or
some one else has superior titls ovcr lard, At ltart the ordinary people do not know. Even
legitimate owners who rnay have cnly the elemcnt of possession as the lbundation for assuming
or defending their rights may suffer i1'the r:oncept of adverse possession is abolished or allowed
to remain under string*nt conditions. That the possession i$ "nine points of law" applies with
great force to such cal*g$ry ofpersons.
7,2 On the other harrd, the question may be legitimately asked as to why those who grab the
land overnight by f'orce or otherwise without semblance of bona fides and without color of title
should be allowed to get title by adverse possession'? Why should land theft or grabbing be
made the basis for deriving title by reason of open, hostile enjoyment for a long period? Should
not the conduct of occupier of land be taken into account? Further, what about those owners of
property who may not bs physically available to evince an intention towards disrupting hostile
74


possession. These questions do arise. in the ultimate analysis, there is perhaps a need to shike a
fair balance between competing considerations in the process of, considering the changes in law
if any.
8. A representation has been made to the Central Government by Pravasi Properties
Protection Council (PROP), Sion, Mumbai stating inter-alia that adverse possession has become
a handy tool to the relatives and neighbours to occupy the NRI's properties with the aid of
village officers who are instrumental in efl-ecting changes in land records. They suggest the
abolition of law of adverse possession and to check the menace of ucspassers. It is not
specifically indicated as to how such problems of NRIs could be ad*quatell' taken care of by
abolishing adverse possession. However, the need to d*vis,; sofire special measures for
protection/restoration of properties owned by NRIs d*serve due consideration.
9. On the basis of infonnations rcceived from the High Courts in U.P., Mahrashtra, Delhi,
Gujarat, Assam and othcr NE States, Ktrrlla, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Bihar and Rajasthan,
there are about 5?430 cases in wlrich the plea llf adverse possession has becn raised in the suits
before the trial courts pending at thi: en<J tif the year 2010. Infonnation has not been received
from other High Crlnrrs. Howevcr. it can be estimated that only in about 80,000 cases, the plea
of adverse possession h*s been raised in the pending matters. In the course of interaction with
the judicial offrcers and lawyers in some places, it has come to light that the plea of adverse
possession though raised is quite often not pursued and hardly any evidence is adduced thereon,
I0. Having regard to the above legal and factual background and the views expressed by the
Supreme Court, it is eonsidered necessary to get responses from the public, especially. the
Judges, Iawyers, legal academia and bureaucracy on various issues ccncerning adverse
possession. A Questionnaire has been prepared and annexed herewitlr lbr this purpose.
75


Queetionnaire on Adversp S"qssesrion
1. Do you think that the law of adverse posssssion under which the legal owner and title
holder of immovable propeny is precluded from bringirg an action to recover the possession
from a person in occupation of tlie property for a c.ontinur:us period of twelve years openly,
peacefully and in a manner hostile to thc interest of legal owner should be retained in the statute
book or the time has come to repeal it? Are there good social reasons or considerations of public
policy for retaining the legal acquisition of title tlirough adverse possessi*rr'l
2,. Do you think that having regard to the conditions in our couil{ry sucli ;rs lack of reliable
record of rights, title registration, the problem of ident:ity of ptoperty anri rlre dilficulties of ev*n
genuine occupants to back up their possession with formal title deeds, the law of adverse
possession should remain or should it be scrapped?
3. (a) Do you think that certain e.re eptirrrrs and qualifications should be carved out by law so
as to ensure that the plea ol'adverse posscssion should not be made available to those lvho
dishunestly enter the land witlr full *Exsciousness that they wsre respassing into another's land?
(b) In other words. whether it is "iust ancl proper to make the plea of adverse possession available
to a naked trespasser *ntering thc laud without good faith?
(c) ln any case, whethcr the bona fide purchasers fiorn a trespasser should be allowed to plead
advcrse posssssion. ?
4. If the benefit of acquisition of title by adverse possession is to be denied to a rank
trespasser, should he be paid compcnsation for the improvements made or other expenditure
incured for preseruation of land?
76


5. Do you think that the real owner who did not evince any interest in the land should at any
distance of time be permitted to claim back the land irrespective of a string of changes in land
occupation and improvements made thereto ?
6. Il adverse posseusion is allowed to remain, do you think that the real owner should be
compensated in terms of market value as per the rate prevailing on the date when the person
claiming adverse possession started possessing the land? Or, could there be any other principle of
working out compensation or indenrnification r,vithout hassles?
7. If adverse possession is retained, is thcrc a case for cnlarging th* present period of
limitation of l2 years and 30 years (in the case of Govt. Iand) ? I1'so, to *,haf cxtent?
8. As far as the property of the State is concerned, the LimiLation Act prescribes thirty year
period for filing a suit against a person in adverse possession. ls there a case for abolition of
adversc posscssion in relation to Oovernment prop*I'ly? $hould it be left to the Covernment to
claim possession of its land nt any time irrcspcctite of the long chain of events that might have
occurred and inaction on the pad of {iovt.?
9. Whether the la*' which extinguislrrs the right to property vested rvith the true orvner by
reason of the lapse of ;lescriberl period of adverse pcssession of another can be tested by the
standards laid down in Article of the l" Protocol:rto the (European) Convention for the
Protection of l{uman ltights and Fundarnental Freedoms and be f'aulted on the ground of being
' irrational' and'disproportionate"l
10. (a) In what way the NRIs would be more handicapped than resident Indians by reason of
application of the law of adverse possession'l
2 I "Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No one shall be deprived
ofhis possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for try lau,and by the general
principles or international law".
77


i q
,:-
{
(b) What safeguards and remedies if any should be provided to the N.R.Is to cheek illegal
encroachment of their immovable properties? Should there be longer period of limitation in
respect of the property owned by N.R.ls. ?
It. f)o you think that the principles goveming adverse possession and its proof should be
provided explicitly in a Statute?
The replies may be sent to Joint Secretary & Law Officer, Law Commission of India, 2nd
Floor, ILI Building, Bhagwan Das Road, New Delhi-l t0 001 rvithin a month. The e-
maiVWebsite particulars are given below:
Website: http:#lawcommis*.ijong{india.nic.in
e-mail: lci-dla(tnic.jn
78
