{raqq-4 s{a
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
COMPENSATIONFORDAMAGE DUE TO INSTALLATION
OF TOWE RS AND TRANSMISSTON LINES UNT)ER THE
INDIAN TELEGRAPH ACT. 1885 AND THE ELECTRTCITY
A 2003
Report No. 281
August r 2023

The 22d Law Commission was constituted by GazerteNotification for a period of threeyears vide orderNo. F No.45021/l/201g-Admn-III(LA) dated 21,tFebruary,2020 issued
by the Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs,New Delhi. The term of the22d Law commission was extended vide order No. FA No.
60 0 I I / 22 5 I 2022 - Admn.ilI(LA) d ated 22d F ebruary, 2023 .
The Law commission consists of a chairperson, three full-time Members, Member
Secretary, two ex-fficio Members and two part-time Members.
Chairnerson
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Full-time Members
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Prof (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Prof. D.P. Verma
Member Secretarv
Shd K. Biswal
Ex-officio Members
Dr. Niten Chandra, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Secretary, Legislative Department
Part-time Members
ShriM. Karunanithi
Prof. (Dr.) Raka Arya
Law Officers
Smt. Varsha Chandra, Joint Secretary &Law Officer
Shri Atul Kumar Gupta, Deputy Law Officer
Lesal Consultants
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Gaurav Yadav
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Shri Davinder Singh
Ms. Priya Rathi
Ms. Ruchika Yadav
The Law Commission is located at:
2d and 4'h Floor, 'B' Wing
Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market
New Delhi-110 003.
The text of this Report is available on the Website at:
$:)). \L.ti])-v- ("te I i.! 1l:t i.:.i.i-qlt eJ"i"n-d i a,rr ie. il
@ Government of India
Law Commission of India

qrq1ff Tg vre €ffiefi
FqrPqil Uq qrqffr, o.qfro sq qnrarfl
3TEzIM
+Irftr d zzd frE srrmJT
s'a$a wrd
76y
0,19ffi6r.
3rqaqFrffiq
DO No. 6(3) 331/2022-LC(LS) Date: grh August, 2023
I
l*2, lla'?\U, S; A.d"^ R ^-^ Y-d,+A f
N*ssaXkp'v'
I am pleased to forward you Report No. 281 of the Law commission of India on
"Compensation for Damage Due to Installation of Towers and Transmission Lines underthe Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Etectricity Act, 2003." The Law Commission
received a reference from the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka, vide letter dated 07th July,
2022, asking the Commission to suggest modes and methodologies of arriving at and
determining compensation on account of erection of towers as well as drawing of power lines
under the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885.
Having examined the judgment passed by the Hon'ble High Court in this regard, the
Commission considered it necessary that methodologies concerning compensation for the
electricity as well as the telecommunication sector be discussed separately in order to enable a
common person to understand the intricacies present in both.
In pursuance of the same, the Commission held extensive consultations with entities involved
in both the sectors. With regard to the electricity sector, the Commission held discussions with
the Ministry of Power, Government of India, the Central Electricity Authority, the Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission, the Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, and the
Central Transmission Utility of India Limited. With reference to the telecommunication sector,
the Commission held deliberations with the Department of Telecommunications. Government
of India.
After perusing the schemes of compensation existing within both the sectors, the Commission
is of the considered view that bearing in mind the advancements made in the
telecommunication sector, it is imperative that a new legislation, more suited to the times and
milieu be enacted at the earliest. Further, with regard to the position of private land owners vis-
d-vis private licensees under the Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2Ol6,the Government
should prescribe some methodology to regulate this hitherto unregulated relationship. This
could be in the form of a minimum consolidated value/rental value or a percentage of the
consolidated/rental value of the property.
o.r-stcrq qrr : s-rnr t'. +os, a-gef ild, ,fi,ftf.r, fr+. qTqs qqq,
OfiiceAddress : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, ,B,Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan,
erqrfrq qei : drrar =i. e, fi-s sr-{fr qr.f, c-$
erq qrff-e, c-$ m-rrooos
Khan Market, New Delhi-110003
ffi-rroorr
Residence : Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Marg, New Delhi_110011
email : rituraj.awasthi@gov.in Tet. : O1,t-246il951 (D), 24UOZO2,243/rO2O3
Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former Chief Justice of High Court of Karnataka)
Chairperson
22^o Law Commission of lndia
v

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former Chief Justice of High Court of Karnataka)
Chairperson
22^o Law Commission of lndia
qrqxffi *g rq qqwfi
ftrftil gq qrqfiyr, oqtco vq qrrcq)
3IEItr
rlrftr 6 zzd frE errfiT
Fcuta ,*
7*.
sll-f,[-4lmr -sqa q-61ffiq
Moreover, with regard to the electricity sector, the Commission is of the measured view thatprovisions dealing with Right of way be incorporated in the Electricity Act, 2003 itself.Additionally, even though the Ministry of Power, Government of India has issued guidelines
for determining compensation in 2015, and subsequently for Right of way on urban land in2020, multiple States have come out with their policies for determining the quantum ofcompensation on account of 'land' being a state subject under List II, Schedule 7 of the
Constitution of India. The Commission recommends that State Govemments should consider
aligning their policies with the guidelines issued in20l5 andZ020to lend uniformity to project
costs and the compensation that a land owner may seek. Accordingly, this Report is being
submitted for your kind perusal.
With warmest regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi)
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (lndependent Charge)
Ministry of Law & Justice
Government of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi -1 10001.
Frqfdrq qdT : o-rI{T t'. +os, ?-$f a-d, 'fi' trT, etfo qrqo rrrr=r, Errq qrtr-c, q$ ffi-rroooe
Ofrice Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B'Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New Delhi_1,10003
edrqrfrq qor : tfrran =i. a, frr sfiO qr.f, c-$ ftefi-rroorr
Residence : Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Marg, New Delhi_110011
email : rituraj.awasthi@gov.in Tet. : 011 -246il951 (D), 24940202, 24340203

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Upon receiving the reference for the subject-matter of this Report from the Hon,ble High
court of Karnataka, Dharwad Bench, through a copy of its final order in w.p. No.
113268/2019 (GM-RES), dated l lth April, 2022,the Law commission held deliberations with
all the relevant stakeholders, primarily the concemed Government Departments and
Undertakings, in order to grasp the legal and technical nuances of the subject. The
Commission held consultations with authorities involved in the electricity sector, namely, the
Ministry of Power, Government of India, the Power Grid Corporation of lndia Limited, the
Central Electricity Authority, the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission, and the Central
Transmission Utility of India Limited. With regard to the telecommunication sector, the
Commission held consultations with the Department of Telecommunication, Government of
India' We are much thankful to the following Government offrcials who took out their
valuable time to furnish their comments and submissions on the instant subject:
1. Shri Mohammad Afzal, Joint Secretary, Ministry of power
2. Shri Anand Singh, Joint Secretary,Department of Telecommunication
3. Shri Ashish Gundal, Joint Secretary and Director (Policy), Department of
Telecommunication
4. Shri Deepak Rao, Director (Trans.), Ministry of power
5. Shri Abhay Choudhary, Director (projects), PGCIL
6. Shri B. Sreekumar, Joint Chief (Legal), CERC
7. Shri Rajesh Kumar, Deputy Director, central Electricity Authority
8. Shri Sourov Chakraborty, Chief General Manager, CTUIL
9. Shri Ram Chandra, Chief Engineer, Legal Division, Central Electricity Authority
10. Shri Awdhesh Kumar yadav, Chief Engineer, CERC
The Commission gratefully acknowledges the commendable assistance rendered in the
preparation of this Report by Mr. Rishi Mishra, Mr. Gaurav Yadav, Mr. Shubhang
Chaturvedi, Mr. Davinder Singh, Ms. Priya Rathi and Ms. Ruchika yadav, who worked
as Consultants. We place on record our heartfelt appreciation for their assiduous efforts in
conducting research and aid in drafting of this Report.
I
A,-/

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION..... I
2
2
4
4
6
(A) Reference to the Commission
(i) Judgment of the Kamataka High Courr
(B) Consultations
(C) The Structure of this Report
2, BACKGROLTND
3. RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE INDIAN TELEGRAPH ACT, 1885.9
4. SCHEME OF COMPENSATION UNDER THE
TELECOMMLINICATION SECTOR ..13
(A) The Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016 14
a) Underground Infrastructure................... 14
b) Overground Infrastructure l6
5. COMPENSATION UNDER THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR t9
(A) The Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003) 21
(B) The Works of Licensee Rules, 2006 ........24
(C) 2015 Guide1ines................... .....................25
(D) 2020 Urban RoW Guidelines ................... .......................30
6. DIFFERENT APPROACHES UNDER DIFFERENT STATUTES ........... 3 I
7. RELEVANT JUDICIAL DECISIONS 33
8. ruRISPRUDENCE OF STATUTORY COMPENSATION 36
(A) Concept of Compensation 36
(B) Just, Fair and Equitable Compensation ...........................3g
(C) ValuationConsideration 40
9. DETERMINING PRINCIPLES FOR STATUTORY COMPENSATION.44
IO. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
ll
4'7

List of Abbreviations
1885 Act Indian Telegraph Act, 1885The
2003 Act Electricity Act,2003The
2006 Rules ks of Licensee Rules,2006Wor
2013 Act Right Compensation
Rehabilitationcquisition,
Fto aff and LandlnTransparency
A and Resettlement I aJ20Act,
2016 Rules Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016
2015 Guidelines
Way (RoW) Compensation
Guideline issued relationMinistryS Power lnby to ofRight
2020 Guidelines Guidelines issued by Ministry of Power in relation to Right
of Way (RoW) Compensation for Urban Areas
AIR All India Reporter
BLJR Bihar Law Journal Reports
Cal Calcutta
CEA Central Electricity Authority
CERC Electricity Regulatory CommissionCentral
CTUIL Transmission Utility of India LimitedCentral
DoT Department of Telecommunications
FB Full Bench
GM General Miscellaneous Matters
HVDC High Voltage Direct Current
Kant R Karnataka High Court Reports
Kar Karnataka
KLT Kerala Law Times
KSEB State Electricity Board LimitedKerala
KV Kilovolt
kwh Kilo-Watt Hour
lll

Mts. Metres
MW Mega-Watt
NLDC Load Despatch CentreNational
PGCIL Power Grid Corporation of India Limited
Pat Patna
PLJR Law Journal ReportsPatna
PLR Punjab Law Reporter
RES Residuary
RLDC Regional Load Despatch Centre
SC Supreme Court
SCC Supreme Court Cases
SCR Supreme Court Reporter
SLDC State Load Despatch Centre
Supp Supplementary
TDR Transfer Development Right
Vol Volume
w.P. Writ Petition
lv

1. INTRODUCTION
l'l After attaining independence, India has managed to develop in leaps and
bounds, having become one of the fastest growing economies in the
contemporary world. This progress has come on the back of
advancements in critical infrastructure, most notably relating to transport
and communication. However, ?fly enhancement in infrastructure
requires electricity to power it. India has made rapid strides in enhancing
its electricity generation capacity. Today, India is an electricity surplus
country, with an installed capacity of over 4 lakh MW,, yet the ever-
growing energy needs of a galloping economy and electricity
consumption of 1.4 billion people remains as challenging as ever.
1.2 The development of an efficient, coordinated, economical and robust
electricity system is essential for the smooth flow of electricity from
generating stations to load centres in order to provide reliable, affordable,
uninterrupted, and quality power for all. However, for a well-functioning
transmission system, it is imperative that land be provided for the erection
of towers and laying of transmission lines.
1.3 Transmission planning is a continuous process of identification of
transmission system addition requirements, their timing and need. The
transmission requirements could arise from:
a) new generation additions in the system
b) increase in demand
I News Services Division, All India Radio, 'India becomes power surplus nation with electricity capacity of
over four lakh Mega Watt', available ot: https://newsonair.gov.in/News?title:India-becomes-power-surplus-
nation-with-electricity-capacity-of-over-four-lakh-Mega-watt&id:447596.
1
G/

c) System strengthening that may become necessary to achieve
reliability as per the planning criteria under changed load-
generation scenarios.
1.4 In this backdrop, the powers concerning the Right of way (Row)
provided under the Electricity Act, 2003 (,2003 Act,) read with the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 ('1885 Act') are specifically relevant. Both
the Acts read together empower Power Transmission Utilities to erect
towers and lay down transmission lines over both public as well as
private property. However, they also make provisions for the payment of
compensation to interested parties for the damage sustained by them in
the course of these Utilities exercising their powers of Row.
(A)
1.5
RnrrnrNCE To rnn CowrMrssroN
The Hon'ble High court of Karnataka, Dharwad Bench, through a copy
of its final order in w.P. No. 11326a/2019 (GM-RES), dated llth April,
2022, requested the Law Commission of India to advise modes and
methodologies of arriving at and determining compensation for
installation of towers and setting up of transmission lines under the Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885. The reference was received by the Commission on
07th July, 2022.
(r) Jadgment of the Karnotaka High Court
1.6 With regard to the intetpretation of 'damage' under Section 10 of the
1885 Act, the Karnataka High Court, in The Chief Engineer, Electricity
Transmission Zone v. Gangappa,2 observed that damage caused to the
land as a result of installation of towers and transmission lines needs to be
2
2 Writ Petition No. I 1326812019 (GM-RES).
q\,,,

given full and wide affect as the damage could be immediate/present or in
the future. It further held that:
"Admittedly, there are wqrning signs put up that nobody can
cultivate anything under the tower or neqr abouts. This court can
also take judicial notice of the fact that whenever there are
petitions which are filed seeking for compensation on account of
destruction of the crop due to the transmission line falting into thZ
agricultural fields, many a times the defence taien ii that the
farmer ought not to have cultivated under the power lines. such
being the case, the authorities cannot be allowei to trk, advantage
in both these situations."
1.7 On enquiry as to whether the authorities had carried out any such study
and come up with the formula to be adopted for determination of
compensation for damages with regard to the erection of towers and
laying down of transmission lines, the Court noted the submission of the
petitioners that:
"...there was no such formula which the authorities had aruived at
nor any study caused or conducted ... as regards diminution on
account of a tower or drawing up of the power lines.
1.8 Whenever there is a tower sought to be established and transmission lines
drawn, the concerned offrcers visit the land, negotiate with the land
owner and fix an amount as compensation for damages. The Karnataka
High Court noted that:
"14 .... in sofor as the land of the petitioner in the present village is
concerned an amount of Rs. 1,50,000/ has been considered towards
the installation of the tower and depending on the extent of land,
loss of diminution has beenfixed... In respect of other lands, higher
amounts have been fixed for the same extent of land. For example,
in Chitradurga district and Tumkur district a sum of Rs 3,00,000/-
has been fixed for "C" type tower and in the Ramanagqr district a
sum of Rs 3,600/ per square meter has been fixed and in Hassan
district, a sum of Rs. 5,50,000/- has beenfixed."
I
J
eh/

1.9 Now, as per the judgment of the Hon'ble Karnataka High court, it
appears as if the case dealt with compensation in the context of laying of
electricity transmission lines. However, the provisions of the Electricity
Act, 2003 and the corresponding rules have not been brought to the
attention of the Court and the entire case has been argued around only the
provisions of the Telegraph Act.
1.10 In order to remove any ambiguities and for the sake of clarity and
convenience, the Commission decided that methodologies, if dfly,
existing within both the sectors, electricity and telecommunication, be
discussed separately so as to enable the common reader an opportunity to
understand the intricacies of both.
(B) CoNsurrArroNs
1.11 Pursuant to the same, the Commission held consultations with entities
involved in the electricity sector, namely, the Ministry of power,
Government of India, the Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, the
Central Electricity Authority, the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission, and the Central Transmission Utility of India Limited.
Likewise, with regard to the telecommunication sector, the Commission
held consultations with the Department of Telecommunication,
Government of India.
(C) Tnr SrnucruRn oF rHrs Rrponr
l.l2 The Report proceeds as follows: firstly, a background relating to the issue
of compensation under both the 2003 Act and the 1885 Act is provided.
Secondly, the relevant provisions of the 1885 Act are discussed since they
are common to both the sectors (Part III of the 1885 Act applies to the
electricity sector). Thirdly, the relevant rules pertaining to compensation
4
h/

with regard to telecommunication are discussed. Fourthly, the relevant
provisions of the 2003 Act and the corresponding rules and guidelines are
discussed in the context of compensation to be paid in the power sector.
Fifthly, certain principles of compensation are laid out. And lastly, the
recofllmendations of the Commission are placed.
5
a/

2. BACKGROUND
2.1 The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 was enacted when the role of the State
was very different than it is now. The State, which today espouses notions
of welfare of its people at the centre of its policy making, was at that time
merely interested in advancing its own colonial interests. Given India's
size and the difficulties that arose in its administration, the British
realised that an efficient telegraph network was a sine qua non for the
able administration of the country. To give effect to the same, the 1885
Act was enacted which empowered the Telegraph Authority to set up
infrastructure relating to telegraphs on both public as well as private
property.
2.2 Over time, the 1885 Act has undergone several amendments to
accommodate advancements in communication technologies. This is
evident in the current definition of 'telegraph'as stated in the 1885 Act,
which reads:
"any appliance, instrument, material or apparatus used or capable
of use for transmission or reception of signs, signals, writing,
images and sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire, visual or
other electro-magnetic emissions, Radio waves or Hertzian waves,
galvanic, electric or magnetic means.
Explanation - "Radio waves" or "Hertzian waves" means electro-
magnetic waves of frequencies lower than 3,000 giga-cycles per
second propagated in space without artificial guide."
2.3 The 1885 Act grants the Central Government the exclusive privilege for
the purpose of setting up telegraphic infrastructure.3 It also provides that
the Central Government may grant licences for doing so. Further, it also
empowers the Central Government to delegate to the Telegraph
6
3 Indian Telegraph Act, I 885, Section 4( 1).

Authority, all or any of its powers, through a notification in the official
gazette.a
2'4 The Telegraph Authority may enter into public and private premises
causing as little damage as possible.s The 1885 Act envisages that in the
context of properties vested in or under the control of a local authority,
the powers will not be exercised without the permission of the authority.6
Further, in the case of private properties, the 1885 Act stipulates that full
compensation will be paid to all persons interested for any damage
sustained by them.7 The amount of compensation has to be paid by the
Telegraph Authority and in case there is any dispute regarding its
sufficiency or the proportion in which it may be divided amongst
interested persons, the decision of the District Judge shall be final.8
2.5 In the domain of electricity, the Electricity Act,2003 holds the field. The
Act was enacted in 2003 and repealed three laws, the Indian Electricity
AcL 1910, the Electricity Supply Act, 1948, and the Electricity
Regulatory Commission Act, 1998. The 2003 Act governs the activities
relating to generation, transmission, distribution, trading and use of
electricity in India. Before the 2003 Act entered into force, the activities
of generation and distribution were state-owned. One of the k"y
objectives of the 2003 Act was promoting competition within its
framework allowing private sector participation in power generation,
supply and distribution of electricity in India.
2.6 Part VIII of the 2003 Act deals with the subject of 'Works.' Under Part
VIII, Section 67 relates to 'works of licensees' which, inter alia, deals
a ld, Section4(2).
5 1d, Section l0 proviso (d).
6 1d Section l0 proviso (c).
7 Id, Section l0 proviso (d).
8 1d Section l6(3) and l6(a).
7
V

with issues relating to the determination and compensation to persons
affected by the carrying out of 'Works'. Section 68 which deals with
overhead lines, provides, inter alio,that in case of any tree or any other
structure that has to be removed for the purpose of laying down a line,
compensation will have to be paid to the affected person(s).
2.7 Further, Section 164 of the zo03 Act empowers the ,Appropriate
Government' to confer upon any public officer, licensee or any other
person engaged in the supplying of electricily, any of the powers which
the Telegraph Authority possesses under the 1885 Act with respect to the
placing of telegraph lines and posts for the purposes of a telegraph
established or maintained, by the Government or to be so established or
maintained.
2.8 Both the Acts therefore have provisions dealing with the aspect of
compensation. However, neither of them has laid down any clear-cut
methodology of determining compensation and in the absence of a clearly
spelt out mechanism, there may arise a possibility where there is variance
in compensation.
8
q\/

3 RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE INDIAN TELEGRAPH ACT,
1885
3.1 Section 4 states that:
"Exclusive privtlege in respect of telegraphs, and power to grant
Itcenses. 
- 1) Within India, the Central Government shall have
the exclusive privilege of establishing, maintaining and working
telegraphs:
Provided that the Central Government may grant a license, on
such conditions and in consideration of such payments as it thinks
fit, to any person to establish, maintain or work a telegraph within
any part of India:
[Providedfurther thot the Central Government moy, by rules made
under this Act and published in the official Gazette, permit, subject
to such restrictions and conditions qs it thinks fit, the
establishment, maintenanc e and working-
(a) of wireless telegraphs on ships within Indiqn territorial waters
[and on aircraft within or above India, or Indian territorial
watersJ, and
(b) of telegraphs other than wireless telegraphs within any part of
India.J ...
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, delegate to the telegraph authority all or any of its powers
under the first proviso to sub-section (1) The exercise by the
telegraph authoriQ of any power so delegated shall be subject to
such restrictions and conditions as the Central Government may,
by the notification, thinkfit to impose."
3.2 Section 10 states that:
"Power for telegruph outhority to place and maintuin telegraph
lines and posts - The telegraph authority may, from time to time,
place and maintain a telegraph line under, over, along, or across,
and posts in or upon any immovable property:
Provided that
4...
b. the (Central Government) shall not acquire any right other than
that of user only in the properQ under, over, along, ocross in or
9

upon which the telegraph authority places any telegraph line orpost,'and
c. except as hereinafter provided, the telegraph authority shall not
exercise those powers in respect of any property vested in or under
the context or management of any local authority, without the
permission of that authority,. and
d. in the exercise of the powers conferred by this section, the
telegraph authority shall do as little damage as possible, qnd when
it has exercised those powers in respect of any property other than
that referred to in clause (c), shall pay full compensotion to all
persons interested for any damage sustained by them by reason of
the exercise of those powers. " (Emphasis added)
3.3 Section 16 states that:
"Exerctse of powers conferred by section 10, and disputes as to
compensution, tn case of property other thun that of a land
authority -
(1)....
(2) ..
(3) If any dispute arises concerning the sfficiency of the
compensation to be paid under section 10, clause (d), it shall on
application for the purpose by either of the disputing parties to the
District Judge within whose jurtsdiction the property is situate, be
determined by him.
(4) If any dispute arises as to the persons entitled to receive
compensation, or as to the proportion in which the persons
tnterested are entitled to share in it, the telegraph authority may
pay into the Court of the District Judge such amount as he deems
sfficient o/, where all the disputing parties have in writing
admitted the amount tendered to be sfficient or the amount has
been determtned under sub-section (3), that amount,. and the
District Judge, after giving notice to the parties ond hearing such
of them as desire to be heard, shall determine the persons entitled
to receive the compensation or, qs the case may be, the
proportions in which the persons interested are entitled to shure
in it,
(5) Every determination of a dispute by a District Judge under sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4) shall befinal:
10
e-/

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the righr ofony person to recover by suit the whole or ony part of any
compensation poid by the telegraph authority, from the jerson
who hus received the same. " (Emphasis added) 
-
3.4 Section l7 reads as:
"Removol or alteration of tetegraph line or post on properry other
thun that of a local authority. -(t)
Provided that, if compensotion has been paid under section 10,
clause (d), he shall, when making the requisition, tender to the
telegraph authority the amount requisite to d"froy the expense ofthe removal or alteration, or half of the amount -paid it
compensation, whichever may be the smaller sum.
(2) If the telegraph authorie omits to comply with the requisition,
the person making it may apply to the District Magistrate within
whose jurisdiction the property is situate to order the removal or
alteration.
(3) A District Magistrate receiving an application under sub-
section (2) may, in his discretion, reject the same or make an
order, absolutely or subject to conditions, for the removal of the
telegraph line or post to any other part of the property or to a
higher or lower level or for the alteration of its.form,. and the order
so made shall befinal."
3.5 Section l8 states that:
"Removol of trees interrupting telegraphic communication -
(l) tf any tree standing or lying near a telegraph line interrupts, or
is likely to interrupt, telegraphic communication, a Magistrate of
the first or second class mey, on the application of the telegraph
authority, cause the tree to be removed or dealt with in such other
wqy as he deems fit.(2) When disposing of an application under sub-section (l), the
Magistrate shall, in the case of ony tree in existence before the
telegraph line was placed, uward to the persons interested in the
tree such compensqtion us he thinks reasonable, and the award
shall beJinal. " (Emphasis added)
3.6 Section l9B reads as:
"Power to confer upon licensee powers of telegraph authority
under this Part. 
-
l1

The central Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, confer upon any licensee under section 4, in - respLct ofthe extent of his license and subject to qny conditiois and
restrictions which the Central Government may think fit to impose
and to the provisions of this part, all or any of the powers which
the telegraph authority possesses under this part wilh regard to a
telegraph established or maintained by the Government or to be so
established or maintained... "
12

4. SCHEME OF COMPENSATION UNDER THE
TELECOMMUNICATION SECTOR
4.1 The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 was originally enacted for the purpose of
laying telegraphic communication lines. over time, all softs of
telecommunication have been included within the ambit of the 1885 Act.
4.2 The issue of compensation with regard to telecommunication is jointly
addressed by the 1885 Act and the Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules,
2016. The relevant provisions of the Telegraph Act have been stated
before and need not be reiterated here.
4.3 If there is any damage to the owner's property because of the exercise of
authority by the licensee or its employees, the land owner can demand or
ask for compensation in accordance with law. The 1885 Act makes
alrangement for the way in which the quantum of compensation is to be
considered. Section 10 of the Act permits the authority to place and
maintain a telegraph line under, over, along or across, or posts in or upon
any immovable property. Clause (b) of the proviso to Section 10 of the
1885 Act makes it very much clear that at the time of laying down
telegraph lines, the Central Government does not get any right over the
land other than that of user in the property. In addition, clause (d) of the
provtso to Section 10 of the 1885 Act requires the telegraph authority to
bring about minimum damage to the property and that the telegraph
authority shall pay full compensation to all persons for damage suffered
because of the exercise of those powers.e
ePower Grid Corporation of India Limited v. Century Textiles and Industries Limited and Others, (2017) 5 SCC
t43
13
eY/

4.4 An aspectthat needs to be taken into account is that telecommunication
authorities themselves are not involved directly in infrastructure
development. Post the emergence of private players in the field,
infrastructure development has steadily become a private exercise.
However, at the same time, all the powers of a Telegraph Authority have
not been given to these private entities. This is discussed in greater detail
in the following section.
(A) THn INnraN Trcr,ncnlpH RrcHT oF WAy Rulns, 2016
4.5 The 2016 Rules have been enacted in pursuance of the rule making power
given under Section 7 of the 1885 Act. The Rules have been amended
from time to time with the latest amendments comin g in 2022.
4.6 Within the 2016 Rules, Chapter I provides definitions for key terms used
throughout the Rules and the applicability of the 2016 Rules. Chapter II
pertains to establishment and maintenance of underground telegraph
infrastructure, while Chapter III deals with the establishment of
overground telegraph infrastructure. Chapter IV lays down the right of the
appropriate authority to seek removal of underground or overground
telegraph infrastructure. Chapter V stipulates the procedure to be
followed for resolving disputes between the licensee and the appropriate
authority. Further, the Schedule appended at the end specifies the
quantum of compensation that will have to be paid in accordance with the
2016 Rules.
a) Underground Infrastructure
4.7 The2016 Rules defines underground infrastructure as
"underground telegraph infrastructure means a telegraph line laid
under the ground and includes manholes, marker stones,
t4
W

appliances and apparatus for the purposes of establishment or
maintenance of the telegraph line."t0
4.8 With regard to underground infrastructure, the 2016 Rules envisage the
usage of property vested in or under the control or management of any
appropriate authority only and not under the control or management of
any private person/entity/body.
4.9 Appropriate authority has been defined as:
"appropriate authority means the Central Government, respective
state Governments, local authorie or such authority, body,
company or institution incorporated or established by the Central
Government or the state Government, in respect of property,
under, over, along, across, in or upon which underground or
overground telegraph infrastructure, ,s to be established or
maintained, vested in, or under, the control or management of such
appropriate authority ; " r t
4.10 Rule 6(1B) provides:
"The appropriate authorie shall be entitled to receive such
compensation .fro* the licensee, not exceeding the omount
specified in Part-III of the Schedule, for the use of the property
under which the underground telegraph infrastructure is proposed
to be established, os may be determined by the appropriate
authority"
4.lI Rule 6(4) reads as
"The appropriate authoriQ shall not charge any -fru and
compensation other than those prescribed under sub-rule (3) of
rule 5, sub-rule (18) and clause (") of sub-rule (2) from the
licensee for establishing, maintaining, working, repairing,
transferring or shifting underground te\egraph infrastructure. "
r0 Rule 2, The Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016.
tt lbid.
l5
q"/

b) Overground Infrastructure
4.12 Overground infrastructure has been defined as follows in the 2}l6Rules:
"overground telegraph infrastructure means a telegraph or a
telegraph line established over the ground and incluies posts or
other above ground contrivances, appliances and apparatis for the
purpose of establishment or maintenance of the telegraph or the
telegraph line. "r2
4.13 With regard to overground infrastructure, the 2016 Rules envisage the
usage of property vested in or under the control or management of any
appropriate authority and also under the control or management of any
private person/entity/body.
4.14 However, there are differences in the relationship between a licensee
and the Appropriate Authority and a licensee and private
persons/bodies/entities.
4.15 The conditions of the license are such that while with respect to the
former, a licensee is deemed to be a Telegraph Authority, with respect to
the latter, a licensee is simply a private entity and as such, within the
framework of the 2016 Rules, does not enjoy the powers endowed on a
Telegraph Authority. Any issue concerning compensation payable to a
private person/body/entity is simply a transaction between two
private persons/bodies/entities.
4.16 The various rules dealing with the issue of compensation payable to the
various persons/bodies with regard to Overground Infrastructure are
reproduced below.
4.17 Rule 10(2):
"V[here the establishment of the overground telegraph
infrastructure renders the immoveable property, vested in the
t2 lbid.
t6

control or management of any appropriate authorie over which
such overground telegraph infrastructure is established, unlikely to
be used for any other purpose, the appropriate authorie shal"l be
entitled to compensation for the value of the immoveable property,
either once or annually, assessed on such rates as that appripriate
authority may, by general order, spectfy.
Provided that the compensation payable for the immovable
property for the establishment of poles for installation of small
cells and telegraph line shall not exceed the amount ,p"irp"d r,
Part-III of the Schedule. "
4.18 Rule l0(4):
4.19 Rule 10B:
"Tlte appropriate authority shall be entitled to receive such
compensation .fro* the licensee, not exceeding the amount
specified in Part-Lil of the Schedule, for use of street furniture forinstallation of small cells and telegraph line, qs may be determined
by the appropriate authority. "
"Establtshment of telegruph infrastructure over private property.
- were the licensee proposes the establishment of overground
telegraph infrastructure over any private property, the licensee
shall not require any permission from the appropriate authorie:
Provided that in case of establishment of mobile tower or pole over
a private building or structure, the licensee shall submit an
intimation, in writing, to the appropriote authority, prior to
c ommencement of such es tablishment.
Provided further that along with the intimqtion, he shall also
submit the details of the building or structure, where the
establishment of mobile tower or pole is proposed, and a copy of
certification by a structural engineer, authorised by the
appropriate authority, attesting to the structural safety of the
building or structure, where the mobile tower or pole is proposed
to be estqblished. "
4.20 Rule 10A states that:
*Usage of street furniture for installation of small cells and
telegraph line -
( 1) ....
(2) ....
t7
q",

(3)....
@) the appropriate authority shall be entitled to receive such
compensation from the licensee, not exceeding the amount
specified in Part-III of the Schedule, for use of street furniture forinstallatton of small cells and telegraph line, as may be
determined by the appropriate authority." (Emphasis added)
4.21 Further, it is to be noted that the 2016 Rules provides the following table
in its Scheduler3 with regard to compensation:
t3The Indian Telegraph Right of l(ay Rules, 2016 as amended by (Amendment Rules) 2022, Schedule, part
III Compensation.
Part-I[ Com nsation
6(1B) Establishment of
underground telegraph
infrastructure
Nil
I 0(2) Establishment of poles
for installation of small
cells and telegraph line
Nil
l0A(4) Usage of street furniture
for installation of small
cells and telegraph line
(i) For installation of
small cells: Three
hundred rupees per
annum for urban area
and one hundred and
fifty rupees per annum
for rural area per street
furniture
(ii) For installation of
telegraph line: One
hundred rupees per
per streetannum
furniture
18
&,/

5. COMPENSATION UNDER THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR
5.1 rhere are three primary segments in the electricity sector: generation,
transmission and distribution. Generation is the process of producing
power using different fuels and is carried out in generating stations
(generation plants). Transmission utilities carry bulk power at high
voltages from the generation plants to the distribution substations through
a grid. Distribution utilities supply electricity from the substations to
individual consumers through a distribution network. Distribution is the
retail stage and operates at lower voltages.
5.2 The issue of compensation with regard to the installation of towers and
transmission lines primarily deals with the transmission aspect of
electricity. Transmission is carried out primarily by central and state
companies and largely remains a government-controlled activity. The
transmission segment was separated from the central generation agency
in 1989 and Power Grid Corporation of India Limited was set up. pGCIL
is responsible for the planning, implementation, operation and
maintenance of inter-state transmission system, and the operation of
national and regional power grids. The National Load Despatch Centre
(NLDC) manages the scheduling and dispatch of electricity over inter-
regional links in accordance with grid standards, and monitors the
national transmission grid. It is also the nodal agency providing
transmission access to the power exchanges. The Regional Load
Despatch Centres (RLDCs) manage the operation of the power system
grid in the respective regions.
Figure I shows the overall structure of the power sector5.3
t9

lc
Ertsrgy
Sourccr
-_--}
Generation
plants
cqst
charges
Generatoo + Trafismisgron +
disffiution O&M costs +
dspr€ciaoon + taxss
-+ Transmirssionutititbs
-----> uftities
+ttPrhrer
Pqrchase
Transmission
I
Oistribution
I I
Small consumers Eulk co.lsumers
Chargss/ TsirT _ _ _ -_ _- - _ _ ;
Flou, of energy, posr€r
5.4 Electricity towers are usually installed at the intervals of about 400 mts.
and conductors are strung on these towers maintaining a safe height
depending on the voltage and other geographical parameters. There are
two kinds of areas i.e.:
(i) Tower base area (tower footing) i.e., land underneath tower
base permanently fixed to earth. This area between the four
legs of the tower is normally lost or loses its productivity
due to severe restrictions on access and it may not be fully
utilized for intended purpose by the randowner. A payment
of full value of land of the tower base area may be justified
against the background of severe restrictions put in by
placing tower which heavily impair the productivity and the
use of land area falling below tower base. Damages are
payable only for transmission lines supported by a tower
base of 66 KV and above, and not for sub-transmission and
distribution lines below 66 KV.
(ii) Right of way (Line corridor) i.e., corridor of land
underneath the conductor strung on the two towers. The
maximum width of the Right of way is calculated on the
20
-

basis of tower design, span, wind speed, maximum sag of
conductor and its swing plus other requirements. This area of
the land in a Right of Way Corridor depends on the type of
land viz. agriculture, residential and industrial etc. In case of
agricultural land, it would be possible to utilize the land for
agriculture, however, it may have restriction for placing tall
trees, pump house and future prospects. In case of residential
and commercial lands, there may be severe restrictions to
meet the safety guidelines. Once a transmission line is
drawn across the land, there are number of restrictions in the
corridor and additionally the land around would lose its
value.
5.5 There are two aspects which need to be considered on account of the
erection of towers and setting up of power lines. First, such activities,
particularly because of constraints on lands with transmission wires
running through it, may have detrimental result on cultivation and
effective use of land to the extent that land would not be able to be
cultivated. Second, the telegraph authority may at any time enter into the
land of any individual and erect towers and set up transmission lines on
the properry of that individual. By virtue of Section 12 of the 1885 Act, an
approval is to be obtained in case of land belonging to local authorities,
while no such permission, on the other hand, is needed in the case of a
property belonging to a private person. In such an event, a land owner
cannot be deprived of compensation on the ground that the authority is
entitled to install towers and transmission lines for the supply of the
service in the public interest.
(A) Tnn Er,EcrRrcrry Act,2003 (36 or 2003)
2t
Cr/

5.6 Section 164 states that
"Exercise of powers of Telegraph Authority in certuin coses:
The Appropriate Government, may, by order in writing, for the
placing of electric lines or electrical plant for the transmission
of electricity or for the purpose of telephonic or telegraphic
communication, necessary for the proper coordination of
works, confer upon any public fficer, licensee or any other
person engaged in the business of supplying electricity under
this Act, subject to suclt conditions, and restrictions, if any, as
the Appropriate Government may thinkfit to impose and to the
provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act, I885 (l 3 of 1885), any
of the powers which the telegraph authority possesses under
that Act with respect to the placing of telegraph lines and posts
for the purposes of a telegraph established or maintained, by
the Government or to be so established or maintained. "
5.7 Section 38 states that:
"Central Trsnsmission Utility and functions: ---- (l) The Central
Government may notifu any Government company as the Central
Transmission Utility:
Provided that the Central Transmission Utility shall not engage in
the business of generation of electricity or trading in electricity:
Provided further that the Central Government may transfer, and
vest any property, interest in property, rights and liabilities
connected with, and personnel involved in transmission of
electricity of such Central Transmission Utility, to a company or
companies to be incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 to
function as a transmission licensee, through a transfer scheme to
be effected in tlte manner specified under Part XIII and such
company or companies shall be deemed to be transmission
licensees under this Act. ... "
5.8 In pursuance of the power vested on it by Section 38, through notification
dated 24th December 2003, Power Grid Corporation of India Limited was
notified as the Central Transmission Utility. Ministry of Power,
Government of India, vide Gazette Notification dated 09ft March,202l,
notified Central Transmission Utility of India Limited, a wholly owned
subsidiary of PGCIL as the Central Transmission Utility. Under Section
22

14 of the Electricity Act, 2003, a Central Transmission Utility is a
deemed licensee under the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and is therefore,
vested with all the powers of a Telegraph authority as per Section 164.
5.9 Section 67, under Part VIII of the Act, lays down provisions dealing with
'Works'. Section 67, inter alia, stiptlates that a licensee may lay down
and place electric lines, electrical plant and other works,ra cause as little
damage, detriment and inconvenience as may be, and shall make full
compensation for any damage, detriment or inconvenience caused by him
or by any one employed by him.rs It further provides that the Appropriate
Government ffiily, by rules made by it in this behalf, specify the
determination and payment of compensation or rent to the persons
affected by works,16 and where any difference or dispute fincluding
amount of compensation under sub-section (3)] arises, the matter shall be
determined by the Appropriate Commission.lT The Appropriate
Commission is also empowered to impose a penalty not exceeding the
amount of compensation payable while determining any difference or
dispute arising under this section in addition to any compensation under
sub-section (3)."
5.10 Section 68 lays down provisions relating to overhead lines, and it says
that, inter alia, where any tree or structure standing or lying near an
overhead line, intemrpts or interferes with or is likely to intemrpt or
interfere with the conveyance or transmission of electricity or
accessibility of any works, the same may be ordered to be removed by an
authority appointed in this regard by the Appropriate Government.le It
14 Electricity Act, 2003, Section 67(lXd)
ts 1d, Section 67(3).
16 1d, Section 67 (2)(e).
t7 Id, Sectior, 6T(4).
r8 14 Section 67(5).
'e.Id, Section 68(5).
23

fuither provides that compensation will be paid by the licensee where
such tree or structure is ordered to be removed.
(B) Tnr Wonxs or LTcBNsEE Rurns, 200620
5.11 The 2006 Rules were enacted through the power given to the Central
Government under Section 176(2)(e) read with Section 67(2)(e) of the
Electricity Act, 2003.
5.12 Rule 3 states that:
"Licensee to curry out works: ...
6. Wile making an order under sub-rule (l), the District
Magistrate or the Commissioner of Police or the fficer so
authorised, as the case may be, shall fix, after considering the
representation of the concerned persons, ,f ony, tlte amount of
compensation or of annual rent, or of both, which should in his
opinion be paid by the licensee to the owner or occupier."
(Emphasis added)
7. Every order made by q District Magistrate or a
Commissioner of Police or an authorised fficer under sub-rule (I)
shall be subject to revision by the Appropriate Commission.
8. Nothing contained in this rule shall effect the powers
conferred upon any licensee under section I 64 of the Act. "
5.13 If a licensee is vested with powers under Section 164 of the Electricity
Acq 2003, Rule 3 of the Works of Licensees rules shall not apply and the
licensee will be governed by the provisions of the Telegraph Act, 1885.
5.14 Rule 13 states that:
"Determinstion and payment of compensation to affected
persons. -
(I) Were the licensee makes default in complying with any of
these rules, they shall muke full compensution for any loss or
20 Ministry of Power, Government of India, Notification G.S.R. 217(E), dated the l8th April 2006.
24
A\,/

damage to incurred reason thereof to the person affected, as may
be determined by the District Magistrate by any other fficer
authorised by the State Government in this behalf ,f not agreed
mutually between the parties concerned.
(2) Where any dffirence und dispute arise as to the amount of
compensation determined under sub-rule (I), the mutter shall be
determined by the Appropriate commission." (Emphasis added)
5.15 Rule 14 states that
"Procedure for deposit of compensstton payable by the licensee
and furnishing of security-
(1) The amount of compensation payable by the licensee under
those rules shall be deposited by means of demand draft."
(C) 2015 Guronr-rNr,s
5.16 In the absence of a clear definition of the term "damage" and any
guideline in this regard, the Ministry of Power, the Government of India,
considered the question of compensation toward damage during
installation of tower base and laying down of transmission lines under
Sections 67 and 68 of The Electricity Act, 2003 read with Sections 10 and
16 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. A Committee was constituted by
the Ministry, to analyse issues related to the Right of Way for laying
transmission line in the country and to suggest uniform methodology for
payment of compensation.
5.17 The Ministry of Power Notification of 2015 recommended the following
guidelines for determining compensation toward damages:2l
(i) Compensation @ S5% of land value as determined by District
Magistrate, or any other authority based on Circle ratelGuideline
2r Ministry of Power, Government of India, Guidelines for Payment of Compensation towards Damages in
regards to Right of Way for Transmission Zines, No. 31712015 -Trans, l5 October 2015.
25 q,/

valueiStamp Act rates for tower base area (between four legs)
impacted severely due to installation of tower/pylon structure;
(ii) Compensation towards diminution of land value in the width of
RoW corridor due to laying of transmission line and imposing
certain restriction would be decided by states as per categorization
of land in different places of states, subject to a maximum of 15%
of land value as determined based on Circle ratelGuideline
value/Stamp Act rates;
(iii) In areas where landowner/owners have been offered/accepted
alternate mode of compensation by concerned
corporation/Municipality under Transfer Development Right
(TDR) policy of State, the licensee/utility shall deposit
compensation amount as per (i) & (ii) above with the concemed
corporation/Munici pality lLocal B ody or the State Government;
(iv) For this pulpose, the width of RoW Corridor shall not be more than
that prescribed in para. 1.3 (of the Report of the Committee for
Payment of Compensation in Regard to the Right of Way for
Transmission Lines) and shall not be less than the width directly
below the conductors.
The above compensation was proposed by the Committee in addition to
damage towards normal crop and tree damage.
5.18 Since land remains a state subj ect, a number of states have come out with
notifications/circulars where the methodology proposed is at a variance
with the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Power. For example, the
Maharashtra Electric Work of Licensee Rules, 2012 provides that
collector has to settle amount of compensation to be paid by licensees to
the land owner. An authority has been given to the State Electricity
26
@,/

Regulatory Commission to revise the order of the Collector in case of
representation made to it by an aggrieved party. But the
landowners/farmers demand exorbitant compensation than fixed through
the Government orders in Maharashtra.
5.19 On the question of payment of land compensation in respect of
transmission line work in various districts in the State of Karnataka, a
corporate circular of the Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation
Limited has approved compensation with respect to tower foot area and
line corridor Area as per the guidelines of the Ministry of Power,
Government of India, to be followed for estimation of land compensation
as under:
I Compensation for
Tower Foot Area
At85% of the aYerage
guidance value of land
required for various
towers in its selected
route.
2 Compensation for Line
Corridor Area
At lsoh of the average
guidance value of the
corridor land required
(excluding tower foot
area in the selected
routes)
In this regard, the surveying agency shall be directed to submit an
estimation of land compensation based on the above guidelines, duly
preparing cadastral mapping of the selected route, for assessment of and,
tree and crop compensation. The survey response shall clearly indicate
the extent of the corridor, land, survey numbers, the village through
27

which the corridor is passing through and the corresponding average
guidance value of the land as notified by the Government of Karnataka.22
5.20 While the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Jharkhand, Kamataka, Madhya Pradesh and Manipur have followed the
guidelines issued by the Central Government, the land compensation and
the Right of Way Corridor compensation largely differ in other states like
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Odisha, Tamil Nadu,
Uttarakhand, and Uttar Pradesh, where the rate of compensation has been
determined either as higher or lower than that of the Central Government
guidelines as under:
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh Tower base @ 85Yo and
Line Corridor Area - Nil
Sikkim Tower base @ 85o/o and
Line Corridor Area @ 15%
applicable only to comprehensive
schemes and allied centrally funded
projects implemented by the state
department of Energy & Power
Haryana, Mizoram Tower base @ l00Yo and
Line Corridor Area - Nil
Andhra Pradesh Tower base @ l00o/o and
Line Corridor Area @ l0%
22 Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited, Circular KPTCL/SAB/87/19105/15-16, dated the 23rd
of January 2019; Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited, Order No. KPTCL/SAB/87/19/05/15-16,
Bengaluru, dated the 25th May 2018.
28 V

Odisha, Meghalaya Tower base - (maximum Rs
50,000/-) and
Line Corridor Area @15%
Tamil Nadu Tower base @85o/o and
Line Corridor Area @ 20%
5.21 In Maharashtra, the compensation for the tower base is @ two times
(200%); for Line Corridor tip to tip @ 30% (lsoh +15%) of the ready
reckoner or the average rate of land sell purchase in the last three years. It
also includes additional compensation for urban areas for the entire state
of Maharashtra. In Goa, the compensation for tower base is two times
(200%) of the ready reckoner rate. In Kerala, the provision for land
compensation is similar to the Central Government guidelines for
Egmore-Kochi line. But the provision is different in Kerala for 320 KV
Pugalur - Thrissur HVDC line. There is special compensation package for
the Pugalur - Thrissur HVDC line for tower base @ 100% of five times of
the fair value as determined by the District Collector (85% to be paid by
PGCIL and rest by the KSEB), while the Right of Way Corridor (tip to
tip) provision for ex gratia payment @ 40% of fair value has been made
in addition to displacement allowance. Its displacement amount and ex
gratia shall not exceed five times of the fair value of land as determined
by the Collector.
5.22 The classification of land in Maharashtra used by the transmission tower
(by not acquiring the land in Maharashtra) on the basis of the prevailing
market rate of the land is as follows:
(a) Non - cultivable agricultural land - 25%
(b) Cultivable agricultural land - 50o/o
29

(c) Fruit bearing agricultural land - 60%
(d) Non-agricultural bend - 65%
Additional compensation to landowner for damages to land during
stringing may be considered along with different rates for trees with 10%
ex gratia.
(D) 2020 UnrlN RoW Guronr,rNns
5.23 Subsequently, another Committee was constituted by the Ministry of
Power, the Government of India, vide Office Memorandum No.31412016
- Trans, dated the 1lth August 2016, to review and analyse the existing
procedure for compensation and suggest possible modifications. Having
noted that the 2015 Guidelines of the Ministry of Power, Government of
India, were yet to be adopted by most of the states, the compensation in
regard to the Right of Way for transmission lines in urban areas were
recommended in2020 as under:
b) Additional compensation in form of Non-Usability allowance up
to I50% of the land value for the width of RoW Corridor would be
applicable in the notified urban areas. No construction activity of
any kind would be permitted under the RoW of the transmission
lines.
c) For the purpose of this guidelines, the definition of Urban areas
is as below:
All places in a municipali\, corporation, cantonment board or
notified area committee etc.
d) the payment towards compensation for RoW in urban qreas
would be one time / upfront. In case of any other arrangement for
payment of compensation, the, same needs to be notified it by
individual states." 23
23 Ministry of Power, Government of lndia, Report of the Committee for Finalization of Compensation in regard
to Right o.f Way (RoW) for Transmission Lines in Urban Areas, p.1197,308134/2019/Office of Bihari Lal.
30
V

6. DIFFERENT APPROACHES UNDER DIFFERENT STATUTES
6.1 The Power Grid Corporation of India Limited and thereafter, the Central
Transmission Utility of India Limited, were notified as the Central
Transmission Utilify under the Electricity Act, 2003 vide the notifications
issued by the Ministry of Power, Government of India, dated 24th
December,2003 and 09th March, 2021, respectively. As a consequence of
the Central Transmission Utilify being a deemed licensee under the 2003
Act,2a PGCIL and CTUIL have been vested with powers of the telegraph
authority under the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. What needs to be noted
therefore is that while provisions exist in the Electricity Act, 2003
concerning compensation, the provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885 also need to be taken into consideration while determining the
quantum of compensation.
6.2 On the other hand, in case of telecommunication infrastructure and
apparatus, it is solely the provisions of the Telegraph Act that come into
p1ay.
6.3 As per the Electricity Act, the quantum of compensation for damages on
account of high electrical voltagelextra high voltage transmission lines
may be much higher than that of damages in a telegraph transmission
towers and for laying down the telegraph transmission lines in the Right
of Way Corridor. Other licensees like the private developers engaged in
power transmission have also been vested with such powers and are to
comply with the guidelines.
6.4 With regard to the payment of compensation for damages, the procedures
are different under the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Indian Telegraph
24 The Electricity Act, 2003, Section 14.
3l

Act, 1885. The District Magistrate or the Commissioner of Police or the
officer so authorized, have been empowered under the Works of Licenses
Rules, 2006 of the Electricity Act, 2003 to determine the amount of
compensation to be paid by the licensee to the land owner, subject to
revision by the Appropriate Commission.
6.5 Conversely, it is the telegraph authority under the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885, which is stipulated to pay compensation to the land owner and if
there is any dispute regarding the adequacy of compensation, it is to be
decided by the District Judge.
6.6 Further, taking into account the Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules,
2076, it is clear that a licensee cannot exercise powers vested with a
Telegraph Authority with regard to private properties. The privatisation of
the domain of telecommunication has meant that it is majorly private
entities which are operating. In such a scenario, the Government has
deemed it fit that all matters pertaining to private properties be settled
between the private entities in the telecommunication sector and the
owners of the properties themselves, without any intervention from the
government.
32
@,/

7. RELEVANT JUDICIAL DBCISIONS
7.1 It was stated by the Hon'ble Karnataka High Court in Powergrid
Corporation of India Ltd. v. Devendrappa2s that:
"15 A presumption has to be drawn that the lands of all
farmers... where the towers and high-tension wires were erected
would be of non-agricultural potential values i.e., commercial
value ond once the towers and high-tension wires werefixed on the
lands..., forever the value of the lands... will be diminished,
thereby the right to life, which is guaranteed by Article 2 t of the
Constitution of India, includes right to livelihood, wtll be affected,
since, they will be deprived of their livelihood in view of the
erection of towers and high-tension wires over the lands... and
without paying any compensation for diminishing value of the
land.... such deprivation would not only denude the life of its
effective content and meaningfulness but, it would make life
impossible to live."
7.2 ln Kerala State Electricity Board v. Livisha qnd Others,26 the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India had observed that:
"9. Both telegraph lines and electric lines are required to be
drawn over the agricultural land and other properties belonging to
third parties. In drowing such lines, the entire land cannot be
acquired but the ffict thereof would be diminution of value of the
property over which such lines is drawn. "
7.3 The Hon'ble Supreme Court held in Kerala State Electricity Board v.
Livisha and Others2T that:
"The amount of compensation is required to be determined keeptng
in view the purpose and object of the statute. There cannot be any
fixed formula therefor or the other. Although undoubtedly one
formula laid down may assist the Board and/or the Reference
Court to apply the same, but there cannot be a hard-and-fast rule
in this behalf, A fixed formula for determining the amount of
25 2015 SCC Online Kar 9537;2 (2016) 2 AIR Kant R 16l
26 (2007) 6 SCC 792.
27 lbid.
JJ
@,/

compensation although may make the task of the Land Acquisition
officer or the Reference Court easier but in our opinion each case
is required to be taken on its own merit. we may hasten to add that
the purpose and object of the Act and the methodolog,t laid down
thereinfor the purpose thereof should be the guidingfactor."
7.4 The Hon'ble Supreme Court laid down certain factors to be observed for
determination of compensation under the 2003 Act, opining in Kerala
State Electricity Board v. Livisha and Others2s that:
"The situs of the land, the distance between the high voltage
electricity line laid thereover, the extent of the line thereon as also
the fact as to whether the high voltage line passes over a small
tract of land or through the middle of the land and other similar
relevant factors in our opinion would be determinative. The value
of the land would also be a relevant foctor. The owner of the land
furthermore, in a given situation may lose his substontive right to
use the property for the purpose for which the same was meant to
be used. "
7.5 The Hon'ble Supreme Court held in P. Vajravelu Mudaliar v. Special
Deputy Collector, Madras2e that:
"The adoption of one principle may give a higher value and
adoption of another principle mqy give o lesser value. But
nonetheless, they are principles on which and the manner in which
compensation is determined. The court cannot obviously say that
the law should have adopted one principle and not the other, for it
relates only to the question of adequacy."
7.6 On compensation in relation to fruit-bearing trees, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court had observed in State of Haryanq v. Gurcharan Singh3U that the
compensation be determined "on the bosis of the yield from the trees by
applying B years' multiplier."
28 lbid.
2e AIR 1965 sc lot7.
30 1995 Supp (2) SCC 637.
34
hr/

7.7 In Kerala State ElectriciQ Board v. Varghese Thomasrl, it was held that
the principle which should be resorted to for the said purpose is annuity
method. A retum of 5Yo interest per annum was held to be reasonable for
calculating the amount of compensation. However, a 5-judge Bench of
the Kerala High Court had opined in Kumbha Amma v. Kerala State
ElectriciQ Board2 that inflation was a relevant factor which should be
taken into consideration while computing the amount of compensation for
destruction of trees.
7.8 rn Krishan Pal & Another v. (Jnion of India (2018),33 the Delhi High
Court relied on the decision in Smt. Kalawati and Other^s v. Union of
India (2004),34 where it was held that a co-owner "would be entitled to
same benefit of the enhanced compensation given in respect of other
owners of the land acquired, which belonged to all of the jointly". Justice
necessitates that co-owners of the property be considered similar and
much the same by paying equal compensation to meet out fair and equal
treatment to them. Owners and co-owners cannot be discriminated in
payment of compensation with regard to the same land acquired under the
same notification and same award. When the land belongs jointly to co-
owners, all co-owners should be given the same amount of compensation
without any discrimination.3s
3t l96l KLT 238.
32 (2008) r KLT 542 (FB)
33 w.P.(c) No. 7184/2015.
34 LA.A. No. 650/2008 & cM No.9226t2008.
35 A. Vishwanatha Pillai and Ors. v. Special Tahsildarfor Land Acquisition,lggT SCR (3) 465
35
4',,/

8. JURISPRUDENCE OF STATUTORY COMPENSATION
(A) CoNcrcpr or ConrENsATroN
8.1 If a person is dispossessed of his property for some reason, either a
property which is similar in nature to the one acquired or compensation
for the same should be paid. A person has acquired vested interest in his
property under the legal system. If he were to lose it at the pleasure of the
state, people will lose confidence in the legal system. It brings an
inference that provision for compensation is an integral part of the law.
The term 'Just compensation" has a fluid and changing content; it is not
as absolute one. It cannot be decided a priori but it is determined in
connection with the genuineness of the demand and significance given to
the requirement and rights of the society as a whole.
8.2 According to the Apex Court in State of Gujarat v. Shanti Lal Mangaldas
& Ors.36:
anything given to make things equivalent; a thing given to or to
make amends for loss, recompose, remuneration or pay. "
A literal interpretation of the term "compensation" is that the owner
whose property is taken for public use and benefit, the loss suffered by
him must be made good.
8.3 ln Madan Mohan Sharma & Ors. v. State of Bihar & Ors, 37 the
High Court of Judicature at Patna had held that:
"13. But "deprivation" of property is dffirent from ""restriction"
on the rights of the owner. The restriction on the right of the
36 AIR 1969 sc 634.
37 1998 SCC Online P at 43 5 ; ( I 998) 3 PLJR 7 I 5 ; ( I 998) 46 (3) BLJR 2206.
36 @./

owner to use and enjoy the propere may necessarily result in
deprivation of it unless it is deprived wholly or partly of substantial
bulk of his rights consisting of property. It is a question which ts to
be decided in each case on its ownfacts.
14. If in thefact situation of a case, by restitution imposed by law,
a person has been deprived of substantial bulk of his rights as
owner of property, he will be entitled to compensation. The Apex
Court in Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar v. State of Gujarat, [1995
Supp (1) SCC 596; AIR 1995 SC 142J has held that Article 300A of
the Constitution does not contemplate payment of compensation in
the sense of "just equivalent or indemnification to the owner of the
property appropriated" and what it contemplates is that law under
which a person is deprived of his property should fix an amount or
lay down the principle in accordance with which such amount can
be determined.... In this connection, the relevant extract.from said
decision are reproduced below:
"... tlte law may fix an amount or which may be determined in
accordance with such principles. as may be laid therein and given
in such mqnner as may be specified in such law. However, such
law shall not be questioned on the grounds that the amount so fixed
or amount determined is not adequate. The amount fixed must not
be illusory. The principles laid to determine the amount must be
relevant to the determination of the amount..."
8.4 According to the opinion of the Attorney General for India on
'Compensation payable under the Electricify Act, 2003 and the Indian
Telegraph Act 1885', given on26 November 2014
"...damage can be temporary in nature wltere after completion of
work the original state can be restored back and other damage
could be such where it cannot be restored to original state.
However, area involved in installation of transmission line i.e.,
tower footing as well as the line coruidor cannot be restored back
to original state due to certain restriction. Thus, this variance in
damage, must befactored in while deciding compensation.
it is logical to hold that the land underneath the legs of the tower
(permanently fixed to the earth) is permanently lost by the owner
Even though tltose pieces of land are not required for acquisition
and the ownersltip remains with the owner yet all incidence of the
ownership, enjoyment, andfree use of those pieces of land becomes
37
qh/

severely restricted. In such case, compensation ought to be as neor
as the present value of the land.
The compensation of such land (as) under the corridor is entirely
dffirent. Such land ,s conveniently usable for agriculture.
However, there would be of course diminution of land value due to
placing of line over it with certain restrictions on land use also any
future prospects .fo, usage other than agriculture. The
compensation for such diminution in land value for the line
corridor is also payable to landowner, the quantum of which
should be commensurate to the damage depending upon the
type/location of land and its intended/recorded land Ltse. "
(B) Jusr, Fam. ArlD EeurrABLE ConmnNsATroN
8.5 Compensation must be so assessed that social interest may be put into
effect without any difficulty. The evaluation of the property appropriated
should be based on proportionate concept of faimess to the person and
advancement of the social interest without turning blind eye to the
fundamental rights of the individual.38 Theories of compensation will have
to be developed on the foundation of social condition and resources
available in this country. The lgth century laissez-faire idea of favouring
individual right to property over social good is no more in harmony with
the necessary development of modern India. The individual interest
should be balanced with greater social interest, and an individual may
have to lose his property only when it is essential to serye the larger
interest of the society. It is no denying a fact that the interest of a large
number of people should be given preference over that of few individuals
in situation of a disagreement between the two. At the same time, the
owner whose property was used or acquired for larger interest of the
society should be given just compensation.
38 Gobinda Chandra Dakka v. Dinesh Chandra Moitra, AIR 1952 Cal 100
38
et/

8.6 The adequacy of compensation is the most vital thing. Whenever land is
taken or used for public pu{pose, fair and adequate compensation is to be
paid. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru had stated before the Constituent Assembly
that:
"First of all, let us be quite clear that there is no question of any
expropriation without compensation. If property is required forpublic use, it is a well-established law that it should be acquired by
the state, by compulsion if necessary and compensation is paid.... If
we have to take the property, if the state so with, we have to see
that fair and equitable compensation is given, because we proceed
on the basts of fair and equitable compensation. But when we
consider the equity of it, we have always to remember that the
equity does not apply only to the individual but to the community.
Ir{o individual can override ultimately the rights of the community
at large. No communiQ should injure and invade the rights of the
individual unless it be, _fo, the most urgent and importont
reasons."39
8.7 The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India observed in State of West Bengal v.
Mrs. Bela Banerjee and Others a0 that:
"...laying down the principles which should govern the
determination of the amount to be given to the owner for the
properQ appropriated, such principles must ensure that what is
determined, os payable must be compensation i.e. just equivalent
of what the owner ltas been deprived of. "
3e Constituent Assembly Debates, Book 1, Vol. lX (30 July t919 to l8 September 1949), at I194 (Sixth Reprint
Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi (2014)); The Constituent Assembly debate on the on the question of
compensation had centered around the constitution provision of Article 3l (2), which has now been repealed by
the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978. However, there were three schools of views expressed
in the Constituent Assembly: (l) requiring fulljusticiability on the question of the quantum of compensation; (2)
excluding justiciability fully and making the legislative verdict on compensation final and unimpeachable; and
(3) permitting justiciability in all cases of acquisition other than those of Zamindari and other holdings; T. S.
Rama Rao, "The Problem of Compensation and its Justiciability in Indian Law", Journal of Indian Law
Institute, Vol. 4, 48 I -503 (1962).
40 AIR 1954 sc l70.
39 V

(C) Var,uarroN CoNsrDERArroN
8.8 If transmission line passes through a plot, no construction is permitted up
to certain distance on either side of such a line and also no development is
permitted for prescribed safety distance. This affects land value. It is
understood that construction of building on the land is an improvement
providing means of access, drainage etc. Land has productive capacity,
but not without the application of labour and capital on it. In the case of
agrarian land, labour for cultivating it and the working capital in the form
of seeds, fertilizers and water are provided to make the land productive.
8.9 It appears that the courts have acknowledged that the conception of value
is more perplexing than any other idea on determining the amount of
compensation. The term "value" has several connotations in the area of
land acquisition. It is difficult to evaluate the value stemming from such
ideas as "true compensation" or 'oreal compensation" or "true value" or
"real value". The challenging factors engrossed in the value options of a
society make it difficult for the court to determine the amount of
compensation.
8.10 Value in land in certain areas is found to be much higher. In the less
populated and deserted places where the paying capacity of people in the
region is very low, value fetched in market is much lower than its actual
cost. The social forces affecting value include all the characteristics and
customs of the people that make up the community. In certain parts of the
country, lands on "T" junction have very limited marketability as hardly
anybody comes forward to buy such plots. In other parts of India, such
lands are sold like hot cakes. This is indicative of the effect of the social
forces, having effect on valuation consideration.
40
M

8.11 Value is dependent on the degree of satisfaction derived, which varies
from person to person and here it is subjective. The main criterion in the
valuation of any land is its utility. The method used in the valuation
exercise must have the main objective of qualif,iing usefulness of the
property valued. Utilify is not an absolute condition but a relative term.
The value of land is dependent on the quality and quantify of produce,
and the utility of an agricultural land is conditioned by its productivity.
The valuation of land needs to be viewed in the light of all factors,
internal and external, having a bearing on its operating performance. In
valuation, the following questions should be taken into consideration such
as the utility of the land, existing and anticipated benefits due to the
ownership, possession and use of land, it's source availability or its
abundance, and its demand in the market.
8.12 Properfy right is not only related to material thing but it is also an abstract
relationship defined as right to future benefit arising from ownerships.
One can see in a land a physical thing limited by boundaries, a pile of
bricks, mortar, steel, cement, and timber. But the fact is that a land has
not only physical features, but it has also legal and economic
characteristics. In valuation, it is required to estimate value of "interest"
in a [and. i.e., a person's "legal right to derive benefit by putting a
property to legally permissible use." It is thus to estimate value of a
"legal-economic entity" and not of a 'physical" entity. This leads to the
following:
(l) in valuation of a land what is being valued is not the tangible thing
land or building, but the right of individuals in land and building;
(2) the value of the entire unit, consisting of land and the building, must
be determined with all its advantage and its potentialities; and,
(3) no right no value. t-'+1Y'
41

8.13 As per the Intemational Valuation Standard (IVS), income approach,
market approach and cost approach are applied to valuation depending on
the nature of the land. In India, the cost approach is generally used for
valuation of land. In the cost approach, value of a physical entity is
estimated and value of the "interest", which is in fact is the subject matter
of valuation, is not estimated.al
8.14 The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act,2013 (2013 Act) provides principles
for consideration in assessing market value. Principles for determination
of market value aim that compensation be awarded to the owner the value
of the property acquired. Under this Act, an authority has been given to
decide quantum of the compensation and make an award. An owner may
refuse the said determination and seek reference of the judicial authority
which is given the task of determining the market value. Even when the
compensation is determined, the Act gives a right to the aggrieved owner
to file an appeal. The purpose is to determine, by judicial process, fair
market value of the land acquired by the government and compensate the
owner with an equal value.
8.15 Section 28 of the 2013 Act provides parameters to be considered in
determination of award as follows:
"firstly, the market value as determined under section 26 and the
award amount in accordance with the First and Second Schedules;
4rKirit P. Budhbhatti, Valuation of Real Eslate for Bank Finance and Liquidation. Anand'. Anand Press (2022);
P.T. Hardikar, Basic in Real Estate Valuation. Pune: Mudra (2020).
42
V

secondly, the damage sustained by the person tnterested, by reason
of the taking of any standing crops and trees which may be on the
land at the time of the Collector's taking possession thereof;
thirdly, the damage (if any) sustained by the person interested, at
the time of the Collector's taking possession of the land, by reason
of severing such landfrom the other land;
fourthly, the damage (f any) sustained by the person interested, at
the time of the Collector's taking possession of the land, by reason
of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other property, movable
or immovable, in any other manner, or his earnings;
fifthly, in consequence of the acquisition of the land by the
Collector, person interested is compelled to change his residence
or place of business, the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to
such change;
sixthly, the damage (if any) bona fide resulting from diminution of
the profits of the land between the time of the publication of the
declaration under section l9 and the time of the Collector's taking
possession of the land; and
seventltly, any other ground which may be in the interest of equity,
justice and beneficial to the affectedfamilies.
43
*r/

9. DETERMINING PRINCIPLES FOR STATUTORY
COMPENSATION
9.1 It is not the value of the land alone but there are many considerations
which should be taken into account in determining the amount of
compensation. These factors may be the capacity of the state to pay the
compensation, the profit already derived by the owner of the land, and the
purpose for which the land is to be taken for use, and any part of the land
which is unused or neglected for a number of years.a2 Al1 these questions
have to be decided when a particular case arises according to the
circumstances of each case.
9.2 Sometimes a demand is made that there should be uniformity in
compensation for the erection of transmission tower base and laying
down of transmission lines in the Right of Way Corridor in rural and
urban areas, irrigated, non-irrigated and barren land, non-cultivable,
cultivable, and fruit-bearing agricultural land and non-agricultural land to
avoid any dispute.
9.3 However, it may not be viable to provide a uniform scheme of
compensation. Each case before the court of law is required to be taken
on its own merit. In case the transmission lines are drawn in forest land,
the transmission utility is required to pay the cost of afforestation, the cost
for environmental protection work in the Right of Way Corridor and also
to provide the Forest Department with land for compensatory
a2 Constituent Assembly Debates, supra note 39, at l22l.In making statement in the Constituents Assembly,
Prof. K.T. Shah had opined that: ".... No compensation should be due or be payable, and that I contend, is
inherent both in the economics and ethics of the case I am trying to advance.... The land has remained utterly
unutilized... and ... for that act of negligence, or for that incompetence or indifference the comrnunity is not
bound to compensate the owner. I, therefore suggest that in the case of any property which is capable of adding
to the growth and wealth of the community, which on account of the indifference, incompetence, negligence or
otherwise of the owner is not so utilized, the owner does not deserve to be compensated and the community
would be wrong if it gives any compensation in respect of such items of property."
44
qv/

afforestation equal to the land used for the setting up of the transmission
corridor. Further, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its own judgments in
Kerala state Electricity Board v. Livisha,a3 Kerala State
Electricity Board v. B. Sreekumari aa and Kerala State Electricity Board v.
Chinamma Antonyar has also observed that there can be no uniform
formula or policy to arrive at the rate of compensation and is of the view
that each case is required to be taken on its own merit. Similarly, the
practices of the Central Government and various State Governments in
determining the quantum of compensation (one in case of transmission
tower, and the other in case of transmission lines) have shown that there
cannot be uniform formula for calculating the quantum of compensation.
9.4 In laying down general principles for calculation of compensation, it may
not be advisable to specifiz the exact amount of compensation for each
case; instead, broad principles governing the quantification of
compensation should be preferred. The impact of placing of tower and
transmission lines will depend on the placement of towers, the height of
the tower and the land of the conidor. If the towers are placed in the
middle of the agricultural land, the position will be distinct as compared
to towers at the edge of the property. In case of residential and industrial
area there is severe restriction on usage for safety of human life and
electrical clearance. Further, compensation for a particular piece of land
also needs to take into account the valuation of similar land or an adjacent
parcel of land. This will ensure confidence in the system and land owners
would not be compelled to think that compensation will be determined
according to whims and fancies of those in positions of authority.
o3 Supra note 25.
44 (2008) 5 SCC 398.
45 (2008) I I SCC 476.
45
err-

9.5 The mandate of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 is "full compensation" for
all damage. With respect to the utilisation of any land for the purposes of
the Telegraph Act, it is to be noted that such a land remains in the
ownership of the landowner and there are no proceedings to acquire the
same. In case of acquisition, fulI market value is to be payable since the
land does not remain with the owner and in fact becomes vested in the
govemment after its compulsory acquisition. Hence, in the case of non-
acquisition, the authority only gets the right of a user and need only pay
compensation that is commensurate with the damage caused to the land in
the exercise of this right.
46
e,,

10. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
10.1 A study into the working of the compensation schemes under the Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Electricity Act,2003, suggests that the issue
of compensation is not a straightforward one and involves multiple
aspects that stakeholders need to take into account. For example, in the
Electricity Sector, a conjoint reading of the Electricity Act and the Indian
Telegraph Act is necessitated. The Commission is of the opinion that the
provisions concerning right of way (RoW) with regard to laying down of
electricity towers and transmission lines be incorporated in the Electricity
Act,2003 itself.
10.2 The Commission is satisfied with the Guidelines issued in 2015 and
subsequently in 2020 for Urban RoW. However, since land remains a
state subject under List II of Schedule 7 of the Constitution of India, a
number of State Governments have come out with different policies on
the quantum of compensation to be paid. The Commission recommends
that the State Governments align their policies in accordance with the
2015 RoW Guidelines and the 2020 Urban RoW Guidelines as this will
lend certainty to project costs and also the compensation that a land
owner will be entitled to seek.
10.3 Further, the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 has been in operation for almost
a century and a half now. While amendments have been affected time and
again, the Commission believes that a new legislation, more suited to the
times and milieu, be enacted by the Parliament to further the progress and
advancement made in the field of telecommunication and to plug the gaps
left by the present Act. The Commission is also of the opinion that the
issue pertaining to compensation be fully and clearly spelt out in the new
legislation, with separate provisions for public and non-public properties.
47 w"/

10.4 With regard to non-public properties, keeping in mind the power
imbalance that is present between private players operating in the
telecommunication sector and the owners of private properties, the
Commission proposes that some methodology be prescribed by the
Central Government to regulate this arrangement. This could be in the
form of a minimum rental/consolidated value or a percentage of the
property's total rental/consolidated value.
10.5 As a parting note, the Commission is of the view that certain principles
should guide the determination ofjust and equitable compensation, some
of which are enumerated as follows (Chapter 9 may also be referred to):
(u) the situs of the land (i.e., rural land, semi-urban or semi-rural
land, urban land);
(b) the quality and nature of land (i.e., agricultural land, non-
agricultural land, irrigated land, non-irrigated land, barren
land, fruit - bearing agricultural land, residential land,
commercial land, industrial land, forest land);
(c) earlier determined valuation rate of similar adjacent land;
and;
(d) any other relevant factor.
The Commission recommends accordingly.
----xxx----
48
qh,'

a-fl vr,t
. [Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi]
Chairperson
>j
IProf. (Dr.) Anand Paliwall
Member
lL
A'W
[Prof. D.Pj Verma][Justice K.T. Sankaran]
Member
lMr.
Member Secretary
Member
Member (Ex-Officio)
t{.k.,'.fr.i.!I,ufl'>1[Dr. Niten Chandra]
Member (Ex-Officio)
49