rtzElrl ?TI
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
AMENDMENT IN SECTION I54 OF
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDU RE. 1973
FOR ENABLING ONLINE RECISTRATION OF FIR
Report No. 282
September,2023

The 22nd Law Commission was constituted by Gazette Notification for a period ofthree
years vide Order No. F No. 4502 l/ l/2018-Admn-lll(LA) dated 21" February, 2020 issued
by the Govemment of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs,
New Delhi. The term ofthe 22"d Law Commission was extended vide Order No. FA No.
6001 1 /225 /2022- Admn. III(LA) dated 22'd February. 2021.
The Law Commission consists of a Chairperson, three full-time Members. Member
Secretary. two ex-ofJi.'io Mefibers and two Part-time Members.
ChairDersoll
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Full-time Members
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Prol (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Prof. D.P. Verma
Member Secretarv
Shri K. Biswal
Ex-olficio Members
Dr. Niten Chandra, Secretary. Depanment of Legal Affairs
Dr. Reeta Vasishta. Seffetary. Legislative Department
Part-time Members
Shri M. Karunanithi
Prof. (Dr.) Raka Arya
La$ Officers
Smt. Varsha Chandra, Joint Secrelary & Law Officer
Shri Atul Kumar Gupta. Deputy Law Officer
Legal Consulta nts
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Caurav Yadav
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Shri Davinder Singh
Ms. Priya Rathi
Ms. Ruchika Yadav
The Law Commission is located 
at:
2nd and 4'h Floor, 'B' wing
Lok Nayak Bhawan. Khan Market
New Delhi-l l0 003.
The text ofthis Report is available on the Website at:
www.lawcommissionofi ndia.nic.in
O Covemment of India
Law Commission of lndia

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former Chief Justice of High Courl of Kamalaka)
Chairperson
22"0 Law Commission of lndia
qrq{,d xg rTq ermfr
ffitgc gw <nfr*, o-riro va qrqdq)
OIEIfr
qrqf, + 22d ftE sTrdFr
rrq4q ao-d
7*
oIrf,l-{I+r 
^3rTdTdrffiE
the online registration of complaints which may be converted into a FIR later
a,qttrq rrdr : orm d. 405. TEeI ra, 6' fttq, d?t il{6 fiFI, sFI cltr-c, T$ frd-t t oooa
Ofrce Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Markst, New Oelhl-110003
3rr4rtrq cil : drrdr;i. e, fis sfifr .n f, q$ ftd-rroorr
Residenc€ ; Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Marg, New Delhi-110011
smail i rituraj.awasthi@govin Tel. : 011-2465495'l (O\, 243/020a 243/,0203
DO No. 6(3) 324I2018-LC(LS) W27'n September, 2023
#Tv,Lk Jr; M* b^ ,4,*l h No.'_,r*uu t
I am pleased to forward you Report No. 282 of the Law Commission of India on "Amendment
in Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for Enabling Online Registration
of FIR". The Law Commission received a reference from the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Govemment of India vide letler dated June, 2018. requesting the Commission to study the
feasibility of amending Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) in order
to enable online registration of FIRs. This reference arose from the DGPs/IGPs Conference-
201 7, held from 6th - 8s January, 2018 at BSF Academy, Tekanpur, Madhya Pradesh, wherein
it was suggested that there should be an amendment in Section 154 ofthe CrPC for enabling
online registration of FIRs.
The 21't Law Commission of India, on 20th July, 2018, urote to the Chief Justices of all the
High Courts, asking them to request the judicial officers in their jurisdiction to send in their
written submissions on the subject. Subsequently, a session with Police Offrcers from different
States was held on 06e August, 2018. The Commission received an overwhelming response,
mostly in favour of amending Section 154 to provide lor online registration of FIR. The
responses also highlighted the merits, demerits and requirements associated with such a scheme
like the IT infrastructure, digital literacy of the Police personnel as well as the citizens, and
procedural aspects like verification of the complainant, information to the accused,
amendments required in other legislations, etc.
In furtherance ofthe aforesaid, the 22nd Law Commission took up this reference and undertook
a comprehensive study of the law relating to online registration of FIRs and its working in
India, tracing its genesis and development in the digital era. The Commission also analysed the
history of registration of FIRs, both in colonial and independent India, and the various
pronouncements of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the Hon'ble High Courts on the subject-
matter. Additionatly, the 22"d Law Commission held extensive consultations with entities
involved in policing reforms, namely, the National Crime Records Bureau and the Bureau of
Police Research & Development. Further, the Commission also held wide-ranging
consultations with academicians, advocates, senior Police Officers, etc.
Due to the march oftechnology, means ofcommunication have progressed in leaps and bounds.
In such a landscape, clinging on to an archaic system of registering FIRs does not augur well
for criminal reforms. In this regard, it is imperative to trace the creation of the Crime and
Criminal Tracking Network & Systems (CCTNS). Under the aegis of CCTNS, at present, eight
states have already allowed for the registration of e-FlRs. Further, all States have facilitated

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former ChiefJustice of High Court of Karnataka)
Chairperson
22^d Law Commission of lndia
qrq{tr x-g rrv er+efr
ffi+5a gw enfrr, o-qtro sq qrrsq)
3{EItr
r+lvo A 22d frE 3Trfr.r
flrqq( wrd
Trog
oll-ffi+i .siTdE6l-CsE
The Commission, therefore, is olthe considered view that registration ofe-FIR be enabled in
a phased manner, beginning with offences bearing a punishment of upto three years
imprisonment. This would allow the relevant stakeholders to test the efficacy of the proposed
system, and at the same time, keep the possible misuse olsuch a facility to a bare minimum. If
it is found that the proposed system is indeed working effectively, the ambit ofthe same can
be extended through subsequent amendments. The Commission is ofthe measured view that a
Centralised National Portal be created to facilitate the registration of e-FIR. A procedure to
implement the same has been suggested by the Commission in this Report.
The Commission is ofthe considered opinion that enabling registration ofe-FIR would tackle
the long persisting issue of delay in registration ol FIRs. allowing citizens to repon crimes in
real time. Further, the said move would also align with the National e-Govemance Plan of
Govemment of India. Keeping the above in mind, I am submitting this repo( for your kind
perusal.
With warmest regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Justice Ritu Raj A$ asthi)
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (lndependent Charge)
Ministry of Law & Justice
Government of lndia
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi - I 10001 .
orqtdq qdr : orm i. +os, q$f ad, 6'f4.r, alo qrq-6 "ttFL Enq qrtr-c, Ti ftld-t t ooog
Offce Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New Oolhl-1'10003
3rFnftq rrdr : drrdr i. B, dlq qfift qrrf, q-{ ftd-rrootr
Residenc€ : Bungalow No. 8, Toes January Marg, New Delhi-110011
email : rituraj.awasthi@gov.in T6l. : 01 1-24654951 lO\, 243/0202, 243/,0203
E+r-

Pursuant to receiving the reference for the subject-matter ofthis Report from the
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, vide letter dated June,2018,
requesting the Commission to study the feasibility of amending Section 154 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in order to enable online registration of
FIRs, the Law Commission undertook expansive discussions with the concemed
Govemment Departments and entities engaged in the field of policing reforms.
The Commission also held ample consultations with academicians, scholars,
judges, advocates, senior Police Officers, etc. to get hold of the legalities
associated with the subject and the practical difficulties therein existing as ground
realties. We remain immensely thankful to all such people for their much needed
advice.
The 22nd Law Commission extends its wholehearted gratitude towards the
following individuals/organisations in particular, who took out their valuable time
to fumish their valuable insights, comments and submissions on the present
subject:
1. Bureau of Police Research & Development
2. National Crime Records Bureau
3. Shri Ashutosh Pandey, IPS, ADG State S.I.T, Uttar Pradesh
4. Shri Anish Gupta, IRS (C&IT), Additional Commissioner
5. Shri M. Nageswara Rao, IPS (Retd.), Former Director, CBI
6. Shri Sidharth Luthra, SeniorAdvocate, Supreme Court oflndia
7. Prof. (Dr.) N. K. Chakrabarti, Vice-Chancellor, The West Bengal National
University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata
8. Dr. Kumar Askand Pandey, Associate Professor (Law), Dr. Ram Manohar
Lohiya National Law University, Lucknow
The Commission gratefully acknowledges the commendable assistance rendered
in the preparation of this Report by Mr. Rishi Mishra, Mr. Gaurav Yadav, Mr.
Shubhang Chaturvedi, Mr. Davinder Singh, Ms. Priya Rathi and Ms.
Ruchika Yadav, who worked as Consultants. We place on record our fervent
appreciation for their scrupulous efforts in conducting research and extending aid
in drafting of this Report.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Aw-

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION
5.
I
A. Reference to the Law Commission of |ndia........... ........... I
B. Consultations Carried out by the 2l't Law Commission in 2018 ..........
C. Consultations Caruied out by the 22'd Law Commission in 2023..........
2, RELEVANT PROVISIONS RELATED TO F.I.R.
A. An Introduction to Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
..1
..1
l5
15
t6
19
t9
21
2t
28
3l
3l
34
35
35
B. Evolution of provision of FIR under the Code of Criminal Procedure
C. Advantages and Importance of Section 154...
D. Some other provisions in the Code w.r.t. FIR
3. DEMAND FOR REGISTRATION OF e-FIR
A. Reports of Commissions and Committees: .
B. Dffirence between Complaint and FIR............
4. e-GOVERNANCE INITIATIVE OF THE GOVERNMENT....................
A. lntroduction of CC
B. CCTNSARCHITECTURE
C. CCTNS COMPLAINT REGISTRATION PROCESS,.....
D. Present Status of Implementation of CCTNS..
E. Lodging ofe-FIR on web portal ofStates.
RELEVANT JUDICIAL PRONOLTNCEMENTS ON REGISTRATION
OF FIR
A. Youth Bar Association v. Union of India
B. Lalita Kumari v. Govt. of Uuar Pradesh
C. Court on its Own Motion v. State
D. Tajinder Singh & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors
E. Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar and Another
F. Satender Kumar Antil v. Central Bureau of Investigation and Another 46
6. CONCLUSION.................... .......................48
7. RECOMMENDATIONS 55
A. Registration of e-FIR to be permittedfor all cognizable offences where
the accused is not known 55
B. Registration of e-FIR to be permittedfor all cognizoble offences
attracting punishment up to j years where the accused is known 55
C. States to have power to expand list of offences...... ........57
38
38
40
40
42
43
ll
q-

D. Registration of e-FlR to not apply to all offences
E. e-Complaint to be allowed for all Non-Cognizable Offences
F. Verification of Informant/Complainant and Punishment for False
Informalion....
G. Privacy of the parties to be ensured..
H. Capocity Building to be ghten importance ....................
l. MiscellaneousRecommendations
ANNEXURE A: PROCEDURE FOR REGISTEzuNG E-FIR
ANNEXURE B: CENTRALIZED NATIONAL PORTAL.
57
58
58
59
59
60
62
64
lll
q".

ADG Additional Director General of Police.
App
ATM Automated Teller Machine
The Bureau of Police Research & Development
BSF Border Security Force
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation
CCTNS Crime and Criminal Tracking Network and Systems
CCTV Closed Circuit Television
CIPA Common Integrated Police Application
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring
System
Crl. Criminal
CrPC Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
DARPG
Delhi-National Capital Region
I)irector-General of Police
Dr Doctor
DvSP
EO E,nquiry Officer
etc Et celera
F.I.R. First Information Report
Government
HP Himachal Pradesh
ICJS Inter-operable Criminal Justice System
Information & Communication Technology
ID Identity
IEA Indian Evidence Act, 1872
IGP Inspector-General of Police
IPC Indian Penal Code, 1860
IPS Indian Police Service
IRS Indian Revenue Service
IT Information Technology
J&K Jammu & Kashmir
KYC Know Your Customer
lv
Application
BPR&D
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances
Delhi-NCR
DGP
Deputy Superintendent of Police
Golt.
ICT
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
q/

MIIA Ministry of Home Affairs
MIS Management Information System
MP
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau
NCRP National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal
NDPS Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
NICNET National Informatics Centre Network
NPC
OTP One Time Password
PAN Permanent Account Number
para Paragraph
PCR Police Control Room
Doctor of Philosophy
PM Prime Minister
POCSO Protection of Children from of Sexual Offences
Retired
S Section
S.I.T. Special Investigation Team
SC Supreme Court
SCC Supreme Court Cases
SDC State Data Centre
SHO Station House Officer
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
Uffar Pradesh
UT [Jnion Territorv
Versus
w.e.f. with effect from
w.r.t. with respect to
V
Madhya Pradesh
National Police Commission
Ph.D
Retd.
UP

A. Reference to the Law Commission of India
1.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs ('MHA) ide letter dated 05'h July, 2018,
requested the Law Commission to consider "amending Section 154 CrPC
for enabling online registration of FIR". This was in pursuance of a
conference held from 6ft to 8th January, 2018 at BSF Academy, Tekanpur,
Madhya Pradesh involving the DGPs,{GPs from multiple states and the
action points arising out of Prime Minister's address.
B. Consultations Carried out by the 2l't Law Commission in 2018
1.2. The 21st Law Commission of India, on 20s July 2018, wrote to the Chief
Justices of all the High Courts, asking them to request the judicial officers
in their jurisdiction to send in their written opinion on the subject. In
response to the above, the Commission received an overwhelming
response, mostly in favour of amending section 154 to provide for
registration of e-FIR, highlighting the merits and demerits associated with
this scheme like IT infrastructure, digital literacy of the Police personnel
as well as the citizens, and procedural aspects like verification of the
complainant, information to the accused, amendments required in other
legislations, etc. The Commission also received responses from the session
held on 06th August, 2018 involving Police officers from different states.
C. Consultstions Carried out by the 22'd Law Commission in 2023
1.3. The Commission held consultations with the following for preparing this
report:
I
1. INTRODUCTION
V

I Bureau of Police Research and Development: A meeting with a
representative from BPR&D was held on 13s June, 2023 wherein the
Commission was informed that BPR&D is responsible for research
pertaining to policing reforms and reviews legislations like IPC, CrPC,
NDPS etc. BPR&D also informed the Commission that a Committee was
constituted to review the provisions of the criminal laws including CrPC,
IPC, and IEA, and that the Committee had submitted recommendations to
the Ministry of Home Affairs. The said recommendations, while allowing
e-FIRs to be registered, do not provide any list of offences for the same.
Additionally, as per the correspondence dated 22d May 2023t, BPR&D
informed the Commission that eight states (Delhi, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and Uttarakhand) have
implemented registration of e-FIR under the CCTNS Project of the NCRB.
It further said that source code, both in Java & Microsoft stacks, along with
SOPs of e-FIR module are made available under the Nodal Officer section
of the NCRB website. As police is a state subject, the States/UTs had been
informed and requested to download and implement the e-FIR module.
Further, in its letter dated 3'd August, 2023,the BPR&D informed the Law
Commission that the proposed amendments were submitted to the MHA
and it is under consideration of the MHA. BPR&D also fumished a letter
dated I 8th November, 2019 addressed to the MHA stating the details
I Letter No. 32131/2022-RD (E-14061) received ftom the Bureau ofPolice Research & Development dated 22"d
May,2023.
2 w,

regarding formation of sub-committees for the purpose of review of the
above-mentioned laws and that the sub-committee on CrPC has submitted
the proposed amendments on the CrPC to the MHA.
2. National Crime Records Bureau: A meeting between NCRB and the Law
Commission was held on 13th Jtne, 2023, wherein NCRB informed the
Commission that the CCTNS portal is providing online services in nine
areas (lost and found articles, verification of tenants/servants, missing
person/children reports, unidentified dead bodies etc.) and also informed
about the current status in the eight States which are registering e-FIRs
(Delhi, Gujarat, Kamataka, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh, and Uttarakhand).
NCRB was asked to provide the data of misuse from the above-mentioned
eight States which are presently allowing e-FIR along with the latest data of
PRACATI DASHBOARD.
In its reply dated 16n August 2023, NCRB enumerated the following points:
a. Checking the effectiveness of working of Cyber-Crime in all states:
NCRB has been entrusted with the responsibitity of Operation and
Maintenance of National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal (NCRP) by the
MHA. Citizens can lodge online complaints regarding cyber-crime of any
category on this portal which are forwarded to the concemed States/UTs
through the portal itself for taking appropriate action. As on 01 't July, 2023,
3
R-

24,74,813 complaints have been lodged on NCRP and all of them have been
forwarded to the concerned States/UTs for taking appropriate action.
b. Data of misuse from the States which are presentty allowing e-FIR:
As regards the data on misuse from the eight States which are presently
allowing e-FIR facility (Delhi, Gujarat, Karnaraka, Madhya pradesh,
Odisha, Rajasthan. Uttar Pradesh, and Uttarakhand), it was stated that
NCRB has no information on this point and any feedback on the misuse of
this facility by the citizens can be given by the concemed States only.
c. Latest data of PRAGATI DASHBOARD (titt May 2023):
ST.{TUS (as on l'r June,2023)
l. Total Numbcr of Police Stations: 16,677
t May-23
. Dec-21
4
16611
l6-1t l

2. Total Number of Police Stations where CCTNS Application is deployed:
16,666
t May-23
r Dec-21
3. Number of Police Stations where networking connectivity is available:
t6,6t8
r May-23
. Dec-21
J Prof. (Dr.) N. K. Chakrabarti,, Vice Chancellor, The West Bengal
National University of Juridical Sciences: A consultation with Prof. N.K.
Chakrabarti was held via Video Conferencing on l4th June,2023 wherein
he presented his views on the topic and suggested that e-FIRs be allowed
to be registered in cases ofcognizable offences to provide access to justice
to people. He also suggested that stringent measures must be provided in
order to avoid the misuse of registration of false e-FIR, including making
section I 82 of IPC more stringent.
5
16666
I 6-11t0
l66l8
15919

4. Dr. Kumar Askand Pandey, Associate Professor, Dr. Ram Manohar
Lohiya National Law University, Lucknow: Dr. K.A. Pandey presented
his views to the Commission through video conferencing on l4th June,
2023 and suggested that registration ofe-FIR may be allowed in cases of
cognizable offences attracting punishment up to 3 years. Dr. Pandey also
took note of the possibility of misuse and suggested that measures be put
in place to prevent the same.
The Professors provided their written submissions together, which are as
follows: -
There cannot be any doubt that the dream of Digital India will remain
unfulfilled unless lnformation and Communication Technology
becomes an essential tool for accessing criminal justice. A dedicated
online portal, where a victim or any other person who wishes to share
information regarding the commission of crime should be launched
across the country. However, it should be restricted to cognizable
offences attracting a maximum of three years' imprisonment.
ll.
(either by putting signature or thumb impression), after an FIR is
registered based on online information, the informant shall be required
to visit the concerned police station for signing it. It is submitted that
in view of this legal requirement, the online facility will have only
6
Additionatly, as the present law requires the informant to sign the FIR
q-

limited utility that is sharing of information with the police without loss
of time. It will also ensure that the police mandatorily register FIR in
all cases of disclosure of cognizable offence in the online information
submitted to the police.
iii. The victim/informant while sharing information with the police
through the online portal may share information concerning
commission of both cognizable and non-cognizable offences, the
police shall be obliged to register FIR in all cases where the online
information discloses commission of cognizable offence. No other
criterion is required in taking a decision as to which online information
should be convefted into FIR.
In order to prevent misuse of the online facility, it is suggested that thelv.
punishment should be a minimum prison term of one year which may
go up to three years and a fine ofrupees one lakh.
In view of the huge digital divide in a country like India, it is also
suggested that the Legal Services Clinics in the NLUs/Law
schools/Colleges/Universities should act as a catalyst and facilitator in
bringing about this online revolution.
5. Shri Sidharth Luthra, Senior Advocate:
Shri Sidharth Luthra, in his response, made a mention about the following
lssues: -
As FIR must be mandatorily registered for cognizable cases, if
registered, there is little escape from trial of the individual (if wrongly
7
t.
G-

accused), who will face arrest, investigation and possibly a trial where
he/she seeks to prove his/her innocence.
ll. Registration of e-FIR seems attractive but that would include oral and
written information including anonymous complaints. If FIRs are
registered and investigation ensues, it may affect individual's liberty,
since the (police) practice in India is ordinarily to arrest. And despite
multiple judgments from the Hon'ble Supreme Court, arrest is a norm
in India barring by the CBL Also, the directions in Arnesh Kumar v
State of Biha/ are evaded by adding offences with more than 7 years'
punishment.
lll. Another pitfall concerns laymen who are unaware of the ingredients of
offences and hence may not be able to point out the cognizable offences
or understand the difference between different kinds of offences.
lv. On comparison with other countries with regard to the procedure
followed for registration of FIRs, he suggested that while certain
jurisdictions permit filing of e-complaints regarding specified offences,
we must keep in mind the distinction between the criminal justice
system of civil law countries and common law countries. While civil
law countries follow an inquisitorial and prosecutorial system, it is
adversarial in the common law countries. The presumption of
8
: (2014) 8 scc 273.
e,-

innocence is a crucial part of common law j urisprudence and an FIR is
not a basis to treat an individual as an accused, but only as a suspect
In his suggestions to the Commission, Shri. Luthra suggested that since
the power to determine (at the first instance) whether a cognizable or
non-cognizable offence is made out or not, is vested in a police officer,
it would be appropriate to seek to amend the Code to introduce a
provision for recording ofthe offence electronically in the case diary
Only if a cognizable offence is found either in a time bound inquiry or
on a reading of the complaint/ information, then the information be
recorded in the book maintained for recording of FIRs and a formal
investigation should ensue. This would ensure that there is no mishap
at the stage of recording of first information which is the crucial point
6. Shri Ashutosh Pandey, IPS, ADG State S.I.T, Uttar Pradesh:
The Law Commission invited valuable insights from Shri. Ashutosh
Pandey with respect to the following points on which he submitted the
following comments: -
On the present status and implementation of registration of e-FIR in the
State of Uttar Pradesh, he informed about the working of the CCTNS
App and the UPCoP App.
Apropos the status of registration of e-FIRs and its misuse, he informed
that every year around I lakh e-FIRs are registered in the State of UP
9
ll.
to begin an investigation.
I
and the segregation is not being done of false chargesheets and final
A
\",

reports. Also, he mentioned that since there is no distinction between
normal FIR and e-FIR, therefore, there is no bias during the
investigation. Moreover, maximum number of cases registered online
are primarily of cyber frauds, vehicle theft, theft and burglary
lll Regarding the issue ofadding more category of offences for enabling
registration of e-FIR, mainly cognizable offences for which the
maximum punishment is up to 3 years' imprisonment, offences against
women such as sexual harassment, dowry-related offences, etc., he
replied in affirmative but with caution that if it is allowed in cases
where the accused is known, it will lead to gross misuse by false
registration, as implicating someone would lead to hue and cry by the
public, media and political leaders. It can be used to register cross FIRs
and fake FIRs against victims of rape and other serious offences to
facilitate a compromise.
lv. With respect to the challenges faced in the adoption and utilization of
this online system and the steps taken to prevent the misuse ofthe same,
he informed that challenges were primarily from the Police,
jurisdictional issues with respect to Delhi-NCR areas, high incidence
of fake FIRs conceming vehicle theft etc. Another challenge flagged
by him was the training of the concerned personnel in e-Thana
headquartered in Lucknow to check any discrepancies while routing
the e-FIRs.
10

Regarding the measures being taken to ensure data security and privacy
in the digital reporting process, he informed the commission that Data
Security concem is being taken care ofby the NIC
vi. He further stated that the benefits observed from the introduction of
registration of e-FIR can be divided for the police force and the public.
He informed that for the public, the benefits are enormous as this
procedure saves them from all the hassles at the Police Station which
ultimately saves their precious time. Also, early and timely registration
of FIR especially in cases of stolen vehicles helps in getting insurance
claims and recovery of vehicles. With respect to the Police, it helped in
reducing the footfall at the Police Station and complainants can also
check timely status of their complaints online.
vlr. Apropos any future plans to further improve and expand the scope of
registration of e-FIR and whether there is sufficient infrastructure and
workforce to deal with the same, he suggested that the software needs
regular updating and improvement to match the aspirations and
expectations of the people based on the feedback received and the
improvement in technology.
On the possibility of misuse of the facility for filing e-FIRs, he
suggested that misuse can be checked by making different provisions
in the software but its benefits are highly appreciated by public and it
is the need of the hour for smooth and effective running of criminal
justice system.
ll
vll l.

7 Shri Anish Gupta, IRS:
Shri Anish Gupta, IRS, emphasized on the issues related to economic
offences with regard to the introduction of registration of e-FIR. He
stressed on the fact that economic offences are treated on a distinct pedestal
and cannot be treated at par with other offences like theft, stolen
documents, or matrimonial disputes. Also, the genesis as well as impact of
an economic offence is far and wide, and are not just restricted to the
specific individual or group and many of the economic offences as
enumerated by the NCRB, MHA, Govemment of India, are governed by
specialized legislations which invariably include the procedure for filing
FlR/Complaint before the relevant forum. Moreover, Section 5, read with
Section 4 of the CrPC, 1973 entails that the provisions of specialized
legislations would prevail over the general provisions of the CrPC, 1973
and hence, the same are not governed by Section 154 of CrPC. In fact, in
many of these specialized Acts, FIR is known by different variants and the
same may be outside the focus area of the study.
He suggested that it may not be possible to allow filing of e-FIR for
economic offences for varied reasons, some of which are: -
i. Economic Offences being of commercial nature, invariably require a
preliminary inquiry, so that the FlWcomplaint can be as
comprehensive as possible, to withstand the scrutiny of judicial fora as
t2
ft,,-

confirmed by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the landmark judgment of
Lalita Kumari v. Govt. of U.P & Ors3.
ii. The accused involved in economic offences are often influential,
represented by eminent lawyers, which makes it critical that the
cornplaint IS cogent, precise, and legally accurate. These unique
I . He also made a mention of a case from the High Court of Delhi,
Tajinder Singh & Anr. v. Union of Indiar wherein, the judicial/ora, in
general, have resisted in expanding the scope of registration of e-FIR
for all offences.
Based on the above-mentioned points and legal as well as practicaltv.
impediments, he submitted that registration of e-FIR may not be
8. Shri M. Nagesrvara Rao, IPS (Retired), Former Director, CBI:
Shri M. Nageswara Rao IPS (Retired), Former Director, CBI, firstly,
stressed on the sociological context of this issue, that the demand for online
registration of FIR is actually an aarta naadam of lonely citizens for
immediate statist (police) intervention, as the victim is left with no familial
or communal support, and often, there is also none to go all the way to the
nearby police station to lodge the FIR. Secondly, while endorsing the
proposal for registration of e-FIR in principle, inter alia, he raised the
following concems which, according to him, require consideration:
r (2014) 2 SCC r.
4 Tajinder Singh & Ors. v. lLnion oJ Inlln 2019 SCC Online Del 12143
l3
characteristics may be difficult to be incorporated in an e-FIR.
introduced for any of the economic offences, as the same would be
detrimental to both the defence and the prosecution.
Ph-

5 (2014) 2 scc l.
t4
i. Registration of e-FIR will lead to explosion in the number of FIRs
(criminal cases) registered and increase in registration of crimes (FIRs)
is always a politicalty sensitive mafter.
ii. Sometimes, in the heat of the situation even petty crimes, non-
cognizable offences or issues of non-criminal in nature get exaggerated
and reported as serious crimes and if prompt action is not taken by the
Police, it leads to media or public outrage.
iii. He further suggested that, directions provided by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the Lalita Kumaris jtdgment may be followed in the manner
that the information received impersonally such as through electronic
means may be added to that indicative list (as given in para l l l (vi) of
the said judgment) so as to address the concems about registration of
e-FIR. Accordingly, he further suggested that a sub-section may be
inserted under section 154 CrPC providing for registration of a
Preliminary Enquiry Report when the information is received through
electronic mode, which should be enquired into within 24 hours by a
police officer.
W

2. RELEVANT PROVISIONS RELATED TO F.I.R.
A. An Introduction lo Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
2.1. Section I 54 of CrPC govems how the first information about the
commission of a cognizable offense is recorded. The current framework is
the result of extensive work done by numerous Commissions, Committees,
and Courts over a period ofyears.
2.2. The principal object of the first information report from the point of view
of the informant is to set the criminal law in motion and from the point of
view of the investigation authorities, is to obtain information about the
alleged criminal activity so as to be able to take suitable steps for tracing
and bringing to book the guilty party. The first information report does
not constitute substantive evidence though its importance as conveying the
earliest information regarding the occurrence cannot be doubted. It can,
however, only be used as a previous statement for the purpose of either
corroborating its maker under Section 157 ofthe IEA, or for contradicting
him under Section 145 of IEA. It cannot be used for the purpose of
corroborating or contradicting other witnesses6. There must be information
and it must disclose a cognizable offence.T
2.3. The Section and corresponding provisions that existed in the previous
enactments of the CrPC have been discussed at length by the Constitution
Bench (5 Judges) in Lalita Kumari y. Goyernment of U.P & others.s The
Supreme Court observed:
"30. The precursor to the present Code of 1973 is the Code of 1898
wherein substantial changes were made in the powers and
procedure of the police to investigate. The starting point of the
powers of police was changed from the power of the fficer in-
charge of a police station to investigate into a cognizable offence
without the order of a Magistrate, to the reduction of the first
l5
6 Sheikh Hasib y. State ofBihar (1912\ 4 SCC 773.
1 Lqlita Kuma e. Gol)emment of U.P. (2014) 2 SCC l.
I lbid. 6-

B
information regarding commission of a cognizable offence, whether
received orally or in writing, into writing and into the book
separately prescribed by the Provincial government for recording
such first information.
3 I . As such, a significant change that took place by way of the 1898
Code was with respect to the placement of Section 154, i.e., the
provision imposing requirement of recording the first information
regarding commission ofa cognizable offence in the special book
prior to Section I 56, i.e., the provision empowering the police fficer
to investigate a cognizable offence. As such, the objective of such
placement of provisions wos clear which was to ensure that the
recording of the first information should be the starting point of any
investigation by the police. In the interest of expediency of
investigation since there was no safeguard of obtaining permission
from lhe Magistrate to commence an investigation, the said
procedure of recording first idormation in their books along with
the signature/seal of the informant, would act os an "exlremely
valuable safeguard" ogainst the excessive, mala fide and illegal
exercise of investigative powers by the police."
Evolution of provision of FIR under the Code of Criminol Procedure.
2.4. Historical background of the section 154 of the Code seems to represent
the following stages from 1861 to 2013:
l. Code of Criminal Procedure, l86l
2. Code of Criminal Procedure. 1872
" 112. Complaint to police to be in writing. - Every complaint
preferred to on oficer in charge of a police stalion, shall be reduced
into writing, ond shall be signed, sealed or marked by the person
making it; and the substance thereofsholl be entered in o book to be
l6
" l39.Complaint etc,, to be in writing. - Every complaint or
information preferred to an fficer in charge of a police station,
shall be reduced into utriting and the substance thereof shall be
entered in a diary to be kept by such fficer, in suchform as shall be
prescribed by the local Goyernment."
t
(){r-

kept by such oficer in the form prescribed by the local
Goyernment. " 9
3. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882
" 154. Information is cognizable coses. - Every information relating
to the commission of a cognizable offence if given orally to an fficer
in charge of a Police-station, shall be reduced to writing by him, or
under his direction, and be read over to the informant; and every
such information, whether given in writing or reduced to writing as
aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance
thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such form as the
Local Government moy prescribe in this behalf. "
4. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898
"154. Informotion is cognizoble cases. - Every information relating
to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to an
ofrcer in charge of a police-station, shall be reduced to writing by
him or under his direclion, and be read oyer to the informant; and
every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to
writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the
substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such
ofrcer in such form as the Local Government may prescribe in this
behalf "
2.5. Post-Independence, the Parliament of India restructured the Criminal
Procedure Code and provided for the provision relating to registration ofFIR
under Section 154 of the new Code i.e., the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 which was further amended by the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act,
2013 and reads as follows:
5. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
" 154. Information in cogniT,able cases- ( 1) Every information
relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally lo
an fficer in charge of a police station, sholl be reduced to writing
by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant;
and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to
e The Code of Criminal Procedure (Act No. X of 1872), s. ll2
I1
w

writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the
substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such
oficer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this
behalf
Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom
an offence under section 326A, section 3268, section 354, section
3544, section 3548, section 354C, section 354D, section 376,
section 3764, section 3768, section 376C, section 376D, section
376E or section 509 ofthe Indian Penal Code (a5 of 1860) is alleged
to have been committed or attempted, then such information shall be
recorded, by a woman police fficer or any woman oficer:
Provided further that-
(a) in the event that the person against whom an offence under
section 354, section 354A, section 3548, section 354C, section
354D, section 376, section 376A, section 3768, section 376C,
section 376D, section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code
@5 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed or ottempted, is
temporarily or permanently mentally or physically disabled, then
such information shall be recorded by a police oficer, at the
residence of the person seeking to report such offence or at a
convenient place of such person's choice, in the presence of an
interpreter or a special educator, as the case may be;
(b) the recording of such information shall be video graphed;
(c) the police officer shall get the statement of the person recorded
by a Judicial Magistrate under clause (a) of sub-section (5A) of
section 164 as soon as possible.
(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section (1) shall
be given forthwith, free of cost, to the informant.
(3) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an fficer in
charge of a police station to record the information referred to in
sub-section (l) may send the substance of such information, in
writing and by post, to the Superintendent of Police concerned who,
if satisfied that such information discloses the commission of a
cognizable offence, shall either investigate the case himselfor direct
an investigation to be made by any police fficer subordinate to him,
in the manner provided by this Code, and such fficer shall have all
the powers of an fficer in charge of the police station in relation to
that offence. "
l8
q-

C. Advantages and Importance of Section 154
2.6. The obligation to register FIR has inherent advantages and it is emphasized
in para 88 of the judgmentin Lalita Kumari caselo as under:
D
" (a) h k the first step to 'access to justice'for a victim.
(b) It upholds the 'Rule of Law' in as much os the ordinary person
bring forth the commission of a cognizable crime in the knowledge
of the State.
(c) It also facilitates swift investigation and sometimes even
prevention of the crime. In both cases, it only efectuates the regime
of low.
(d) It leads to less manipulation in criminal cases and lessens
incidents of 'ante-dates' FIR or deliberately delayed FIR. "
Some other provisions in the Code w.r.t. FIR
2.7. It is essential to have a look at some of the provisions which relate to FIR,
the definitions as given under Section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 are enumerated as under:
" Cognizable Offence " means an offence for which, and " cognizable
case" means a case in which, a Police Oficer may, in accordance
with the First Schedule or under any other law for the time being in
force, arrest without warrant. "tI
"Non-Cognizable Offence means an offence for which, and "non-
cognizable case " means a cose in which, a Police O1/icer has no
authority to arrest without warrant."t2
2.8. Section 155 of the Code deals with information as to non-cognizable cases
and investigation of such cases which reads as under:
" 155. Informalion as to non-cogniTable cases and investigalion of
such cases. 
-(l) When information is given to an fficer in charge of o police
station of the commission within the limits of such station of a non-
cognizable offence, he shall enter or cause to be entered the
substance of the information in a book to be kept by such fficer in
ro (2014) 2 scc L
rr The Code of Criminal Procedure, s.2(c)
t2 Id, s.2(l).
l9

suchform as the State Governntent may prescribe in this behalf, and
refer the informant to the Magistrate.
(2) No police fficer shall inyestigate a non-cognizable case without
the order of a Magistrale having power to try such case or commit
the case for trial.
(3) Any police fficer receiving such order may exercise the same
powers in respect of the investigation (except the power to aruest
without wanant) as an fficer in charge of a police station may
exercise in a cognizable case.
(4) IYhere a case relates to two or more offences of which at least
one is cognizable, the case sholl be deemed to be a cognizable case,
notwithstanding that the other offences are non-cognizable. "
20
w,-

3. DEMAND FOR REGISTRATION OF E-FIR
A. Reports of Commissions and Committees:
3.1. Second Administrative Reform Commission was constituted in 2005 to
prepare a detailed blueprint for revamping the public administration
system. The Commission, inter alia, examined the issue of promoting e-
govemance. The Commission was of the view that a clear road map with a
set of milestones should be outlined by Govemment of India with the
ultimate objective of transforming the citizen-govemment interaction at all
levels to the e-Govemance mode by 2020. The Commission also outlined
the benefits ofe-Governance. Para 2.5 of its l lfiReportr3 reads as under:
"2.5 Benefits of e-Governance:
2.5.1 In the end, e-Governance is about reform in governance,
facilitated by the creative use of Information and Communications
Technolog,t. It is expected that this would lead to:
i. Better access lo information and quality services for citizens: ICT
would make available timely and reliable information on various
aspects of governance. In the initial phase, information would be
made available with respect to simple aspects of governance such as
forms, laws, rules, procedures etc later extending to detailed
information including reports (including performance reports),
public database, decision making processes etc. As regards services,
there would be an immediate impact in terms of savings in time,
effort and money, resulting from online and one-point accessibility
of public services backed up by automation of back end processes.
The ultimate objective of e-Governance is to reach oul to citizens by
adopting a lfe-cycle approach i.e. providing public services to
citizens which would be required right from birth to death.
ii. Simplicity, eficiency and accountability in the government:
Application of ICT to governance combined with detailed business
process reengineering would lead to simplification of complicoted
processes, weeding out of redundant processes, simplification in
structures and changes in statutes and regulations. The end result
would be simplification of the functioning of government, enhanced
rr Second Administrative Reforms Commission. Government of India, " l I'h Repo( on Promoting e-Governance:
The Smart Way Forward" | 2 (Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, December 2008).
2t
q-

decision-making abilities and increased efficiency across
government - all contributing to an overall environment ofa more
accountable government machinery. This, in turn, would result in
enhanced productivity and eficiency in all sectors.
iii. Expanded reach of governance: Rapid growth of
communications technologt and its adoption in governance would
help in bringing government machinery to the doorsteps of the
citizens. Expansion of telephone network, rapid strides in mobile
telephony, spread of internet and strengthening of other
communications infrastructure would facilitate delittery of a large
number of services provided by the government. This enhancement
of the reoch of government - both spatial and demographic - would
also enable better participalion of citizens in the process of
governance."
3.2. The Second Administrative Reform Commission, in its l2sReportra made
an observation on Centralized Public Grievances Redress and Monitoring
System (CPGRAMS) as under:
"7.5.1 The Department of Administrative Reforms and Public
Grievances launched the CPGRIMS in 2007 for receiving,
redressing and monitoring of grievances from the public.
CPGRAMS provides the facility to lodge a grievance 'online'from
any geographical location. It enables the citizen to track online
his/her grievance being followed up with departments concerned
and also enables the DARPG to monitor the grievance. CPGRAMS
is a web enabled application and can be accessed by
Ministries/Departments/Organizations through a PC using an
internet connection and an internet browser. The citizen can access
the system online through the portal www.pgportal.nic.in. As the
system developed has been recently launched, its eficacy and
response by other Ministries/Departments is yet to be tested.
However, the system is an excellent use of modern technologt.
7.5.2 The Commission is of the view that a similar system should be
installed at the State ond district levels because a decentralized
system would benefit a lorger number of citizens on the one hand
and would also help in improving the effictiveness offield ffices on
the other. Similar concepts have already been tried in several States,
for example, the Lokvani in Uttar Pradesh."
ra Second Administrative Reforms Commission, Govemment of India. "12'h Report on Citizen Centric
Administration" 8l (Depanment of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances, February 2009).
22 h.

3.3. Further, the Second Administrative Reform Commission in its 5s Reportrs
recommended regarding registration of FIR and also reiterated the
recommendations made by the National Police Commission (1980) as
under:
" 7. 5. 1. 1 I Recommendations :
a. Registration of FIRs should be made totally citizen friendly.
Technologt should be used to improve the accessibility of police
stations to the public. Establishing call centers and public kiosks are
possible options in this regard.
b. Police stations should be equipped with CCTV cameras in order
to prevent malpractice, ensure transparency and make the police
more citizen-friendly. This could be implemented in all police
stations within a time frame offive years.
c. Amendments to the CrPC should be made as suggested by the
National Police Commission.
d. The performance ofpolice stations should be assessed on the basis
of the cases successfully detected and prosecuted and not on the
number of cases registered. This is necessary to eliminate the widely
prevalent malpractice of 'burking' of cases.
7.5.1 .4 The Commission is of the view that since registering the FIR
is the first step in the criminal justice system and unless
shortcomings in the registration procedure are set right, other
reforms particularly in the subsequent stages would have limited
impact. Therefore, a system has to be evolved in which registration
of FIRs is totally tronsparent and instances of refusal to register
FIRs are eliminated.
7.5.1.9 As noted by the National Police Commission (NPC) (1980),
FIRs have drawn a number ofcourt rulings that have tended to give
undue importance to the omission of any salient fact in the FIR even
if such omission was due to the disturbed or confused state of mind
of the complainant. As a result, according to the NPC, police oficers
resort to the malpractice of delaying the FIR in order to obtain
additional details because of the inordinote evidentiary value placed
by the courts on the FIR. The NPC therefore recommended the
following amendments in Section 154 Cr.P.C to remedy the
situation:
. Police should be allowed to query the informant to obtoin
additional details and clarifications ;
15 Second Administrative Reforms Commission, Government of India, "5'h Report on Public Order" 172
(Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances, June 2007).
:) u.

. Make it clear that registration of FIR is mandatory, whether or not
the alleged offence has taken place within the jurisdiction of the
police station; and
. Allow constituent units of the police station such as police outposts
etc. to also record FIRs. "
3.4. The Law Commission of India, in its 239th Reportr6 titled 'Expeditious
Investigation and Trial of Criminal Cases against Influential Public
Personalities', (submitted in March 2012) mentioned two important steps
for speeding up the criminal justice which are as under:
"(a) Deployment of technologlt at the level of police stations.
(b) Strengthening Criminal Courts' infrastructure and
upgrading facilities and amenities therein.
These steps have to be taken up in a phased manner after due
planning.
A. Deployment of technology at the Police Stations: (a) Recording
of FIRs: It is found that many of the acquittals are due to the delay,
ante timing and absence of the necessary details of the incident in
the FIRs. This one single factor can be eliminated by providing for
compulsory and automatic recording of all landlines provided in the
Police Stations. There should also be a provisionfor automatic relay
of the telephone conversation between the caller and Police Station
operator to all the Patrol vehicles of the police deployed in the area
to reduce the response time ofpolice. The patrol vehicles should also
haye connectivity with the police netfor knowing the antecedents of
the suspects/vehicles/documents etc. on the spot and instantly. FIRs
shall be recorded on the computer and they shall be instantly sent to
the Magistrates' Courts by e-mail. The practice of sending FIR
through e-mail should be legally recognized. Similarly, section I6l
statements should also be placed on the computer and posted on the
website of the concerned court. (b) Police Stations: Modernization:
(i) Networking of all police stotions to establish a link with all the
courts: (ii) Digital videography to be installed at police stations. At
the time of receiving FlR/complaint, videography should be made
compulsory. By this process, the earliest version of the informant
will be evident. So also, at the time of inspection of the scene of
offence and recovery of material objects, videography should be
16 Law Commission of India, "239'h Report on Expeditious lnvestigation and Trial of Criminal Cascs Against
Influential Public Persoralities" 3l (March, 2012).
')! v

3.5. The Report of the Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law headed by
Justice J.S. VermarT while examining 'Filing and Registration of
Complaints' recommended the following:
" (a) This Committee recommends that the guidelines issuedfor the
police by the High Court of Delhi in Delhi Commission for Ll/omen
v. Lalit Pandey and Another, must be mandatory and immediately
followed in relation to all sexual offence complaints across the
country. This is as per Standing Order No. 303/2010 issued by the
Delhi Police in the Guidelines to be followed by the Police whilst
investigating cases of Rape.
Of these, the guideline that the duty oficer, immediately, upon
receipt of the complaint/ information must intimate the "Rape Crises
Cell" on its notified helpline number is especially important. The
Rape Crisis Cell must then send to the complainant an appropriately
qualified person to provide legal assistance in the filing of the FIR
and to provide counseling to the complainant.
(b) All police stations should have CCTVs at the entrance of the
police station, in police cells and in the questioning room. All PCR
vans should also contoin CCTV's.
The CCTV's must not be tampered with and every month an
independent expert should ensure that the CCTV footage has not
been tampered with. This is an additional method to ensure safety in
police stations and that proper procedure is followed in handling
complaints, the recording and filing of FIR's and in treatment of
those in police custody. We understand that this may not be possible
r?Government of Indi4 'R.eport ofthe Committee on Amendments to Criminal Laf' 331 (Government of India,
23 January 2013).
25
insisted upon. (iii) Interrogation Rooms: Each Police Station should
be provided with secure interrogation rooms, with simultaneous
audio-visual recording facililies by two cameras, one focusing on
the close-up of the face of the witness or the suspect and the second
giving a wide angled picture to show that there is no coercion to
influence the statement of the witness or the suspect. Statement of all
suspects and witnesses should, by law, be required to be recorded in
such windowless interrogation rooms with mirrors on the two walls.
The question of treating as admissible the statements of the accused
and witnesses examined in secure interrogation rooms deserye
serious cons ideration. "
W

in all rural areas but feel that where possible CCTV's should be
installed.
k) In addition to every individual being able to register an FIR
at any police station irrespective of the jurisdiction in which the
crime was complained of in writing, ettery individual must also be
able to register his complaint online on a designated website. After
this a complaint number should be automatically generated so the
complainant can track the FIR.
The same complaint would then be generated at the nearest police
station and a copy would also be provided to an ombudsman ofrce
located in every district. It will still be the case that an FIR cannot
be registered anonymously and the individual who has registered an
FIR online will then have to go to any police station to verify his
identity and the FIR. The Delhi Police already have the facility for
online registration and tracking of FIR. Something of this nature
must be replicated and made operational across the country. The
FIR should also be recorded on a national online databasefor ready
accessibility by the complainant. "
3.6. Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committeesrs, Malimath
Committeere and National Police Commission20 while considering issues
pertaining to complainants on Sexual violence and other complainants
observed that complainants are treated indifferently by police and
sometimes harassed when they go to them with their grievances. In this
regard the following recommendations are made as under:
a. Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs in its l67n Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill,
201221 recommended as under:
*5.36.2 The Committee feels that registration of FIRs should be
made mandatory. The Committee is of the strong view thot strict
action should be takenfor dereliction of duty ogainst the fficer, who
26
18 Govemment of India, "167fi Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs" 48
(Rajya Sabh4 March 2013).
recovemment of India, "Committee on Reforms of Criminal Justice System" 78 (Ministry of Home Affairs,
March 2003).
20 Government of Indi4 "4'h Repo( ofNational Police Commission" 4 (National Police Commission, 1980).
2r Government of India, "167h Department-Related Parliamentary Starding Committee on Home Affairs" 48
(Rajya Sabh4 March 2013).
fr,^
w\,/

refuses to receiye complaints on Sexual violence. The Committee
also recommends that once the FIR is lodged, it must be passed on
to the higher police officer for informalion and necessary direction
in the matter to ensure time bound investigation. The Committee
further recommends that investigation should be done within a
period of 60 days, and charge sheet should be filed in time so that
justice is not denied. "
b. Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs in its 189ft Report22 examined the problems in registration of
FIRs and recommended that the resilient mechanism should be evolved
so that all FIRs are registered. The committee also reiterated its
recommendations made in 1 67s Report in respect of registration of
FIRs.
c. As regards Complaints, the Malimath Committee23 while examining the
criminal justice system observed as under:
" 6.7.5 Complainants say that they are treated indffirently by police
and sometimes harassed when they go to them with their grievances.
There are complaints that the police do not truthfully record the
information but distort facts as found convenient to them.
Cognizable cases are made non-cognizable and vice versa.
Complainants are sometimes made the accused and investigations
initiated accordingly. Though these are unauthorized by the law and
are rare, yet whenever it happens the victim gets disillusioned and
alienated from the system itself.
16.7 FIRST INFORMATION REPORT
16.7.1 It is a matter of common knowledge that women in lndia are
quite reluctant to disclose even to their dear and near ones that they
were victims of rape partly because of the shame, apprehension of
being misunderslood and fear of consequences besides her deeply
traumatized and confused state of mind. This often contributes to
22 Govemmenl of India. "189fi Repon on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observaliqns contained in the 176'h Repon on the Functioning of Delhi Police" 9 (Rajya
Sabha, December 2015).
2r Govemment of India, "Committee on Reforms of Criminal Justice System" 78 (Ministry of Home Affairs,
March 2003).
27 W-

delay in lodging FIR. Unexplained delay in submitting the FIR often
proves fatal to the prosecution. The Committee therefore suggests
that a suitable provision be incorporated in the Code fixing a
reasonable period for presenting FIR in such cases. "
d. The National Police Commission2a examined various police reforms
including provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Para 27 .6
of the 4s Report the National Police Commission proposed to amend
section 154 as under:
"Section 154 CrPC may be amended to-
Enable the oficer in-charge of police station to ascertain adequote
information from a complainant and incorporate it in the form
pres cr i be d for re gi ste r ing Firs t - I nformat ion Report ;
Make it clear that the registration of First-Information Report is
mandatory whether or not the alleged offence has taken place in the
jurisdiction of the police stotion; and
Facilitate the recording of First-Information Report in constituent
units attached to the police station- for example; police out of post
or such other reporting centers as may be evolved in due course.
(Para 27.6)"
e. Further, Padmanabhiah Committee on police reforms was of the view
that the present classification of offences into cognizable and non-
cognizable made 150 years ago is not very relevant today.25
B. Difference betb)een Complaint and FIR.
3.7. 'Complaint'26 as defined under Section 2(d) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 reads as under:
"(d) "complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to
a Magistrote, with a view to his taking action under this Code, that
some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an offence,
but does not include a police report.
Explanation. -A report made by a police ofrcer in a case which
discloses, ofter investigation, the commission of a non-cognizable
:a Government of I nd ia, "4'h Report of National Police Conlnl ission" (National Police Commission, I 980).
r5 Government of India, "Padmanabhiah Committee Report on Police Reforms" (Ministry of Home Affairs.
January 2000).
16 The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, s. 2(d)
28
V

offence shall be deemed to be a complaint; and the police fficer by
whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant."
3.8. 'FIR' has not been defined as such anywhere except that 'Information'
relating to cognizable offences finds a mention under Section 154( I ) ofthe
Code of Criminal procedure, 1973 and reads as under:
"154. Information in cognizable cases27.-(1) Every information
relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to
an oficer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing
by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant;
and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to
writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the
substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such
fficer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this
behalf
[Provided that if the information is given by the woman against
whom an offence under section 326A, section 3268, section
354, section 354A, section 3548, section 354C, section 354D,
section i76, 2[section 376A, section 376A8, section 3768, section
376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DBJ, section 376E
or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to
have been committed or attempted, then such information shall be
recorded, by a woman police fficer or any woman fficer:
Provided further that-
(a) in the event that the person against whom an offence under
section 354, section 354A, section 3548, section 354C, section
354D, section 376, l[section 376A, section 376A8, section 3768,
section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DBJ,
section 376E or section 509 ofthe Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)
is alleged to have been committed or attempted, is temporarily or
permanently mentally or physically disabled, then such information
shall be recorded by a police fficer, at the residence of the person
seeking to report such offence or at a convenient place of such
person's choice, in the presence of an interpreler or a special
educator, as the case may be;
(b) the recording of such information shall be video grophed;
:7The Code ofcriminal Procedure. 1973. s. 154.
29
V

(c) the police fficer shall get the statement of the person recorded
by a Judicial Magistrate under clause (a) of sub-section (5A) of
section I64 as soon as possible.J
(2) A copy ofthe information as recorded under sub-section (I) shall
be givenforthwith, free of cost, to the informant.
(3) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an fficer in
charge of a police station to record the information referred to in
sub-section (l) may send the substance of such information, in
writing and by post, to the Superintendent of Police concerned who,
if satisfied that such information discloses the commission of a
cognizable offence, shall either investigate the case himselfor direct
an investigation to be made by any police oficer subordinate to him,
in the manner provided by this Code, and such oficer shall have all
the powers of an oficer in charge of the police slation in relation to
that offence. "
3.9. Thus, any information about a cognizable offence, oral or written, has to
be entered by the officer in charge ofa police station in a book meant for
the purpose. This information, which is also signed by the informant, is
known as the First Information Report, or FIR.
3.10. Also, Complaint is different from FIR in the sense that Complaint is cogent
yet lucid, accurate, yet legal, but FIR is more of a technical document
which is prepared by the police known as TEHRIR which involves the
terms form the Criminal Codes and hence intervention of police cannot be
avoided wherever there arises a need to register an FIR.
3.1 I . Moreover, as suggested by the BPR&D in their letter, the online complaint
may be converted into FIR by SHO based on enquiry report submitted by
Enquiry Officer (EO).'*
28 Letter No. 32l31/2022-RD (E- 14061 ) received liom the Bureau of Police Research & Development dated 22nd
May,2023
30
m)-

A,
4.1.
4. E-GOVERNANCE INITIATIVE OF THE GOVERNMENT
Introduction of CCTNS.
The Digital India Program of the Govemment of India was initiated with a
vision to transform India into a digitally empowered society and knowledge
economy. The main thrust for e-Govemance was provided by the launching
of NICNET in 1987 - the national satellite-based computer network. The
E-Govemance initiatives took a broader dimension in the mid-1990s for
wider sectoral applications with emphasis on citizen-centric services. In the
ensuing years, with ongoing computerization, tele-connectivity and intemet
connectivity established a large number of e-Covemance initiatives, both
at the Union and State levels.2e
Common Integrated Police Application (CIPA) project was introduced in
2004-05 which aimed at digitization of crime and criminal records on a
standalone basis taking police station as a unit. It was felt that there is a
need for inter-linking all Police Stations in the country for aiding
investigation and for providing citizen services that involve verification of
antecedents, which cannot be achieved unless data is shared across the
board and aggregated centrally. Hence, Crime and Criminal Tracking
Network and Systems (CCTNS) project was started in 2009. CCTNS is a
mission mode project under the National e-Governance Plan of
Govemment of India and aims at creating a comprehensive and integrated
system for enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of policing through
adopting of principle of e-Govemance and creation of a nationwide
networking infrastructure for evolution of IT-enabled-state-of-the-art
tracking system around 'Investigation of crime and detection of
criminals'. The overall vision of project CCTNS is to create - A State-of-
4.2.
2e Introduction, Digital India, Goyernment of lndia, ayailable a, https://digitalindia.gov.irlintroductiorv (last
visited on 136 July 2023).
31 W.

Art System that allows access to real-time crime and criminal information
to all stakeholders.3o
4.3. Objectives of CCTNSSr:
a. Achieve computerization of Police Processes (FIRs, Investigations,
Challans)
b. Provide pan India search on National database of Crime & Criminal
records.
c. Generate Crime and Criminal reports at State and Center.
d. Provide Citizen Centric Police Services via a web portal.
e. Sharing of Crime and Criminal data among Police Stations, Courts,
Prisons, Forensics and Prosecution for more effective justice
delivery.
f. Providing enhanced tools for crime investigation, crime prevention,
law and order maintenance and other functions such as traffic
management, emergency response etc.
g. Increasing operational efficiency by reducing redundancy in
processes through their streamlining and standardization, increasing
communication by providing access to and availability of additional
communication modes such as police messaging, email, mobile
telephony etc., automating back office functions such as information
collection, MIS, workflows etc.
h. Creating national platform to share information and intelligence.
4.4. Benefits of CCTNS32:
The following are the benefits envisaged from successful implementation
of the CCTNS:
r0 CCTNS, Women Safety Division, Ministry of Home AfIairs, Govemment of lndia, available ot
https://www.mha.gov.in/en/divisionotnha./women-safety-division/cctns (last visited on l3'i July 2023).
ITCCTNS Project Brief and Status, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of lndia, available at
https://www.mha.gov.inler/divisionofmha,/women-saGty-divisior/cctns (last visited on l3'h July 2023).
r: CCTNS, National Crime Records Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs, Govemment of lndi4 avoilable at
hftps://ncrb.gov.ir/en/crime-and-criminal-tracking-network-systems-cctns (last visired oD l3'h July 2023).
32 Uy

a) Benefits to Police Department
i. Enhanced tools for investigation.
ii. Centralized crime and criminal information repository along with
the criminal images and fingerprints with advanced search
capabilities.
iii. Enhanced ability to aralyze crime pattems and/ or modus operandi
iv. Enhanced ability to analyze road incidents and other accidents.
v. Faster tumaround time for the analysis results (criminal and traffic)
to reach the officers on the field.
vi. Reduced workload for the police stations back-office activities such
as preparation of regular and ad-hoc reports and station records
management.
vii. A collaborative knowledge-oriented environmentwhere knowledge
is shared across different regions and units.
viii. Beffer co-ordination and communication with extemal stakeholders
through implementation of electronic information exchange
systems.
b) Benefits to Citizens
i. Multiple channels to access services from police.
ii. Simplified process for registering petitions.
iii. Simplified process for accessing general services such as requests
for certificates, verifications, and permissions.
iv. Simplified process and accurate means of tracking the progress of
the case during trials.
v. Simplified and accurate access to view/report unclaimed/recovered
vehicles and property.
vi. Simplified process and channel for grievance registration.
vii. Improved relationship management for victims and witnesses.
viii. Faster and assured response from police to any emergency calls for
assistance.
d,Y6L
33

c) Benefits to external departments
i. Seamless integration with police systems for better citizen service
delivery and improved law enforcement.
ii. Quick exchange of accurate information with the police department.
ln Youth Bar Asstt. of India v. (Jnion of India]t, online filing of complaints
under the project 'Crime & Criminal Tracking Network & Systems (CCTNS)'
was discussed wherein it was submitted by Mr. Tushar Mehta, leamed
Additional Solicitor General appearing for the Union of India, that the Central
Government is supporting all the States to set up a mechanism for online filing
of complaints under the protect 'Crirne & Criminal Tracking Network &
Systems (CCTNS)'.
B. CCTNS ARCHITECTURE
.i' ..1-! t-t nr
a*...'./tklr!!...6
CCII{5 ARCHITTCTURT
f *--
]HET
'r AIR 20t6 sc 4136
34
L
W\,/

((IN5(OMIILAINI RL6 
' ' 
fiATION
\
C. CCTNS COMPLAINT REGISTRATION PROCESS
D. Present Status of Implementation of CCTNS1a
4.5. The following figures illustrate the status related to CCTNS Software and
its usage. The first figure deals with CCTNS Software deployment at
Police Stations, the second one with Police Stations connected to State
Data Centre (SDC), and the third with Police Stations entering 100% FIR
in CCTNS.
rrDr. Prashun Gupta & Narendra Kurnar Koli, "Projecr Managemcnr ofCCTNS" I NCRB JournalS0 (November
l0l2 )
35
Lr
Wv'

Figure l: CCTNS Software deployment at Police Stations3s
CCTNS Software Deployment at Police
Stations
(,
z
Fz
:
o
o
LLO9A
7@i6
90%
80%
1W
ga% |W,
YEAR
12017 12018 y2019 ..2020 a202t a2022
Police Stations connectivity to SDC
150r/a
6
!
:
9L% 93% 95% 97% 97%
100%
w6
o%
80%
II
I
I
YIAR
12017 12018 y2O19 r'2020 a2O27 a2022
Figure 2: Police Stations connected to State Data Centre (SDC)36
:R
'i6o2
O'U
E
!
o
110%
LW.
90%
80%
10%
rI ll'
rl*bi ff
YEAN
12017 12018 C2019 ,.12020 a202t a2O22.
Figure 3: Police Stations entering 100% FIR in CCTNS3?
ts lbid
r,. tbid
t1 lbid
36
Police Stations entering 100% FIR in
CCTNS
q,-
t,.

4.6. As per the NCRB data dated 3l't August 2018, following Mobile
Applications have been developed in the states for citizens and Police:
a. Complaint Registration (Telangana, Jharkhand, HP, Puducherry,
J&K Tamil Nadu, MP, Maharashtra, J&K)
b. Online lodging of FIR for Motor Vehicle Theft and Property Theft
(Delhi, Chhattisgarh, UP)
c. Track Missing child/Person (HP, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Delhi)
d. Un-Identified Dead Body Matching (Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, MP)
e. Citizen Tip (Maharashtra, MP)
f. Citizen Help App and e-FIR - Uttar Pradesh Gujarat, MP)
E. Lodging ofe-FIR on web portal ofStates.
4.7. As per the correspondence dated 22nd May 202338, the Bureau of Police
Research & Development has informed the Law Commission of India that
eight States (Delhi, Gujarat, Kamataka, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and Uttarakhand) have implemented registration
of e-FIR under the CCTNS Project of the NCRB. Source Code, both in
Java & Microsoft stacks, along with SOPs of e-FIR module are made
available under the Nodal Officer section of the NCRB website. As police
is a state subject, the StatesfuTs were informed and requested to download
and implement the e-FIR module.
4.8. However, the registration of the online complaint facility is available in all
the States/UT on their State Citizen Portal developed under CCTNS
Pro.iect.re
r8 Letter No. 32l3 l/2022-RD (E-14061) received from the Bureau ofPolice Research & Development dated 22"d
May,2023
1e lbid.
37
W'

5. RELEVANT JUDICIAL PRONOUNCEMENTS ON REGISTRATION
OF FIR
A. Youth Bar Associotion v. (lnion of Indiaao
5.1 . ln Youth Bar Association of India v. Union of India, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court while issuing directions to the States to upload each and every FIR
registered in all the Police Stations within the territory of India in their
official website, inter alia issued the following directions:
I1.1 An accused is entilled to get a copy of the First lnformation
Report at an earlier stage than as prescribed under Section 207 of
the CrPC.
11.2 An accused who has reasons to suspect that he has been
roped in a criminal case and his name may be finding place in a
First Information Report can submit an application through his
representative/agent/parokor for grant ofa certified copy before the
concerned police fficer or to the Superintendent of Police on
payment ofsuchfee which is payable for obtaining such a copyfrom
the Court. On such application being made, the copy shall be
supp I ied wi t hin tw e nty-four hours.
I 1 .3 Once the First Informotion Report is forwarded by the police
station to the concerned Magistrale or any Special Judge, on an
application beingfiledfor certified copy on behalf of the accused,
the same shall be given by the Court concerned within two working
days. The aforesoid direction has nothing to do with the statutory
mandate inhered under Section 207 of the CrPC.
I 1.4 The copies of the FIR, unless the offence is sensitive in
nature, like sexual offences, offences pertaining to insurgency,
terrorism and of that category, offences under POCSO Act and such
olher offences, should be uploaded on the police website, and ifthere
is no such website, on the oficial website of the State Government,
within twenty-four hours of the registrotion of the First Information
Report so that the accused or ony person connected with the same
can download the FIR and file appropriate application before the
Court as per law for redressal of his grievances. It may be clarified
here that in case there is connectivity problems due to geographical
4 AtR 20t 6 sc 4t t6
38
W

location or there is some other unavoidable difficulty, the time can
be extended up to forty-eight hours. The said 48 hours can be
extended maximum up to 72 hours and it is only relatable to
connectivity problems to geographical location.
11.5 The decision not to upload the copy of the FIRon the website
shall not be taken by an fficer below the ronk of Depult
Superintendent of Police or any person holding equivalent post. In
case, the States where District Magistrate has a role, he may also
assume the said authority. A decision taken by the concerned police
fficer or the District Magistrate shall be duly communicated to the
c once r ned j uris d i c t ional Magi s trate.
I 1 .6 The word 'sensitive ' apart from the other aspects which may
be thought of being sensitive by the competent authority as stated
hereinbefore would also include concept of privacy regard being
had to the nature of the FIR. The examples given with regard to the
sensitive coses ore absolutely illustrative and are not exhaustive.
I L7 lfan FIR is not uploaded, needless to soy, it sholl not ensure
per se a ground to obtain the benefit under section 438 of the CrPC.
I1.8 In case a copy of the FIR is not provided on the ground of
sensitive nature of the case, a person grieved by the said action, after
disclosing his identity, can submit a representation to the
Superintendent of Police or any person holding the equivalent post
in the State. The Superintendent of Police shall constitute a
committee of three oficers which shall deal with the soid grievance.
As far as the Metropolitan cities are concerned, where
Commissioner is there, if a representation is submitted to the
Commissioner of Police who shall constitute a committee of three
ofrcers. The committee so constituted shall deal with the grievance
within three days from the date of receipt of the representation and
communicate it to lhe grieved person.
1 1.9 The competent authority referued to hereinaboye shall
constitute the committee, as directed herein-above, within eight
weeks from today.
1 I . l0 In cases where in decisions have been taken not to give copies
of the FIR regard being had to the sensitiye nature of the case, itwill
be open to the accused/his authorized representative/parokar to file
an application for grant of certified copy before the Court to which
lhe FIR has been sent and the same shall be provided in quite
39 V'

promplitude by the concerned Court not beyond three days of the
submission of the application.
I I.l I The directions for uploading of FIR in the website of all the
States shall be given effect from I 5-1 1-201 6. "
B. Lalita Kumari v. Govt. of (lttar Prodeshat
5.2. In this case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court while allowing preliminary
enquiry before registration ofFIR in certain cases, held that:
"v. The scope of preliminary enquiry is not to verify the veracity or
otherwise of the information received but only to ascertain whether
the informotion reveals any cognizable offence.
vi. As to what type and in which cases preliminary enquiry is to be
conducted will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
The category of cases in which preliminary enquiry may be made
are as under:
a. Matrimonial disputes/family disputes
b. Commercial offences
c. Medical negligence cases
d. Cotuption cases
e. Cases where there is abnormal delay/latches in initiating criminal
prosecution, for example, over three-month delay in reporting the
matter without sotisfactorily explaining the reasons for delay.
The aforesaid are only illustrations and not exhaustive of all
conditions which may waruant preliminary enquiry.
vii. While ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused and the
complainant, a preliminary enquiry should be made time bound and,
in any case it should not exceed 7 days. The fact of such delay and
lhe causes of it must be re/lected in the general diary entry. "
C. Court on its Own Motion v. Statea2
5.3. ln Court on its Own Motion v. State, the Division Bench of Delhi High
Court dealt with the issue of entitlement of an accused to have a copy of
FIR and held that FIR is a public document as defined under section 74 of
the IEA and fair and impartial investigation is a facet of Art. 21 of the
Constitution of India and presumption as regards the innocence of an
'rr (2014) 2 SCC l.
4? 201 I crt..l t347
40
M,,.

accused is a human right. Therefore, a person who is booked under criminal
law has a right to know the nature of allegations so that he can take
necessary steps to safeguard his liberty. It is imperative in a country
govemed by Rule of Law. The court held as under:
" (A) An accused is entitled to get a copy of the First Information
Report at an earlier stage than as prescribed under section 207 of
the CrPC.
(B) An accused who has reasons to suspect that he has been roped
in a criminal case and his name may be finding place in a First
Information Report can submit an application through his
representative/agent/parokar for grant ofa certified copy before the
concerned police fficer or to the Superintendent of Police on
poyment ofsuch fee which is payable for obtaining such a copy from
the Court. On such application being made, the copy shall be
supplied w ithin twe nly-four hours.
(C) Once the First ldormation Report is forwarded by the police
station to the concerned Magistrate or any Special Judge, on an
application beingfiledfor certified copy on behalf of the accused,
the same shall be given by the Court concerned within two working
days. The aforesaid direction has nothing to do with the statutory
mandate inhered under section 207 of the CrPC.
(D) The copies of the FIR, unless reasons recorded regard being had
to the nature of the offence that the same is sensitive in nature,
should be uploaded on the Delhi Police website within twenty-four
hours of lodging of the FIR so that the accused or any person
connected with the same can download the FIR andfile appropriate
application before the Court as per law for redressal of his
grievances.
4t
(E) The decision not to upload the copy of the FIR on the website of
Delhi Police shall not be taken by an ofiicer below the rank of
Depuly Commissioner of Police and that too by way of a speaking
order. A decision so taken by the Deputy Commissioner of Police
shall also be duly communicated to the Area magistrote.
(F) The word 'sensitive' apart from the other aspects which may be
thought of being sensitive by the competent authority as stated
hereinbefore would also include concept of privacy regard being
had to the nature of the FIR. r
&_."-,|.Y

(G) In case a copy of the FIR is not provided on the ground of
sensitive nature of the case, a person grieved by the said oction, after
disclosing his identity, can submit a representation with the
Commissioner of Police who shall constitute a committee of three
high oficers and the committee shall deal with the said grievance
within three days from the date of receipt of the representation and
communicate it to the grieved person.
(H) The Commissioner of Police shall constitute the committee
within eight weeks from today.
(l) In cases wherein decisions have been taken not to give copies of
the FIR regard being had to the sensitiye nature of the case, it will
be open to the accused/his authorized representative/parokar to file
an application for grant of certified copy before the Court to which
the FIR has been sent and the same shall be provided in quite
promptitude by the concerned Court not beyond three days of the
submission of rhe application.
(J) The directions for uploading the FIR on the website of the Delhi
Police shall be given effect from I st February, 201 1 . "
D. Tajinder Singh & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.a3
5.4. The court in this case dismissed the petition praying for a policy decision
to be taken by the respondents for lodging e-FIR against both cognizable
and non-cognizable offences and resisted in expanding the scope ofe-FIR
for all offences by saying that,
"For several types of offences, e-FlR is already permitted by the
respondents, but we do not want to allow e-FIR to befiled in all ytpe
of offences."
5.5. The court in this petition further observed that:
"It ought to be kept in mind that in all cases e-FIR cannot be
permitted mainly for the reason that sometimes a victim who has to
file an FIR moy not be aware of the fine niceties and therefore the
ingredients of the offinces may not be incorporated in e-FIR. lf at
1' l'ajindcr Sihgh & Ors. v. t tnion o/'lndia 2019 SCC' Online Del 12143.
42

all it is permitted, in that eventuality if in any proceedings initiated
by the accused under the inherent powers of the High Court, the
same is granted on accounl of any such infirmity, the very purpose
of lodging of an FIR will be frustrated. There can be e-FIR for such
other type of cases for which e-FIR is not permissible as per policy
decision taken by the respondents."
E. Arnesh Kumar v. Stote of Bihar and Anotheraa
5.6. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in this case allowed the appeal and issued
detailed directions on the exercise ofpower ofarrest and held that:
"5. Arrest brings humiliation, curtoils freedom and casts scars
forever. Lawmakers know it so also the police ... .
6... no orrest should be made only because the offence is non-
bailable and cognizable and therefore, lawful for the police fficers
to do so. The existence of the power to arrest is one thing, the
justification, for the exercise of it is quite another. Apart from power
to arrest, the police oficers ntust be able to justify the reasons
thereof No arrest can be made in a routine manner on a mere
allegation of commission of an offence made against a person. It
would be prudent andwisefor a police ofrcer that no arrest is made
without a reasonable satisfaction reached after some investigation
as to the genuineness of the allegation . . .
7. ...
41. When police may aruest without warrant. (1) Any police
fficer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a
warrant, arrest any person-
(o)*i<**;
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or
credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion
exists that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or
which may extend to seven years whether with or without fine, if the
following conditions are satisfied, namely: -(r****;
(ii) the 
police oficer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary-
(a) to prevent such personfrom committing any further offence; or
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
41(2014) 8 SCC 273
43

(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence
to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any manner; or
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
dissuade himfrom disclosing suchfacts to the Court or to the police
oficer; or
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court
whenever required cannot be ensured,
and the police oficer shall record while making such arrest, his
reasons in writing:
Provided that a police fficer shall, in all cases where the arrest of
a person is not required under the provisions of this sub-section,
record the reasons in writingfor not making the arrest;
7.1 From a plain reading ofthe aforesaid provision, it is evident that
a person accused of offence punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to
seven years with or without fine, cannot be arrested by the police
oficer only on its satisfaction that such person had committed the
ofence punishable as aforesaid. A Police officer before aruest, in
such cases hos to be further satisfied that such orrest is necessory to
prevent such person from committing any further offence; or for
proper investigation of the case; or to prevent the accused from
causing the evidence of the offence to disappear; or tampering with
such evidence in any manner; or to prevent such personfrom making
any inducement, threat or promise to a witne,ss so ds to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or the police fficer; or
unless such accused person is arrested, his presence in the court
whenever required cannot be ensured. These are the conclusions,
which one may reach based onfacts.
7.2 The law mandates the police oficer to state the facts and record
the reasons in writingwhich led him to come to a conclusion covered
by any of the provisions aforesaid, while making such arrest. The
Law further requires the police fficers to record the reasons in
writingfor not making the arrest. ..."
5.7. In order to ensure that the accused are not arrested unnecessarily and
Magistrates do not authorize detention casually and mechanically, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court gave the following directions:
11.1 All the State Governments to instruct its police oficers not to
automaticolly arrest when o case under Section 498-A of the IPC is
44 U-

5.8
registered but to satisfy themselves about the necessity for arrest
under the parometers laid down above /lowing from Section 41,
CrPC;
I1.2 
All police oficers be provided with a check list containing
specified sub-clauses under Section a I ( I ) (b) (ii) ;
11.3 The police offcer shall forward the check list duly filed and
furnish the reasons and materials which necessitated the arrest,
while forwarding/producing the accused before the Magistrate for
further detention;
11.4 The Magistrate while authorizing detention of the accused
shall peruse the report furnished by the police fficer in terms
aforesaid and only after recording its satisfaction, the Magistrate
will authorize detention ;
11.5 The decision not to arrest an accused, be forwarded to the
Magistrate within two weel<s from c the date of the institution of the
case with o copy to the Magistrate which may be extended by the
Superintendent of police of the district for the reasons to be
recorded' in writing;
11.6 Notice of appearance in ternts of Section 4lA of Cr.PC be
served on the accused within two weeks from the date of institution
of the case, which may be extended by the Superintendent of Police
of the District for the reasons to be recorded inwriting;
I1.7 Failure to comply with the directions aforesaid shall apart
from rendering the police officers concerned liable for departmental
action, they shall also be liable to be punishedfor contempt ofcourt
to be instituted before High Court having territorial jurisdiction.
1 L8 Authorizing detention without recording reasons as aforesaid
by the judicial Magistrate concerned shall be liable for
departmental action by the appropriate High Court. "
The court also added that
"...the directions aforesoid shall not only apply to the cases under
Section 498-A of the I.P.C. or Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition
Act, the case in hand, but also such cases where offence is
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less than
45

seven years or which may extend to seven years; whether with or
without fine;' (emphasis in original)
F. Sotender Kumar Antil v. Central Bureau of Investigation and Anotheras
5.9. In the case of Satender Kumar Antil v. Central Bureau of Investigation and
Another (2022)16, the Hon'ble Supreme Court while reiterating the
provisions related to arrest under the CrPC, discussed the intention of the
Parliament as follows-
"20. The Code of Criminal Procedure, despite being a procedural
lsw, is enacted on the inviolable right enshrined under Article 21
and 22 of the Constitution of India. The provisions governing clearly
exhibited the oforesaid intendment of the Parliament.
21. Though the word 'bail' has not been defined as aforesaid,
Section 2A de/ines a bailable and non-bailable offense. A non-
bailable offense is a cognizable offense enabling the police fficer
to arrest without a waruant. To exercise the said power, the Code
introduces certain
embargoes by way of restrictions."
"24. This provision mandates the police fficer to record his reasons
in writing while making the aruest. Thus, a police offcer is duty-
bound to record the reasons for arrest in writing. Similarly, the
police oficer shall record reasons when he/she chooses not to
arrest. There is no requirement of the aforesaid procedure when the
offense alleged is more than seven years, among other reasons. "
5.10. On the scope and objective of Section 41 and 4lA, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court held that they are obviously facets of Article 21 of the Constitution
and reiterated its judgment in Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar4T and held
that the directions given in the aforesaid case ought to be complied with in
letter and spirit by the investigating and prosecuting agencies and that,
45 (2022) lo scc 5l
46 lbid.
r? (2014) 8 scc 273
46
I
\t\".

"...the directions aforesaid shall not only apply to the cases under
Section 498-A IPC or Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, the
case in hand, but also such cases where offence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven yeors or
which may extend to seven years, whether with or without fine."
47
L

6. CONCLUSION
6.1. Police (including railway police and village police), subject to the
provisions of Entry 2A of List I (Union List), falls under Entry 2 of List-II
(State List) of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India.48 Police,
a part of the Government's administrative apparatus, is responsible for
uphotding the law, preventing, detecting, and investigating crimes, and
maintaining public safety and order.ae
6.2. Substantive law and procedural law share a syrnbiotic relationship. An
effective procedural regime is necessary for the proper implernentation of
substantive law. Through a well laid out procedural law, substantive law is
made relevant, meaningf'ul, and accessible to the citizens.
6.3. Grievances arising out of abuse of office and comrption for non-
registration of FIR have been highlighted by most of the Commissions and
Committees and various suggestions have been made by them from time
to time so that all FIRs are registered by the police and public grievances
are addressed adequately. However, the problem ofnon-registration ofFIR
even in cognizable cases is experienced by the public even today and is one
of the main causes for delay in disposal of cases involving commission of
heinous crimes.
6.4. The advent of digital technology has decreased the role of paper-based
documents and thereby necessitated the need to make changes in the
procedural laws of the country. There is no provision for registration of e-
FIR under the Code of Criminal Procedure, I 973. However, eight Statesso
(Delhi, Gujarat, Kamataka, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh, and Uttarakhand) have developed a mechanism for registering e-
FIRs. Currently, these online portals facilitate registration of e-FIRs for
48
a8 Constitution oflndia, Entry 2, List II, Schedule Vll.
4e Enabling Transformation ofPolice Functioning yia Digitizar io\ Hitachi, at'ailoble at
https://social-innovation.hitachi/en-in/knowledge-hub/collaborate/transformalion-of-police(last visited on l3ri
luly 2023).
50 Letter No. 32131/2022-RD (E-14061) received fiom the Bureau ofPolice Research & Development dated 22"d
May,2023.
\ur/

vehicle or property theft, for lost articles, like wallet/purse, PAN Card,
Passport, important documents like School or College Mark Sheets or
Degree, Aadhaar Card, Driving License etc. Uploading of FIR on the
police website is also being done as directed by the Supreme Court. The
following table lists the offences for which e-FIR is being done in the
above-mentioned eight states:
List of Offences for which Resistration of e-FIR is beins done in the
followin 8 States
STATES LIST OF OFFENCES
I Delhi5l l. Property Theft Case
2. M.V. Theft cases
2 Gujarat52 1. Mobile Theft
2. Vehicle Theft
3 Karnatakas3 e-FIR for Reporting of Stolen Vehicles.
4 Madhya
Pradesh5a
e-FIR in cases of vehicle theft up to 15 lakh or general
theft up to one lakh.
Odisha55 Citizen can lodge FIR electronically for MV Theft
Cases in the following Circumstances:
i) Unknown Accused
ii) Not involved in Crime (Vehicle should not be
involved in any Crime. Complaint shall give
mandatory self-certification that the vehicle is not
involved in any crime at the time of filing of e-FIR)
5' Delhi Police, lndi4 available at hhps!/delhipolice.gov.in/viewfir (last visited on Seprember 13,h, 2023).tr Gujarat Police, India, awildble dt https://gujhome.gujarat.gov.in/portal/ (last visited on September l3th, 2023).
tr Karnataka Pofice, I ndia, available at htJ.ps:/,4$p.karnataka.gov.i english (last v,sited on September l3th, 2023 ).t4 Department of Public Relations, Government of Madhya Pradesh, India, ayailable at:
https://www.mpinfo.org/Home/TodaysNews?newsid=2021 I008N92&fontname=FontEnglish&LoclD=32&pub
dale.=10/08D021 (last visited on Seprember l3!h,2023).
55 Odisha Pofice, lndia, ataildble dtt hnps://citizenportal-op.gov.in/citizen/Aboutcomplaint.aspx (last visited on
September l3'r', 2023).
49
S.
No.
5
V

iii) Not traced (Vehicle should not have been
recovered till the filing of e-FIR. Complainant shall
give mandatory self-certification to this effect. There
shall be provision for verification of vehicle
information from Vahan/Sarathi applications.)
iv) No injury
6 Rajasthan56 Vehicle Theft onlv
7 U ttar
Pradesh5T
8 Uttarakhand58 e-FIR facility is available only for unknown accused
6.5. India has successfully implemented several online services like Centralized
Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System, online RTI portal and e-
passport services etc. This has notjust exhibited an excellent use ofmodern
technology and digitalizing the economy but has also ensured greater
transparency and improved convenience for the citizens.
6.6. The Information Technology Act, 2000 contains provisions on legal
recognition of digital signatures and authentication, attribution.
acknowledgement, dispatch and security of electronic records, regulation
of certifying authorities etc. The relevant provisions of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 and Indian Evidence Act, etc. have also been amended by this
Act of2000.
6.7. The Law Commission of India in its 239ft Reportse titled "Expeditious
Investigation and Trial of Criminal Cases Against Influential Public
Personalities" proposed that:
56 Rajasthan Police, India, available ot https://police.rajasthan.gov.in/citizen/indexcitizen.htm (last visited on
September 14th,2023).
57 Uttar Pradesh Police, India, available at hnps://uppolice.gov. in/#Findo/o2\youtyo20Police%2ostation (last
visited on September l3'h, 2023).
58 Uttarakhand Police, India a,ailable at https://policecitizenportat.uk.gov.in/efir/Login.aspx (last visited on
September l3rh, 2023).
te Law Commission oflndia, "239th Repon on Expeditious Investigation and Trial of Criminal Cases Against
Influential Public Personalities" 3I (March 2012).
50
e-FIR facility available for unknown accused cases
ah/

"FIRs shall be recorded on the computer and they shall be instantb)
sent to the Magistrates' Courts by e-mail. The practice of sending
FIR through e-mail should be legally recognized. "
6.8. The Commission also proposed the networking of all police stations to
establish a link with all the courts.
6.9. In Youth Bar Association of Indiav. (Jnion of India60 the Supreme Court
directed for uploading of FIR (unless the offence is sensitive in nature, like
sexual offences, offences pertaining to insurgency, terrorism, offences
under POCSO Act and such other offences) on the website of allthe States
with effect from 1 5th November, 20 16.
6.10. The Report of the Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law headed by
Justice J.S. Verma6l recommended that:
" (c) In addition to every individual being able to register an FIR at
any police station irrespective of the jurisdiction in which the crime
was complained of in writing, every individual must also be able to
register his complaint online on a designated website. After this a
complaint number should be automatically generated so the
complainant can track the FIR.
The same complaint would then be generated at the nearest police
station and a copy would also be provided to an ombudsman office
located in every district. It will still be the case that an FIR connot
be registered anonymously and the individual who has registered an
FIR online will then have to go to any police station to verify his
identity and the FIR. The Delhi Police already have the facilityfor
online registration and tracking of FIR. Something of this nature
must be replicated and made operational across the country. The
FIR should also be recorded on a national online database for ready
occessibility by the complainant. "
6.1 1. Due to advancements in technology, the groMh of justice and law
enforcement systems, policing is going through a major transition. India is
@ Yofih Bar Association y. l/nion of lndia AIR 2016 SC 4136.
6r Government of India, "Report ofthe Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law" 355-356 (Covernment of
Indi4 23 January 2013)
51
q-

62sanjay Mathur and Dr. Prashun Gupta, "CyTrain: Cybercrime Training Portal with Simulated Leaming"
I NCRB Journal l-10 (November 2022).
6rDr. Prashun Gupta & Narendra Kumar Koli', "Project Management of CCTNS" I NCRB JournalT6-84
(Novembe.2022).
52
no exception being the second largest internet-using population.62 And as
technology permeates daily life, police systems are quickly adapting to
state-of-the-art technologies to keep up with the changing nature of law
enforcement and the legal system. Traditional administrative and
govemance structures are being replaced by an ICT-driven e-governance
paradigm as Digital India gathers traction. IT and digital technologies are
becoming more and more integrated into policing, modernizing operations
and improving the availability, efficacy, and quality of police services.
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is already being used
in police operations across states to varying degrees. In an effort to
modernize the police force, the Ministry of Home Affairs conceptualized
the Crime and Criminal Tracking Networks and Systems (CCTNS) project
as a Mission Mode Project under the National e-Govemance Plan (NeGP),
a Government of India initiative during the year 2009.It focused on the
modernization of the Police to improve outcomes in the area of crime
investigation, criminal detection, information gathering and its
dissemination across various police organizations and units across the
country and to enhance services to citizens.63
6.12. The Digital India program of the Govemment of India initiated with a
vision to transform India into a digitally empowered society and knowledge
economy which includes Crime and Criminal Tracking Network & systems
(CCTNS). To facilitate the implementation of e-govemance projects at
various levels across the country, registration of e-FIR will be one of the
most important steps. Apart from improving transparency, it will improve
overall efficiency and convenience for the citizens and Police alike.
Secured data will be generated by the registration of e-FIR and would
provide for better track of evidence during trial.

6.13. Implementation of section 154 CrPC in its undiluted form is not only
possible but also desirable. The process of registration of FIR may be made
simple by allowing multiple modes of providing information. Most of the
States in India have provided online portals to citizens enabling them to
lodge complaints. The complaints are all enquired into and final reports are
prepared. The same or similar system can be used to register e-FIR. The
Govemment of India has already provided CCTNS facilities to all the
States. Adequate hardware and software have already been provided in
most locations. The use of these facilities to promote free registration of e-
FIR will give legitimacy to the criminal justice process and increase the
faith ofthe common man in law. Unless the citizens are allowed unhindered
and equal access to the criminal justice system, for which registration of
FIR is the first step, there can be no equality before law, or equal protection
of law, as envisioned in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.6a
At present, as per the correspondence with BPR&D and NCRB, the States
and Union Territories across the country are providing online services in
nine areas like verification of tenants, domestic help and employees,
issuance of character certificates, etc. However, only eight states are
registering e-FIR. The data from all the CCTNS portals are stored in the
respective State Data Service Centres. CCTNS was also expected to help
in the deployment of the Interoperable Criminal Justice System (ICJS),
which aimed at integrating police data under CCTNS with prisons data,
prosecution, forensics and courts. CCTNS was conceptualized to automate
the police working. It facilitates the entry of data related to crime reported
at police stations including details ofthe scene of crime, accused involved,
property seized, and final report filed in the court. It also provides a search
facility in respect of persons and property, which makes the investigation
process easier and faster. NCRB, as one of the main stakeholders, was
eHanifQureshi, "Whether India is Ready for Online FtRs" 65 lmlian Police Journal 73-80 (2018\, avtilable at
https://papers.ssm.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=365 1230 ( last visited on l3'h July 2023 )
$'
6.14.
53

6.15.
6.16.
6.17.
entrusted with monitoring and coordination of this project at the National
Level.
Digitization of data ensures 
access to all stakeholders in the system: courts,
transport authorities, hospitals, municipal authorities, etc. It helps address
the challenges of public order and crime control more effectively.
Importantly, CCTNS implementation rests on integrated service delivery.
Fortiffing citizen-police interfaces augurs well with this premise. As per
the latest data till May, 2023 of the PRAGATI DASTIBOARD (provided
by NCRB), it can be seen that Network Connectivity in the Police Station
has improved and almost 99% Police Stations are equipped with the
CCTNS software.
In areas where visiting the Police Station might not be feasible due to
security or other infrastructural issues, filing e-FIR may prove to be a boon.
Also, filing of e-FIR would help in overcoming reluctance shown by police
officers to file FIRs in cases of petty offences. Moreover, it would
overcome the difficulties resulting from low police to public ratio.
By automating processes and functions at the level of Police Stations and
improving delivery of citizen-centric services through effective use of
Information & Communication Technology (ICT), the ultimate goal is to
make the Police functioning citizen-friendly, transparent, accountable,
effective and effi cient.
54
L
\h,

A
7. RECOMMENDATIONS
Registration of e-FIR to be permitted for all cognizable offences where
the accused is not known
7.1. In tune with India's progressive Digital India mission and National e-
Governance Plan, the Commission recommends that in cases where the
accused is not known, registration of e-FIR should be allowed for all
cognizable offbnces as per section 154 ofthe Code of Criminal Procedure,
t973.
B. Registration of e-FIR to be permitted for oll cognizable offences
ottracting punishment up to 3 years where the occused is known
7.2. The Commission further recommends that where the accused is known, as
a preliminary step, registration of e-FIRs may be allowed for all cognizable
offences wherein the punishment prescribed under the Indian Penal Code,
1860 and other laws for the time being in force, is up to three years. Such
a limited roll-out of the e-FIR scheme in the initial phase would ensure that
for the time being, there is no disruption relating to the procedure adopted
for reporting and investigation ofserious offences.
'7.3. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Satender Kumar Antilv. Central Bureau of
Investigation (2022)65 , emphasized on the presumption of innocence ofthe
accused and observed:
*...14. Presumption of innocence has been acknowledged
throughout the world. Article l4 (2) of the International Coyenant
on Civil and Polilical Rights, 1966 and Article I I of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights acknowledge the presumption of
innocence, as a cardinal principle of law, until the individual is
proven guilty."
65 (2022) l0 scc 5l
s"
55

7.4. Further, the Apex Court in Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar66 had issued
detailed directions on the exercise of power of arrest and held that since
arrest brings humiliation, curtails freedom and casts scars forever,
therefore, no arrest should be made only because the offence is non-
bailable and cognizable and also cannot be made in a routine manner on a
mere allegation of commission of an offence made against a person. It
would be prudent and wise for a police officer that no arrest is made
without a reasonable satisfaction reached after some investigation as to the
genuineness of the allegation. The Court also clarified that the directions
given in this case shall not only apply to the cases under Section 498-4 of
the l.P.C. or Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, the case in hand, but
also such cases where offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years;
whether with or without fine.
7.5. As per the above-mentioned judgments, the strict guidelines are to be
adhered to while making an arrest where offence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may
extend to seven years; whether with or without fine. Therefore,
implementing this scheme of registration of e-FIR for all cognizable
offences wherein the punishment prescribed under the Indian Penal Code,
1860 and other laws for the time being in force, is up to three years, would
also protect the accused from arrest, in cases ofany misuse as the Police is
duty bound to adhere to the said guidelines.
7.6. Additionally, as per sub-clause (2) of Clause 283 of the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 202361 , Magistrates have been empowered to try in a
summary way all or any of the offences not punishable with death or
66 (2014) 8 SCC 273.
67 Bill No. 123 of 2023
56
s-/

imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three years
(presently this is allowed for offences not punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years
under section 260 of the CrPC). Therefore, to protect the accused from any
abuse, this recommended scheme can be implemented in a phased manner
and initially for all the cognizable offences wherein the punishment
prescribed under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and other laws for the time
being in force, is up to three years.
C. States to have power to expand list of offences
7.7. In addition to the above, the Commission recommends that States may
expand the list of offences for which e-FIR may be registered in future, if
the working of registration of e-FIR tums out to be effective.
D. Regislration of e-FIR to not apply to all offinces
7.8. The present scheme of registration of e-FIR may not be allowed in all cases
due to the following reasons:
i. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the landmark judgment of
Lalita Kumari v . Govt. of Uttar Pradesh6s, while allowing the
preliminary enquiry before registration of FIR, has held;
"v. The scope of preliminary enquiry is not to verify the veracity or
otherwise of the information receiyed bul only to ascertain whether
the idormation reveals any cognizable offence.
vi. As to what type and in which cases preliminary enquiry is to be
conducted will depend on the facts and circumstances ofeach case.
The category of cases in which preliminary enquiry may be made
are as under:
a. Matrimonial disputes/fumily disputes
b. Commercial offences
c. Medical negligence cases
d. Coruuption cases
63 (2014) 2 SCC l.
57
v

e. Cases where there is abnormal delay/latches in initiating criminal
prosecution, for example, over three-month delay in reporting the
matter without satisfactorily explaining the reasons for delay.
The aforesaid are only illustrations and not exhaustive of all
conditions which may warrant preliminary enquiry.
vii. While ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused and the
complainant, a preliminary enquiry should be made time bound and,
in any case it should not exceed 7 days. The fact of such delay and
the causes of it must be reJlected in the general diary entry. "
7.9. Further, a layman may not be aware of these legal intricacies and once
registration of FIR by way of e-FIR in all cases is allowed, it may cause
extremely high investigative burden on police apart from curtailing its
power to conduct preliminary enquiry in appropriate cases as is required
under a clear mandate of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
E. e-Complaint to be allowed for all Non-Cognizable Offences
7.10. Registration of e-Complaint should be allowed for all non-cognizable
offences as per section 155 ofthe Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as is
being currently done in all the States/UTs.
Verification of Informant/Complainant and Punishment for Folse
Information
In order to avoid false registration of e-Complaints/e-FlR and for the
constructive use of the facility, it is important that the verification of
complainant or informant is done using e-authentication techniques. This
can be achieved by verifring mobile number through OTP for the purpose
of registering e-FIPJe-Complaint and mandating the uploading of vatid ID
proof like Aadhaar or any other Govemment approved ID.
Declaration by the informant that the facts contained in the e-FIR are true
to the best of knowledge, information and belief of the informant must be
made mandatory.
7 .11.
7.12.
58
F.
L
W.l"-

" ...shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or withfine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees, or with both. "
G. Privacy of the porlies to be ensured
7.14. It must be ensured that data provided while registering the FIR online is
not compromised with and there is no infringement of privacy of the parties
involved. Privacy of the InformanVComplainant and the person named as
'Suspect' on the Centralized National Portal is to be secured till the e-FIR
is not signed by the InformantiComplainant. In case the registered
information is not signed by the informant deliberately within the
prescribed time, the information shall be deleted from the Centralized
National portal after 2 weeks. Privacy of sexual offence victims must be
given prime consideration at all stages.
H. Copocity Building to be given importonce
7.15. For the successful implementation of the recommended IT initiatives,
capacity building at various levels is extremely important. Hence, it is
recommended that training programs must cover general/basic computer
awareness programs in addition to CCTNS-specific programs to ensure
adoption ofthe system at the police station level.
6, (2015) 6 scc 287
59
(This is also in line with the judgment of Priyanka Srivastaya v. State of
UP,U')
7.13. A minimum punishment of imprisonment and fine should be inflicted for
false registration of e-complaints or e-FIR. This can be achieved by
amending the provision under section 182 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
?S,
V

7.16. The Legal Services Clinics in the Law Schools/Collegesfuniversities
should act as a catalyst and facilitator in bringing about this online
revolution.
7.17. ln order to promote awareness en masse for the implementation of
registration of e-FIR, information regarding this facility shall be widely
disseminated so that the common man is encouraged to report offences
without facing the hurdles of procedural formalities.To Since raising mass
awareness is a continuous process, the following methods can be adopted:
a. Information about registration of e-FIR registration should be
prominently displayed on govemment websites and portals,
including detailed guides, FAQs, infographics and video tutorials.
b. Workshops and webinars may be organized in various regions to
educate the public about the process ofregistration of e-FIR.
c. Advertisements may be placed in newspapers and magazines,
. especially in regional and local publications.
d. The public must be informed about the initiative's progress, and any
improvements made to the system.
e. It also must be ensured that information and resources are available
in multiple local languages to reach a wider audience.
l. Miscellaneous Recommendotions
7.18. All e-FIRs should be forwarded to the Courts concemed by linking the
website of police with e-Courts portal. This can be achieved by using the
Inter-operable Criminal Justice System (ICJS), which allows digital
signing of e-FIR and automatically sending it to the court.
7.19. The Commission recommends that suitable amendments be made to the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the Information Technology Act, 2000, the
70 Kodungallur Film Society v.lJnion oflndia,(2018) I0 SCC 713
60
OI-

Indian Penal Code, 1860, and other legislation to facilitate the registration
of e-FIR.
7.20. The proposal of electronic registration of FIR which is being partly
implemented for specified crimes in eight states (as per the information
provided by BPR&D) has taken one step forward under Clause 173 in the
proposed Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita Bill, which will replace the
CrPC, 1973. However, as per the proposed Clause 173 in the new Bill,
while information can be given electronically for cognizable offences
without any bar on jurisdiction, the police officer is required to take it on
record after it has been signed within three days of giving the first
information. Further, the same has to be kept for record in a book by the
Police Officer as prescribed by the State Government.
7.21. The online portal developed for registering e-FIR or e-Complaint must be
user friendly. A Centralized System, as proposed under Annexure B, may
be setup for processing information in order to expand the mode of
electronic communication. The Police Officer shall use the information
provided on this portal to check whether a cognizable offence has been
committed or not and will proceed accordingly.
7.22. For registration of e-FIR, the suggestive procedure as stipulated in
Annexure-A may be adopted.
The Commission recommends, accordingly.
----xxx----
6l
6'-

ANNEXURE A: PROCEDURE FOR REGISTERING E-FIR
(to be followcd by Police and other Investigating Agencies)
STEP l: INFORMATION comes from the Centralized National Portal to the
Police Station concerned 
I
The Police Officer concemed. who is responsible for handling the online
information from the Portal witl check the details as provided on the Centralized
National Portal by the Informant and check whether any Cognizable Offence,
attracting punishment up to 3 ycars (as prescribed under the Indian Penal Code,
1860 and other special laws lor the time being in force) has been committed or
noI.
STEP 2:
I\ CASE NON-COG\IZABLE
OFFE\('E IS \I,{Dt] OUT
Cognizet le Offence attracring
punishment aho\'c I years is
madc out
A
I
The Police Officer will regisrer rhe
said information by filing it in the
prescribed format provided in
Annexure-C, mentioning all the
relevant details: -
L Act involved,
2. Relevaot sections of law.
3. Place ofOccurence.
4. Time oflncidcnr,
5- Police Station concemed.
6. Beat Number, erc.
Tho Police Officcr *ill follow
lhc convenlional nn)de oI
registering the FIR in accordancc
wilh seclion 15.1 ol lhc Code oi
Crimrnal procedurc. I 971
I
Cognizable Offence
attracting punishmcnt up to l
yrtrs is made out
The Police officer will not regisrcr the
information as e-FIR and give the reasons for the
same in writing. The reasons shall also be
uploaded on the Centralized National Ponal under
the tab 'STATUS'.
Whcre, Non-Cognizable Offence is committed,
the Police will proceed as pcr section I55 ofthe
Criminal Procedure Code. 1973.
62
IN CASE COGNIZABLE OFFENCE
IS MADE OUT B.
THIS MUST BE COMPI,ETED BY THE
POLICE OFT'ICER \I'ITHIN 3 DAYS OF
RECEIVING THE INTORMATION ON THE
CENTR,{LIZED NATIO\.IL PORTAL
q\,,

STEP 3: The Police Officer registering the information in the prescribed FIR format
will inform the informant (via text on the mobile or using any other electronic mode
and on the portal, under the tab 'STATUS')
.E This will go automatically, in every case, whether the information is registered
in the prescribed FIR format or not.
THE POLICE OFFICER CONCERNED WILL GET THE SIGNATURE OF THE
INFORMANT WITHIN THREE DAYS IN THE MANNER WHICH IS FEASIBLE
UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES.
STEP 4:
lf SIGNED within 3 davs If NOT SIGNED within 3 days
deliberately by the lnlbnnant
I I
I
The substance
entered in a book to
such officer in such
State Government may
behalf and the e-FIR
on the website of the
concerned within
' Regardless of this facility, the informant is free to adopt the conventional nrode for the
purpose of registration of FIR.
6-l
e-FIR will be registered The Police Officcr, alier recording the
reasons in writing. nccd not register thc c-
FIR.
Alter 
nvo wccks, the said inlbrmation (as
provided by thc informant on the
Centralized National Portal), shall be
automatically dclctcd liom the portal.
V

ANNEXURE B: CENTRALIZED NATIONAL PORTAL
(to be used for filing e-FIR)
STEP l: Select STATE
I
DISTRICT
PIN CODE
I
I
I
POLICE STATION (optional)
STEP 2: Stage of SIGN UP:
MOBILE NO.
OTP
FULI, NAME
I
I
CAPTCHA
STEP 3: Stage ofproviding USER DETAILS:
1. Name
2. Gender
3. Date of Birth
4. Address
5. Mobile Number
6, Aadhaar Number or any other valid Government ID
7. Upload proof of the Valid ID:
STEP.l: NATURE OF INCIDENT:
Following is a suggestive drop-down list of broad categorization of offences committed
against the following: -
I . Against Children
2. Against Defence and Paramilitary Force
3. Against Department
64
\\,/

4. Against Foreigners
5. Against Individual
6. AgainstOrganization
7. Against Police O{frcer
8. Against Public Servant
9. Against Public
10. Against Senior Citizen
I l. Against Women
12. Cyber Crime
1 3. Wild Life Case
14. Any other case
STEP 5: DETAILS OF INCIDE\T:
1. Date of Incident (DD/MM/ryYYY); (From _ to_)
2. Place of Incident (Statc-District-Zonc ctc.)
3. Time of Incident (HH: MM: SS)
4. Description ofthe Incident (complete details)
STEP 6: DETAILS OF SUSPECT:
Can you identify the suspect: -?
YES
l. Name ofthe suspect
2. Number of Suspect
3. Age
4. Gender
5. Vehicle used by the suspect, ifany
6. Weapon used, if any
NO
S'I'EP 7: ANY OTHER DETAILS:
65
W,'

STEP It: DECI,ARATIO\:
"I _hereby declare that the information given bv e is true to the best of my
knorvledge, information and belief and that nothing has been concealed or distorted. If
any information given by me is found to be lalse or frivolous, I shall be tiable to be
prosecuted/punished under the laws for the time being in force applicable"
STEP 9: SIGNA'I'URE:
STEP l0: STATUS/ ACTION TAKEN BY POLICE ON THE INFORNTATTON: A rab
will be there for the convenience of the informant wherein the action taken by the Police on
the information can be checked
'A check must be put in placc by restricring the tiling of information bearing same details of
incident (like date, time and place ofincident and the name ofsuspect) in order to avoid
repeated filing ofe-FIR on the Centralized National Portal.
66
VY/

[Justice K.T. Sankaranl
Member
[Justice Ritu Raj Awasthil
Chairperson
[Prof. (Dr.) Anand Paliwall
Member
[Prof. D.P. Vermal
Member
Ae
[Mr. K. Biswall
Member Secretary
U- Le-*---A*^
[Dr. Niten Chandral
Member (Ex-Oficio)
p..*I/",,,0,,t
Member (Ex-Officio)
61
V
l"*o$"0".4

g,\--
[Prof. (Dr.) Raka Aryal
Part-time Member
68
[Mr. M. Karunanithi]
Part-time Member