qaq.l nlra
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
AGE OF CONSENT UNDER THE PROTECTION OF
CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT,2012
Report No.283
September,2023

The 22"d Law Commission was constituted by Gazette Notification for a period ofthree
years vide Order No. F No, 45021/l/2018-Admn-ltt(LA) dated 2 t.' February,2020 issued
by the Governmenl of lndia, Ministry of Law and Justice, Depanment of Legal Affairs.
New Delhi. The term ofthe 22nd Law Commission was extended vide Order No. FA No.
6001I1225/2022-Admn. t(LA) dated 22"d February. 2023.
The Law Commission consists of a Chairperson. three fullrime Members, Member
Secretary. two er-o/ficb Members and two Part-time Members.
Chai rson
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Full-time Members
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Prof. (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Prof. D.P. Verma
Member Secretarv
Shri K. Biswal
Et-officio Members
Dr. Niten Chandra, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
Dr. Reeta Vasishta, Sefietary. Legislative Depanment
Part-time Members
Shri M. Karunan ithi
Prol. (Dr.) Raka Arya
Law Officers
Smt. Vanha Chandra" Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri Atul Kumar Gupta, Deputy Law Officer
Legal Consultants
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Caurav Yadav
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Shri Davinder Singh
Ms. Priya Rathi
Ms. Ruchika Yadav
The Law Commission is located at:
2nd and 41h Floor. 'B' wing
Lok Nayak Bhawan. Khan Market
New Delhi-l l0 003.
The text ofthis Report is available on the Website at:
www.lawcommi ionofindia.nic.in
O Government of lndia
Law Commission of India

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former Chief Justic€ of High Court of Karnataka)
Chairperson
22'o Law Commission of India
DO No.6(3) 33212022-LC(LS)
rrq{o fr{rd
qrqll, Eg lTq q{efr
ffitga p arofirr, qqt 6 s'q qnrdq)
qqH
qrrfr A 22d frB sTrdFr
Date: 27th September, 2023
Trog
3Il-fi-Uoi.
3rTdTdrflq
Hl.bb[< 3h %P-*rWt Xle,+*abrz t
I am pleased to forward you Report No. 283 of the Law Commission of India on "Age of
Consent under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act.2012". The Law
Commission received a reference from the Hon'ble High Court of Kamataka (Dharwad
Bench), uide letter dated 9th November, 2022, asking the Commission to rethink on the age
criteria for consent, taking into consideration the rising number ofcases relating to minor girls
above the age of 16 years falling in love, eloping and having sexual intercourse with the boy,
thereby attracting the provisions ofthe Protection ofChildren lrom Sexual OffencesAct,20l2
("POCSO) and/or the Indian Penal Code, 1860. The Commission is also in receipt of a
reference from the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh (Gwalior Bench), vide letter dated
l gth April, 2023, wherein the Cou( has drawn the Commission's attention on how the
enforcement of the POCSOAct, in its present form, causes gross injustice in cases of statutory
rape where de facro consent is present. The Court further requested the Commission to suggest
amendment to the POCSO Act, vesting discretionary power in the Special Judge to not impose
the statutory minimum sentence in cases where de.facto consent is apparent on part ofthe girl
child or where such a relationship has culminated in marriage, with or without children.
The Commission thoroughly examined the judgments rendered by High Court of Kamataka in
Slate of Kornataka u Basavraj S/o Yellappa Madar (2023) I AIR Kant R 231 and the High
Court of Madhya Pradesh in Veekesh Kalawat v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. [Misc.
Criminal Case No. 4521 of 20231, forwarded to us in this regard. In pursuance ofthe same,
the Commission held extensive consultations on the subject-matter concemed with the
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR), former judges, lawyers, child
rights activists, NGOs and academicians who have expertise in this field. The Commission also
solicited response from all the High Courts and the National Crime Records Bureau QIICRB)
for rglgv4ql data on the issue. C
orqtdq rrdr : ortr i. 4os, Tg.pf aa, t' ftfq, ato qrtr6 T{i, igFt qrtre, T$ ffi-rrooos
Omce Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New Delhi-'l'l0003
olrdrtrq qdr : dran i. e. d-s qr-{ff qr.i, q{ ftld-r rool
Residence : Bungalow No. 8, Tess January Marg, New Oelhi-l10011
email : rituraj.awasthl@gov.ln Tel. r 011-24654951 (Ol, 243/.020a 24310203
"D,

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former ChielJuslice of High Coud of Kamataka)
Chairperson
22"0 Law Commission of lndia
qrqrfd x-g rro amfr
ffit1a gw qrq*v, r.rtco rq qrq-oq)
SIEIET
qrrf, A 22d frE sTrdrrr
fldlqq r[d
Trag
3{irrfl-4lar -
3i{d T6rffi4
With warmest regards,
Yours sincerely,
(Justice Ritu Raj .{u asthi)
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (lndependent Charge)
Ministry of Law & Justice
Govemment of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi - l10001.
orqtdq rrfl : ory i. +os, q$f n-a, 6' fitq. ato qrq6 qtFr. €Fr {rtrz. r{ fti-d-r rooos
Offc6 Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, Nsw Delhi-110003
sTrErffq qfrI : ;fr56 ;. a. fle qr+fi qr.f. <S ftd-rroorr
Residence : Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Mae, New Delhi-1'1001'l
email : rituraj.awasthi@9ov.in Tel. r 011-24654951 (Ol, 24U02Oz 243/.0203
After a careful review of existing chitd protection laws, various judgements and considering
the maladies olchild abuse, child trafficking and child prostitution that plague our society, the
Commission is of the measured view that it is not advisable to tinker with the existing age of
consent under the POCSO Act. However, having cautiously considered all the views and
suggestions fumished in this regard, the Commission considers it necessary that certain
amendments need to be brought in the POCSO Act to remedy the situation in cases wherein
there is tacit approval in fact though not consent in law on part of the child aged between I 6 to
l8 years. This is so because in our considered opinion, such cases do not merit to be dealt with
the same severity as the cases that were ideally imagined to fall under the POCSO Act. The
Commission, therefore, deems it fit to introduce guided judicial discretion in the matter of
sentencing in such cases. This will ensure that the law is balanced, thus safeguarding the best
interests ofthe child. Accordingly, this Report is being submitted for your kind perusal.
W.

Upon receiving the reference for the subject-matter ofthis Report from the Hon'ble High Court
of Kamataka, Dharwad Bench, through a copy of its judgment in Criminal Appeal
No.100515/2O21(A), dated 4rh November, 2022 and from the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya
Pradesh, Gwalior Bench, through a copy of its final order in Miscellaneous Criminal Case No.
4521 of 2023, dated 28th February, 2023, the Law Commission held expansive deliberations
with all the relevant stakeholders, primarily, the concemed statutory body, retired judges,
lawyers. academicians, scholars and child rights activists to grasp the legal and technical
nuances of the subject. The Commission also sought the relevant data from all the Hon'ble
High Courts and Govemment agencies. We remain deeply thankfut to all of them.
The Commission extends its hea(felt gratitude towards the following individuals/organisations
in particular, who took out their valuable time to fumish their valuable insights, comments and
submissions on the instant subject:
1. Shri Priyank Kanoongo, Chairperson, National Commission for Protection of Child
Rights
2. Hon'ble Justice (Retd.) Shri R. Basant, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court oflndia
3. Prof. (Dr.) Ved Kumari, Vice-Chancellor, National Law University, Odisha
4. Prof. (Dr.) Asha Bajpai, School of Law, Rights and Constitutional Govemance, Tata
Institute of Social Sciences
5. Dr. Kumar Askand Pandey, Associate Professor (Law), Dr. Ram Manohar Lohiya
National Law University, Lucknow
6. Dr. Latika Vashist, Associate Professor, School of Law, Govemance and Citizenship,
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University, Delhi
7. Shd O.P. Singh (lPS Retd., Former DGP, U.P.), Chief Executive Offrcer, India Child
Protection Fund
8. Shri Bhuwan Ribhu, Advocate, Kailash Satyarthi Children's Foundation
9. Shri Vikram Srivastava, Advocate and Founder, Independent Thought
10. Ms. Swagata Raha, Director, Research and Co-Director Restorative Practices, Enfold
Proactive Health Trust
1 l. Ms. Maharukh Adenwalla, Advocate
12. Ms. Vidya Reddy, Executive Director, Tulir - Centre for the Prevention & Healing of
Child Sexual Abuse
13. Ms. Bharti Ali, Co-Founder & Executive Director, HAQ: Centre for Child Rights
14. Shri Kumar Sanjay, Additional Public Prosecutor, Rouse Avenue Court. New Delhi
15. National Crime Records Bureau
The Commission gratefully acknowledges the commendable assistance rendered in the
preparation of this Report by Mr. Rishi Mishra. Mr. Gaurav Yadav, Mr. Shubhang
Chaturvedi. Mr. Davinder Singh. Ms. Priya Rathi and Ms. Ruchika Yadav, who worked
as Consultants. We place on record our profound admiration lor their meticulous efforts in
conducting research and extending aid in drafting of this Report.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I
w

1
2
INTRODUCTION
AGE OF CONSENT PRIOR TO THE POCSO ACT
I
REFERENCE TO THE LAW COMMISSION 5
J
B. Reference receivedfrom the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya
Pradesh 8
3. BACKGROUND OF THE ISSUE n
4. BACKGROUND OF CHILD zuGHTS LAWS
THE POCSO ACT: HISTORY, OBJECT AND CONTENT.....205
6
7. LAW COMMISSION REPORTS RELATING TO AGE OF
8. AGE OF CONSENT I.INDER THE POCSO ACT
9. JUSTICE J.S. VERMA COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE
ISSUE OF AGE OF CONSENT/STATUTORY RAPE
IO. AGE OF CONSENT AFTER ENACTMENT OF THE POCSO
ACT
11. AGE OF CONSENT IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
A. Canada
JJ
44
47
54
..54
B. United States of America.
lt
56
TABLE OF CONTENTS
A. Reference receivedfrom the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka.
t3
29

C. Australia.
B. Amendment to Section 8 of the POCSO Act
......57
Japan J8
South Africa 58
61
I3. EMERGING ASPECTS RELATING TO CHILD ABUSE.......68
14. INTE,RPLAY OF THE POCSO ACT WITH CHILD
MARRIAGE AND CHILD TRAFFICKING 73
I5. JUDICIAL DETERMINATION OF CONSENSUAL
ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS TINDER THE POCSO ACT ........79
16. DATA OF THE NATIONAL CRIME RECORDS BUREAU ..86
17. CONSULTATIONS HELD BY THE COMMISSION
18. CONCLUDING ANALYSIS 101
19. RECOMMENDATIONS I t6
A. Amendment to Section 4 of the POCSO Act.......................... 116
D
E.
...... t 19
C. Inclusion of Proviso and Explanation in Section l8 of the JJ
Act, 2015 ......... .. 121
D. Amendment in the Indian Penal Code .. 124
E. Spreading Atuareness regarding Child Sexual Abuse, Sexttal &
Reproductive Health as well as the provisions of the POCSO Act....
124
l
12. ANALYSIS OF THE POCSO ACT...............
89
Wr-'

I. INTRODTICTION
1.1. The thought-process, habits, attitude and behavioural conduct of
an adult are shaped mostly in the early years ofhis or her childhood.
The rivulet of love and innocence that flows from a child is what makes
him or her such an exuberant source of delight for all. If the physical
and mental development of a child takes place in an environment full
of effervescence, the child goes on to metamorphose into a confident
and successfi.rl adult. On the other hand, a child who faces constant
abuse and is made to undergo untold physical or mental suffering is
most likely to transfigure into a bruised and distraught individual. The
agonies that one is compelled to endure in one's childhood leave an
indelible scar on one's traits and personality. It is in this sense that one
reminisces William Wordsworth's immortal lines, "The Child is father
of the Man. " Hence, it becomes peremptory that all civilised societies
adopt moral as well as legal practices to secure and nourish their
children. As Mahatma Gandhi put it, "lf we are to reach real peace in
this world and if we are to carry on a real war against war, we shall
have to begin with children; and if they will grow up in their natural
innocence, we won't have to struggle: we won't have to pass fruitless
idle resolutions, but we shall go from love to love and peace to peace,
until at last all the corners of the world are covered with that peace and
love for which consciously or unconsciously the whole world is
hungering. "
1.2. In the realm of human rights and social justice, the
responsibilities of a state towards its children are of paramount
I 7

importance. Ensuring the development and protection of children is not
only a moral imperative but also a legal obligation that every state bears.
As Bhagwati J., has stated inSleela Barsev. Union of India,t "if a child
is a national asset, it is the duty of the State to look after the child with
a view to ensuring the full development of its personality ". Thus, States
bear a vital obligation to ensure the holistic development of children
and shield them from any form ofexploitation. This dual responsibitity
is anchored in both moral imperatives and constitutional commitments.
The State's commitment to development of the child encompasses the
provision of quality education, accessible healthcare, proper nutrition,
and essential social services. Simultaneously, the State must establish
and enforce stringent laws and safeguards to protect children from
exploitation, including child labour, trafficking, and abuse. By fulfilling
these obligations, the government lays the foundation for a just and
thriving society, ensuring that every child's rights are upheld and their
potential is nurtured in a safe and secure environment.
1.3. The origin of child rights marks a significant milestone in human
history, highlighting the growing recognition of the unique
vulnerabilities and needs of children. It reflects our collective
understanding that children, as individuals in their own right, require
special safeguards and protections to ensure their well-being,
development, and dignity. Child rights origins underscore the belief that
every child has the right to survival, education, health, and protection
from harm. They emphasize the importance of nurturing children's
1
, 1986 3 SCC 596
Wr/

physical, emotional, and cognitive growth, allowing them to reach their
full potential. These concems have also been previously expressed by
the Law Commission in its 259th Report on "Early Childhood
Development and Legal Entitlement", wherein the Commission opined
that:
"This critical period up to the age of six years is a 'window of
opportunity', i.e., if the child receives favourable enyironmental
inputs of health, nutrition, learning and psychosocial
development, the chances of the child's brain developing to its
full potential are considerably enhanced. If the environmental
experiences are unfavourable and the child faces deprivalion or
emotional or physical abuse, the brain's development is
negatively affected and the 'window of opportunity' is lost, often
irrevocably. "2
1.4. As the concept of child rights evolved, the fact that children are
not merely extensions of adults but have distinct rights and needs
gained recognition. This acknowledgement has prompted the re-
evaluation of legal frameworks aimed at safeguarding children from
exploitation, abuse, neglect, and discrimination. This becomes all the
more crucial in light of the judicial pronouncement in K. S. Puttaswamy
v. (Jnion of Indias, wherein the right to privacy was accorded the status
of a fundamental right. One of the contours of the right to privacy is
that it protects a decisional aspect of the individual, seeking to
safeguard the realm of autonomous social development of the person.
Thus, it is critical to address child abuse while also considering the
: Law Commission of Indi4 "259th Report on Early Childhood Development and Legal
Entitlements" 2 (August, 2015) available at
https://cdnbbsr.s3 waas-gov. in-/s3 caOdaec69b5 adc 880fb464 895 T26dbdfhploads/2022/08/20220816
88.pdf (last visited August 16, 2023).
I (2017) l0 scc l.
J

delicate balance between protecting children and respecting their
development of personal autonomy.
1.5. Child abuse is a deeply conceming issue that threatens the well-
being and future of our society's most vulnerable members. It
encompasses various forms of physical, emotional, or psychological
harm inflicted upon children, which can have long-lasting and
devastating effects. ln India, the legal framework has taken significant
steps to curb child abuse and protect children's rights. The most
prominent legislation addressing this grave concem is the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act (hereinafter, referred to as "POCSO
Act") enacted in2012. This Act specifically focuses on addressing and
preventing sexual offences against children, ensuring a child-friendly
legal process, and establishing stringent penalties for offenders.
4
@-

2. REFERENCE TO THE LAW COMMISSION
2.1. In the light of influx of cases pertaining to romantic relationships
between 16 to 18 year-olds, various High Courts in the country have
echoed the opinion that either the age ofconsent be reduced to l6 years
or the trial judge be given some kind of discretion while trying such
cases so as to alleviate the harm and suffering that. is inevitably caused
to male children or adolescents who engage in consensual sexual
relations with female children and are later prosecuted on account of
the mandatory reporting requirement under law or at the behest of the
girl child's family who disapprove of such relationship. The Hon'ble
High Courts, such as those of Madras, Kamataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Delhi, Bombay, etc., while dealing with cases tlled under the POCSO
Act, have highlighted the need for reduction of age of consent for the
victim from 16 to 18 years, in so far as it relates to a romantic
relationship with the accused.
2.2. In this regard, two separate references were received by the
Commission from the Hon'ble High Courts of Kamataka and Madhya
Pradesh.
A. Reference receivedfrom the Hon'ble High Court of Karnaloka
a Stqte ofKarnatakqv. Basovraj S/O Yellappa Madar (2O23) t AIR Kant R 23 : (2023) I KANT LJ
486.
5
2.3 . ln Slate of Karnataka versus Basavraj S/O Yellappa Madara , the
Dharwad Bench of the High Court of Karnataka, was faced with a case
under the POCSO Act wherein the victim was a girl aged 17 years and
qt,.

9 months and had eloped with the accused. The two had subsequently
married and had two children. The accused was acquitted by the Special
Judge as the prosecution had failed to bring forth sufficient evidence to
successfully establish the case. The State, being aggrieved, preferred an
appeal before the Hon'ble High Court. The High Court, while
confirming the order of acquittal, requested the Law Commission to
rethink the age-criteria provided under the Act. The Court thus
observed:
"29.I. This Court is conring across several matters alleging
offences under Section 376(2)(il or under the POCSO Act when
the girl is l6 years and above, where the girl and the boy are said
to be in love with each other and wanted to get married.
However, there being opposition to their morriage, the girl and
the boy eloped resulting in either the mother or the father of the
girl filing a complaint. Thereafter, upon investigation the girl
and the boy are traced living happily in a dffirent city. However,
since a complaint has been lodged, investigation is contpleted
and the girl and the boy when traced, a charge sheet is laid
resulting in criminal prosecution of the boy.
29.2. The effect of such criminal prosecution of a minor girl
and/or minor boy and/or boy who has attained majority recently,
causes severe harm and injury to all the concerned including the
families.
29.3. When o criminal prosecution is initiated and the boy is
laken into custody, there is also a possibility of misunderstanding
occurring bet'vveen the boy and the girl which could impact their
relationship. The parents of boy and girl, the siblings of the boy
and girl and if they are maruied, their respective spouses and
their respective families would olso undergo severe mental
lrouma apart from being ostracized, severe financial losses are
also caused.
6
W.

29.4. Many a time the complaint isfiled in the heat of the moment
on account of objection to the maruiage, however later on the
complainanl and the other family members turn hostile and do
not support the case of the prosecution.
29.5. The olher set of complaints is when the same isfiled by an
NGO or the doctor on noticing that the girl is pregnant. In such
cases thefamily members turn hostile and do not support the case
of the prosecution.
29.6. In the present case, though initially a complaint was filed
making various allegations, all the witnesses turned hostile since
probably they realized that the minor girl wanted to marry the
boy. Thus, though the complaint had been lodged no one has
supported the same. On the date of hearing before this court, the
mother and father of the minor girl along with the boy were
present before this Court along wilh their two children. On
enquiry, the girl, who is now a major, has stated that she and the
boy got married on 17.01.2017 and thereafter they are living
together as husband ond wife, the boy has been taking care of
her properly and two children hove been born, who are olso
being taken care of by the boy, now her husband, the mother and
father of the girl also stated that both of them are living happily
and they never wanted to prosecute the case.
29.7. The aim and objective of POCSO Act is to protect the minor
children from sexual exploitation and it is made clear that a
minor cannot provide consent, the minor under POCSO Act
being a person under the age of l8 years.
29.9. The aspect of consent even by a girl of I 6 years and aboye
would have to be considered if there is indeed an offence under
7
29.8. Hoving come ocross several cases relating to minor girls
above the sge of l6 yeors hoving fallen in love and eloped ond
in the meantime, having hud sexuul intercourse with the boy,
we are of the considered opinioil thul lhe Law Commission of
India would have to rethink on the age criteria, so us lo take
itrto consideralion lhe ground realilies. (emphasis added)
u

the IPC and/or or POCSO Act. Normally when evidence is lead
the victim is a major and the testimony given then of an act
committed while being a minor would have to be given due
value. "
B. Reference received from the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya
Pradesh
2.4. 
ln Veekesh Kalawat v. State of Madhya Pradeshs, the Gwalior
Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh was seized with a similar
case of child sexual assault under the POCSO Act, wherein a minor girl
had voluntarily eloped with a boy and the relationship had also resulted
in their marriage and birth of a child. While rendering its judgment, the
High Court suggested an amendment to be introduced in the POCSO
Act so as to allow discretion to the Special Judge in deciding such cases.
The High Court further requested the Law Commission to consider the
same and accordingly suggest an amendment to the Parliament. The
observations made by the Court are as follows:
"REQUEST TO THE HON'BLE LAW COMMISSION OF
INDIA (IYITH SPECIFIC REFERENCE TO PARAGRAPH
21)
7. The oppressiveness of the POCSO in its application to the
marginalised sections of the society reeling under the combined
negative effects of illiteracy and poverty, is most pronounced in
the State of Madhya Prodesh. This Court feels it necessary to
bring it to the notice of the Hon'ble Lcw Commission of India,
how the operation of the POCSO in certain cases is disrupting
and devastating.families in rural Madhya Pradesh by sending the
sole bread winner in the family to jail for a minimum of ten years,
s Veekesh Kqlawat v. State oJ Mddhya Pradesh, High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Misc. Criminal
Case No.452l of2023.
8
q-

at times leaving his wife and children lo the vagaries of social
exploitation if the parents and the in-lmvs of the prosecutrix/wife
are not willing Io keep her. Where the prosecutrix is unemployed
as is mostly the case, the options for surviyal are dismal ranging
from prostitution to crime. The State has no obligation under the
POCSO to provide for the basic minimum required for survival
of the so-called "survivor". The enforcement of the POCSO to
such cases in its present form, does gross injustice.
8. The vision of the Law Commission of India is " Reforming the
laws for mmimizing justice in society and promoting good
goyernance under the rule of law" and its mission is "The Terms
of Reference of the Law Commission, inter alia, includes
review/repeal of obsolete laws, to examine the Laws which affect
the poor and corry out post-oudit for socio-economic
legislations, to keep under review the system of judicial
administration lo ensure that it is responsive to the reosonable
demands of the times and in particular to secure, lo examine the
existing laws in the light of Directitte Principles of State Policy
and to suggest ways of improvement and reform and also to
suggest such legislations as might be necessary to implement the
Directive Principles and to attain the objectives set out in the
Preamble to the Constitution, Examine the existing laws with a
view for promoting gender equality and suggesting amendments
there to, to reyise the Central Acts of general importance so as
to simplify them and lo remove anomalies, ambiguities and
inequities, to examine the impact of globalization on food
security and employment and recommend measures for the
protection of the interests of the morginalised".
2 I . Therefore. the Hon 'ble Law Commission of India is requested
to kindl ons der the llowtn and est the amendntent oo
tl,e POeSO b the Parliament (if the Hon'ble Commission so
deems fit). to sive discretion to the Special Judse where; h)
Where lhe oroseculrix is below lhe age of consenl bul de facto
consent is aDDarent, nol to have a minimum sentence and
instead. sive the discretiotrlo the Speciol Court (who is a senior
Session Judse qsually wilh more thsn ti)enty veors of iudicial
9
u

exDerience) to imnose o senlence os Der lhe facls tnd
circumstances of the case. which can extend up to th)entv vears
and ft) ?lt'here the orosecutrix is below the ase ofconsenl and
the relations hID has culminated in marriase fuith or without
children), there should not be any sentence of imorisonment
and inslead the Soecial Court be emDowered to imoose
slternate tionul melltods like co service etc ."
(emphasis added)
10
e,-

3. BACKGROUND OF THE ISSUE
3. I . It is undeniable that pendency ofcases before the POCSO Special
Courts is an issue that needs to be considered. Some attribute this
pendency to the fact that cases that ought not to be criminalised are
given a criminal colour by the strict wording and implementation of the
POCSO Act, thereby increasing the number of cases as well as
rendering precarious the ptight ofthose that are caught within the folds
of its application. There is a growing concern that the Special Courts
are plagued with false cases, especially those arising out of teenage
romantic relationships, which are filed by the family members who
disapprove of such relationships or come to the forefront due to
mandatory reporting requirements under law. Various High Courts
have expressed the opinion that the POCSO Act was never meant to
criminalise consensual romantic relationships between young adults
which are a ground reality in today's day and age. It has been observed
that consensual sex between minors is a legal grey area as consent ofa
minor is no consent in the eyes of law.6 Such an opinion is largely
resonated by the academia and experts as well.
3.2. There remains a great deal of divergence regarding how to best
address this issue. While there are some who t'avour lowering the age
of consent for consensual sexual relationships to l6 years as was the
position prior to enactment of the POCSO Act, others have suggested
introducing "close-in-age" exemptions as present in the USA and
6 Arhant Janardan Sunalkori v. Slole of Mahatoshh'a Ohrough Sanpada Police Station) (2021) I
Bom CR (Cri) 658.
ll
}-
Wr/

Canada; or introducing judicial discretion in the matter of sentencing
but not lowering the age ofconsent under any circumstance. The issue
of romantic relationship between minors or with a minor is a nuanced
one and requires careful consideration, which this Report tries to
achieve.
t2
q,

4.1 . "Child rights" as a discourse is of much recent origin, gaining
formal shape only in the twentieth century.7 While some laws did treat
children as separate legal persons and recognised the State's obligation
towards them, for instance the Code of Hammurabi, comprehensive set
of rights such as those present in the recent times were largely absent.
Any rights that did accrue to children flowed from the understanding
that children were dependent on their parents for their rights and were
properties of their parents and not independent in themselves.s Thus,
earlier the approach of the State torvards children was limited in its
protectione and domains such as their education, inheritance and
protection of vulnerable children were the focal areas when it came to
laws pertaining to children or rights explicitly vested in them.
4.2. The shift towards a true rights-based approach occurred only in
the twentieth century starting with the Geneva Declaration of the Rights
of the Child adopted by the League of Nations n 1924. which for the
first-time acknowledged child rights and emphasised the importance of
providing special safeguards and care for children.r0 Thereafter, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 though not specific to
children, did recognise that a child is entitled to special care and
? Abhay Vikram Singh, "Theory ofHuman Rights in Perspectives to Child Rights", 73 The Indian
Journal of Political Science 365 (2012).
3 Christine Alice Corcos, "The Child in Intemational Law: A Pathfinder and Selected Bibliography"
23 Case lleslern Reserve Journal of Inlernalional Law l7l (1991).
e Geeta Chopra, Chi ld Righls in India: Challenges and Social tction l0-l I (Springer India, 201 5).
r0 Geneva Declaration of the Rights of the Child, 1924 qyoilable a, hnp://www.un-
documents.net/gdrc I 924.htm.
l3
4. BACKGROUND OF CHILD RIGHTS LAWS
)n
\u,,

assistance, and that all children shall enjoy the same social protection.ll
The Declaration of the Rights of the Child (1959) adopred by the UN
General Assembly was the next comprehensive document outlining
chitd rights and highlighting the principle of best interest of the child.
The most landmark instrument in the lleld of child rights, United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. 1989 (UNCRC), came
after that. The UNCRC is a legally binding treaty that has been ratified
by 196 countries, thus making it one of the most ratified international
treaties. Out of all (IN members, only the United States of America has
not ratified this Convention.rz The LTNCRC is a comprehensive treaty
encompassing a broad variety of rights be it civil, social, political,
economic or cultural rights. Besides the child specific instruments and
declarations, recognition of the rights of a child can also be found in
human rights instrumentsl3 such as the Intemational Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966 (ICESCR),r{ the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 (ICCPR)'s
as well as International Labour Organisation Conventions.l6 The move
towards a rights based approach to child rights was on account of the
change in attitude towards a child, that is to say, children started being
viewed as autonomous individuals separate from their parents whose
rights, interests and needs were unique on account ofthe vulnerabilities
rr Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, 1948. art. 25(2).
r: United Nations Treaty Collection, Status ofConvention on the Rights of the Child avoilable at
https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=ND&mtdsLno=IV-
I l&chapter:4&clang=_en.
rr Abhay Vikram Singh. "Theory ofHuman Rights in Perspectives to Child Rights",73 The lndian
Jownal o/ Political Science 365 (2012\.
rr Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966, arts. l0(3) & l2(2)(a).
r5 International Covenant on Civil and Political fughts. 1966, an.24.
r6 Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138); Worst Forms ofChild Labour Convention, 1999 (No.
r82).
lrl ts"

they faced compared to the adults, thus warranting separate framework,
recognition and protection. I?
4.3. In the Indian context, the earliest traces of any form of implicit
or explicit recognition of child rights can be found in various labour
laws that were passed during the colonial times, for instance, the
Factories Act, 1881 which, inter alia, brought in conditions to regulate
child labour.r8 Similarly, the Apprentices Act, 1850 had provisions
pertaining to welfare of child workers and for the first time it provided
that convicted children, aged 10-18 years, be provided vocational
training as part of their rehabilitation process.re ln a similar fashion, the
Reformatory Schools Act, 1876 focused on reformation and
rehabilitation of young offenders.2o The Code of Criminat Procedure,
18982r also provided for diff-erential treatment of juvenile ofl-enders.
The next step forward in juvenile justice system came from the Indian
Jail Comm ittee ( 1 9 I 9- 1 920)22 which recommended that child-offenders
should not be treated the same as adults23 and that juveniles should not
be imprisoned2a but sent to remand homes2s and attempt must be made
l7 Geeta Chopra, Clr ild Rights in India: Challenges oru| Social ,4ction l}-l I (Springer Ind ia, 201 5).
r8 The lndian Factories Act, l88l (Act No. l5 of l88l). The word "child" was defined as a person
under the age of I2 years. The Act prohibited employment of a child under the age of 7 in any
factory and also imposed a restriction ofmaximum t hours ofwork per day for a child. The Act also
laid down other requirements such as one-hour daily interval for food and rest during the working
hours, at least four holidays per month, children not to be employed in certain dangerous works etc.
re The Apprentices Act, 1850 (Act No. l9 of 1850).
r0 The Reformatory Schools Act, 1876 (Act No. V of 1876). The Act for the first time provided a
system separate from adult criminal system catering to reformation ofmale youthful offenders which
was defined as a boy under the age of 16 yeals convicted of any offence punishable with
imprisonment or transportation,
:rCode of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898).
rr Indian Jails Committee, Report oJ the Indian Jails Commiuee 1919-20: Volume I Report and
Appendices (Srperintendent Govemment Central Press, Simla, 1920)
':r /d. para 363 at pg 50-
'.4 ld, pzra 367 at pg 195.
15 /d, para 386 at pg 195.
l5
E

towards their reformation. It also suggested the creation of Children's
Courts.26 Consequent to the Indian Jail Committee Report, provincial
legislations, namely, Madras Children Act, 192021; Bengal Children
Act, 792228; and Bombay Children Act 19242e were enacted, all of
which provided for detailed procedure for trial ofa child offender, thus
treating child offenders on a different footing as a category separate
from adult offenders. However, juvenile justice is just one dimension
of child-welfare and other areas were also touched upon. For instance,
the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 192930 was a piece of benetlcial
legislation aimed at securing the interests of a child by prohibiting child
marriage.
4.4. The post-independence scenario is quite different and more
progressive. There is emphatic recognition of the rights of a child and
their position is explicitly emphasised within the Constitution itself.
Article l5(3) of the Indian Constitution allows the State to make special
laws for children.3r Further, Article 24 prohibits employment of
children in hazardous industries.32 The inclusion of Article 2 1 A, which
provides the right to free and compulsory education for children
between the ages of 6 to 14 years, in 2002, also reflects the evolving
and growing recognition of child rights in India.r3 Further, the Directive
Principles of State Policy recognise the State's obligation towards
26 ld, pard- 3'10 at pg 197 .
17 The Madras Children Act, I920 (Madras Act lV of 1920).
r3 The Bengal Children Act, 1922 (Bengal Act II of 1922).
:e The Bombay Children Act, 1924 (Bombay Act Xlll of 1924).
30 The Child Maniage Restraint Act, 1929 (Act No. 19 of 1929)
rr The Constitution oflndia- art. l5(3).
1? ld, an.24.
31 Id, an.2l.
l6
A\.

welfare and protection of children as provided under Articles 39 and
45.34 In furtherance of the constitutional mandate and India's
intemational obligations, various child-specific legislations addressing
different dimensions of child rights and welfare have been enacted over
the years such as the Immoral Traffic (Suppression) Act, 1956, the
Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986. the Child and
Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Act,
2016, the POCSO Act, 2012 and the Juvenile Jusrice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 201 5 (hereinafter, referred to as "JJ Act"),,
the last two being relevant for the purposes of this Act.
4.5. The terms "child" and "minor" are often used synonymously and
interchangeably in common parlance. Further, both "child" and
"minor" have multiple and varying definitions under different laws and
the legal meaning of these terms [acks uniformity. The age of majority
is set at 1 8 years under the Indian Majority Act, 1875. The Hindu
Minority and Guardianship Act, 195635 and the Guardians and Wards
Act, 1 89036 also define "minor" as a person below the age of 1 8. Under
the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, "child" is a person under
the age of 21 in case of males and under 1 8 in case of females.sT The
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, defines
"child" as a person between the age of6 to l4 years.38 Further, under
34 Id. afts. 39.45.
35 The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 (Act No. 32 of 1956), sec 4(a).
16 The Guardians and Wards Act, I 890 (Act No. 8 of I 890). sec. 4( I ).
37 The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act. 2006 (Act No. 6 of2007), sec. 2(a).
13 The Right ofChildren to Free and Compulsory Education Act,2009 (Act No.35 of2009), sec
2(c).
17
}-
!Ar-

the JJ Act3e and the POCSO Act,ao "child" is defined as any person
under the age of 18 years. The Child and Adolescent Labour
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986, defines a child as a person who
has not completed the age of l4.ar Additionally, the Act also defines
"adolescent" as a person between the age of l4 to 18 years42, which is
notable given that definition ofadolescent is largely absent under other
laws and is mostly defined in the context of govemmental policies and
programs.
4.6. Under the 
criminal law jurisprudence, there is a presumption that
a child is incapable of doing any wrong or committing a crime. This is
best reflected in the Latin maxim doli incapax. This presumption also
finds place in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter, referred to as
"lPC"), with different degrees of immunity being extended to children
falling under different age brackets. Section 82 of the IPC provides
absolute immunity to children below the age of 7 by stating "Nothing
is an offence which is done by a child under 7 years of age". A child
over 7 years is, horvever, considered doli capax and Section 83 of the
IPC provides only qualified immunity to a child over 7 years and under
12 years who has "not attained sfficient maturity of understanding to
judge the nature ond consequences of his conduct on thot occasion."
The immunity would flow once it is proved that the child in question
has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding. While the IPC
re The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection ofChildren) Act.20l5 (ActNo.2 of20l6), sec.2(12).
10 The Protection ofChildren from Sexual Offences Act,20l2 (ActNo.32 of20l2). sec. 2(d).
41 The Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (Act No. 6l of 1986).
sec.2(ii).
1' Id, sec.2(i).
18
k\-

provides varying degrees of immunity to children from criminal
liability, the JJ Act also devolves upon a child in conflict with law a
certain degree of immunity from punishment and sentencing. However,
recognising the fact that children fatling in different age brackets have
different levels of maturity and understanding, a child between the ages
of 16 to 18 years can be tried as an adult under the JJ Act and receive
punishment as such.13
4.7. The law as it stands now, has different statutes dealing with
different ambits of chitd rights ranging from education to child labour,
sexual exploitation and juvenile delinquency. For the limited purpose
of this Report, the POCSO Act and the JJ Act are most relevant.
ar The Juvenile Juslice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 20 l5 (Act No. 2 of 2016), sec. I 5 r/w
sec. l8(3).
l9 s-,

5.1. The POCSO Acq2012 was enacted by the Parliament with the
view to protect children from offences of sexual assault, sexual
harassment and pomography. The Act also provides for establishment
of Special Courts for trial of such offences and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto. The Act came into force on 14th
November, 2012.
5.2. Before the enactment of the POCSO Act, there was no specific
legislation dealing with sexual exploitation of children.aa Prior to the
POCSO Act, charges were filed under the IPC, especially under Section
375, 354 and 377.4s Barring Section 377, other provisions are nor
gender neutral and thus male children did not enj oy equal protection
against sexual abuse under the law.a6 Against sexual abuse of the male
child, the general provisions of the IPC relating to hurt, criminal force
and/or assault were attracted.4T However, the issue remained that there
were several sexual offences which were not specifically defined and
made punishable under the scheme of the IPC and were hence charged
under the general non-specific sections of the IPC. Thus, the earlier
legal framework to deal with a crime of such grave nature was
ar The term "children" or "child" in this Reporr means any person below the age of l8 unless the
context otherwise specifi es.
a'Law Commission of lndia, "l56'h Report on lndian Penal Code, 1860" 180 (August, 1997)
available at
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3ca0daec69b5adc880fb464895726dbdf/tploads/2022109/20220923
29.pdf(last visited June 13, 2023); Satu,i v. Union of India (2004) 5 SCC 5 18.
16 Rajya Sabha Debates on May 10, 2012.
a7 Law Commission of tndia, "l56'h Report on Indian Penal Code, 1860" 180 (August, 1997)
avqilable dl
https://cdnbbsr.s3 waas.gov. in/s3 ca0daec69b5 adc 880fb464 895 726dbdf/\tploads/2o22/09/20220923
29.pdf(last visited on June 13,2023); Satu iv. (lnion of India (2004) 5 SCC 518.
l0
5. THEPOCSOACT: HISTORY,OBJECT AND CONTENT
q-

thoroughly inadequate and even the punishment did not seem
commensurate with the gravity of the offence.aE The POCSO Act finally
remedied this situation. It is a gender-neutral law covering within its
purview any person below the age of I 8 years and provides for a wider
and defined category of sexual offences committed against children
with stricter punishments in proportion with the gravity of the offence.ae
The Act is intended to protect children from the offences of sexual
assault, sexual harassment and pomography. The Act also provides for
establishment of Special Courts for trial of offences under the Act so
that the best interest of the chitd, who is a victim of such abominable
acts, be prioritised and trials be conducted in a sensitive manner. The
Act recognizes the right to privacy and confidentiality of a child and
places paramount importance on the best-interest and well-being of the
child.5o
5.3. The POCSO Act has been enacted keeping in mind the goals
enshrined in our Constitution. Article 39(f) of the Constitution, being a
Directive Principle of State Policy, is a fundamental principle of
governance. It provides that the State shall frame its policy towards
ensuring that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop
in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that
childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against
moral and material abandonment.5r Further, Article l5(3), inter alia,
a8 Na\rabuddin y. State oftJuarakhand (2022) 5 SCC 419.
{e The Protection ofChildren from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (ActNo.32 of20l2), sec. 2(d), sec
2(d\.
sa Eera v. State QVCT of Delhi) and Another 12017) l5 SCC 133
5r The Constitution oflndia, 1949, art.39(f).
2t

empowers the State to make laws for children.52 The justification for
this special law can also be found in India's intemational obligations
under various conventions, in specific, the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, 1989, which was signed by India on llth December, 1992.
The preamble of the POCSO Act reflects this most perspicuously.
5.4. Over the years, there were mounting concerns about the rising
cases of child sexual abuse and in this regard certain recommendations
were made by various concerned quarters from time to time. The Law
Commission, in its 1 56th Report released in 1997, had noted the increase
in incidences of child rape.53 The Commission, in order to address the
sexual exploitation and rape of girl children, recommended
amendments in Section 375,354 and 509 of the IPC5a, which however
would have not come to the aid of male children being subjected to
sexual abuse as the victim of the offences specified under the said
provisions can only be a female. The l56tl' Report had a separate section
dealing with child abuse, wherein the Commission stated that the
amendments to Section 375 and 377 in terms of increased punishment
and broader coverage were adequate to deal with this "epidemic" that
had emerged over the past decade.55 The 1566 Repon noted that Section
375 and 354 of the IPC would specifically cover cases ofsexual abuse
22
52 Id, afi- 15(3).
53 Law Commission of India, "l56s Report on Indian Penal Code, 1860" 174 (August. 199?)
wqilable at
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.inls3ca0daec69b5adc880Ib464895726dbdfluploadsl2022/09/20220923
29.pdf(last visited June 13. 2023).
5a Law Commission of India, "l56d Report on Indian Penal Code, 1860" 180 (August, 1997)
available at
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.inls3caodaec69b5adc880tu464895726dbdf/uploads/2022/09/2O22O,Z3
29.pdf(last visited June 13, 2023).
h.,-

of a female child involving penile penetration into the vagina and
penetration with finger and/or inanimate object. respectively. Section
377 of the IPC would cover other cases of camal intercourse with a
child, be it male or female. Further, penal provisions dealing rvith
'hurt', 'criminal force' or 'assault' could be invoked for acts of
penetration with finger or inanimate object committed on a male child.56
Any attempt to commit any of these offences would attract penal
sanction under Section 5 1 I of the IPC.
5.5. The exigency for a protective legislation for children was echoed
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sakshi v. Union of India,57 wherein
the Apex Court recognised that in light of an alarming increase in cases
of child abuse and rape, an appropriate legislation in that regard was
urgently required. ln Sakshi v. Union of India,58 a writ petition was filed
before the Supreme Court for declaring, inter alia, the words "sexual
intercourse" in Section 375 of the IPC shall mean to include all forms
of penetration such as penile/vaginal penetration, penile/oral
penetration, penile/anal penetration, finger/vaginal and finger/anal
penetration and object/vaginal penetration, as an otherwise narrow
interpretation of the law was leading to treatment of non-penile/vaginal
penetration as a lesser offence even though the trauma suffered by
victims in both scenarios may be equivalent. The Petitioner therein,
further contented that such an interpretation ran counter to the
contemporary understanding on rape and had an adverse bearing upon
56 Id.
51 Sakshi v. tlnion ol lndia (2004) 5 SCC 518 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 1645
5" ld.
23
\-

the sexual integrity and autonomy of women and children thereby
violating Anicle 21 of the Constitution. The Court solicited the
opinions of the Law Commission which cited the l56th Report.
However, the precise issues raised in the writ petition were different
than those considered by the Commission in its 1561h Report.
Consequently, the Apex Court had requested the Law Commission to
examine the feasibility of introducing amendments to the IPC or
making recommendations to deal with the issue of child sexual abuse
by interpreting the provision lbr rape in a manner so as to plug the
loopholes that existed.
5 .6. The Law Commission. subsequently, in its I 72"d Report
considered the review of rape laws in light of rising cases of sexual
abuse of children.5e The Commission, inter alia, recommended not only
widening the scope of offence falling under Section 375 of the IPC by
substituting "sexual assault" for "rape" but also making it gender
neutral.6o
5.7. The POCSO Act was brought in light of the increasing cases of
crimes against children, especially of sexual nature, as was reflected in
the data provided by National Crime Records Bureau as well as the
"Study on Child Abuse: India 2007"6r conducted by the Ministry of
5e Law Conrmission oflndia. " 172"d Report on Review ofRape Laws" 4 (March, 2000\ available at
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3ca0daec69b5adc880fb464895726dbdfluploads/2022108/20220824
87.pdf(last visited Jdy 7,2023).
60 /d. at 13- 15.
6r Covemment of India, "Study on Child Abuse: India 2007" (Ministry of Women and Child
Development, 2007).
24
l-
\u\r-

Women and Child Development. The position as it stood then was that
sexual crimes against a child and an adult were treated the same and
were charged under the same provisions of the IPC, which was
detrimental to the interests of the child and proved largely ineffective
in tackling cases of child abuse. It was observed that on account oflack
of specific provisions dealing with sexual abuse of children, the
perpetrators often were unpunished and went scot-free. It was with the
aim of addressing this glaring gap in law and providing for a suitable
legislation with stringent provisions to curb child sexual abuse that the
POCSO Act was introduced. The significance of this Act can only be
understood when considering the humongous child population that
India has. As per the Census 201 I data, there were more than 400
million persons in India below the age of 18 years, which is about
36.70/o of the total population.62 Thus, the POCSO Act serves to be a
protective umbrella for the future torch bearers of our nation who form
a significant part of our populace.
5.8. The underlying philosophy of the POCSO Act is quite pioneering
in comparison to views on child protection expressed earlier by various
quarters. The Act is gender neutral and quite monumental in that regard.
The Act provides for various child-friendly provisions in order to
adequately safeguard the interests ofchildren in its entirety and at every
step.
6r Govemment of India, "Census of India 201l" Table C-|3 (Office of the Registrar General &
Census Commissioner, India, Ministry of Home Affairs. 2015), available at:
https://censusind ia.gov.in/nada,/index.php/catalog/ 1436 (last visited on May 30, 2023).
25 u

5.9. The entire scheme of the Act is devised by the Legislature in such
a manner that it ensures the child is protected at every stage and the trial
is appropriately conducted.63 The Act is divided into nine chapters and
various parts therein. Chapter II defines various kinds of Sexual
Offences Against Children, hence titled the same. It contains the
definitions of the offences of penetrative sexual assault, aggravated
penetrative sexual assault, sexual assault, aggravated sexual assault and
sexual harassment and prescribes stringent punishments for the said
offences. Chapter III addresses using a child for pomographic
purposes and storage of such content. This is a grave issue that has
magnified lately as an ugly consequence ofincreased use ofthe internet.
Chapter IV deals with abetment of and attempt to commit an offence
under the Act so that any person who aids and abets in the sexual
exploitation of a child cannot escape the vigour of its stringent
provisions.
5.10. Chapter V is on procedure for reporting ofcases and introduces
a vital safeguard in the form ofmandatory reporting so as to ensure that
no case is left out of purview of the system and all cases are actually
investigated by the authorities. The severity of offence and the vigour
with which the State endeavours to protect children is well reflected in
this mandatory reporting requirement prescribed under the Act. The Act
enjoins upon a person, having knowledge ofan offence under the Act
or apprehension of the same, a legal obligation to report the same to the
relevant authorities.6{ The mandatory nature ofreporting is enforced by
bi Alakh Alok Sriv.tsrava v. Union of India (2018) l7 SCC 291 : (2019) 4 SCC (Cri) 184.
6r The Protection ofChildren from Sexual Offences Act. 2012 (Act No. 32 of20l2), sec. 2(d), sec
l9 and 20.
26 h-

the penal sanction attached to the failure to discharge the said duty.6s
Even though the quantum of punishment prescribed under law is not
too high, the Courts have consistently viewed this duty to report very
seriously and its dereliction a serious crime as the failure to report
commission of an offence would be deleterious to the very object of the
Act.66 Apart from this. obligations of the media while reporting
offences under the Act as well as punishment tbr reporting false cases
or information has also been clearly laid down under Chapter V.
5.11. The procedural requirements under Chapters VI to IX highlight
the child friendly procedure to be adopted in line with the best interest
of the child. Section 28 mandates designation ofa Court ofSession in
each district as Special Court for ensuring a speedy trial of offences
under the Act. Further. Section 32 obligates the State Government to
appoint a Special Public Prosecutor for every Special Court designated
under Section 28, to conduct trials under the POCSO Act. Furthermore.
Chapter VIII of the Act deals with the procedure and powers of these
Special Courts and the procedure for recording evidence of the child
victim. Section 33 lists numerous safeguards at the trial stage to protect
the interests of the child. Section 35 provides for recording of the
evidence of the child within thirty days of cognizance by the Court and
disposal of the cases within a period of one year. Moreover, Section 37
further provides for an in-camera trial in the presence of the child's
parents or any other person in whom the child has trust or confidence.
Importantly, Section 36 obligates the Special Court to shield the child
65 /4 sec. 2(d)., sec. 21.
66 Slale of Maharoshlro y. Mq'oli (2023) 4 SCC 298; Shonkar Kisanrao Khade v. Slate of
Maharashta (2013\ 5 SCC 546 : (2013) 3 SCC (Cri) 402.
27 W.

from the accused at the time of recording of the evidence while at the
same time ensuring that the accused is in a position to hear the statement
of the child and communicate with his advocate, thereby striking a
balance between the competing interests of protecting the child from
further trauma and right of the accused to fair trial.67
5.12. The true seriousness ofthe Legislature intakingthe devit of child
sexual abuse by its horns is best reflected in Section 29 and 30 of the
Act. Section 29 reverses the presumption of innocence usually present
in criminal law. Under Section 29. the person being prosecuted is
presumed to be guilty unless the contrary is proved. Section 30 further
states that where ever there is a culpable mental state specified for an
offence under this Act, the Court shall presume that such culpable
mental state or mens rea exists on part of the accused, the same being a
rebuttable presumption. However, the burden of proof on the accused
is quite high and it has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused had no such mental state.
61 Alakh Alok Srivasrava v. Llnion of India (201 8) l7 SCC 291 :(2019) 4 SCC (Cri) 184.
28
qa,'

6. AGE OF CONSENT PRIOR TO THE POCSO ACT
6.1. The age of consent is the age at which a person is considered
legally capable ofagreeing to marriage or sexual intercourse.68 This age
is defined by statute. At present the age ofconsent for sexual intercourse
is 18 years on account of the POCSO Act. However, prior to the
POCSO Act, there was no age of consent defined separately and it was
fixed by virtue of Section 375 ofthe IPC, which defines "rape". Rape
being defined as a crime that can only be committed against a woman,
the age ofconsent for sexual intercourse was only defined for a female,
under which age consent is immaterial and any sexual activity amounts
to statutory rape. On the other hand, there was no age of consent for
males. In fact, the term "child" itself was not defined either under the
IPC or the General Clauses Act, 1897. Further, the age of consent
defined for a woman by virtue of Section 375 of the IPC defining
"rape", has had a chequered history with the age set at 10 years in 1860
to l8 years as it stands presently.
6.2. In 1860, the age of consent for women stood at l0 years.
Thereafter, in I 891 , the age of consent for a woman was raised to 1 2
years under Section 375 in the aftermath ofthe public outcry caused by
the Phulmoni case.6e Phulmoni was an eleven-year-old girl who died of
haemorrhage from a rupture ofvagina caused by her husband who had
forced sex on her. The husband was held guilty of only causing grievous
63 Black's Law Dictionary,9th ed., Pg.70.
6e 
Qreen-Empress t. Ihrrree ltlohrn |l,lylree, (1891) ILR l8 Cal 49
29
il\,.

hurt by doing a rash or negligent act dangerous to life and sentenced to
one year's rigorous imprisonment.
6.3 Thereafter, the age ofconsent was raised to l4 years in 1925 and to
l6 years in 1940. Up till 2012 when the POCSO Act was enacted, the
age of consent remained to be 16 years for women and there continued
to be no age of consent defined for a male. However, the minimum age
of marriage was l8 years for women and 21 years for men. The marital
rape exception in Section 375 has also witnessed changes over the years
starting from 10 years in 1860 to 15 years in 2012. The changes in age
of consent can be summarised as follows:?o
70 Law Commission oflndia, "205'h Report on Proposal to Amend the Prohibition ofChild Mamiage
Act, 2006 and other Allied Laws" (February, 2008) arailable at
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.inls3ca0daec69b5adc880Ib464895726dbdfluploads/2022108/20220810
72- l .pdf (last visited June I . 2023); lndeperulent Thotrghr v . Llnion of Imliu (2017 ) I 0 SCC 800.
Year Age of consent
under Section 375,
5th Clause of IPC
Age
mentioned
in the
Exception
to Section
375 of
IPC
Minimum
age of
m a rriage
under the
child
Marriage
Restraint
Act, 1929
l Ir60
'I 
0 vears I 0 years
l89I(I0 of l89l)
(after the
amendment of
IPC)
I 2 vears I 2 vears
1925 (after the
amendment of
IPC)
l4 vears I 3 years
1929 (after the
passing of the
I 4 years I 3 vears l4 vears
30 a}-

Child Marriage
Act)
1940 (after the
amendment of
Penal Code and
the Child
Marriage Act)
I 6 years 15 years I 5 years
1978 I 6 years 15 years I 8 years
2006 (after
enactment of
Prohibition of
Child Marriage
Act, 2006)
16 vears I 5 years I 8 years for
female and
21 years for
male
2013 (after
Criminal Law
Amendment Act.
2013 which
amended IPC
and followed
shortly after
enactment of
POCSO)
I 8 years 1 5 years 1 8 years for
female and
2l years for
male
2017 (After the
Supreme Court's
decision in
Independent
Thought v. UOI)
I 8 years (even in
case of a married
woman under 18
on account of
reading down of
Exception 2 of
Section 375 in light
ofPOCSO)
I 5 years
however
the same
was read
down
I 8 years for
female and
2l years for
male
3l
h\-

7. LAW COMMISSION REPORTS RELATING TO AGE OF
CONSENT
7.1. The Law Commission, in its 84'h Report titled "Rape and Allied
Offences- Some Questions of Substantive Law, Procedure and
Evidence"Tr, had suggested that the age ofconsent under fifth clause of
Section 375 as it stood then should be increased to 18 years as the
minimum age for marriage of a girl was 18 years under the erstwhile
Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 (as amended in 1978). However,
the Parliament in its wisdom, thought it fit to retain the age of consent
at l6 years.
7.2. Thereafter, in its 156th Report on Indian Penal Code, 1860,72 the
Law Commission, while considering the age of consent, accepted the
suggestion of the National Commission for Women to increase the age
of consent to 18 years and accordingly recommended that the age
specified in the sixth clause of Section 375 be increased to l8 years.
However, the age of consent was not increased by the Parliament as
recommended and continued to be l6 years till 2012 when POCSO was
enacted and under IPC till Section 375 was amended in 2013.
7r Law Commission oflndia, "84'h Report on Rape and allied offenses-some questions ofsubstantive
law, procedure and eyidence" (April, l9E0) ovailqble ql
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3ca0daec69b5adc880fb464895726dbdf/uploads/2022108/20220805
44.pdf(last yisited June 13, 2023).
7r Law Commission of India, "l56rh Report on Indian Penal Code, 1860- 16l (August, 1997)
availqble at
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3ca0daec69b5adc880Ib464895726dbdf/uploads/2022109/20220923
29.pdf (last yisited June 13, 2023).
32
q-'

8. AGE OF CONSENT UNDER THE POCSO ACT
8.1. The age ofconsent under the POCSO Act is l8 years on account
of the definition of "child" and the manner in which the sexual offences
have been defined under the Act. It is pertinent to note that the age of
consent was not always envisaged as 18 years under the Act. Initially,
when the Act was being drafted and subsequently debated, there were
proposals to recognise consent by a child between the ages of 16 to l8
years and there was debate on the same. However, it was a conscious
decision that the Parliament made to keep the age ofconsent at 18 years
without exception, given the special vulnerabilities faced by children
and keeping in consideration the social situation prevailing in our
nation.
8.2. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Bill, 201 0 as
prepared by National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
("NCPCR") in November 2010 provided for a close-in-age exemption
and recognized the possibility of rwo children engaging in sexual
activities. Clause 3 of the said Bill defined "Unlawful Sexual Act with
a Child" in the following manner:
'3. Unlawful Sexual Act with a Child
A. Subject to the exceptions hereinafter provided, any sexual act
committed with a Child under the age of 16 years, with or without
such child's consent, is unlauful.
Exceptions:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter or in any
other low for the time being in force:
t1 h-

(i) Any consensual non-penetrative sexual act penalized by this
chapter (except for sections 23, 25, 27 and 3l) is not an offence
when engaged in between two children who are both over 12
years of age and are either of the same oge or whose oges ore
within 2 years of each other.
(ii) Any consensual sexual act penalized by this chapter (except
for sections 23, 25, 27 and 3l) is not an offence when engaged in
between two persons who are both over l 4 years of age and are
either of the sante oge or whose oges are within 3 years of each
other.
B. Any sexual act with a Child aged between 16 -18 years is
unlawful when, a person engages in a sexual act with thot Child
in any of the following circumstances:
Firstly: With or without the Child's consent when the sexual act
is accompanied or preceded by express or implied force or
violence on the Child or on any other person in whom the Child
is interested, which overpowers or intimidates or subdues lhat
Child;
Secondly: With or without the Child's consent when the sexual
act is accompanied or preceded by coercion which is suficient
lo make a Child submit to lhe sexual act in the circumstances of
the case:
Thirdly: With or without the Child's consent when the sexual act
is accompanied or preceded by threat of serious harm or injury
to the Child or to any other person in whom the Child is
inlerested, or conduct instilling in the Child a reasonable fear of
such harm, violence or injury, and the said threat or conduct is
enough to make a Child submit to the sexual act in the
circumstances of the case,'
Fourthly: With or without the Child's consent when that person
impersonates anolher person to engage in the sexual act, and
knows, or has reason to htow, thal the Child is mistaken about
that person's ident ily ;
34
u

Fifthly l{ith or without the Child's consent when the Child is
made to engage in the sexual act mistaking it to be something
else and that person lorcws or has reason to know that the Child
is so mistaken;
Sixthly: Ilith or without the Child's consent when, by reason of
intoxication or the administration by that person personally or
through another of any stupefuing or unwholesome substance,
the Child is unable to understond the nature and consequences
of the sexual act.
Seventhly: With or without the Child's consent when that person
has taken undue advantage of the mental or physical incapacity
of the Child to understand the nature and consequences of the
sexual act or to voluntarily participate in it or to resist it.
Eighthly: Ilhen the Child is sleeping or unconscious;
Ninthly. Against the Child's will or without the Child's consent
lo engage in or continue with that sexual act.
Explanation:
(a) The fact that a Child did not say or do anything to indicate
consent to a sexual act is enough lo show that the act took place
without thal Child's consent.
(b) A Child is not to be regarded as having consented to a sexual
act only because-
(i) the Child did not protest or physically resist; or
(ii) the Child did not sustain any physical injury; or
(iii) on that or an earlier occasion the Child had consensually
engaged in or consented to engage in a sexual act (whether or
not of the same type) with that or another person.
General Exception:
35
U)r-

No act is an offence if that act is done bona fide, in good faith
and in a reasonable manner for proper hygiene or medical
examination o r req uire m e nl.1 3"
8.3. The POCSO Bill, 201 l7a (hereinafter, referred to as "the Bitl") as
introduced by the Ministry of Women & Child Development
recognized the possibility ofconsent by a child between the ages of 16
to 18 years. Clause 2(d) ofthe 201 I Bill defined "child" as any person
below the age of 18 years save as provided otherwise. Though "child"
was defined as any person under 1 8 years, the age of consent was set at
l6 years as the Bill of2011 recognized that a child between the ages of
l6 to l8 years could consent to sexual activities. A proviso to that effect
was provided in Clauses 3 & 7 of the 201 I Bill dealing with penetrative
sexual assault and sexual assault, respectively. The said provlso read:
"Provided that where such penetratiye sexual assault is
committed against a child between sixteen lo eighteen yeors of
oge, it shall be considered whether lhe consent for such an act
has been obtained against the will of the child or the consent hos
been obtoined by use of violence, force, threat Io use force,
intoxicants, drugs, impersonation, fraud, deceit, coercion, undue
in/luence, threats, v,hen lhe child is sleeping or unconscious or
where the child does not have the capacity to understand the
nature of the act or to resist it. " (emphasis added)
8.4. The said Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 23'd March,
2011 and was subsequently referred to the Parliamentary Standing
Comm ittee. The Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development, with regard to the same,
74 The Protection ofChildren from Sexual Offences Bill,20ll. BillNo. XIV of 201 I
36 w",

recommended that the said exception should be dropped as once a child
is defined as any person under the age of 18, the element of consent
becomes irrelevant. With respect to the definition of "child" and the
proviso in Clauses 3 & 7 the committee had made the following
recommendations:75
"V Clause 2: Definitions
5.1 Clause 2 of the Bill deals with dertnifions. Sub-clause 2(d)
defnes the term 'child' as "any person below the age ofeighteen
years scue as provided otherwise " .
5.2 It was pointed out thol the words "sove as provided
otherwise" should be deleted from the provision lo remove any
misunderstanding or confusion. The proposed definition tended
to create an exception which was not required. (emphasis
added)
5.3 The Ministty justified the wording by stating that it vas not
always the adult who committed an offence against the child.
There was a need to protect children from sexual abuse by their
own peerc and relatively older children, Further, the definition
was in consonance with the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2000 and the United Notion
Convention on the Rights of the Child (WCRC) to which India
v,as a party. (emphasis added)
6.5 Committee's attention was drawn to the following identical
proviso to clauses 3 and 7: -
" Provided that where such penetrative sexual assault is
commilted against a child between sixteen to eighteen years of
age it shall be considered whether the consent for such an act
has been obtained against the will of the child or the consent has
been obtained by use of violence, force, threat to use force,
?5 Parliament oflndia, "240'h Repon oftlre Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development on the Protection ofChildren from Sexual Offences Bill.20ll" 27 and 3l -33 (Rajya
Sabha, December, 201 l).
37 S\-,

intoxicants, drugs, impersonation, fraud, deceit, coercion, undue
influence, threats, when the child is sleeping or unconscious or
where the child does not have the capacity to understand the
nature of the act or to resist it. "
6.6 It was contended by the stakeholders that the proposed
provisos were completely erroneous, misleading and agoinst
the interests of the children. Such a provision would completely
negote our legal commitments under UNCRC 1989/1992 and
JJ Act 2000/2006. Whereas the declored age of the child in these
enactments v)as l8 years, in the proposed legislationfor children
between I 6- I 8 years, these provisions were nd made applicable
on them. Clause 2(d) of the Bill defines 'child' as any person
below the age of 18 years, which is the declared age of the child
in other similar enactments. The provisos convey that children
between the ages of I6-18 years are to be treated differently ond
can be outside the ambit of the provision. It was further stated
that this provision had been borrowed from section 375 of IPC
in which o man did not conmtit rape while having sexual
intercourse with the woman of I 6 - I8 years if there was a consent
for the same. Another orgument given against having the
component ofconsentfor children benyeen l6-18 years was that
it would invariably lesd to cross-examination of a viclim and
would make the enlire trial process central lo the conduct of the
victim rather thun that of the accused. It was felt that
unequivocal voluntary agreement for o specitic and limited act
only could be dangerous as it would put the victim to
unnecessary questioning lo decide on whether the sexual act
that took place wos differentform the one for which willingness
h'as expressed. Another discrepancy pointed out by the
stakeholders was thot for much graver crinres like 'penetralive
sexual assauh in clause 3 ond 'sexual assault' in clause 7, the
age of the child has been kept at I 6 years and for a much milder
form of crime i.e. sexual harassment in clause I I the age of the
child has been kept l8 years. (emphasis added)
6.7 Justifying the provisions, the Ministry clarified that the
definition of 'child' and the age of consent for sexual octivity
were two dffirent issues. There wos no contradiction in the
38

definition of 'child'as provided in clause 2 (d) and the age group
menlioned in clauses 3 and 7 as the age ofconsent had been kept
at 16 years consistentwith the provisions of section 375 and 377
of the IPC. The Bill also provided for a unifornr age of consent
for all the children irrespective of gender. Another justification
put forth by the Ministry wos lhat emerging social reality
regarding flworeness, understonding and exposure of the
adolescents cannot be overlooked and it would csuse mote
detrimenl to criminolize consensual action by children between
16 to I8 years of age. (emphasis added)
39
6.8 The Committee notes that olher enaclments such as the
Indian Maiority Act, I 87 5, the Indian Contract Act and the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000
define child as the one who has not completed l8 years ofage.
Further, the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 stipulares
thal child meons o person who, if a male has not completed 2l
years ofage, and if afemale, has not completed l8 years ofage.
Only in the Imntoral Trffic Prevention Act, 1986 a child has
been defined as a person below 16 years ofage. It can, therefore,
be concluded thal for most of the enactments a child means a
person beloht 18 years of age. The Committee would also like to
point out that the contention of the Ministry that the rye of
consent kept ot 16 years in clauses 3 and 7 is consistent with
lhe provisions under IPC cannot be considered correct. A
reoding of section 375 of IPC clearly indicates that out of the
sk descriptions of rope given thereunder, only one condition
mentions the age factor which soys a rape will be committed
with or wilhout consent when the womon is under sixteen yeors
of age. Section 375 of IPC would operote in totally different
circumstances when compared with the provisions in clauses 3
and 7 of the presenl Bill. The Commifiee is of the view thot once
the age of child hos been specified as 18 yeors, the element of
consent should be treated as irrelevant upto this age. Therefore,
the provisos to clauses 3 and 7 of the Bill should be deleted to
protect the rights of child and for the sake of protecting children
against abuse. This would olso be in consonance with the
counlr))'s commilment towards UNCRC ond the Juvenile Justice
Act, 2000. (emphasis added)
U",

6.9 The Committee hos also a word of caution. By having the
element of consent, the focus would be on the victim which
would invsriably lead to re-victimisation of the victim in the
hands of the justice delivery prccess and would be especially
problematic when dealing with children. The Committee would
like to point out that a great deal ofjurisprudence supports the
theory that law should mote away from this classical approach
of trials in such cases and focus on the conduct of the accused
and lhe circumstances surrounding the offence rather lhan the
conduct of lhe victim thereby obviating the necessity of lengthy
cross examination of the victim on the issue of consent."
(emphasis added)
76 The Protection ofChildren from Sexual Offences Bill,20l2, Bilt No. XIV-C of20l l, passed by
the Rajya Sabha on loth May, 2012.
40
8.5. Most of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee were accepted and the Bill was accordingly amended and
reintroduced in the Rajya Sabha on 10th May, 2011. Thus, the Bill as
reintroduced and passed by the Rajya SabhaT6 defined "child" as any
person under the age of 1 8 and the proviso in Clauses 3 & 7 recognising
consent by a child between 1 6 to I 8 years of age was also dropped. The
reason for dispensing with the proviso in case of sexual intercourse with
a child between 16 to 1 8 years of age wherein consent was factored in
was stated to be that repeated enquiry from a child as to whether they
in fact consented to the act or not is traumatic. In the context of fixing
the age of consent at 18 and not 16 years, it was stated that when
children were posed the question as part of a Study, they themselves

favoured the age of I 8 and some even advocated for the age of 2l . It
was thus stated that:77
{6}fl. rf, ka t {d crsc { qr{r s alt< qr{r z { rri ro i ra a;l org
S fuc d *qere vfrrh-E q EA-w Eli h ffis ?ir$z +1 crd -?r'S 8. qtf yr<l
{ frf{qr t rSsn 3I,R TiF 16 * rs fl-a 6I aql F;S qf{n t, dt ffi {
q{ ol ei u-trn vtR'o. s,ir{r q:nfl t *r qr< { r1rr 6ni1 on"r I w arPm
al Rr6,r{d 6tfr t. d {d crsqri } orfsR m i-er fl\'rll lo +eFra gFAeffA
e AC' {d afl q-{E ,ff qT Tt1 I ?-d & frC n6 \'6 a-$ fm r}rn fa rr*-sr
TrS qEI olc fd g5i d oa en qr .rd o-a en r E-fifrq s-fl drfuqi 61 6a
fo-qm .rqr t r
fua q- a6u sri qrqqn rit ,rr { I S' sq*fl t fu qfi rs rd i, qrfl-
&-or .n o)$ (qd sssl Rrmrqrd 6Td t. d sn Tia b's S rsr qror t r o-{
qrcttffitffitfuiilci{ff-o1 \'q ro i ra ail o-< * t re Od
nfl rri A. {fib Fa\ -di d rga {rt Esl 6rqr{ ,r{t qEd } E{, qE qHr
ft' q] sexual agc t, ar rg * sqr Etfr flFg * rra i dr rS er sra rr6nr
tt { sralfi t m cga trtl wflxtq   fi 6-€r fo fuo} ol ait fra,ro 6,
,i tt\ o{ ari } {}$ i gru orwr r) r sc.r $ rn { rr(ll} lh ar {l {fl qlc
tri-r it trn0 d crftrqr{f €ftq ?,'+A t. rfli rfl rr$ o-rr i fu rfib ffu
rs srf, 61 ss fl EIfl srBg t
tt cr rff w< o-< tcr qrfn fo. Teenage Sex t qrt { ,ftR-qr al 96
q'rd w S {qt n-ra d yr an u-cr{ ,r{ t, dr fa-q-a frtun t r ftrt rgr nrt
3r{r srqsn ff t, dfar srq { oq tt 6+A d ffi t .:t:Fq qm {2N) {
r* sr r{r t. fri-{e firrtB tn*{ v{6l-{ *tt mi rrq R-rs.r{t 6t q-6 gBffq-.r
or+r rlql fu- srq q.rm. a-d art< rdhnq-di o) rs ory< b qrt I on-o'R1 t.
{g'b frc orffif, f6('c o't r qq 6rtq.ri€ ffi.rc af qts"rff dt .Ejt fi fufirq' Eti
qrd orl q$d s* arc{s e s{d] +fl qr rrbm r
8.6. During the Parliamentary Debate following introduction of the
Bill in the Rajya Sabha, the issue of teenage relationships and the
77 Statement made by Minister of State, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Smt. Krishna
Tirath, Rajya Sabha Debates on May 10, 2012, page 364 available .rt
https://rsdebate.nic.in/bits:(learl,l123456789l60308411llD_225_10052012_l)36lj39l_29.pdf (last
visitcd on September 14,2023\.
4t h\-

likelihood of the provision being misused against young couples who
get married without the permission of their parents was highlighted by
some members.T8 In this context, it was argued that the age of consent
be fixed between 1 6- I 8 years as was provided for in the Bill as
introduced initially and that there also needs to be a provision akin to
close-in age exemption in order to protect young people engaging in
consensual sexual intercourse. It was stated that:
"Firstly, about the provision regarding consent for sexual acts.
Clauses 3 and 7 of the Bill hove identical provisions which state
thot if a sexual assoult is committed against a child between l6
and l8 years of age, it shall be considered whether the consent
has been obtained or not. I understond thal the Government has
already decided to amend the similar provisions in the Indian
Penal Code (375 and 377) in the matter of rape of women
behueen l6 and lSyearsofage. While supporting this provision
of consent of tge as 16-18 in the Bill, I would like to express
my concern about lhe issue regarding the teenagers who are
getting married without the permission of their parents. We
know there are many incidents of honour killings reportedfrom
many, mony Stotes and it is happening every day in many
States. Young people ore getting murried without the will of
their porents. I am afraid, the penal provisions ogainst the
offenders wlto are involved in sexual relationship with minor
girls provided in this Bill will be used os a tool against those
young couples who are getting married without the permission
of their porenls. So. I v,ould like to suggest thot a provision
should be added in this Bill that 'if two young people engage in
consensual act, lhen it should not be crintinalized and the boy
should not be punished. If the age difference isfive years or more
between the man and the ntinor girl, lhen the nan con be held
liable. "7e (emphasis added)
73 Statements made by Dr. T.N Seema, Rajya Sabha Debates on May 10, 2012, p age 373 available
at https://rsdebate.nic. in/birsrream/ I 2 3456'789t603084/l /tD 225 tO0S20l, p36l p39t 29.pdf
(last visited on September 14. 2023).
1n Id.
42 q-

8.7. Nonrrithstanding the concems brought to the fore, the age of
consent was fixed at 18 years when the Rajya Sabha passed the Bill.
The Bill with age of consent set at l8 years without exception was also
passed by the Lok Sabha and came to be enacted as the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.80 It is worth noting that
similar concems regarding potential misuse of the POCSO Act in cases
ofteenage relationships were also echoed in the Lok Sabha.tl
80 The Protcction ofChildren from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (Act No. 32 of20l2).
3r Statement made by Smt. Susmita Bauri, Lok Sabha Debates on May 22,2012, page 781 available
ar https://eparlib.nic.inlbitstream/ I2345 6789/7 586l4l3llsd l5 l0 22-05-2012_english.pdf (last
visited August 16, 2023).
1+., A,-

9. JUSTICE J.S. VERMA COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE
ISSUE OF AGE OF CONSENT/STATUTORY RAPE
9.1. The Justice J.S. Verma Committee, in its Report, had suggested
lowering the age of consent under the POCSO Act to 16 years in line
with Section 375 of the IPC. In the context of Section 375 of IPC, as it
stood prior to Criminal Law Amendment Act. 2013 wherein the sixth
clause mentioned age of consent as 16 years, Justice Verma Committee
in its Report suggested that the sixth description under Section 375 be
amended to read:
" Sixthly, llrhen the person is unable to communicate consent
either express or impliedly. "82
9.2. Further, the Committee recommended the addition of a new
Section 3768, defining and punishing rape of an underage person as
follows:
"Section 3768(1). Rape of an underage person: If a man has
sexual intercourse with a person below sixleen years ofage with
or without that person's consent, he shall be deemed to haye
committed rape of an underage person, and shall be pttnished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life.
Provided that the existence of a marital relationship between the
accused and the underage person shall not be a valid defence.
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, sexual intercourse
shall mean any of the acts specified in Section 375 (a) to (c).
32 Justice Verma Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law, "Report of the Committee on
Amendments to Criminal Law,2013" 440 (January 23,2013).
44
A
S-

Section 376(8)(2): Punishment for causing death or a persistent
vegelalive state in lhe course of committing rape of an underage
person.
Whoever, commits an offence punishable under Section 3768(l)
and in the course of such commission in/licts an injury which
causes the death of the person, or causes the person to be in a
persistent vegetative state shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a lerm which shall not be less than twenty
years, but may be for lfe, which shall mean the rest of that
person's natural life. "83
9.3. Justice Verma Committee stated the reasoning behind adoption
of the age of l6 to categorize underage rape as follows:
The Preamble to The Protection of Childrenfrom Sexual offences
Act, 2012 states "And whereas, the Government of India has
acceded on the Ilth December. 1992 to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, odopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations, which has prescribed a set of standards to be
followed by all State Parties in securing the best interests of the
child...and whereas the State Parties to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child are required to undertake all appropriate
national, bilateral and multilateral measures to preyent - (a) the
inducement or coercion of a child to engage in any unlawful
sexual activity; (b) the exploitative use of children in prostitution
or other unlawful sexual practices; (c) the exploitative use of
children in pornographic performances ond materials; That
further to the obove, the Parlianrent earmarked eighteen as the
age of consent for the purposes of Section 375, thereby achieving
lhe result of criminalising all sexual activity whether consensual
or non-consensual where one person is below the age of
eighteen. That the above Convention was aimed inter alia to
protect children from sexual assault and obuse and not to
criminalise consensual sex between two individuals even dthey
3r Justice Verma Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law, "Report of the Committee on
Amendments to Criminal Law, 2013" 443 & 444 (Jamary 23.2013).
45 q--

are below eighteen years of age. That on the basis of the
interpretation of Article 34 of the Convention along with the
representotion made by various groups this Committee
recommends that the age ofconsent be reduced lo slrteen, ond
necessary amendments be mode in lhe Protection of Children
from Sexuol Offences Act,2012 (No.32 of2012), in order to
avoid controdictions with the Indion Penal Code.sa (emphasis
added)
81 Justice Verma Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law, "Report of the Comminee on
Amendments to Criminal Law, 2013" 443 & 444 (January 23,2013).
+o
kh,

IO. AGE OF CONSENT AFTER ENACTMENT OF THE
POCSO ACT
10.1. Though enacted to adequately protect children against any kind
of sexual exploitation, the enactment of the POCSO Act brought in an
inherent contradiction in law. There now existed an anomalous
situation. The POCSO Act fixed the age of being categorised as a child
at 18 years, thus making it the default "age of consent',, meaning
thereby that once the person upon whom the sexual act is committed is
a child i.e., he/she is below the age of l8 years, consent would be
irrelevant for the purpose of attracting criminal liability under the
POCSO Act. On the other hand, under Section 375 of the IPC which
defines "rape" as it then existed, the age of consent remained to be l6
years. Further, an exception under Section 375 ofthe IPC provided that
sexual intercourse by a man with his wife who is not under the age of
l5 years shall not amount to rape. The Ministry of Home Affairs had
introduced Criminal Law Amendment Bill, 2012 in the Lok Sabha on
4th December,20l2, wherein it has suggested amendments to the IpC,
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Indian Evidence Act,
1872.85 The said Bill sought to amend Secrion 375 of the IPC to define
the offence of"sexual assault" as against "rape" and it raised the age of
consent to 18 years. Further, the Bill extended the exception with
respect to sexual intercourse by a man with his wife only when the wife
was not under the age of 16 years. lt is interesting to note that the
amendment as suggested under the said Bill made Section 375 gender
35 The Criminaf Law (Amendmenr) Bill. 2012, Bill No. 130 of 2012. available at
htrps://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/ 130 201? Eng LS.pdflsource=legi
slation (last visited on May 24,2023).
47
ay

neutral as the terminology employed was no longer gendered and the
word "person" was used instead of "man" or "woman". However, the
exception applicable in case of intercourse happening within a marriage
only exempted acts of a husband as not amounting to sexual assault.
The amendment as proposed read as follows:
" 375. A person is said to commit "sexual assault" if that
(a) penetrates, for a sexual purpose, the vagina or anus
or urethra or mouth of another person with-
(i) any part of the body including the penis of
such person; or
(ii) any object manipulated by such person,
excepl where such penetration is carried out for proper
hygienic or medical purposes;
(b) manipulates any part of the bo$t of another person
so as to cause penetration of the vagina or anus or urethrq or
mouth of such person by any part of the other person's body;
(c) engages in "cunnilingus" or "fellatio", under the
circumstances falling under any of the following six
descriplions:-
Firstly.-Against the other person's will.
Secondly.- Without the other person's consent.
Thirdly.- With the other person's consent when such
consent hos been obtained by putting such other person or
any person in whom such other person is interested, in fear
of death or of hurt.
Fourthly.-lI/hen the person assaulted is afemale, with
her consent, when the man knows thal he is not her husband
and that her consent is given because she believes that he is
another man lo whom she is or believes to be lawfully
married.
Fifthly.-With the consent of the other person when, at
the lime of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness of
mind or intoxication or the administration by that person
personally or through another of any stupefuing or
unwholesome substance, the other person is unable to
48
person-
A,-

understand the nature and consequences of lhat action to
which such other person gives consent.
Sixthly.-ll/ith or without the other person's consent,
when such other person is under eighteen years of age.
Explanation l.-Penetration to any extent is
"penetration" for the purposes of this section.
Explanation II.-For the purposes of this section,
"vagino" shall also include labia majora.
Exception.-Sexual intercourse or sexual acls by a
man wilh his own wife, the wile nol being under skleen
years of age, is not sexual assault.
(emphasis added)
10.2. The aforesaid Bill as introduced in the Lok Sabha was referred
to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs for examination; however, it was subsequently withdrawn on
l9s March,2013 in the wake of a series of developments, namely, the
16th December,20l2 Delhi rape case, the constitution of Justice Verma
Committee, the promulgation of Criminal Law (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2013 and the Recommendations made by the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs in its
Report tabled before the Parliament.86 It is pertinent to note that the
issue of fixing the age of consent was a sensitive and contested issue
even back then as is evident from the contrary views of different
Committees. While the Justice J.S. Verma Committee8T in its Report
had suggested that the POCSO Act be suitably amended and the age of
consent under it be reduced to l6 years to bring it in line with the IPC,
36 Lok Sabha Debates on March 19, 2013 a'ailable at:
https://eparlib.nic.in/bitsream/ I 23456789/71372611/9739.pdf ( Iast visited May 24, 2023).
37 Justice Verma Committee on Amendments to Criminal Law, "Report of the Committee on
Amendments to Criminal Law,2013" 443 & 444 (January 23,2013).
49 @-

the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
Affairs in its Report on the other hand suggested that the age ofconsent
be fixed at 18 years in line with the Criminal Law (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2013 which was also gender neutral. However, the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee in its Report
had also noted the dissenting view of two members namely, Shri D.
Raja and Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, who in the context of Section 375,
expressed that:
"4. Clause 5 raises the age of consent from 16 to 18 years in
cases of sexual assatit under Section 375 IPC. However, the
social reality is that there are many instances of consensual
sexual activity between adolescents between the ages of 16 and
18 and it would lead to injustice if in these cases there was
prosecution for rape. The Law Commission in its 205th report
has made a recommendotion which may form the basis of lhis
amendment we suggest. By way of a proviso to clause 'sixthly' to
Section 375 IPC to exempt such consensual activity from the
purtiew of statutory rape provided the accused person is not
more than 5 years older."88
10.3. Thereafter, the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2013 was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 19th March,2013 wherein, on account of
amendment suggested to Section 375 of IPC, the default age ofconsent
for girls/women was set at 16 years.Se The Bill continued to define
"rape" as offence committed by a man against a woman unlike the
gender-neutral definition employed under the earlier Bill of 2012, the
88 Parliament oflndia, "One Hundred and Sixty Seventh Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment)
Bill, 2012" 8l (Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, March
2003).
8e 
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2013, Bill No. 63 of 2013, awilable at
https://sansad. inlgetFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/63_2013_eng_ls.pdPsource=legisla
tion (last visited August 16, 2023).
50
q,

Ordinance of 2013 and the Standing Committee Report. Furthermore,
in order to rectifu the inherent contradiction in law as it then existed,
the Bill sought to amend the definition of "child" under Section 2(1)(d)
of the POCSO Act to mean any person below the age of 16 years. The
amendment to the POCSO Act, as suggested by the said Bill of 2013
thus read as follows:
"29. In section 2 of the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the
Protection of Children Act), in sub-section (l), in clause (d), for
the words "eighteen years", the words "sixteen years" shall be
substituted. "
10.4. The 2013 Bill, as originally introduced in Lok Sabhaeo, was more
in line with the recommendations made by the J.S. Verma Committee;
however, in the Bill as was finally passed by the Lok Sabha,er the age
of consent was raised to 1 8 years and the amendment to Section 2( 1)(d)
of the POCSO Act was rejected. The same was passed by Rajya Sabha
and became the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 201 3 . Since the
passage of the said Act of2013, the age of consent has been raised to
18 years on account of the clause Sixthly of Section 375, which is in
line with the age criteria provided under the POCSO Act. However, the
exception for a man having intercourse with his wife who is not under
the age of 15 years remained on the statute-book and this was now
contradictory to the POCSO Act as Section 42A of the POCSO Act,
which gives it an overriding effect over other laws, was inserted by the
same 2013 Amendment Act. The issue came up before the Hon'ble
e0 ld.
er Thc Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill, 2013, Bill No. 63-C of2013
5l
V

Supreme Court in Independent Thought y. (Jnion of lndia & Anr.e2,
wherein, the age of 15 years in Exception 2 to Section 375 was read
down as 18 years, thereby bringing in uniformity so far as the age of
consent under criminal law in India is concerned.e3
10.5. Certain other amendments in law become relevant in context of
the issue under consideration. There was considerable debate on
prosecuting a child as an adult post the 2012 Delhi rape incident,
wherein one of the perpetrators on account of being a minor, was thus
being tried as ajuvenile under the then applicable Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, and the punishment imposed on
him was not felt commensurate with the seriousness of offence
committed by the juvenile. Consequently, Section 15 of the new JJ Act
enacted in 201 5 provided for trial of a juvenile as an adult in case of
heinous offences. Section 2(33) of the JJ Act,20l5 defines ,.heinous
offences" as offences for which the minimum punishment under the
IPC or any other law for the time being in force is imprisonment for 7
years or more. Further, under the POCSO Act, punishment for
penetrative sexual assault under Section 4 was enhanced by the
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act,2019
from imprisonment for not less than 7 years but which may extend to
life to imprisonment for not less than 10 years but which may extend to
life and in case the victim child is below the age of 16 years.
imprisonment for not less than 20 years but which may extend to life.
Thus, in case of a romantic relationship between two children who are
52
h,
,: (2017) Io scc 800.
eJ Id.

between the age of l6 to l8 years, there is probability of the boy being
tried as an adult as in most cases. the stringent provisions of the POCSO
Act are pressed against the boy and not the girl even though the POCSO
Act is gender neutral and technically the two children involved are
individually both victim and offender. This is an area of concem that
various High Courts have highlighted on multiple occasions.ea There is
a grey area in law on how to determine which child is the victim and
which one is the offender in case of such consensual relationships
between two children.
"a Sabari v. Inspectot of Police and Others (2019) 3 RCR (Cri) 452: Ranjit Rajbqnshi v. Slqte of
lVest Bengal and Others 2023 Cri Ll (NOC 74) 25; Ravi @ Virumandi v. State rcpresented by the
Assistant Commissioner of Police & Anr. Madras High Court CRL.A.No.627 of 2021 dated
18.1t.2022.
53
U

II. AGE OF CONSENT IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
I I . I . The UNCRCe5 defines a child as any person below the age of I 8
years. However, the age ofconsent ranges from l3 to 18 years globally.
11.2. It is pertinent to note that the age ofconsent in Canada was raised
from 14 to 16 years only in the year 2008 in light of increased incidents
of teenagers being lured online. The Canadian law on sexual
exploitation of children has been explained below.
1 1.3. As per the Canadian Criminal Code, the age of consent is 16
years. However, close-in-age exceptions are incorporated under the
law. Certain situations have also been specified wherein there can be no
consent, which largely include situations wherein the accused is in a
position of trust, the complainant is in a relationship of dependency and
the relationship is exploitative. Section 150 of the Canadian Criminal
Codee6 provides for the same.
1 1.4. The close-in-age exemption has been categorised as:
a. When the complainant is 12 years or above but
below the age of 14 years, then consent can be present if
the accused is less than two years older than the
complainant;
er United Nations Convention on the Rights ofthe Child. 1989. art. I
e6 Criminal Code ofCanada, sec. 150.
54
A. Canads
S'

b. When the complainant is 14 years or above but
below the age of l6 years, then consent can be present if
the accused is less than five years older than the
complainant.
11.5. In both the above situations, however, the accused must not be in
a position of trust or authority towards the complainant, must not be a
person with whom the complainant is in a relationship of dependency
and must not be in a relationship with the complainant that is
exploitative of the complainant. Further, a person aged 12 or 13 years
has also been exempted from being tried for offences under Sections
151, 152 or 173(2) of the Criminal Code unless the accused holds a
position of trust or authority or there is a relationship of dependency or
the relationship is exploitative in nature.
1 I .6. It is pertinent to highlight that while the age of consent has been
set at 16 years, however, the law does protect against sexual
exploitation of"young persons" from persons who are in a position of
trust or authority over the young person, with whom the young person
is in a relationship of dependency or who are in a relationship with a
young person that is exploitative of the young person. The term ')oung
persons" has been defined as a person aged l6 years or above but under
the age of I 8 years.eT Further, Section I 53 ( I .2) of the Criminal Code
provides for circumstances/factors under which the judge may infer
sexual exploitation. The provision reads:
e7 Criminal Code ofCanada, sec. 153
55
B-

"Section I 53. Sexuol exploitation
Inference of sexual exploitation
(1.2) A judge may infer thot a person is in a relationship with a
young person that is exploitative of the young person from the
nature and circumstonces of the relationship, including
(a) the age of the young person;
(b) the age dffirence between the person and the young
person;
(c) the evolution of the relationship; and
(d) the degree of control or influence by the person over
the young person. "
1 1.7. In addition to the Criminal Code, each province and territory of
Canada has its own child welfare laws to protect children against abuse,
exploitation and neglect.es
B. United Slates of America
11.8. In the US, the age of consent varies by the State. Under the
federal law, the age of consent is l8 years.ee In many States, in addition
to age of consenl, there is a minimum age requirement and the
criminality of sexual intercourse with an individual who is above the
minimum age requirement and below the age of consent is dependent
on the age differential between the two parties and/or the age of the
defendant. For example, in the state of New Jersey, while the age of
consent is 16 years. an individual who is 13 years or older can consent
to sexual activity with another individual who is less than 4 years older
e3 Department of Justice Canada, Govemment of Canada, "Age of Consent to Sexual Activity",
available at https://wqwjustice.gc.ca./eng/rp-pr/other-autre/clp/faq.html (last visited August 8,
2023't.
ee United states Code, sec. 2251
56
k\-'

C, Australia
I 1 .9. The age of consent in Australia varies between 16 to 17 years
depending on the State or territory. Most States also make sexual
interaction by a person in supervisory role with a person aged l6 or 17
years under their special care an offence. This would cover instances of
persons with authority such as teachers, parents, medical practitioners
having sexual contact with minors or children who are under their care
and supervision. Many States also incorporate close-in-age exemptions
within the statutory framework as a defence in situations where there is
rm The New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, sec. 2C:14-2
r0r Nevada Revised Statutes. sec. 200.366.
ro'?ld. sec. 200.364.
57
than the minor in question.l00 The minimum age requirement or close-
in-age exception are also referred to as the "Romeo and Juliet Laws".
Many States also provide for a minimum age of defendant, below rvhich
individuals cannot be prosecuted for engaging in sexual intercourse
with minors. For instance, in Nevada while the age of consent is I 6
years, sexual intercourse with someone who is under 16 years of age
would amount to an offence of sexual assault only if the defbndant is at
least l8 years of age.r0r Further, a Romeo-Juliet exception has been
carved out in law where the perpetrator is aged l8 years or above and
the victim is 14 or 15 years of age and is at least 4 years younger than
the perpetrator.l 02
hy

consensual mutual sexual interaction betr;veen two persons who are
under the legal age of consent.ros
D. Japan
1 1 .10. Theageof consent in Japan was 13 yearsr04 till2023, while the
age of majority is 20 yearsr05 and the minimum age for marriage for a
man is l8 years and that for a woman is 16 years.l06 Further, a minor
has to take consent of their parents in order to marry.l07 There had been
widespread criticism from various quarters for retaining such a low age
of consent and inadequacy in punishment that has remained unchanged
since 1907, among other issues plaguing the Japanese criminal law
dealing with sexual offences. In light of the same, the Japanese
Parliament recently passed a series of laws revamping the legal
provisions for dealing with crimes of sexual nature, which includes
raising the age ofconsent to 16 years.l0E
E. South Africa
1 I .l 1 . In South Africa, the age of consent is l6 yearsroe even though a
child has been defined as a person under the age of l8 years.ll0 The age
58
r0r Australian Institute ofFamily studies, "Age ofconsent laws in Australia: CFCA Resource sheet
- May 2021" (May, 2021) availqble al https://aifs.gov.au/sites/defaulVfiles/publication-
documents/2104_age_olconsentjesource_sheet_0.pdf ( last visited July 3 l, 2023).
ra Penal Code ofJapan,1907, art. 177.
ro5 Civil Code ofJapan, 1896, art.4.
t6 Id, art.73l.
to1 ld, att.738,
f03 Sayantani Biswas, "Japan raises age ofconsent from 13 to l6 after over a century" Live Minl,
llun. 16, 2023, alailable al https://wrarv.livemint.com/news/world/japan-raises-age-of-consent-
from- I 3+o- 16-after-over-a-century- l 1686931414374.htm1 (last visited August 5, 2023).
r@ Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act of2007, sec. l5& 16.
rro Id, sec. l(a).
,h ..'
\YYL//

of consent debate ignited in the South Afiican context as well and the
same has been explained belorv:
11.12. Under the law as it stood in 2007, statutory rape (sexual
penetration)11 I and statutory sexual assault (sexual violation - direct or
indirect contact)ll2 had been defined and the same could only be
perpetrated against children between the ages of l2 to 15 years.r13 There
was a defence available in the form of close-in-age exemption clause
whereby, it would not be statutory sexual assault if both the parties were
children and within an age gap of not more than two years from each
other. However, the same did not apply to cases of statutory rape.l la
Further, such a defence was available only to persons under the age of
18 years. Moreover, if the age difference exceeded two years, then the
exception would not apply and both the parties, who are adolescents,
were required to be mandatorily prosecuted and even if one of them
were below the age of 16 years, they could not claim benefit of the
exception. Similar to its Indian counterpart, there is a mandatory
reporting provision under the South African law as well which
contributed to bringing in purported cases ofconsensual adolescent sex
within the folds of criminal law.rr5 This anomalous situation created by
the statute was brought before the Constitutional Court of South Africa
'rr /d, sec. 15.
tt2 Id, sec, 16,
I t1 The Teddy Bear Clinic tor Abused Children and A nolher v, i{inisler oJJuslice and Conslilulional
Dewlopnent ond Others Case CCT l2l13 [2013] ZACC 35 (3 October 2013), para 15.
rri Criminal Law (Sexual Offcnces and Related Matters) Amcndment Act of2007, sec. 56(2).
rr5 /d, sec. 54. 
h\G//
59

11.13. In the Teddy Bear Clinic case, the harshness of the criminal
justice system and the chilling effect of such exposure on the
development ofa proper understanding ofand healthy attitudes towards
sexual behaviour as well as the infringement of constitutional rights of
children, namely, rights to human dignity, privacy and bodily and
psychological integrity, besides the best-interests principle were
highlighted before the Constitutional Court.rrT The Court recognised
the need to ensure that children receive appropriate support to make
healthy choices and are provided with a safe environment to do so. This
was considered vital to ensure that children receive the benefit of
guidance at a sensitive and developmental stage of their lives.rr8 The
adverse social and psychological impact of the impugned provision
were also noted by the Constitutional Court.
I 1.14. The Constitutional Court of South Africa recognised that
children merit special protection through legislation that guards and
enforces their rights and liberties; however, in this endeavour, great care
has to be taken to ensure that, in attempting to guide and protect
children, interventions do not expose them to negative consequences
having adverse effects on their development.lre The Court also
tt6 fhe Teddy Bear ClinicJor Abused Childt en and l nother v. Minisler ofJustice dnd Constilulional
Development and Others Case CCT lAl3 [2013] ZACC 35 (3 October 2013), para l5
tt1 Id, para28-29.
I t3 ld, para 45 .
tte Id, para l.
60
in the case of Teddy Bear Clinic for Abused Children and Another v.
Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development and Others.tt6
a\-

recognised that children are individual rights-bearers rather than mere
extensions oftheir parents.l20 The Court held in clear unequivocal terms
that "children's dignity rights are of special importance and are not
dependent on the rights of their parents. Nor is the exercise by children
of their dignity rights held in abeyance until they reach a certain
age."t2t In declaring the impugned provisions unconstitutional, the
Court held that upholding best interest of the child involves a balancing
act and, in each case, various factors need to be considered. The Court
was of the view that the impugned Sections 15 and 16 of the Sexual
Offences Act exacerbated the harm and risk to adolescents by
undermining support structures, preventing adolescents from seeking
help and potentially driving adolescent sexual behaviour
underground.l22 The observations of the Court that also become
relevant in the Indian context, read as follows:
" [55J It cannot be doubted that the criminalisation ofconsensual
sexual conduct is a form of stigmatisation which is degrading
and invasive. In the circumstances of this case, the human dignity
of the adolescenls largeted by the impugned provisions is clearly
infringed. If one's consensual sexual choices are not respected
by society, but are criminalised, one's innate sense of self-worth
will inevitably be diminished. Even when such criminal
provisions are rarely enforced, their symbolic impact has a
severe effect on the sociol lives and dignity of those targeted. It
must be borne in mind that sections I 5 and I6 criminalise a wide
range of consensual sexual conduct between children: the
categories of prohibited activity are so broad that they inchde
much of vhat constitutes activity undertaken in the course of
adolescents' normal development. There can also be no doubt
that the existence of a statutory provision that punishes forms of
t'o Id. para 40.
t:l ld. para 52.
txl Id, pata 72.
6l
q\-

sexual expression that are developmentally normal degrades and
inflicts a state of disgrace on adolescents ... ... ...
[57J The stigma of criminalisalion is exacerbated by the
provisions in section 4l of the Sexual Offences Act mondating
that the name of any person who commits an offence in terms of
sections I5 and 16 be placed on the Register... ... ... .... The
relevant provisions of section 4l(1) are clearly and laudably
aimed at protecting children from odult sexuol predators.
However, this goal will not be achieved by the inclttsion in the
Register of the details of adolescents who have engaged in
consensuol sexual penetration or sexual violation. Indeed, to
prevent an adolescent from meaningfully interacting with
children in the future purely because thot adolescent engaged in
what may be developmentally normal sexual conduct constitutes
a significant limitation of his or her right to dignity.
[60] . The offences ollow police fficers, prosecutors and
judicial fficers to scrutinise and assume control of the intimate
relationships of adolescents, thereby intruding into a deeply
personal realm of their lives. This intrusion is exacerbated by the
reporting provisions: trusted third parties are obliged by section
54 of the Sexual Ofences Acl to disclose information which may
have been shared with them in the strictest confidence, on poin
of prosecution. "
I 1 . 1 5. While the Constitutional Court declared the impugned
provisions to be invalid, however, the invalidity was suspended lbr 18
months to allow Parliament to correct defects and pass appropriate
amendments. In the meanwhile, a moratorium was imposed on all
investigations into, arrests in, prosecutions in, and criminal and
ancillary proceedings regarding such Sections 15 and 16 offences. The
South African Parliament brought in the Criminal Law (Sexual
Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act (5 of 2015), rvhich
62
8,,-

brought the law in consonance with the ruling of the South African
Constitutional Court.
63
U

12. ANALYSIS OF THE POCSO ACT
12.1. The POCSO Act is aimed at performing two core functions that
largely remained unaddressed in law as it stood erstwhile. Firstly, to
enforce the rights of all children to safety, security and protection from
sexual abuse and exploitation. Secondly, it is intended to define
explicitly the offences against children countered through
commensurate penalties as an effective deterrence.l23 The punishment
for offences prescribed under the Act is directly proportionate to the
severity of the offence. The punishment is also inversely proportional
to the autonomy exercisable by the child, with offences against children
below the age of 12 years falling under the "aggravated" nature, thus
subject to greater terms of imprisonment and fine. Sexual assault is also
of an "aggravated" nature under Sections 5 and 9 of the Act when
committed by a person in a position of authority or those exercising
authority over children in their care.r2a
12.2. While the POCSO Act is gender neutral,r25 it is an undeniable
fact that the girl child is faced vvith greater threats in our society. The
vulnerability of children, especially the girl child in our society was
very aptly noted by the Hon'ble Supreme Cowt in Nawabuddin v. Stote
of uttarakhand,r26 wherein the Court observed:
" Children are precious human resources ofour country; they are
the country's future. The hope of tomorrow rests on them. But
unfortunately, in our countty, a girl child is in a ttery vulnerable
t23 Attorney General v. Salrsi (2022) 5 SCC 545.
124 Id.
tx5 Alakh,4lok Srivdstava't. Llnion oJ lndia (2018) l7 SCC 291
126 Nantabttddin v. State ofLlttarakhand (2022) 5 SCC 419.
64
t
\q-,

position. There are different modes of her exploitation, including
sexual assault and/or sexual abuse. In our view, exploitation of
children in such a manner is a crime against humanity and the
society. Therefore, the children and more particularly the girl
child deserve full protection and need greater care and
protection whether in the urban or rural areas.|27
12.3. As a society, we often fail our children and in such situations the
duty and responsibility rests upon the courts to ensure adequate legal
protection to these children in need of special care and protection.r28
Further, a child who has been sexually abused is placed in a much more
precarious situation than an adult victim of a similar crime as it can be
much more difficult for a child to withstand the social ostracization and
mental harassment meted out by society. The child also needs extra
protection especially in light of the fact that in a significant number of
cases the perpetrator is a family member or a close friend.r2e The courts
thus cannot take a lenient view and are in fact obligated to follow the
strict letter of law. In State of U.P. v. Sonu Kushwaha,t30 the Supreme
Court noted that the POCSO Act was a stringent legislation with
mandatory minimum punishments intended to address the malady of
child abuse plaguing our society and that the Courts were not
empowered to award lesser punishments once a case was made out
under the Act. The Court observed as follows:
" 15. The POCSO Act was enacted to provide more stringent
punishments for the offences of child abuse of various kinds
ond thal is why minimum punishments have been prescribed in
t21 ld.
t28 State ofRaiasthanv. Om Prakash (2002) 5 SCC 745.
t2e Nipun Saxena v. Union oflndio (2019) 2 SCC 703.
t3o Stale of U.P. v, Sonu Kushuaha, Supreme Court oflndia, Criminal Appeal No. 1633 of2023
65 \-,

Sections 4, 6,8 and 10 of lhe POCSO Actfor various categories
of sexual assaults on children. Hence, Section 6, on its ploin
language, leoves no discretion lo lhe Court and there is no
option but to impose the minimum sentence as done by the Trial
Court, ll/hen t penal provision uses the phraseology "shall not
be less than....", the Courts cunnot do offence to lhe Section
and impose o lesser sentence. The Courls are powerless to do
that unless there is o specilic stotutory provision enobling lhe
Court to impose a lesser sentence. However, we /ind no such
provision in lhe POCSO Act._Therefore, notwithstanding the fact
lhot the respondent ntay ha,e moved ahead in life after
undergoing lhe sentence as nodified b1, the High Court, there is
no question of showing any leniency to him...t3l
(emphasis added)
12.4. From the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court as well as
the Parliamentary discussions that took place after the introduction of
the POCSO Bill in 2011, it is amply clear that the law is strict in its
application and the element of "consent" of a child can have no role to
play whatsoever. When the victim is a child, there can be no question
of consent and any claim of there being consent is totally meaningless.
This has already been held by the Supreme Court in the context of
Section 375 Clause Srx thly of the IPCr32, where the age of consent being
16 years was read down as 18 years to bring it in tune with the POCSO
Act. It may be argued that any reading of the element of discretion will
dilute the protective shield that has been built under law after a long-
drawn process. To address a specific undesirable situation that has
arisen. thousands of children, especially girl children who are in
particular danger of being trafficked or abused, cannot be deprived of
t)t Id.
132 Parhlad & Anr. v. State of Haryana (20l5) 3 SCC (Cri) 807
66
)^
Tr/

the protective edifice that exists on account of strict provisions of the
POCSO Act, which may be their only arrnour. Further, it can be
observed that in certain cases, the courts are exercising discretion in
terms of sentencing which otherwise does not exist. If such discretion,
which is not otherwise vested in the court under the black letter of law,
is allowed to be exercised and that too in an unguided manner, it will
lead to blunting the edges of law by doing something that is contrary to
that which was intended by the Legislature. While in order to remedy
the anomalous situation created by the strict letter of law, various High
Courts have imposed lesser sentences noting that the Act was not
intended to criminalise adolescent love, however, the observations
made by the Supreme Court in State of U.P. v. Sonu Kushwahats3 would
restrict the trial Courts in imposing lesser sentence on the accused.
tt3 State o! [].P. v. Sonu Kushsaha, Supreme Court of India Criminal Appeal No. 1633 of 2023-
67 A\-

13. EMERGING ASPECTS RELATING TO CHILD ABUSE
13.2. The Parliament has been cognizant of the rising vulnerabilities
that the children face in the virtual r.vorld, the consequences of which
flow into the physical world. In this context, an ad-hoc committee rvas
constituted on l2th December,2019 in the Rajya Sabha to look into the
issues that arise out of the increased accessibility of pornographic
material and its effect on the society. The Report of the Committee
focused on child pomography on social media and gave
recommendations on amendments in law, including in the POCSO Act
and the Information Technology Act, 2000, that were required to
effectively tackle these issues that had mushroomed over the past years.
In view of the increased vulnerability and threats to children online, the
Committee suggested inclusion of provisions pertaining to cyber
grooming, including defining the term "grooming", so as to explicitly
rr' Sonam Saigal, "Children in romantic relationships are at risk for online bullying and abuse, says
hefpline", The Hindu, March 19, 2023, available at
https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/mumbai/children-in-romantic-relationships-are-at-risk-for-
online-bullying-and-abuse-says-helpline/article66634844.ece (last visited July 25,2023).
6tt
13.1. The access to the intemet, including to children, has increased in
recent times. This is marked by the emergence of new dangers against
children. There has been an alarming rise in cases of online child abuse
and cyber-bullying. A worrisome dimension of these cases is that
children and young people in romantic relationships, especially girls,
are more vulnerable to online sexual abuse.l3a There has been an
observable rise in incidents of sextortion and online grooming
involving children. There has also been a rise in the availabitity of child
sexual abuse material online.
W

recognise it as a crime in India. Accordingly, the Committee had
suggested inclusion of a new provision in the POCSO Act under
Section 11, after sub-clause (vi), rvhich would read:r35
" (vii) knowingly persuades, coerces, entices, grooms,
communicates, orranges a meeting with a child for oneself or
another person and/or meets with a child with the intent of
sexually abusing the child, and even if the actor thinks he/she is
communicating with a child but is octually talking to an adult."
I 3.3. Further, as regards the definition of "grooming", the Committee
recommended that India could adopt a definition similar to that adopted
by the International Labour Organisation in its "Terminolog,t
Guidelines for the Protection of Children from Sexual Exploitation and
Sexual Abuse". These guidelines define "grooming" as:
"the process of establishing/building a relationship with a child
either in person or through the use of the lnternet or olher digital
technologies to facilitate either online or offline sexual contact
with that person. "
13.4. It is pertinent to mention that the Committee did note that
minors/young adults are engaged in exchanging seltles or sexting and
in this context, recommended a debate on the introduction of an
exception clause in Section l5 of the POCSO Act that would apply in
situations wherein such images or texts are shared between two
minors/adolescents. The issue of introducing such an exception proved
r35 Parliament of India, "Report ofthe Adhoc Committee ofthe Rajya Sabha to Study the Alarming
Issue ofPornography on Social Media and its Effect on Children and Society as a Whole,2020" ll(Para 1.2\ (Rajya Sabha, 2020) ovailable at
https://sansad.inlgetFile/rsne Committee_site/Committee_File/ReportFile/71ll 4Ol0 2020 2l'1.
pdPsource=rajyasabha (last visited August 14, 2023).
69
\-

to be quite contentious, with some members feeling that young adults
between the age-group of l6-19 years should also be covered under this
exception while other members felt that the possession of any sexual
material of whatever kind by minors must be banned outright. The
proposed exception clause to be inserted after Section 15(3) of the
POCSO Act, 2012, as recommended by the Committee read as
follows:r36
" (4) Exceptions under this Act include (a) minors who cannot be
prosecuted for child pornography offences if the child takes or
stores or exchanges with another minor, indecent images of
oneself; (b) rf the individual is under l8 years and (i) no person
in the image is more than two years younger than the individual;
(ii) the image does not show an act lhat is a serious criminal
offence. "
13.5. The Committee further recommended the Ministry of Women
and Child Development to engage in a widespread campaign through
schools and community organisations to discowage risky online
behaviour amongst children. 
I 37
13.6. At present, Section 678 of the Information Technology Act,
2000 is used to combat incidences of online child sexual abuse by
criminalising any publication, transmission, creation, collection,
r16 Parliament oflndia, "Report ofthe Adhoc Committee ofthe Rajya Sabha to Study the Alarming
Issue ofPomography on Social Media and its Effect on Children and society as a Whole, 2020" I I
and 12 (Para 1.3) (Rajya Sabha, 2020) available qt
https://sansad.ir/getFile/rsnew/Committee-site/Committee_File/ReportFile/71l I 4O/0_2020 2 '17.
pdPsource=rajyasabha (last visited August 14. 2023).
rr7 Parliament oflndia, "Report ofthe Adhoc Committee ofthe Rajya Sabha to Study the Alarming
Issue ofPomography on Social Media and its Effect on Children and Society as a Whole, 2020" l2
(Para 1.3) (Rajya Sabha, 2020), available at
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Comminee_site/Committee_File/ReportFile/71l 1 40/0_2020 2_17.
pdf?source=rajyasabha (last visited August 14, 2023).
N"
70

promotion, exchange, distribution, or possession of child sexual abuse
material as well as criminalizing the act of facilitating abuse of children
online, recording acts of child abuse in electronic form and cultivating,
enticing or inducing children for sexually explicit acts.r38
13.7 . Apart from the aspect of child abuse in the online realm, another
aspect that has emerged is how the mandatory reporting requirement
under the POCSO Act has worked to the detriment of adolescent girls
in seeking reproductive and sexual health services. This was noted by
the Apex Court inX v. Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare
Department, Govt. of NCT of Delhi and Anr.t3e. The Court, in this case,
observed that while the POCSO Act does not consider factual consent
by a minor, it in no way prevents adolescents from engaging in
consensual sex. The Court noted that such activities continue to take
place and may at times result in pregnancy and being aware of this
reality, the Legislature included adolescents within purview of Rule 38
of the MTP Rules, which provides a category of women who may
terminate their pregnancy up to 24 weeks. The Court further noted how
the mandatory reporting requirement and insistence on the disclosure
of the name of the minor in the report under Section l9(1) of the
POCSO Act may act as a barrier for the minor to access safe termination
of pregnancy. Upholding the right to reproductive autonomy and in
order to ensure single and unmarried women are not deprived of
rr3 The Information Technology Act. 2000 (Act No. 2l of 2000), sec. 678.
t)e Supteme Court ollndia, Civil Appeal No, 5802 of2022 (Arising out ofSLP (C) No. 12612 of
2022).
71
V

abortions between 20 and 24 weeks, the Court interpreted the rule
purposively and in a broad manner. The Court held that:
"84. To ensure that the benefit of Rule 3B(b) is extended to all
women under l8 years of age who engage in consensual sexual
activity, it is necessary to harmoniously read both the POCSO
Act and the MTP Act. For the limited purposes of providing
medical termination of pregnancy in terms of the MTP Act, we
clarify that the RMP, only on request of the minor ond the
guardian of the minor, need not disclose the identity and other
personal details of the minor in the information provided under
Section 19(l) of the POCSO Act. The RMP who has provided
information under Section l9(l) of the POCSO Act (in reference
to a minor seeking medical termination of a pregnancy under the
MTP Act) is also exempt from disclosing the minor's identity in
any criminal proceedings which may follow from the RMP's
report under Section l9(1) of the POCSO Act. Such an
interpretation would prevent any conJlict between the statutory
obligation of the RMP to mandatorily report the offence under
the POCSO Act and the rights of privacy and reproductive
autonomy of the minor under Article 2l of the Constitution. It
could not possibly be the legislature's intent to deprive minors of
safe abortions. "tao
tt) Id,
72
h/

14.INTERPLAY OF THE POCSO ACT WITH CHILD
MARRIAGE AND CHILD TRAFFICKING
14.1. Apart from the intemet, there is also the element of the POCSO
Act and its interplay with other child-centric legislations, in particular,
the Prohibition of Child Marriage Acl, 2006 (hereinafter, referred to as
"PCMA'). PCMA was brought in to address the age-old social practice
of child marriage that continues to afflict our society even today. The
battle to end child marriage has been a continuous one and India is
lirmly committed to ending the same by 2030 as a part of target 5.3 of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
14.2. Atthough India has made laudable progress in the goal of
eliminating child marriage yet one in three child brides in the world are
in India.rar The consequences of child-marriage are undeniably more
adverse for young girls.ra2 Majority of child brides give birth in their
adolescence and face challenges when it comes to their education.rar As
per recent statistics, in India, 27%o of youngwomen got married in their
childhood which is down from 47Yo earlier.taa Nonetheless, this is a
substantial number of women when seen in terms of real numbers that
rlr United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), "Ending Child Marriage: A profile of progress in
lndia 2023 update" 4 (May, 2023) qveiluble er https://data.unicef.org/resources/ending-child-
marriage-a-profile-of-progress-in-india-2023/ (last visited July 20,2023).
'4'? B. Pramila, "Chifd Maniage: Scenario in India", 74 Proceedings oJ the Indian History Congress
998 (2013).
rrr United Nations Children's Fund (LNICEF), "Ending Child Marriage: A profile of progress in
India 2021 update" 4 (May. 2023) available at https://data.unicef.org/resources/ending-child-
marriage-a-profile-of-progress-in-india-2023/ (last visited July 20, 2023).
re United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), "UNFPA-UNICEF Global Programme to End Child
Marriage: 2020 Country Profiles - India" 2 (2020) arailable at
https://www.unicef.org/media./ I I l3 8 l/fi lelChild-marriage-country-profile-lndia-2021 .pdf ( last
visited July 20, 2023).
73
h\.,

this percentage converts to. According to the National Family Health
Survey - 5 (NFHS-S), 23.3oh of the women between the ages 20-24
years were married before the age of 18 years.l45 It must be bome in
mind that premature pregnancy, motherhood, disruptions in education,
increased risk to violence and other health risks such as matemal
mortality often accompany as consequences of an early marriage.146
According to NFHS-5, 6.8 per cent of women aged l5-19 years were
already mothers or pregnant at the time of the survey.raT Thus, the risk
towards becoming victims of violence that these young girls face cannot
be understated.
14.3. The problem compounds further when one considers the
prevailing social mindset against such violence. Around 35%o male and
41%o female adolescents consider it justified for a husband to beat his
wife for reasons such as arguing with the husband, refusing sexual
intercourse, buming food etc.raE Such a high percentage of female
adolescents considering domestic violence and abuse to be justified
renders them further vulnerable. The Supreme Court has also taken note
of the ill-impacts of child marriage upon the person and health of a girl
child.
t1
rr5 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 'National Family Health Survey (NFHS - 5) 2019-21:
Compendium ofFact Sheets lndia and l4 Stater(JTs (PhaseJI)" 3 (September. 2021) available at
https://main.mohfir.gov.in/sites/defaultifilesA.lFHS-S_PhaseJI 0.pdf l last visited August 2, 2023).
la6 B. Pramila, "Child Marriage: Scenario in lndia", 74 Proceedings oflhe Indiqn History Congress
998 (2013);
r4? Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 'National Family Health Survey (NFHS - 5) 2019-21:
Compendium ofFact Sheets India and l4 StatesruTs (PhaseJI)" 3 (September. 2021\ wailoble at
https://main.mohfir.gov.in/sites/default/fi lesA.lFHS-5_Phase-ll-0.pdf (last visited August 2, 2023 ).
r{3 United Nations Children's Fund (tNICEF), "The state ofThe World's Children 2023: For Every
Child, Vaccination" 180 (April, 2023\ available at
hnps://uww.unicef.org,/media./l08l6l/file/SOWC-2023-full-report-English.pdf (last visited July
20,2023).
u,,

14.4. Child marriage also has a socio-economic dimensionrae which
can also be found to reflect in these "romantic relationship cases" that
are coming up under the POCSO Act. A large number of chitd-brides
come from a certain social-economic background and the same can be
seen in the romantic cases falling under the POCSO Act. Even the
courts that have highlighted the anomalous situation we have at hand
have observed the same.ls0 In cases of child marriage and child
trafficking, the perpetrators often try to portray that the child has
consented to the act. However, consent of a child is irrelevant as there
is often a power imbalance in such situations and children usually
occupy weak positions, are ill informed about marriages and thus
incapable of giving free, full and informed consent.l5r Further, in cases
of child trafficking, a child's consent can also be gained by deceitful
means.l52 The child might be encouraged, coerced, coaxed or
manipulated into thinking that they are equal participants in the
situation when it might not be so.r53 The emerging cases of online
grooming are a perf-ect example of manipulation and manufactured
"consent". One cannot discount the reality that often enough it is a
family member or a close person who pushes the child into such a
marriage or prostitution or traffics them. As per NCRB data, in around
970% of cases that were reported under Sections 4 and 6 of the POCSO
rae United Nations Children's Fund (UMCEF), "Ending Child Marriage : A profile of progress in
lndia2023 update" l2-15 (May,2023), available at httpsl ldata.unicef.org/resources/ending-child-
marriage-a-profile-of-progress-in-india-2023/ (last visited July 20,2023).
tso L'eekesh Kalawat v. State of Madhya Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh High Court Misc. Criminal Case
No.452l of2023.
r5r Ajwang Warria, "Forced Child Marriages as a Form of Child T'"-ffrcking",79 Children and Youth
Semices Review 274 (2017) at'ailable at https://cdn.icmec.org/wpcontent/uploads/2020l07lforced-
child-mariagcs-as-HT-Warria-20l7.pdf (last visited July 20. 2023)
r52 Id.
r5r ld.
75
q-

Act, the offender was someone known to the victim.rsa Thus,
considering the "consent" of the child is introducing an element of
subjectivity that provides a great scope for groomers, traffickers and
perpetrators to escape their liabiliry.
14.5. While the purpose of the PCMA and the POCSO Act may appear
to be different, they are invariably correlated. Till 2017, Exception 2 to
Section 375 of IPC was used as a safe harbour for men having sexual
intercourse with their minor wives and only when this exception was
read down in Independent Thought v. {Jnion of India & Anr.ts5, didtrue
protection to children against sexual exploitation in the sense envisaged
under the POCSO Act actually became a reality in law. It is important
to appreciate the inter-linking between these laws. PCMA, though very
noble in its goal, is a weak law. It does not declare a child marriage void
but only voidable and while there are penal provisions against
solemnising such marriages, the law does not deal with the question of
sexual relations with a minor spouse. The POCSO Act fills in this void
that was left unaddressed for long and provides a deterrent against
marrying a child and initiating sexual relations with her as the
consequences under the POCSO Act are much graver. The impact upon
the avowed goal of preventing child-marriages has to be bome in mind
while making any changes in the POCSO Act. As stated earlier, it is
Ita National Crime Records Bureau, "Crime in India 2021 - Volume I", table 4A.10, 372 (August,
2022). available at https://ncrb.gov. inlsites/default/fi les/CII-2021/CII 2021Volume%20l.pdf (last
visited August 7, 2023)
I55 (2017) l0 scc 800.
76

young girls who are predominantly forced into child-marriages and any
dilution in law may very well lead to further exploitation of a girt child.
14.6. An emerging aspect that needs to be factored in the discussion is
that the Parliament is considering increasing the age of marriage under
PCMA for girls to 21 years, thus making it at par with that of boys. The
Bill introduced to affect the same has been referred to Department
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women,
Children, Youth and Sports for examination.l56 In such a situation, any
tinkering with the age of consent in the opposite direction may
compound the issues that already exist. While it is otten tried to delink
the age of consent and age of marriage, however, it is a reality in our
country that consent to sexual activity exposes a girl child to the risk of
early pregnancy and marriage. Thus, in all practicality, the two aspects
cannot be divorced from each other entirely.
14.7 . Yet another inter-play that has to be carefully considered in the
context of the POCSO Act is child trafficking and prostitution of
children. According to NCRB Data, in 2021, 6,533 victims were
reported to be trafficked out ofwhich 2,877 were children.rsT However,
only 2l 89 cases of trafficking were registered. r58 A large percentage of
r56 The Prohibition of Child Marriage (Amendment) Bill,2021, Bill No. 163 of 2O2l; Ministry of
Women and Child Development, "Policy Initiative to Check Child Marriages", P/B (March 17,
2023) crvailable a/ https://pib.gov.in,/PressReleaselframePage.aspx?PRID= 1908007 (last visited
August 7, 2023).
r57 National Crime Records Bureau, "Crime in India 2021 - Volume I I I", Table 14.2, l0l 7 (August,
2022). available at https://ncrb.gov.inlsites/default/files/CII-2021/CII_2021 Volumeo/o203.pdf ( last
visited August 7, 2023).
r58 National Crime Records Bureau, "Crime in India 2021 - Volume III", Table l4.l, l0l6 (August,
2022), available at https://ncrb.gov.inlsites/default/files/CIl-2021/Cl 202IVolume%203.pdf (last
visited August 7, 2023).
77
A\-

cases of human trafficking were for the purposes of sexual exploitation
for prostitution and some were even for forced marriages.lse The
POCSO Act is an important tool to combat the scourge of child
trafficking and child prostitution that exists. Trafficking can be done in
the garb of child marriager60 and the POCSO Act becomes all the more
important in such a situation.l6r Thus, in considering the issue ofage of
consent under the POCSO Act, the two competing interests of child
protection and consent of child have to be perfectly balanced.
r5e National Crime Records Bureau, "Crime irr India 2021 - Volume Itl", Table 14.5, l02l (August,
2022), available at https://ncrb.gov. inlsites/default/fi les/CII-2O21/CII_2021Volume%203.pdf (last
visited August 7, 2023).
t@ ln re: Conlagion of COI'|D-|9 l'irus in (lhildren Protectioh Hones 2020 SCC Online Cal 974,
W.P. 5327(W) of 2020 (Cal HC): Irutependent Thought v. Union of lndia (2017 ) l0 SCC 800.
16t Lonkaran Cholhmalji Paruar v. State of Maharashtra 2016 SCC Online Bom 9851: (2017) 5
RCR (Cri) 198.
78 fu-

15. JUDICIAL DETERMINATION OF CONSENSUAL
ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS UNDER THE POCSO ACT
15.1. The contentious issue of cases of romantic relationships being
charged under the POCSO Act has invited significantjudicial attention,
with the various High Courts, confronted with the issue, having decided
differently.162 Some High Courts have expressed their helplessness in
traversing beyond the plain language of the statute, and have thus,
convicted the accused in cases where he has entered into a consensual
sexual relationship with a minor girl.163 On the other hand, different
High Courts have adopted a distinct approach in giving effect to an
interpretation which extends beyond the immediate confines of the
POCSO Act.r6a By reading the provisions liberally and transcending
their literal text, the courts have opined that it was never the objective
of the POCSO Act to punish adolescent boys who enter into a
consensual sexual relationship with minor girls.165
15.2. To take just one example fiom each set of many to be found, in
Ajay Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi), the Delhi High Court opined that
162 Sabari v. lnspector of Police and Others (2019) 3 RCR (Cri) 452; -Rari v. S/a/e, Madras High
Court, Criminal Application No. 627 of 2021; Vijayalakshmi & Anr. y. Slale Rep. by the lnspector
of Police & Anr. (2021) 2 cTc 191 , Atll Mishto N. State of U.P. (2022) 3 ,\ll LJ 278, Ajal Kunar
v. Stote (NCT ofDelhy', Delhi High Court, Bail Application 272912022: Sunil lvlahqdev Patilv. The
Stare of lllaharashtra, (2015) 3 AIR Bom R (Cri) 594.
163 Rat i v. State,Madras High Coun, Criminal Application No . 627 of 2021; State (liCT of Delhi)
'r. Vipin Sharma 2023/DHC/001668.
ta Sabari v. Inspeclor of Police and Others (2019) 3 RCR (Cti) 452; FUd & 1nr. v. Sldte Govl. of
NCT o;f Delhi & Ors. High Court of Delhi, W.P.(CRL) 763 /2022; Ranjit Rajbanshi v. Stdte of lyest
Bengal and Ors. 2023 Cri LJ (NOC 74) 25, Ashik Ramjan .lnsari v. The State oJ Maharashtra &
z1rr., Bombay High Court, Criminal Appeal No.l 184 Of20l9; Rahul (lhandel Jatav v. the State of
lladlrya Pradesh & Azr., High Court ofMadhya Pradesh, Miscellaneous Criminal Case No. 24691
of 2023; ljithhtm.r'v. S/a/e, High Court of Madras, Criminal Revision Case No. 817 of 2021l,
r65 Madras High Court, Criminal Appeal No. 627 of202l.
79
,,fi
\4s"/

the intention of the POCSO Act was to protect children below the age
of 18 years from sexual exploitation and it was never meant to
criminalise consensual romantic relationships between young adults.
On the other hand, taking a contrary position, in Ravi v. State, the
Madras High Court held that in matters under the POCSO Act, the
consent of the child is immaterial, holding that:
"Whereas, the law defines that the person who has not completed
the age of 18 years, is a child. This Court, being on Appellate
Court, is a final fact finding Court ond cannot lroyerse beyond
the statute. This Court also eagerly is waitingfor the amendment
in the Legislature as expressed by my learned brothers. In the
case on hand, this Court finds that the victim was a minor and
the appellant took lhe custody of the minor without the
knowledge or consent of her natural guardians and had
committed penetrative sexual assault on her and hence, the
offence committed by the appellantfalls under Section 5(l) which
is punishable under Section 6 of the POCSO Act."t66
15.3. Thus, the concems about the rising number of such cases,
wherein minors are punished under the POCSO Act for indulging in
sexual intercourse arising out of romantic relationships, are being
expressed by various quarters in proceedings before the High Courts of
the country as well as the POCSO Special Courts. Despite a clear stand
being taken by a female in such an act, that it was a case ofconsensual
sex, the other party. i.e., the male accused, stands convicted under the
POCSO Act on the basis of the reasoning that the POCSO Act was
never intended to exclude from its purview cases ofconsensual sex with
the minor.
t6 ld, at 23
80
U

15.5. Another related dimension that has been touched by the courts is
that of mandatory reporting and medical termination of pregnancy in
such cases. The Madras High Court, in line u,ith the Supreme Court's
judgment in X v. Principal Secretory, Health and Family llelfore
161 Dharmander Singh v. State (NCT of Delhr, (2020) 275 DLT 49; Ajay Kumat y- State A'CT of
Delhi),Delhi High Court, Bail Application 272912022, otder dated 20.10.2O22: Sunil i4ahadev Potil
v. The State of Mqhat-ashru, (2015) 3 AIR Bom R (Cri) 594;
168 Mahesh Kumar v. s/4re (NcT of De lhi) 2023:DHC:3 t 51 . A.,
\K,r"yV
81
15.4. The cases of consensual adolescent relationships have
overwhelmed the judicial system, with the courts taking varied stands.
However, one common trend that can be observed is that of the
approach taken by High Courts in granting bail to the accused in such
cases, which is otherwise often denied by the trial courts given the
gravity of underlying offence. The High Courts, faced with an
increasing number of bail applications and writ petitions or quashing of
FIR cases, have laid down parameters to be considered by the trial
courts in considering bail. These include certain real-life considerations
such as age of the victim and accused, their comparative age and
whether they were at an age of innocence; familial relationship between
the victim and the accused; conduct of the accused after alleged act;
comparative social standing of the accused and the victim; charges of
witnesses being harassed/intimidated; whether the alleged act involved
threat, intimidation or violence; and whether there appears to be tacit
approval in fact on part of the victim, though not consent in law.r67 The
High Courts have also been careful to point out that every case ofsuch
nature has to be adjudged on its own peculiar facts and
circumstances.l6t

Departmentt6e, has held that the registered medical practitioner may not
insist on disclosure of the name of the minor while reporting under
Section 19 of the POSCO Act in cases where a minor is seeking
termination of pregnancy arising out of a consensual sexual
relationship, as sometimes the m inor and their guardian may not be
interested in proceeding further with the case and to entangle
themselves with a legal process.lT0
15.6. The trial courts, given the grave nature ofPOCSO cases, often
refuse to grant bail or exercise any discretion in even if it is pleaded that
the relationship between the victim and accused was consensual. In the
matter of sentencing,, there exists no discretion with the trial judge that
can be exercised under the POCSO Act. The decisions rendered by the
Special Courts in POCSO trials are subject to scrutiny of High Courts
given the severe nature of offences involved. Any grant ofbail without
proper reasoningrTr or awarding of lesser punishmentrT2 by the Special
Court is not permissible within the framework of the POCSO Act and
doing the same may attract condemnation from the High Courts.
15.7. In a few States, the police, faced with such rising cases, have also
tried to address the same without much success and sometimes to the
dismay of the public and the courts. For instance, the Mumbai Police in
r6e Supreme Coun of India, Civil Appeal No. 5802 of 2022 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 12612 of
2022).
t1o Kajendran J v The Superintendent of Police & Ors.,High Court of Madras, H.C.P. No. 2182 of
2022, order dated 14.08.2023.
t1l Ms. N v. State & Arr., Delhi High Court CRL.M.C.-3399/2023 :2023:DHC:6253.
t72 Rodu Bhaga Wagh v. The Stab ofMahatoshtra & Anr.,High Coun ofBombay Criminal Appeal
No. 833 of2022, orde'r d"ted 15.09.2023.
82
\E--

2020, vide its circular dated June 6, 2022, had made recommendation
of Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) and approval of the zonal
Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) mandatory before registering
FIRs under the POCSO Act or molestation cases.r73 The said circular
was challenged before the Hon'ble High Court of Bombay. The
Mumbai Police first amended the circular on June 17,2022 to require
the ACP's permission only in controversial cases and was eventually
withdrawn entirely.rTa The circular v\,'as severely criticised by the
NCPCR and Maharashtra State Commission for Protection of Child
Rights (MSCPCR) and was also challenged before the Bombay High
Court by several NGOs.
15.8. Similarly, in light of the increasing cases of consensual romantic
relationships under the POCSO Act, the Director General of Police,
Tamil Nadu, has also issued a circular dated 03.12.2022, vide
Rc.No.009464 lCrime-4(3)12022, advising investigating offi cers not to
be hasty in arresting youngsters involved in romantic relationships and
to invoke Section 4l-A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in lieu
of arrest. This circular ll'as passed by the Director General of Police,
Tamil Nadu during the course of proceedings going on before the
Madras High Court looking in to the implementation ofthe POCSO Act
r7r Press Trust oflndi4 Can POCSO circular issued by Mumbai Police chief be withdrrwn? High
Coutl asts Maharashlra goyl, Firstpost, June 16, 2022, available at
https://www.firstpost.com,/india/can-pocso-circular-issued-by-mumbai-police-chief-be-withdrawn-
high-court-asks-maharashtra-got- 1080128 I .html (last visited June 28,2023).
17! Vinay Dalvi, CP withdrtt4s circular on regislrution of molestation, Pocso cases, Hindustan
Times. June 12, 2022, dvailable ol https://wr,vw.hindustantimes.com/cities/mumbai-news/cp-
withdraws-circular-on-registration-of-molestation-pocso-cases- 10165 7637269554.htm1 ( last
visited June 28,2021).
E-83

in the State.r75 The Madras High Court has constituted a Special Bench
for monitoring the implementation of the POCSO Act and the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection) Act,2015 on the judicial side.ri6 The case
before the Special Bench of the Madras High Court initially arose as a
habeas corpus petition filed by the parents of girl for her restoration,
alleging the she was being detained by the State in a child care home.
Though the custody of the child was retumed to her parents, several
issues were flagged during the proceedings in cases involving juveniles.
Since larger issues were involved which required continued monitoring
and setting up of best practices, a Special Bench was constituted for
monitoring implementation of the POCSO Act and the JJ Act on the
judicial side. The issue of adolescent romantic relationships is also
being considered extensively. The Special Bench of Madras High Court
had called for particulars regarding the cases pending before the
Courts/Juvenile Justice Board pertaining to victims and the children in
conflict below the age of 18 years.r77 The Court had further directed the
Director General of Police to identily cases involving consensual
relationships from among the pending cases as already determined
under previous orders of the Court.l78 The Court shall look into
exercising its jurisdiction and quash the proceedings in appropriate
cases, especially if the proceedings are ultimately going to be against
the interest and future of the children involved in those cases and if it is
found to be an abuse ofprocess ofCourt or abuse ofprocess of law.lTe
t75 Kajendran Jv. The Superintendent ofPolice & Ors.,High Court of Madras, H.C.P.No. 2182 of
L
{v
'r7./
2022.
t16 Id.
r77 /d. order dated 16.06.2023
t73 Id, odet dated 07 .07 .2023
t1e Id, ordet dated 07 .07 .2023
8.1

In compliance with the Court orders, the Director General of Police had
identified that there were 1274 pending cases out of which 1l I cases
have been identified as involving consensual relationship which are
either at the stage of investigation or where the investigation has been
completed and final report has been filed and the same is yet to be taken
on file by the concemed Special Court.r80 The High Court will now, in
deserving cases (among the I l1 identified cases), exercise its
jurisdiction ultimately to the benefit of the children involved by
relieving them from the trauma of facing a criminal trial before the
Court.ltl
15.9. In light of the foregoing, it is amply clear that the situation as to
the rising cases of adolescent love that the courts are faced with needs
to be carefully considered keeping in mind all the dimensions and
balancing them to the best extent possible. Protecting children from any
sexual abuse or exploitation, however, must remain the central and
paramount consideration in this endeavour.
r3o 1d. order dated 14.08.2023.
r3r /d, order dated 14.08.2023.
8-s
u

16.1. The Crime in lndia 2021 Report released by National Crime
Records Bureau (NCRB) shows that the largest number of victims of
cases under the POCSO Act fall in the age group of 16 to 1 8 years and
are majorly girls. When we look at the.juveniles apprehended under the
POCSO Act, a gendered picture of mostly boys being charged in such
cases emerges. There is no separate record maintained of cases wherein
romantic relationship is alleged and all cases irrespective of factual
consent or absence thereof are treated as offences and collated as such
in the data. The latest relevant data as available has been tabulated
below:
Age Profile of Child Victims of POCSO Act (all India) for the year
201 9-202 I :t82
Victims below 6 Years (all India) 0
Victims 6 to 12 Years (all India) 140 0
Victims 12to l6 Years (all India) 83 13173 0
Victims l6 to I 8 Years (all India) 69 16206 0
Total Child Victims (all India) 33503
r8: National Crime Records Bureau, "Crime in India 2021 - Volume I", table 44.9, 370-71 (Augusr.
2022), available at fittps://ncrb.gov.inlsites/default/files/CI I-2021lcll_2021Volume%201 .pdf ( last
visited August 7, 2023).
li6
I6. DATA OF THE NATIONAL CRIME RECORDS BUREAU
BOYS GIRLS TRANS
25 650
3157
Note: No data with regard to the age profile of victims provided for
Crime Against Children in Metropolitan Cities under Chapter-48.
G\"

Data on Crimes under POCSO for the year 201 9-202 1 ')83
I : No. of Incidents
V: No. of Child Victims
R: Crime Rate per Lakh Population
Juveniles apprehended under POCSO Act in the year 2019-2021(all
sections);18a
Boys Girls Trans
Belorv I 2 33 0 0
12 - 16 years 592 J 0
16 - l8 years 1720 5 0
Total 2353
16.2. The Law Commission, during the consultation process, had
elicited response from the NCRB regarding specific data pertaining to
the cases under the POCSO Act. As per the response received, separate
data reflecting the age and gender profile ofjuveniles apprehended and
persons arrested under the POCSO Act, StatefuT-wise, has been
collected and published since 2017. Similarly, age and gender profile
of victims under Sections 4 & 6 of the POCSO Act has also been
t31 ld, table 4A.2(ii), 32'1
t8o Id, table 5A.4,448.
POCSO
sections)
(Ail Under S.4 & 6 POCSO or S.4 & 6 POCSO
r/w S.376 IPC
Total Against Girls Against
Boys
I I v I v I v
States 5t863 52341 32099 32251 3t792 31939 307 312
UTs 2011 2018 1249 1252 1244 1247 5 5
Total 53874 54359 33348 33503 33036 33186 312 317
87
V
s/

It8
collated and made available since 2017. The data relating to conviction
rate under the POCSO Act has been collected and put in the public
domain since 2014. For the latest data available i.e., for the y ear 2021.
the all-India conviction rate slood 32.2o/o.
q-

17. CONSULTATIONS HELD BY THE COMMISSION
17.1. The Commission, cognizant of the wide import of any change
made to the POCSO Act in light of the plethora of issues and nuances
already highlighted, engaged in broad consultations with various
stakeholders such as NCPCR, civil society and chitd rights
organisations, domain experts, lawyers and academicians. The
Commission also solicited the views of the Ministry of Women and
Child Development and also reached out to all the twenty-five High
Courts ofthe country to take stock ofsuch cases that are pending.
17.2. During the course of this wide consultative process, various
concerns pertaining to the present implementation of the laws were
highlighted. While there emerged no consensus on what the statutory
age ofconsent should be, all experts were of the view that the definition
of "child" as present under the POCSO Act need not be altered,
meaning thereby that all children below the age of 18 years should be
protected under the beneficial shield of the POCSO Act, including those
between the ages of 16 to 1 8 years when there is no consent, so as to
attract higher penal consequences and afford better protection to all
children given their special vulnerabilities. While children falling in
different age brackets may differ in terms of their mental development
and thinking capacity, they are all children nonetheless and merit
greater protection under law by virtue of their status as a "child".
89
V

17.3. Another aspect on which all views aligned was pertaining to sex
education and health. Age-appropriate sex education needs to be scaled-
up in all schools among adolescents so as to ensure that our children
can make better and informed choices. Apart from the law, there needs
to be awareness among the children about their body. There needs to be
awareness among the children about the risks of engaging in early
sexual activify and the manner of preventing risks associated with
sexual behaviour. Comprehensive sexual education not only impacts
sexual initiation by adolescents by delaying it but also has a positive
bearing upon issues of contraception, partner selection, and
reproductive health outcomes.l8s While there are government
programmes addressing these issues in India, there is a definite need to
restructure and upscale the same.
17.4. During the entire consultative process, whether the age of
consent should be lowered to 16 years emerged to be the most
contentious issue.
17.5. Arguments forwarded in favour of lowering the age of consent
or introducing an exception for the age group of l6 to 18 years were as
follows:
It was highlighted that in fixing such a high age ofconsent at 18
years, India was a global outlier with a significant number of
countries adopting 16 years as the age of consent. Post-
185 Laura Duberstein Lindberg and Isaac Maddow-Zimet, "Consequences ofSex Education on Teen
and Young Adult Sexual Behaviors and Outcomes" 5l Journal ofldolescenl Heahh 332 (2012).
90
l.
6-,

11.
independence, for more than sixty years, the age of consent in
India remained to be l6 years and there was no rationale behind
lowering it to 18 years in 2012. It was further argued that the
current issue of adolescent love being criminalised emerged only
as a consequence of ignoring adolescent sexuality and evolving
capacities of a child, thereby disregarding the fact that all
children cannot be viewed with the same lens as age is a
differentiating factor. There needs to be a balance befween
'protecting' and 'over-criminalising' and thus, the definition of
child should remain the same and all children should receive
protection under the Act. All Chapters of the POCSO Act, except
Chapters II (Sexual Offences against Children), III (Using
Children for Pomographic Purposes and Punishment thereof) and
IV (Abetment and Attempt to commit an offence) should
continue to govern all children. To address the present issue,
Chapters II, III and IV should not apply to children between the
age of 16 years to 18 years who engage in consensual sexual
activity.
While there is a lack of any comprehensive all India study on the
issue of POCSO and adolescent romantic relationships, there
have been limited studies conducted by civil society and child
rights organisations as well as individuals, such as the study
conducted by Enfold Proactive Health Trust in Assam,
Maharashtra, and West Bengal, which was relied on and
referenced to show how a large number of cases under the
9t
\\/

lll The impact upon dignity, privacy. deprivation of liberty, adverse
impact on sexual & reproductive health and overburdening of the
criminal justice system was also highlighted. It was stated how
criminalisation of normative sexual behaviour by persons in the
age range of l6 to 18 years and discounting the evolving capaciry
of a child is actually undermining the best interest of the child. It
was expressed that close-in-age exemptions as present in certain
other jurisdictions of the world would not solve the issue as age
difference cannot be a proxy for coercion as there are multiple
186 Enfold Proactive Health Trust, ""Romantic" Cases under the POCSO Act: A Study of l7l5
Judgmens of Special Couns in Assam, Maharashtra & West Bengal" (June 2022) aeoiloble qt
https://enfoldindia.org/rvp-content/uploadsl2022ll2lRonartic-cases-under-the-POCSG
Act.pdf (last visited July 20,2023).
r37 Centre for Child and the Law National Law School of India University Bangalore,
"Implementation of the POCSO Act,2012 by Special Courts: Challenges and Issues" (February.
2018).
r33 Maharukh Adenwalla and Prakriti Shah, " "Age ofConsent" Under the POCSO Act" 8 S p/eae
Court Cases l-80 (2022): HAQ: Centre for Child Rights and Forum Against Sexual Exploitation of
Children (FACSE), "lmplementation of the POCSO Act: Goals, Gaps and Challenges: Study of
cases in Special Courts in Delhi & Mumbai 2012 - 2015" (November 2017) u.-ailable ot
https:/Aaqcrc.org,/wp-content/uploads/20 I 8/02/implementation-of-the-pocso-act-delhi-mumbai-
study-final.pdf (last visited July 20,2023); "A Decade ofPOCSO: Developments, Challenges and
Insights from Judicial Data" (November 2022) uvailable ar https://vidhilegalpolicy.inlresearch/a-
decade-of-pocso-developments-challenges-and-insights-from-judicial-data./ (last visited July 20,
2023).
92
POCSO Act in these States pertained to romantic cases and how
the accused's acquittal was a norrn in such cases.l86 Another
study that was cited was that conducted by the Centre for Child
and the Law at National Law School of India University,
Bangalore, carried out in Delhi, Assam, Maharashtra, Kamataka
and Andhra Pradesh.l8T Three more studies were also referenced
to buttress the argument as to how the law was actually being
misused against adolescents.l88
ek/

lv.
factors that contribute to exploitation within a relationship. There
should be no space for exploitative sexual relationships and only
non-exploitative consensuaI acts should be decriminalised.
Further, given that documentation of birth registrations is still in
a state of flux in our country, a close-in-age exemption would
provide no respite in many cases warranting the same and will
only increase age-related litigation. Judicial discretion as
suggested by the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh would
also not provide adequate resolution as normative sexual
behaviour would still be subject to criminal investigation and
trial. Awarding judicial discretion for reducing sentence does not
address the issue of labelling consensual conduct as 'criminal'. It
was also underscored that judicial discretion in the area of
sentencing, especially in cases of sexual violence, is often
exercised based on gender stereotypes. To buttress the argument,
the example of deletion of proviso to Section 375 of the IPC was
cited.
The costs of criminalising adolescent romantic relationships in
terms of harms to the children involved, their future, mental and
physical health, as well as to the justice system and other human
resources wasted have also been raised. Certain case studies were
brought forth to outline the plight of children who may engage in
consensual sexual relationships and are caught within the folds
of the POCSO Act, also shedding light on how the child-friendly
93
V

procedures outlined within the JJ Act and the relevant Rules
framed therein were not being implemented.
I 7.6. Arguments put forth in favour of introducing a limited exception
in case of consent by a child between the age of l6 to I 8 years were as
follows:
The arguments in favour of a limited exception, without
touching the age of consent or definition of child, were more or
less identical to the ones advocating for lowering of the age of
consent with the difference that it was argued there cannot be
automatic decriminalisation of such cases and that a judicial
determination as to the nature and factual existence of consent
ought to be specified in order to prevent misuse of such an
exception.
There is requirement for amendments in the POCSO Act as well
as the IPC to decriminalise consensual sexual acts involving
adolescents above l6 years, while ensuring that those below l8
years are protected against non-consensual acts within the
framework of the POCSO Act itself. The age of consent should
be retained at l8 years while carving out exceptions for those
between the ages of 16 to l8 years engaging in consensual and
normative sexual behaviour.
94
l.

lll.
17.7. Arguments forwarded against any tinkering with the age of
consent:
Some individuals/organisations expressed strong reservations
against altering the age of child or of consent under any
circumstance, whatsoever. Any such lowering would have a
debilitating impact on the fight against child marriage and forced
prostitution of children, especially the girl child. Children in the
age group of 16 to 18 years face larger vulnerability when it
comes to grooming and manipulation as can be observed in the
recent cases that have come to the fore. Any reduction in the age
ofconsent will motivate paedophiles and provide them an avenue
to exploit young children in the name of so-called "love". In the
same vein, it was expressed that age of consent under the POCSO
Act cannot and should not be viewed in isolation as it has a
logical nexus with other equally important child protection laws
such as PCMA.
95
It was suggested that an exception recognising consent ofperson
above the age of 16 years which would decriminalise non-
exploitative consensual sexual acts is the need of the hour. The
definition of "child" need not be altered and the protection
available would remain available, however, the offence of
penetrative sexual assault and sexual assault against child above
the age of 16 years could be treated under a separate provision
wherein consent would be a relevant factor.
l.
q)/

.
Iu.
In the above context, it was also highlighted that considering
"consent" in these so-called "romantic cases" wherein two
adolescents or one adolescent and an adult are involved will
amount to legitimising violation of PCMA. It can be observed in
many cases that the plea before the court is that the victim and
accused have married each other or are going to marry each other
and accepting the same will encourage child/teenage pregnancy
and will have a disastrous impact upon the health of not only the
child who ends up entering a marriage at a premature stage but
also the child/offspring which will be begotten as a result of such
sexual relations with the said child.
Attention was also drawn to the fact that there is a socio-
economic dimension to the issue at hand. Considering all such
circumstances, lowering the age of consent and allowing children
to enter into such relationships rvill inevitably trap the child in
the vicious cycle of multi-dimensional and multi-generational
poverty. Any chitd that is bom out of such a relationship would
also be trapped in the same poverty cycle.
96
The aspect of protection of mental and physical dignity of
children and also the high possibility of exploitation, trafficking,
prostitution and prejudice to one's mental and physical growth
were also stressed upon as relevant considerations in this
scenario that ought not to be ignored. 
hWV,,)-

vl.
Any decrease in the age of consent would negatively impact the
age-old fight against child marriage by providing parents an
opportunity to marry off minor girls. PCMA is silent on age of
consent and sexual relations with a minor, with the POCSO Act
filling this void. especially after Exception 2 to Section 375 of
IPC was read down by the Supreme Court in 201 7. The
Parliament is already considering increasing the age of marriage
for girls to 21 years, at par with boys, and thus any decrease in
the age of consent would be against the tide of rational change.
Further, a Romeo-Juliet Clause would never work in India as the
majority of cases would fall outside its protective purview which
usually extends to relationships between a minor and an
individual within an age bracket of 24 to 46 months.
A disturbing development was highlighted from the State of
Assam, wherein some parents arrange marriage between minors
or a minor and a major by signing notarized agreements, stating
that the minors or the minor and major had fallen in love and
hence the families had decided to marry them off. Through these
incidents, it was demonstrated that any reduction in age of
consent will inevitably provide an escape provision to coerce
minor girls into subjugation, marital rape and other forms of
abuse, including traffi cking.
97
\/

vll.
vlt l.
A child is neither matured physically nor mentally to understand
the meaning of consent and its consequences of such acts.
Reliance was placed on the Study by Ministry of Women and
Child Developmentrse to show that children in the age group of
15-18 years were most vulnerable to exploitation and child
abuse. Results of Kailash Satyarthi Children's Foundation's
(KSCF) National Prevalence Studyreo on Child Sexual Abuse
showed that victims themselves identifu friends and
boyfriend/girlfriend as most common perpetrators across all acts
of child sexual abuse, including penetrative assaults. Any
element of consent is going to be an easy escape route for adult
abusers, thereby enabling prostitution and exploitation of
children. It was also highlighted how courts have failed to
analyse the cause of victim tuming hostile and also cases where
the victim has been counselled to marry their abuser. Emerging
forms ofconsensual sexual exploitation such as online grooming
and online child sexual abuse material were also brought to the
fore. All of these concerns are further compounded by the
increased vulnerability and danger that children face in a digital
world.
Imposing alternative punishment may trivialise the crime.
However, judicial discretion rvith procedural safeguards can be
r3e Covemment of India. "Study on Child Abuse: India 2007" (Ministry of Women and Child
Development, 2007).
reo Mr. Bhuwan Ribhu provided the Commission with the unpublished repon of Satyarthi Global
Policy Institute for Children, Kailash Satyarthi Children's Foundation (2022) on Prevalence and
Nature of Child Sexual Abuse in India.
98
fu\,

incorporated so as to determine the mental and physical capacity,
ability to understand the consequences and circumstances
leading to consent of the girl child, sexual relation and
elopement, as the case may be. In cases of consensual sex where
both the parties are under l8 years ofage, the correct application
of the JJ Act and its Rules can prevent any miscarriage ofjustice
to the parties or any severe consequences. When one of the
parties is an adult, then guided judicial discretion can be allowed
to address the same, when warranted.
17.8. Another related aspect that was highlighted by all of those
consulted by the Commission was the deprivation of access to sexual
and reproductive health services to young girls as a result of the current
system wherein there is a fear of a police case being initiated. In no
situation should young girls be deprived of sexual and reproductive
health services as it makes their precarious situation worse, with most
of them often ending up seeking the services of quacks, thereby
jeopardising their lives and well-being.
17.9. Comments were also sought from the Ministry of Women and
Child Development. However, despite reminders, no response was
received.
l7.10.The Commission also wrote to all the High Courts seeking data
of cases filed under the POCSO Act, wherein there is a case of romantic
relationship and protection is sought against harassment by police and
99
t
\/

private individuals. Responses were received from the High Courts of
Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh, Tripura, Meghalaya, Bombay,
Telangana, Jharkhand, Madras, Gujarat, Kerala, Gauhati, Uttarakhand,
Himachal Pradesh, Punjab & Haryana, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh.
Many ofthese responses either stated that there were no such cases or
provided information pertaining to general cases pending under the
POSCO Act or protection-seeking cases as no separate data pertaining
to the category of romantic cases was being maintained. The High Court
of Kerala even sought time for physical veritlcation of similar groups
of cases since there is no specific code assigned to enable retrieval of
data pertaining to such romantic cases. The Madras High Court stated
that there is no such case pending before it; however, it is noteworthy
that it recently constituted a Special Bench to ascertain the number of
pending cases before the Courts/Juvenile Justice Boards involving
consensual relationships of minor children. Thus, it is obvious from the
responses received that appropriate data pertaining to cases that would
qualifu as those involving romantic relationship is not being separately
maintained and thus, a blind study of court decisions will not present
the true picrure of the situation.
h)-
100

18. CONCLUDING ANALYSIS
18.1. While there is sea-wide divergence of opinion on how to resolve
the issue at hand, there is unanimity of thought when it comes to the
aspect of the POCSO Act working against the very children it ought to
protect. The blanket criminalisation of sexual activity amongst and with
a child, though intended to safeguard children, is leading to
incarceration ofyoung boys and girls who engage in such activities as
a consequence ofsexual curiosity and need for exploration that may to
some extent be normative for an adolescent. There is a social cost
associated with the present situation, including the negative impact
upon the health, both physical and mental, of the children as well as a
burden upon the investigating agencies and courts which takes au'ay
focus from the cases that are genuine and require immediate
consideration. The mental trauma and harassment faced by children
who, on account of engaging in such a consensual act, come to fall
within the ambit of the POCSO Act is certainly an issue of concern.
Thus, steps are obviously required to be taken to address this aberrant
situation created by the working of law as intended in its black letter.
I 8.2. Broadly, three possible solutions came up during the deliberation
of the Commission which are: (a) blanket reduction of the age of
consent to 16 years as was the situation prior to enactment of the
POCSO Act; or (b) to introduce a limited exception in case of
consensual sexual act involving a child above the age of 16 years; or (c)
to introduce judicial discretion in sentencing in cases of consensual
t0t
v

romantic relationship between adolescents or u,ith an adolescent
between the age of l6 to l8years.
18.3. With respect to the first proposed solution, while giving a blanket
exemption to consensual sexual acts by persons above 16 years may
seem like a panacea for the situation we are faced with, however, the
same will lead to many unintended consequences of much severe
nature. If there is an automatic decriminalisation once the defence of
consent is claimed, then it must be borne in mind that consent is
something that can always be manufactured. The data available clearly
reflects that most perpetrators are someone close to the child or
someone the child knows including from their own family. Further, the
Police investigation sut'fers from a great number of inadequacies and if
it is the investigating agencies that get to determine if there was consent
or not, then a lot ofgenuine cases that need to be prosecuted under the
POCSO Act may not see trial on account of investigating agencies
themselves declaring them to be cases of consensual romantic sexual
relationship. Such a dilution will provide an easy route to reduce the
cases under the POCSO Act or deal with them without getting into the
complexity of issues that surround such a trial, thereby reducing the
POCSO Act to a 'paper law'. Moreover, it cannot be ignored that
reducing the age ofconsent will have a direct and negative bearing on
the fight against child marriage and child trafficking, the battles against
which have been hard-fought and are still ongoing.
102

18.4. With respect to the second proposed solution, carving out a
limited exception for sexual relations with a child above 16 years is
equally concerning and prone to misuse. The consent of a child is no
consent and reading the same would be deeply problematic. All
children deserve the protection of the special law enacted for this very
purpose and diluting the age of consent will deprive a significant
portion of the child population, especially young girls aged 16 to l8
years, of the protection and expose them to unchecked exploitation. The
increasing incidents of grooming and cyber-crimes such as sextortion
are classic examples ofhow children in this vulnerable age group can
be trapped and exploited. Naivety is no reason to deprive these children
of a higher protection under law that the Parliament in its wisdom
thought fit to establish. A deeply conceming phenomena that has
emerged in the State of Assam was highlighted during the consultation
process and is quite relevant in this regard.lel In Assam, some parents
arrange marriage between minors or a minor and an adult by signing
notarized agreements stating that the minors or the minor and the adult
have fallen in love. Thus, any reduction in age ofconsent will inevitably
provide a safe harbour provision to coerce minor girls into subjugation,
marital rape and other forms of abuse, including trafficking. Further
Studiesle2 were referred to that showed that victims themselves identiff
friends and boyfriend/girtfriend as the most common perpetrators
across all acts of child sexual abuse, including penetrative assaults. The
very real possibility ofyoung girls being easily seduced in love traps
''r Highlighted by Shri Vikram Srivastava oflndependent Thought.
pr Shii Bhuwan Ribhu provided the Commission with the unpublished report of Satyanhi Global
Policy Institute for Children, Kailash Satyarthi Children's Foundation (2022) on Prevalence and
Nature of Child Sexual Abuse in India.
103
q-

and then sold off in trafficking cannot and should not be ignored. Any
element of consent can be misused and may lead to children being at
the mercy of adult abusers, thereby enabling prostitution and
exploitation of children.
18.5. In arguing tbr introducing an element of consent in cases where
the child is between the ages of 16 to 18 years by introducing an
exception to that effect, various studies were brought to the notice of
the Commission. The Commission is mindful that a true picture is not
portrayed by any study as was also submitted by the NCPCR with
respect to the Study conducted by Enfold Proactive Health Trust' While
the Enfold Study analyses orders of the cases, it does not go into the
cases per se. In some cases, it is clear that the victim girl has maintained
a consistent stand as to the romantic relationship she shared with the
accused and her unequivocal consent tbr the said sexual act; however.
there are many cases in which the victim girl turns hostile during the
trial at an advanced stage of the proceedings in the case. All such
instances of victims turning hostile at a later stage cannot be equated
with factual consent actually being present as the victim can easily turn
hostile on account of pressure, lack of support from family or victim
compensation to sustain herself during the protracted proceedings. It
has been observed that there is a certain level of.iudicial laxify in cases
where such a relationship is alleged to exist between the victim and
accused.le3 The same can be seen from the absence ofany determination
'er Veenashree Anchan, Navaneetham Janardhana and John Vijay Sagar Kommu, "POCSO Act'
2Ol2: Consensual Sex as a Matter of Tug of War Between Developmental Need and Legal
Obligation for the Adolescents in India" 43 Indian Journal of Psychologicol lledicine 158 (2020)
awilable at https:l/www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/anicles/PMC8313457/ (last visited 25 Jrtly,2023l'
10+ \/

into the circumstances leading to the consent of the victim and complete
absence of any analysis of age difference between the accused and the
victim, thereby completely ignoring that very real prospects of child-
grooming being involved, especially where the age-gap is wide.re{ A
lenient approach is also adopted in age-determination of the victim and
courts overwhelmingly favour deeming the victim a major in cases
where marriage has been solemnised or relationship has been admitted
or where the victim tums hostile.rej In such a situation, it is necessary
to tread with caution. Providing for consent to negate the element of
criminality is not appropriate as it could inevitably lead to inferring of
consent where none exists, hence, defeating the very purpose of law to
protect children from abuse and exploitation.
18.6. Another argument that was raised in the context of introducing
exception when the child is between 16 to I 8 years of age was that the
age of consent and age of marriage ought not to be conflated as they
serve different purposes. It is thought that while the same may be true
in theory; however, in practice, given our social milieu, the two are
intrinsically linked. In many cases before the High Courts, one of the
grounds for allowing bail or quashing the proceedings is that the victim
and accused have got married and, in a number of cases, have a child
as well. Thus, marriage and age of consent cannot be considered
mutually exclusive. Further, if as a result ofsexual intercourse, the girl
rea Centre for Child and the Law - National Law School of India University Bangalore,
"lmplementation of the POCSO Act,2012 by Special Courts: Challenges and Issues" 37, 135
(February, 2018).
re5 Centre for Child and the Law - National Law School of India Universiry Bangalore,
"Implementation ofthe POCSO Act,20l2 by SpecialCourts: Challenges and Issues" 9l (February,
2018).
105
fu)-,

gets pregnant, then marriage may be the consequence in such cases. If
we are to disassociate age ofconsent and age of marriage, then consent
can always be pleaded to exist where the accused marries the victim,
even if the said "consent" arises after the occurrence of the alleged
offence. The courts have also been circumspect of the fact that in many
instances, the accused deceitfully marries the victim under the guise of
willingness to evade criminal charges and once bail or acquittal is
secured, he abandons the victim.le6 Thus, introducing the element of
consent can provide opportunity to child-abusers to escape the rigours
of law and enjoy impunity by using loopholes.
18.7. The third solution of introducingjudicial discretion in sentencing
seems to strike a delicate balance to address the issue at hand and at the
same time protecting children from sexual exploitation. There cannot
be any automatic decriminalisation of sexual acts with a person between
the age of 1 6 to I 8 years and carving out a limited judicial discretion at
the stage ofsentencing is a more reasonable approach. Such a discretion
bestowed on the Special Court can be exercisable in cases where there
appears to be factual consent on part ofa child above the age of l6 years
for the alleged act in question. It has to be further ensured that such a
discretionary power is provided in such a manner that it is well guided
and insulated from any potential misuse as far as possible. In this
context, as to when such a discretion will come into play and who will
determine if at all it applies, becomes relevant. Only a judicially trained
mind aided by experts will be able to appropriately determine whether
t% Mohd. Amaon Malik v. The State Govt NCT of Delhi & .4ru:, Delhi High Court, CRL.M-C
7 t2t /2022 & CNL.M.A. 882912023.
106 a\,,

the consent in fact of the child in question was indeed free from any
coercion, deception, fraud or undue influence. This would require
proper investigation and evidence being adduced so as to determine if
any reduction in sentence is warranted. The concerns raised about wide
judicial discretion leading to arbitrariness and being exercised on
gender stereotypes are genuine and have also been noted by the
Supreme Court in Aparna Bhat and Ors. v. Slate of Madhya Pradesh
ond Anr.rel Thus, the Commission is of the opinion that discretionary
power of the Special Court in ascertaining consent and if discretion is
to be exercised at all, ought to be limited and guided so as to prevent
misapplication. The issue whether factual consent exists cannot be left
to the hands of investigating agencies as there are more dangers of
abuse and misapplication in such cases. Further, in order to ensure that
there is no unnecessary harassment or protracted proceedings, the
current system of investigation and judicial determination have to be
strengthened and improved in order to ensure expeditious trial as
envisaged under the POCSO Act.
18.8. There are two categories of cases within the umbrella of
purported consensual romantic relationships that fall under the ambit of
the POCSO Act. First, relationships between two consenting
adolescents, both of whom are of the ages 16 to 18 years. In such
situations, technically both the adolescents are equally victims as well
as children in conflict with law. However, it is more often the boy who
is labetled as an accused and the girl a victim, even though the POCSO
''q7 scc online sc 230
107
q,

Act is gender neutral. Ideatly, such a boy should be prosecuted as per
the provisions of the JJ Act, which allows for much liberal and wider
discretion in punishment and sentencing. However, a child can be
prosecuted as an adult in cases of heinous offences under the JJ Act.
Offences defined under Sections 3 and 7 of the POCSO Act are heinous
in nature and there is always the danger of the child being tried as an
adult even though the sexual act had been consensual. Thus, changes
are also required to be brought within the JJ Act in order to ensure that
in such cases ofromantic relationships, the child is not tried as an adult
and gets the benefit of a trial in accordance with the JJ Act.
18.9. In the second category of cases, wherein there is an alleged
consensual relationship between a child aged 16 years or above and an
adult, the situation needs to be considered more delicately as consent
by a child is difficult to ascertain and even more so in an adult-child
relationship. Courts may fail to recognize predatory and exploitative
behaviour wherein an adult may take undue advantage of a child's
positive feelings towards them and may label them as consensual. There
are nuances of inequality ofpower that ought to be considered carefully.
The power balance is heavily skewed in an adult-child relationship
owing to the factors such as difference in age and such an imbalance
and the resultant exploitation may, in fact, even exist in a relationship
between adolescents. There are instances when the court has considered
the age difference, however, in no manner has it considered whether the
"consent" of the child is in fact true consent.leE There are also cases
tee Joved v. Slate NCT of Delhi, Delhi High Court Bail Application 4l29l2t2l decided on
23.1't.2022.
108
&/

wherein even if the adult is married and there is a large age difference,
the court has considered consent to be present on part ofthe child/minor
and the same is found to be sufficient to quash the proceedings.lee Law
cannot be blind to the coercive nature oflarge age-differences and ought
to factor them in order to bring such exploitation within the purview of
law. Thus, even though close-in-age exemptions have been largely
considered inadequate to deal with the present situation, the
Commission considers that the age-difference between the victim-child
and the accused in such romantic cases ought to be a relevant factor that
is to be carefully considered by the court. However, in light of the
existing ground realities, if the age-difference between the victim child
and the accused is less than three years, the Commission is of the
considered view that introduction ofjudicial discretion in the matter of
sentencing can help alleviate the plight of those truly aggrieved.
18.10. Solely providing judicial discretion under the POCSO Act to
deal with such cases will not resolve the situation entirely as clause
Sixthly of Section 375 of the IPC may still be invoked against the
accused if the victim girl is below 18 years ofage. It is pertinent to note
even though Exception 2 of Section 375 exempts a husband from any
liability of rape under this section for indulging in sexual intercourse
with his wife who is above the age of 15 years; however, the Supreme
Court in the case of Independent Thought v. (Jnion of India & Anr.200,
read down Exception 2 to Section 375 to the extent that 15 years is to
te Sontanu Koudi v. State of Odisha,High Courr of Orissa JCRLA No. 37 of20l9
:m (2017) lo scc 8oo.
109
u

be read as 18 years. Thus, the current position in law as it stands is that
even if the husband has consensual sexual intercourse with his wife who
is below the age of l8 years, it will amount to rape under this provision.
Now such a position in law gives rise to a peculiar dilemma. As per the
current scheme of law, sexual intercourse with a girl child by the
husband, lover or any other person, amounts to an offence under
Section 375 of the IPC as rvell as the POCSO Act. However, if certain
reprieve is sought to be granted to the accused under the POCSO Act in
cases of adolescent romantic relationships, as is being recommended in
this Report. the same would be meaningless without a corresponding
amendment in Section 375 punishable under Section 376 of the IPC.
This is so because while the reprieve under the POCSO Act can be
claimed by the lover of the child. the alleged offence in question shall
continue to be penalised under Section 375 for both the lover or the
husband ofthe child.
18.11. Another aspect that warrants attention is the barrier to access
sexual and reproductive health services created by the operation of
mandatory reporting as provided under the POCSO Act. Access to
sexual and reproductive health services is vital to ensure that a victim
is not rendered further vulnerable. Inaccessibility to such essential
health services worsens the prospects for a young girl who due to the
fear of prosecution and police can be driven to resort to unsafe
abortions, thereby putting her life and health at great risk. The Hon'ble
I l0
a)-

Supreme Court20r also gave guidelines to ensure that unmarried and
single women including adolescents are not deprived access to safe
abortion under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, l97l and
the Rules made thereunder. The guidelines issued by the Supreme Court
in X. v. Principal Secretary, Heolth and Family Welfare Department,
Govt. of NCT of Delhi and Anr.202, exempting the registered medical
practitioner from disclosing the identity of the minor victim, who has
approached the medical practitioner for termination ofpregnancy, at the
request of the minor and the guardian of the minor, should assuage all
fears ofthe prosecution, thereby encouraging such pregnant adolescents
to avail the sexual and reproductive healthcare that they may require.
18.12. A recurring theme in the entire discussion was also the aspect of
lack of awareness regarding child sexual abuse and the POCSO Act
amongst the public. There is general lack of awareness amongst the
children as to what constitutes child sexual abuse and its various forms.
Even if the child knows that the act done is wrong and exploitative, a
large number of them never report the same to their parents or even
close friends out of fear of inviting further trouble for themselves and
their family. Thus, the supportive mechanism available to children
clearly requires strengthening. Further, awareness regarding sex,
consequences of engaging in sex at an early age, information about
contraception and safe sexual behaviour along with awareness
regarding the POCSO Act is also the need of the hour. Mandatory
1o1 X. v. Principal Secretary, Heallh ahd Fanily ll/elfare l)eparlmenl, GovL of NCT of Delhi and
,rzr., Supreme Court oflndia, Civil Appeal No. 5802 of2022 (Arising out ofSLP (C) No. 12612 of
2022)
2ax Id.
lll
q-

inclusion of comprehensive age-appropriate sex education in school
curriculum is required. Efforts should also be made for upscaling of
schemes like Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK).
wherein health and well-being of adolescents so as to enable holistic
development of the adolescent population is the central theme. This can
go a long with in bridging this deficit in awareness that exists.
18.13. In a written reply to a question in the Rajya Sabha, it was
informed that as of December 2022, there were 733 Fast Track Special
Courts (FTSC) including 413 exclusive POCSO Courts operational
across StatesfuTs.2o3 As per the website of the Department of Justice,
as of January 2023,764 FTSCs including 41 I exclusive POCSO Courts
are functional in 28 StatesAJTs, which have disposed of more than
1,44,000 pending cases.204 As per the latest statistics, there are 412
exclusive POCSO Courts functional in 29 StatesfuTs which have
disposed of more than 1,74,000 pending cases.205 However, there is still
high pendency ofPOCSO cases and the same has also been hightighted
by the Apex Court.206 Cases such as consensual adolescent romantic
relations are often listed as a reason for such pendency as these cases
r0r Ministry of Law and Justice, "733 Fast Track Special Courts including 413 exclusive POCSO
Courts operationalized in 28 StatesruTs", PIB, Dec. 22, 2022, available at
https://pib.gov. in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRtD= I 885668 (last visited August I 8, 2023 ).
2e Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice, aeailable at htlps;//doj.gov.in/fast-track-
special-court-
tucs/#:-:text=AsTo2Oooo/"20Jantaryo/"202|23o/o2CYo20764,23o/o2Co/o20aY"20total'r'o20oe/"20Rs
(last visited July 23, 2023).
r05 Ministry ofLaw and Justice, "Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs) achieving new heighs", P/8,
Aug. 24. 2023, qvailable al
https://pib.gov.inlPressReleaselframePage.aspx?PRID= 195 1673#:-:text=Undef/o20ceniallyyo20
SponsoredTo2oschemeo/o21of,speedyo/o20justice%20to%20the7o20victinrs. (last visited September
r5. 2023).
16 Alarming Rise in the i\'umbcr of Reported Child Rape lncidents, ln re (2020) 7 SCC I l2 : (2020)
3 SCC (Cri) 99.
tt2
qv

clog the system and take away focus from the cases that merit actual
attention. The judicial discretion once vested will enable the Special
POCSO Courts to try the cases expeditiously and the High Courts will
not be plagued with bail applications, quashing proceedings and writ
petitions pertaining to the same.
18.l4.There are several competing interests that call for a considered
and balanced approach in the present situation. Law has to ensure a
delicate balance between the evolving capacities of children and the
need to protect them from harm. While adolescents falling in the age
bracket of 16 to l8 years are indeed differently placed than children
aged 10 or 1 5 years, their brains are still at a developmental stage. There
exists sufficient scientific data to indicate that the brain continues to
develop and the growth of a child continues at least till the child attains
the age of 1 8 years.207 Further, not only physical growth but mental
growth is equally important, in assessing the maturity of a person below
the age of l8 years.2oE Scientific and psychological studies have shown
that the social-emotional part related to emotions is controlled by
punishments or rewards, which undergoes massive changes during
childhood. It is during this stage that juveniles may be driven to commit
certain acts which give them a feeling of high.2oe In order to feel this
sensation, children aged 16 to 18 years have a high tendency towards
risky behaviour without any consideration regarding the pros and cons
ta1 Salil Bali v. Llnion of lndia (2013) 7 SCC 705 : (2013) 3 SCC (Cri) 686.
.oB Id.
r0'"Less Guilty by Reason ofAdolescence: Developmental lmmaturity, Diminished Responsibility,
and the Juvenile Death Penalty" 58 American Psychologist 1009 (2003); Kumar Askand Pandey,
"Brain Science, Juvenile Delinquency and the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2015: A Critique" 7 R-11r.\Z UJ 54 (2015\-
113 u

of the same.2ro The development of the brain is hardly complete at the
age of 18 years and continues well into adulthood and sometimes is not
complete even until the age of 25 years. While teenagers today may
seem to mature physically at a much younger age as compared to their
parents and may often exhibit behaviour similar to that of an adult, it
does not imply that they understand the true and full implications of
their behaviours and actions.2r I The dangers of introducing any element
of consent can be that the child may be induced to have sexual
intercourse and later when the child realises that he/she was induced
and hence wants to proceed with a case, the same may be dismissed
saying that the sexual intercourse was voluntary. Further, a child may
engage in sexual activity out of his/her own volition initially, but if
he/she subsequently objects to it and the accused continues to have
sexual activity with him/her, on a complaint being made by the child.
the accused can always plead that the act was voluntary and get away
with it because the law itself would provide them that avenue. There
have been instances where courts have factored in initial consent of a
child, even though it is impermissible under the current scheme of the
POCSO Act, and have quashed cases against the accused even when
the child maintains that such intercourse was not truly voluntary.2l2 This
can be deeply problematic. Thus, adolescents in the age bracket of 16
to l8 years still remain children who ought to enjoy higher protection
ztn ld.
rrr Marty Beyer, "Recognizing the Child in the Delinquent" 7 Kenlucky Children's Righls Journal
l6 (1999); Kumar Askand Pandey, "Brain Science, Juvenile Delinquency and the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection ofchildren) Act, 2015: A Critique" 7 R,\ILNLUJ 54 (2015).
2t2 Ralrul Chandel Jotav v. the Slale of Madhya Pradesh & Anr., Higlt Coun of Madhya Pradesh,
Miscellaneous Criminal Cas€ No. 24691of2023. ,^
o.{vL.
11.+

of law and age of consent cannot be disturbed either by reducing it or
introducing a limited exception.
18.15. It has also been observed by courts that adolescent love cannot
be controlled and that the criminal intention may be missing in such
consensual acts. However, the courts must tread with caution while
deciding such cases. Each case has to be adjudged on its own peculiar
facts and circumstances. Factors such as the age being in shadow of
doubt, the consistency/inconsistency in the statement of the victim and
lack of inducement or threat in such cases, have to be duly considered
and adjudicated based on facts and circumstances of each case.2l3 Even
when holding that the POCSO Act is not intended to criminalise
consensual romantic relationships of young adults, courts have
cautioned that consensual nature of such relationships has to be seen
from the prism of the facts and circumstances of each case and there
might be cases where the survivor of sexual offence, may under
pressure or trauma, be forced to settle.2la
xl) Mahesh Kumar v. State @Cf oI Delhi), Delhi High Coun, Bail Application 124012023 on
08.05.2023.
2ta .4K v State Govt ofNCT ofDelhi and Anr., Delhi High Coun Bail Application272912022 decided
on 20.10.2022.
115
frv

T9. RECOMMENDATIONS
Having regard to the detailed foregoing analysis, the Commission
recommends the following:
A. Amendmenl lo Section 4 of lhe POCSO Act
l9.l. Section 4 ofthe POCSO Act reads as under:
"4. Punishment for penetrative sexual assault.-
(l) Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than ten years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
rtnr.
(2) Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child
below sixteen years of age shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall nol be less than
t'wenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for
life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of
natural life of that person and shall also be liable tofine.
(3) The.fine imposed under sub-section (l) shall bejust and
reasonable and paid to the victim to meet the medical
expenses and rehabilitation of such victim. "
19.2. lt is recommended that after sub-section (3) of Section 4, the
following may be inserted as sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (9):
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( I ),
where the child on whom the offence is commilted, vras al
the time of commission of the offence, of the age sixteen or
obove, and where the Special Court is satisfied, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, that the relationship
116
h-

between the accused and the child has been intimate, the
Court may, in its discretion, impose any lesser sentence on
the accused than the minimum sentence prescribed under
sub-section (l), taking into account all the facts and
circumstances of the case.
(5) While considering the facts and circumstances
mentioned in sub-section (4), the Special Court shall take
into account lhe following:
(a) that there was tacit approval of the child, though not
consent in law, for the acts leading to the offence;
(b) that the difference in age between the accused and the
child is not more than lhree years;
(c) that the accused has no criminal antecedents;
(d) that the accused bears good conduct after the
occurrence of the offence;
(e) that there is no element of undue inJluence, fraud,
misrepresentalion, coercion, force, violence or deceit
perpetrated on the child by the accused or any other
person on behalfofthe accused; or any element indicating
child trafficking;
(fl that the accused is not in a dominating position to
intimidate the child, parents or relatives of the child or the
witnesses;
(g) that there is no change in the social or cultural
background of the child, indicating an element of
manipulation or indoctrination ; and
(h) that the child was not used by the accused or at his
instance by any other person for pornographic purposes
or for any illegal or immoral activity.
117
A
W

(6) While considering the facts and circumstances
mentioned in sub-section (4), the Special Court may also
take into account the following:
(a) that the accused marcied the child on attaining
majority of the child and they are leading a happy maruied
l,f";
(b) that the family members of the accused or that of the
child or that of both of them accept and approve the
relationship between the accused and the child;
(c) whether any childwas born in the relationship between
the accused and the child;
(d) any other similar and convincing circumstances for
exercising the discretion by the Special Court.
Explanation:- Mere claim of marriage or birth of a child
in the relationship between the accused and the child, shall
not ipso facto entitle the accused for a lesser sentence
unless the circumstances mentioned under sub-section (5)
are satisfied.
(7) Any accused to whom sub-sections (4), (5) and (6), as
the case may be, apply would not be disentitled to the
lesser sentence merely because he committed penetrative
sexual assault on the child more than once or repeatedly,
or that he has impregnated the child, notwithstanding
anything contained in clause (l) of section 5 or sub-clause
(ii) of clause (j) of section 5, respectively.
(8) The Special Court may get the assistance of
experienced psychologists or psycho-social workers or
other experts for the purpose of ascertaining any of the
matters relating to sub-sections &), (5) and (6).
(9) The Special Court may pass such orders as are
necessary for protecting the interests of the child till the
child attains the age of eighteen years.
I l8

B. Amendment to Section 8 of the POCSO Act
19.3. Section 8 of the POCSO Act reads as:
" 8. Punishment for sexual assault.-Whoever, commits
sexual assault, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall nol be less than
three years but which may extend to fve years, and shall
also be liable to fine. "
19.4. It is recommended that Section 8 shall be re-numbered as sub-
section (l) and the following shall be inserted as sub-sections (2), (3)'
(4), (s), (6) and (7):
(2) Notwilhstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where the child on whom the offence is committed, was at
the time of commission of the offence, of the age sixteen or
above, and where the Special Court is satisfied, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, that lhe relationship
between the accused and the child has been intimate, the
court may, in its discretion, impose any lesser sentence on
lhe accused than the minimum sentence prescribed under
sub-section (1), taking into account all the facts and
circumstances of the case.
(a) that there was tacit approval of the child, though not
consent in law, for the acts leading to the offence;
(b) that the dffirence in age between the accused and the
child is nol more than three years;
(c) that the accused has no criminal antecedents;
I l9
(3) fy'hile considering the facts and circumstances
mentioned in sub-section (2), the Special Court shall take
into account the following.
@,

(d) that the accused bears good conduct after the
occurrence of the offence;
(e) that there is no element of undue inJluence, fraud,
misrepresentation, coercion, force, violence or deceit
perpetrated on the child by the accused or any olher
person on behalf of the accused; or any element indicating
child trfficking,
(fl that the accused is not in a dominating position to
intimidate the child, parents or relatives of the child or the
witnesses;
(4) While considering the facts and circumstances
mentioned in sub-section (2), the Special Court may also
take into accounl the following:
(a) that the accused matied the child on attaining
majority of the child and they are leading a happy maruied
lrfr;
(b) that the family members of the accused or that of the
child or that of both of them accepted and approved the
relationship between the accused and the child;
(c) whether any childwas born in the relationship between
the accused and the child;
(d) any other similar and convincing circumstances for
exercising the discretion by the Special Court.
Explonation:- Mere claim of marriage or birth of o child
in the relationship benueen the accused and the child, shall
120
(g) that there is no change in the social or cultural
background of the child, indicating an element of
manipulation or indoctrination; and
(h) that the child was not used by the accused or al his
instance by any other person for pornographic purposes
or for any illegal or immoral activity.
fi\/

not ipso facto entitle the accused for a lesser sentence
unless the circumslances mentioned under sub-section (3)
are satisfied.
(5) Any accused to whom sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), as
the case may be, apply would not be disentitled to the
lesser sentence merely becouse he committed sexual
assault on the child more than once or repeatedly,
notwithstanding anything contained in clause (l) of section
9.
(6) The Special Court may get the assistance of
experienced psychologists or psycho-social workers or
other experts for the purpose of ascertaining any of the
matters relating to sub-sections (2), (3) and &).
(7) The Special Court may pass such orders as ore
necessary for protecting the interests of the child till the
child attains the age of eighteen years.
C, Inclusion ol Proviso and Explanation in Section 18 of the JJ
Act,20l5
19.5. Section 18 of the JJ Act reads as:
V
121
" 18. Orders regarding child found to be in conflict with
law -(l) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that a child
irrespective of age has committed a petty offence, or a
serious offence, or a child below the age of sixteen years
has committed a heinous offence, or a child above the age
of sixteen years has committed a heinous offence and lhe
Board has, after preliminary assessment under Section I5,
disposed of the matter then, notwithstanding anything
contrary contained in any other law for the time being in
force, and based on the nature ofoffence, specific needfor
superttision or intervention, circumstances as brought out

in the social investigation repor! and past conduct of the
child, the Board may, if it so thinks fiL-
(a) allow the child to go home after advice or admonition
by following appropriate inquiry and counselling to such
child and to his parents or the guardian;
(b) direct the child to participate in group counselling and
similar activities:
(c) order the child to perfortn community service under lhe
supervision of an organisation or institution, or a specified
person, persons or group of persons identified by the
Board;
(d) order the child or parents or the guardian of the child
to payfine: Provided that, in case the child is working, it
may be ensured that the provisions of any labour law for
the time being inforce are not violated;
(e) direct the child to be releosed on probation of good
conduct and placed under the care of any parent, guardian
or fit person, on such parent, guardian or fit person
executing a bond, with orwithout surety, as the Board may
require, for the good behaviour and child's well-beingfor
any period not exceeding three yeors;
(fl direct the child to be released on probation of good
conduct and placed under the care and supervision of any
fit facility for ensuring the good behoviour and child's
well-beingfor any period not exceeding three years;
(g) direct the child to be sent to a special home, for such
period, not exceeding three years, as it thinks "fit, "fo,
providing reformotive services including education, skill
development, counselling, behaviour ntodification
therapy, and psychiatric support during the period of stay
in the special home: Provided that if the conduct and
behaviour of the child has been such that, it would not be
in the child's interest, or in the inlerest of other children
122

housed in a special home, the Board may send such child
to the place of safety.
(2) If an order is passed under clauses (a) to (g) of sub-
section (l), the Board may, in addition pass orders lo-
(i) attend school; or
(ii) attend a vocational training centre; or
(iii) attend a therapeutic centre: or
(iv) prohibit the child from visiting, frequenting or
appearing at a specified place; or
(v) undergo a de-addiction programme.
(3) Where the Board after preliminary assessment under
section 15 pass an order that there is a needfor trial of the
said child as an aduh, then the Board may order transfer
of the trial of lhe cose to the Children's Court having
jurisdiction to try such offences. "
19.6. It is recommended that the followin g proviso and explanation be
added to Section l8 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015:
Provided that where a child in conflict with law isfound to
have committed any sexual offence under the Prolection of
Childrenfrom Sexual Offences Act, 2012 [Act 32 of20l2]
or any other law for the time being inforce against a child
aged sixteen or above, having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the particular case, if the Juvenile Justice
Board or the Special Court, as the case may be, is satisfied
that there exist special and odequate reasons, lo be
recorded in writing, it may pass any appropriate
dispositional order under this section.
Explanation:- Special and adequate reasons include the
circumstances listed in the sub-sections (5) and (6) of
Section 4 and sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 8 of the
123
w

Protection of Children from Sexual Ofences Act, 2012
[Act 32 of20l2J.
E. Spreading Awareness regarding Child Sexual Abuse, Sexual &
Reproductive Heulth os well as the provisions of the POCSO Acl
19.8. In order to ensure that children get the best environment to grow
and flourish, it is necessary to increase awareness regarding child
sexual abuse and the varied forms it can take. Further, as a part of their
school curriculum, children can be made aware of their body and
various physiological and psychological changes they experience as a
part of growing up. Information about sex and the ill-effects of
engaging in it at ayoung age can better equip children to make healthier
and safer choices in life. Comprehensive and age-appropriate sex
education should be made a mandatory part of school curriculum and
govemment programs like Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram
should be utilised to inform and empower the adolescent population of
India.
The Commission recommends, accordingly.
----xxx----
t21
D. Amendment in the Indian Penal Code
19.7. Amendment in Section 375 or 376 of the IPC, as is f,ound
suitable, is required to be made in the context of what is stated in
Chapter 18 paragraph 18.10 ofthis Report.
rtb,

[Justice Ritu Raj Awasthil
Chairperson
G--:---
[Justice K.T. Sankaran]
Member
4
IProf. (Dr.) Anand Paliwall
Member
IProf. D.P. Vermal
Member
[Mr. K. Biswall
Member Secretary
4L.
[Dr. Niten Chandra]
Member (Ex-Officio)
IDr. Reeta Vasishtal
Member (Ex-Officio)
\
125
q\r"-

?ra---
lProf. (Dr.) Raka Aryal
Part-time Member
t26
IMr. M. Karunanithi]
Part-time Member