rr{irq Bai
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
REVISITING THE LAW ON PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO
PUBLIC PROPERTY
Report No. 284
Januaryr2024

The 22"d Law Commission was constituted by Cazette Notification for a period ofthree
years vide Order No. F No. 45021/l /2018-Admn-lll(LA) dated 2l', February, 2020 issued
by the Government of lndia, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs.
New Delhi. The term ofthe 22"d Law Commission was extended vide Order No. FA No.
600 1 I /225 /?02?- Admn. l l l( LA) dated 22'd February, 2023.
The Law Commission consists of a Chairperson. three full-time Members, Member
Secretary, two Ex-ofrcrb Members and t\,vo Part-time Members.
Chairperson
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Full-time Members
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Prof. (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Prol D.P. Verma
Ex-oflicio Members
Dr. Niten Chandra, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
Dr. Rajiv Mani, Secretary, Legislative Department
Part-time Members
Shri M. Karunanithi
Prol (Dr.) Raka Arya
Law Officers
Smt. Varsha Chandr4 Joint Secretary & Law OIIicer
Shri Atul Kumar Gupta, Deputy Law officer
Legal Consultants
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Ms. Priya Rathi
Ms. Ruchika Yadav
Ms. Deepika Chaudhary
Shri Kumar Abhishek
Shri Anubhav Dubey
The Law Commission is located at:
2nd and 4th Floor, 'B' Wing
Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market
New Delhi-l 10 003.
The text ofthis Repon is available on the Website at:
www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in
O Govemment of India
Law Commission of India
6t ,

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Forn€r ChiefJustjc€ ol High Coud of Kamatak4
Chairperson
22"0 Law Commission of lndia
s-€qn [a
qrq1d rg crq qqqfi
ftr{a gq qffi{I, ffia5 tsEa ;qiq-f,q)
STEIEI
qrw + 22d frE cndFr
Date: 3 1" January. 2024
7ro4
3fl-frIdtar
qqtrc-e€-4
l-l-a"/L4- 3r' WW u-VUrt
(,,*.,-,
I am pleased to forward you Report No. 284 of the Law Commission of India on "Revisiting
the Law on Prevention of Damage to Public Property."
While the courts in India have been at the forefront in recognizing the right to protest as a
facet of the right to freedom of speech and expression, they have, at the same time, cautioned
that such right needs to be exercised with restraint and at all times, peacefully. In this regard,
the Parliament enacted the 'Prevention of Damage to Public Prope(y Act' in 1984, which
aims to criminalize acts ofvandalism directed at public property.
However, even after passing the said law, destruction ofpublic property continued unabated,
compelling the Hon'ble Supreme Court to take sao motu cognizance in In Re: Destruction of
Public & Private Properties v. State of A.P. l(2009) 5 SCC 2121. The apex Court
subsequently, set up two committees to further look into the said issue. The first committee
was constituted under Justice K. T. Thomas and the second one under Shri Fati S. Nariman.
Both the Committees had submitted their reports and the Supreme Court issued certain
guidelines based on these reports that were made operative immediately.
Thereafter, an attempt was made in 201 5 to amend the said law, and in that regard, the
Ministry of Home Affairs released a draft ol the Prevention of Damage to Public Property
Act (Amendmen| Bill, 2015 and sought comments/suggestions thereon. However, it seems
that the proposal for amendment ofthe Principal Act was not pursued further.
The destruction of public property has continued undiminished. In fact, it appears that the
scale of destruction has only increased over the years. causing gargantuan losses to the public
exchequer and inconvenience to the general public. The law that was passed in 1984 seems to
have failed in its stated objective of preventing the destruction of public prope(y. This is a
sentiment echoed not only by the courts but also by various other govemment bodies. For
example, the Law Commission of Kamataka, in its 56th Report, stated that the current law
was inadequate and recommended its complete overhaul to tackle with the growing concems.
D.O. No. 6(3) 338/2023-LC (LS)
q'"/
orqidq rrdr : ornr i. los. sg.{ ao, t' fit r. A6 {r.rfi q?FI, EIFI qltr-c, T{ ffi-ttoooe
Ofrce Addrass : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wng, Lok Nayak Bhawan. Khan Markst, Now Dolhi'110003
GmIrSq rrdr: Eirrdr i. a. dre q-+efr qrd. TS fttd-rroo1l
Rssid€nco : Bungalow No. 8, To€s January Marg, New oelhi-l1oo11
email : rituraj.awashi@gov.in Tol. : 0'l'l-24654951 (O\, 243!,0202, 243/,0203

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former ChiefJustice of High Court of Kamatakal
Chairperson
22'o Law Gommission of lndia
€arm d
Bearing in mind the gravity ofthe issue and the loss being bome by the state exchequer, the
22nd Law Commission suo moiu undertook to prepare this Report. In pursuance ofthe same,
the Commission undertook an extensive study ol the subject, analysing the various relevant
constitutional and statutory provisions, the numerous judicial pronouncements by the courts
across the country, and the incidents involving large scale destruction ofpublic property.
Having had in-depth deliberations on the same. the Commission has recommended
amendments in the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984. The Commission
also recommends that to tackle the issue of prolonged willful obstruction of public property, a
separate law dealing with the same may be enacted or necessary amendments be made in the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita or the Indian Penal Code to this effect. Accordingly, this Report is
being submitted for your kind perusal.
With warmest regards,
Yours sincerely.
Y
(Justice Ritu w
nxT
asthi)
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (lndependent Charge)
Ministry of Law & Justice
Govemment of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi -l 10001.
orqfmq qdl : ocq ri. a95, agei ca. 6' frtq. FIYo qrrrr rltFl, EIFI cltr-c. TS ftd-t looos
Ofics AddrBss : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wng, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New Dolhi-110003
enerfrq qf,I : .irrdl i. a, df€ qr-{fr qr{t. T$ frd-110011
Residence : Bungalow No. 8, Te€s January Marg, Nsw Oslhi-l10011
email : rituraj.ewesthi@govin Tsl. i 0'11-2465495'l lDl' 24y02oz 213/,0203
qrq{rd rg {lq €rr*fr
ffiqa 1e <rq6n. oitco sa qrqdq)
3iEnfr
arrrd a 22d frfu sTrdFI
75
3II9T41+r -3r{dH-6rdr4

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The commission would like to express its sincere gratitude to all those who have
contributed to the completion of this Report on "Revisiting the Law on prevention
of Damage to Public Property".
we extend our heartfelt thanks to all the legal scholars, practitioners and
academicians who liberally shared their time and knowledge during the
preparation of this Report. Their expertise and insightful feedback have been
instrumental in shaping the content and structure of this document.
Considering that the issue at hand is not simply a legal one, the Commission
would also like to thank the various government officials and public-spirited
groups who contributed to the Commission's understanding on the issue. Their
inputs have added depth and perspective to the findings presented herein.
Further, we would like to acknowledge the perseverant efforts put in the
preparation of this Report by Mr. Rishi Mishra, Mr. Shubhang Chaturvedi,
Ms. Priya Rathi, Ms. Ruchika Yadav, Ms. Deepika Chaudhary, Mr. Kumar
Abhishek, and Mr. Anubhav Dubey, who worked as Legal Consultants. Their
insightful and vital contribution in the research and drafting of this Report
deserves special mention. we place on record our deepest admiration for their
painstaking efforts in the preparation ofthis Report.
This Report would not have been possible without the collective contributions
and support of all those mentioned above. while any erors or omissions remain
our own, the commission is grateful for the collaborative effort that has gone into
the creation of this document.
I
6",,,

I. INTRODUCTION I
5(A) Scherne of the PDPP Act
(B) Inadequacies in Law to Deal with Destruction of Public Property ......5
(C) Previous Attempts at Amending the Law 6
(D) Suo Moto Cognizance 'faken by The Law Commission 6
2. RELEVANT CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL PROVISIONS 9
(A) ConstitutionalProvisions 9
(B) The Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984 12
(C) The Indian Penal Code l4
(D) The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,2023 l8
(E) InternationalObligations 20
3. RELEVANT JUDTCIAL PRONOLINCEMENTS 22
(A) In Re: Destruction of Public and Private Properlies v. State of A.P...22
(B) Kodungallur Film Society v. Union of India 30
(C) Koshy Jacob v. Union of India 34
(D) Bharat Kumar K. Palicha v. State of Kerala 36
(E) Comrrunist Party o1'India (M) v. Bharat Kur.nar )t
(F) George Kurian v. State of Kerala 38
(G) James Martin v. State of Kerala ,11t-
(H) Kerala Vyapari Vyavasayi Ekopana Samithi v. State of Kerala..........43
(I) The State of Kerala v. K. Ajith
ll
45
TABLII OF CONTENTS
$,,

(J) Hemanth Kumar v. Sub Inspector of Police 48
(K) Hemachandran M. T. @ Karnalesh v. Sub Inspector of Police ..........50
(L) Ummer P. C. v. State of Kerala 51
(M) Shanif K. v. State of Kerala 52
(N) Amit Sahni (Shaheen Bagh, In re) v. State 54
(O) Kaniz Fatima v. Commissioner of Police 55
4, STATUTORY PROVISIONS AND JI]DICIAL DECISIONS RELAIINC
.57
(A) National Highways Act, 1956 57
(B) Railways Act, 1989 59
(C) InternationalPerspectives 64
5. SOME INCIDENTS OF VIOLENCII: A TALE OF SCALE OF LOSS AND
DESTRUCTION 66
(A)
(B)
(c)
(D)
(E)
(F)
(20 r 8)
(G)
(H)
(r)
(r)
Muzaflarnagar Riots (20 I 3 ) 68
Patidar Reservation Agitation (20 I 5) 69
Jat Reservation Agitation (2016) 7t
Saharanpur Violence (20 I 7)
Riots After Conviction of Gurrneet Ram Rahim Singh (2017) ..........74
Incidents of Arson and Var-rdalisrr After Release of Movic 'Padmaavat'
......,..,.....',..7 5
Bhirna Koregaon Riots (201 8) 76
Anti-CAA Protests (20 1 9)
Farm Laws Repeal Protests (2020) 80
Violence After Remarks Made on Prophet Mohammad (2022).........81
llt
TO THE ISSUE OF WILFUL OBSTRUCTION
73
77
V

(K) Protests Against Agnipath Scheme (2022) 82
(L) Haryana Riots (2023) 84
(M) Manipur Violence (2023) 85
6, CONCLUSION: URGENT NEED TO AMEND THE PREVENTION OF
DAMAGE TO PI'BLIC PROPERTYACT, 1984....... ................87
7. RECOMMENDATIONS 89
958. ANNEXUREA
IV
6.,

I. INTRODUCTION
l.l Democracy is a rule of the people, for the people, and by the people.l
Citizen participation, thus, lies at the heart of democracy. Freedom of
speech and expression comes to perform a vital function here as it
facilitates active participation of citizens. It is a vehicle for rich political
discourse that helps sustain democracy.2 Dissent is a facet of free speech
and is an imporlant pillar that sustains democracy. The citizens right to
participate is not limited to merely casting the vote but also holding their
elected representatives accountable. True democracy cannot exist unless
all citizens have a right to participate in the affairs of the polity of the
country.3 Protests as a facet of freedom of expression as also the right to
form association and peaceful assernbly enable the citizens to bring various
issues to the fore thereby enabling change. The irnportance of dissent and
protests has been beautifully expressed by the Supreme Court as:
"54. The right to protest is, thus, recognised as a fundamental right
under the Constitution. This right is crucial in a democracy which
rests on participation of an informed citizenry in governance. This
right is also crucial since it strengthens representative democracy by
enabling direct participation in public affairs where individuals and
groups are able to express dissent and grievances, expose the Jlaws
in governance and demand accountabilityfrom the State authorities
as well as powerful entities. This right is crucial in a vibrant
democracy like India but more so in the Indian context to aid in the
assertion of the rights of the marginalised and poorly represented
minorities. "t
I Abraham Lincoltr, Gettysburg qddress delivered at Cettlsburg Pa Nov. l9th, 1863, qvailable at:
www.loc.gov/item/rbpe.24404500/ (last visited on Januray 24, 2024).
2 Secy., Ministry of lnformdtion & Broadcasting, Covt of lndia u Crickel A'ssn. of Bengal, ( 1995) 2 SCC l6l, para
43.
3 ld, para 82.
a Mqzdoor Kison Shakti Sangothan v. Union of India, (2018) l7 SCC 324
I
fi",

1.2 Freedom ofspeech is an essential pre-condition in a system of democratic
govemance. Such a freedom was also valued in the earliest organised
democracy - the city state of Athens.5 During the meetings of the city's
goveming assembly, about 50000 rnale citizens of the city could choose to
participate, and share their thoughts without impediments.6 Even in the
Indian context, freedom of speech and expressing dissent is not an alien
concept. In fact, dissent and protest were central to our struggle for
independence.
1.3. In colonial times, Mahatma Gandhi's call for a civil disobedience and non-
cooperation movement in the face of injustices being unleashed by the
colonizers played a significant role in the struggle for freedom against the
Britishers.T The waves of movements such as Swadeshi movement,
Satyagraha, Non Co-operation Movernent and Quit India Movement
helped transform the Indian society by uniting people together in collective
non-violent action against the common oppressor.8 It is perhaps on account
of the imponant role that such tbnns of dissent played during our
independence struggle and its vitality to democracy as was realised by the
framers, that our constitution protects these aspects. It is against this
background that the Supreme Court in In re Ramlila Maidan lncident,e
observed:
"245. Freedom of speech, right to assemble and demonstrate by
holding dharnas and peaceful agitations are the basic features ofa
democratic system. The people of a democratic country like ours
5 Shameek Sen, "Right to Free Sp€ech And Censorship: A Jurisprudential Analysis" 56 Journal OfThe Indian
Law lnsritute l'75-201 (2014).
6ld.
1ld-
8 Sce Peter Ackerman and Jack Du Vall, Force More Powerful: A Century ofNon-violent Conllict 6l-106 (PalBrave
Macmillan, 2000).
., (20l2) 5 SCC I : (201 2) 2 SCC (Civ) 820
') h,,

have a right to raise their voice against the decisions and actions of
the Government or even to express their resentment over the actions
of the Government on any subject of social or national importance.
The Government has to respect and, in fact, encourage exercise of
such rights. lt is the abundant duty of the State to aid the exercise of
the right to freedom of speech as understood in its comprehensive
sense and not to throttle or frustrate exercise of such rights by
exercising its executive or legislative powers and passing orders or
taking action in that direction in the name of reasonable restrictions.
The preventive steps should be founded on actual and prominent
threat endangering public order and tranquillity, as it may disturb
the social order. This delegated power vested in the State has to be
exercised with great caution and free from arbitrariness. It must
sertte the ends of the constitutional rights rather than to subvert
them. "10
1.4. While right to protest serves a very relevant purpose, however, it has a very
important qualification attached to it. Any protest has to be peaceful. The
Courts have time and again, while upholding the right to protest,
emphasised that such right is guaranteed so long as they are peaceful. Even
the bare language of Article 19(lxb) guarantees the right to assemble
peaceably and without arms. Thus, maintaining a peaceful character of the
protest is asine qua non for claiming any protection as a fundamental right.
Demonstrations are protected so long as they are not violent or disorderly.l 
I
Riotous and disorderly assemblies are by no stretch of imagination
protected within the scope of this right and can be restricted on grounds of
protecting the sovereignty and integrity of India or maintaining public
order.r2 It must always be borne in mind that the framers of our Constitution
were circumspect of the dangers of unrestricted free speech and it is
precisely for this reason that this freedom is not absolute. White the right
to freedom of speech and expression is guaranteed within the Constitution,
to ld.
rr Mahendra Paf Singh (ed.), V.N. Shu*lq's Constitution of lndia l3 I (Eastem Book Company, l4tn edn..2022)
)
rr ,I./. pg. l50

1.5. The right to peacefully demonstrate cannot be stretched to include the
breach of law by causing damage to the public property. The leading
proponents of civil protests, Gandhi and Rawls, support the view that the
function of civil protest is to awaken the conscience of the people and the
ruling class in order to reform some unjust law or another.ra According to
them, such a change can be brought about only if the protest is non-
violent.r5 A violent protest will be countered by violent measures from the
state, thereby leading to added violence and the appeal to conscience will
be lost.l6
1.6. Protests may and indeed do tum violent thus causing disruption to the lives
of other citizens, as well as destruction of public and private property.
Recognising this and with a view to curb such violent forms of protests that
cause damage to public property, the Parliament enacted the Prevention of
Damage to Public Property Act, 198417 (hereinafter, referred to as the
"PDPP Act"). The PDPP Act aims to prevent damage to public property by
curbing acts of vandalism, including destruction and damage resulting
from riots and other public cornmotion.
tj Secy., Ministry of lnformation & Broadcasting, Golt. of India v. Cricker Assn. of Bengal, (1995) 2 SCC l6l,
para I EE.
ra PC. Chatterji, "Protest: Non-Violence, Persuasion and Coercion" l8 lndiq lnternationql Centre Quorlerly 91-
r00 (r 991).
ts ld.
1o ld.
'? Act No. 3 of 1984.
1
the same "cannot be so exercised as to endanger the interest of the nation
or the interest of the society, as the case may be. This is not merely in the
interest of nation and society but equally in the interest of the freedom of
speech and expression itself, the reason being the mutual relevance and
interdepe ndenc e afore s a id. " | 3
Ah,-

(A) Scheme of the PDPP Act
(B) Inadequocies in Law to Daal with Deslruction of Public Property
1.8. Taking note of the large-scale destruction of public and private properties
in the name of agitations, bandhs,, hartals and the like and the virtual
inaction against the offenders responsible for such destruction, the
Supreme Court in In re Destruction of Public & Private Properties2o took
suo moto cognizance of the issue. The Court, in light of various reports
submitted before it, set up two committees to further look in to the said
I8 14 Sec. 3( | ).
r'q 14 Sec.3(2).
,o Q00'1) 4 SCC 474
5
1.7. Section 2(a) of the PDPP Act defines 'mischief as having the same
meaning as in Section 425 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 C'IPC"). Section
2(b) defines 'public property'. Section 3 of the PDPP Act provides that
whoever commits mischief by doing any act in respect of any public
property shall be punished for a term which may extend to five years and
with finer8 and with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months, but which may extend to five years and with finere in
different contingencies. Section 4 of the Act further provides that whoever
commits an offence under sub-section ( I ) or sub-section (2) of section 3 by
fire or explosive substance shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than one yeaq but which may extend to
ten years and with fine. Section 5 provides for special provisions regarding
bail. Section 6 says that the provisions ofthe Act shall be in addition to,
and not in derogation of, the provisions ofany other law for the time being
in force.
6"-

issue. The first committee was set-up under Justice K. T. Thomas and the
second one under Shri Fali S. Nariman. Both the Committees submitted
their reports and the Supreme Court had issued certain guidelines based on
these reports that were made operative immediately.2l
(C) Previous Attenrpts ol Anrcnding the l.aw
1.9. The Ministry of Home Affairs, taking note of the recommendations made
by the Justice K. T. Thomas Committee in respect of the inadequacies in
the PDPP Act, sought to amend the same so as to deter vandalization and
destruction of public or private property during any form of protest.
1.10. In this regard, a proposed dratt of Prevention of Damage to Public Property
Act (Amendment) Bill, 2015 (marked as Annexure-A to this Report) was
released by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Ministry had sought
suggestions/comments on the same from the public and other stakeholders
on or before 20'h July, 2015. However, it would appear, that the proposal
for amendment of the PDPP Act was not pursued further.
(D) Suo Moto Cognizonce Taken by The Low Commission
L I l. The destruction to public property during protests continues unabated. In
fact, the magnitude of such destruction only seems to be increasing22 as the
current law fails to constitute sufficient deterrent to deal with rampant
destruction of public property.
11 .4tritu Thakrr v. Stute of J& K. (2016) l5 sCC 525
6
2t In Re: Destruction of Pub!ic & Privqte Properties v. State oJ A.P,(2009) 5 SCC 212: AIR 2009 SC 2266.
6-,

L 12. Not only the courts, but the inadequacies of the PDPP Act have also been
felt by other bodies. For instance, the Law Commission of Karnataka in its
56th Report, while noting that the PDPP Act was woefully inadequate,
recommended that a comprehensive legislation on the subject to address
the dual issues of imposition of punishment as well as recovery of damages
was the need of the hour. Thus, the Law Commission of Kamataka also
gave the draft layout for the proposed legislation titled 'The Karnataka
Prevention of Damage to Person and Property Act,202l '. In this context,
the following observations of the Law Commission of Kamataka are
noteworthy:
" 19. lJnfortunately it is not uncommon these days that there is large
scale violence resulting in loss of life and property. There are many
incidents now when people get agitated over some issue-political,
social, communal-and they gather as a group and resort to
demonstration which takes different forms-dharna, procession,
hartal, bandh, strike-which even when they begin as peaceful,
develop and turn into violent ones, again violence taking various
forms- pelting stones, torching vehicles, damaging buildings. The
net result of all this is damage to property, public and private, and
also loss of life with consequent disruption of normal life and activity
entailing cessation of economic activity and loss.
20. The targets of such violence are wittingly or unwittingly public
properties like government/quasi government buildings,
installations, means of transport and communications, private
properties - houses, shops and vehicles. Damage and loss can also
occur when police have, out of necessity, to resort to control the
situation with dffirent means like lathi charge, tear gas and firing.
Such agitations and violence trample upon the rights of others like
other individuals, businessman, labourers and even students."23
rr The Larv Commission of Karnataka. "f-iny-Sixth Repon on Proposed Legislation - The Karnataka Prevention
of Damage to Person and Property Act, 2021" (Ministry of Law. Covemment of Kamataka, January, 2021),
ovailable al https://lawcomm ission. karnataka.gov. in/storage/pdf-
files/English%20Reports%20LCK-/Report%20No-56.pdf (last visited on January 24,2024).
7
w,.

1.13. Since no amendment has been made to the PDPPAct so far, in spite of
several judicial pronouncements suggesting the same, the Law
Commission of India felt it necessary to take up the matter suo motu. This
is especially so in light of the widespread loss that is caused on account of
such incidents. The magnitude ofsuch loss suffered has been detailed under
Chapter 5 of this Report, which clearly underscores the exigency of
remedying the deficiencies in the law as it stands on date.
1 . 14. The 22nd Laut Commission has, after carefully considering the issue,
identified certain anomalies in the PDPP Act as it stands presently. The
Commission felt that there is urgent need to amendment the PDPP Act as
pointed outby the Supreme Court in the case of Amit Sahni (Shaheen Bagh,
In re) v. State24 and as pointed out in the recommendations made by Justice
K. T. Thomas Committee and Shri Fali S. Nariman Committee before the
Supreme Court in the case of In Re: Destruction of Public and Private
Properties v. State ofAndhra Pradesh25.
:1 (2020) l0 SCC 439: (2021) I SCC (Cri) 424
15 (2009) 5 SCC 212 :AIR 2009 SC 2266.
8
@"-

2. RELEVANT CONSTITUTIONALAND LEGAL PROVISIONS
(A) Conslilutional Provisions
2.1 Right to Protest is undoubtedly a fundamental right within the scheme of
the Indian Constitution.26 While not enumerated specifically within the text
of the Constitution, this right is implicit and flows from Article l9(l)(a),
I 9( I Xb) and 1 9( I )(c) of the Constitution.2T As a dimension of free speech,
the right to express dissent and criticise is vital to any democracy for it
allows the citizens to directly participate in public aflairs and demand
accountability.2s In this context, freedom of speech and expression would
ensure that the change desired by the people, whether in political, economic
or social sphere, is brought about peacefully and through law thereby
strengthening democracy.2e Further, the freedom to assemble and the
freedom to form associations are equally critical for the citizens of a
democracy as these enable citizens to engage with one another and organise
themselves to collectively participate in the polity.3o The interplay of
Articles 19( l Xa), I 9( 1 Xb) and I 9( I )(c) in protecting the right to protest as
a fundamental right has been perfectly summarised in the observations
made by the Supreme Court in Anita Thakur v. State of J&K:31
" 12. We can appreciate that holding peaceful demonstration in
order to air their grievances and to see that their voice is heard in
the relevant quarters is the right of the people. Such a right can be
traced to the fundamental freedom that is guaranteed under Articles
19(l)(a). 19(l)(b) and l9(1)(c) ofthe Constitution. Article 19(1)(a)
26 Mezdoor Kisan Shakti Sangqthan v. Llnion of India, (201 8) l7 SCC 324, para 54.
27 Anitq Thakur v. Store of J&K, (20l6) l5 SCC 525: (2016) 4 SCC (Cri) 695, para 12.
:8 Lawrence Liang, "Free Speech and Expression" in Sujit Choudhry, Madhav Khosla, et.al. (eds.), Oxford
Handbook ofthe lndian Constitution 814 (Oxford University Press,20l6).
2e Secy., Ministn, oJ lnfornation & Broadcasting, Govt oJ lndio v. Crickel Assn. oJ Bengal,(1995\2 SCC l6l.
r0 Menaka Guruswamy, "Assembly and Associations" in Sujit Choudhry, Madhav Khosla, el.al. (eds.), Oxford
Handbook ofthe lndian Constitution 836 (Oxford University Press,20l6)
rr (2016) t5 scc 525.
9 @"/

confers freedom of speech to the citizens of this country and, thus,
this provis ion ensures that the petitioners could raise slogan, albeit
in a peaceful and orderly manner, without using ofensive language.
Article l9(l)(b) confers the right to assemble and, thus, guarantees
that all citizens have the right to assemble peacefully and without
arms. Right to move freely given under Article l9(1)(d), again,
ensures that the petitioners could take out peaceful march. The
"right to assemble" is beautifully captured in an eloquent statement
that "an unarmed, peaceful protest procession in the land of "salt
satyagraha", fast-unto-death and "do or die" is no iural
anathema". It hardly needs elaboration that a distinguishing feature
of any democracy is the space offered for legitimate dissent. One
cherished and valuable aspect of political I ife in India is a tradition
to express grievances through direct action or peaceful protest.
Organised, non-violent protest marches were a key weapon in the
struggle for Independence, and the right to peaceful protest is now
recognized as a fundamental right in the Constitution. "
2.2. The ambit of right to protest under Article 19 is not unlimited. The same is
subject to reasonable restrictions as permissible under Article 19(2) and
19(3). Further, there can be various forms of protests and only certain forms
fall within the freedoms guaranteed by Articles 19(l)(a) and l9(l)(b).32
The Supreme Court has clearly delineated the contours of right to protest
that is protected within the framework of Article l9:
J2 Kameshwar Prasad v. Stqte of Bihar, 1962 Supp (3) SCR 369 : AIR 1962 SC I 166
l0
" 3 I . Article l9 of the Constitution of India guarantees some of the
most importantfundamental rights to the citizens. Article l9 protects
important attributes of personal liberty. Right to freedom of speech
and expression as guaranteed under Article 19(l)(a) and the right
to assemble peaceably and without arms as protected by Article
lg(l)(b) are the rights which in reference to the present case have
importance. The right offreedom ofspeech and expression coupled
with right to assemble peaceably and without arms are rights,
expression of which are re/lected in carrying demonstration on
several occasions. Freedom to air one's view is the lifeline of any
democratic institution. The words "freedom of speech " must be
broadly construed to include right to circulate one's view by word
W-

public tlislurbonces 0r operole os nuissnces, or creute or
ntunifestlv lltreolen sonrc loncihlc l, ublic or l)riv e mischief. ure
not covered hv protection under Article l9(l). A demonstration
might take the form of an assembly and even then the intention is to
convey to the person or authoritv to whom the communication is
intended the feelings of the group which assembles. From the very
noture of things a demonstrotion may tuke vorious forms; "il may
be noisy ond disorderly", for instance stone-throwing by a crowd
may be cited ss tn example of a violenl and tlisorderly
demonstration and this would nol obviously be within Article
I 9(l)(a) or (b)........ "r1
(emphasis added)
2.3. There have been varying kinds of protests that our polity has witnessed -
dharnas, pickets, strikes, bandhs etc. The Courts have differentiated
between these different kinds ofprotests and have treated them differently'
The Courts have viewed favourably the act ofpicketing by a few not going
beyond the limit of persuasion or inducement and that which does not
restrain others from doing what they please and have read the same as
protected under Article 19( I )(a).3a Peaceful picketing has been considered
a non-violent act of persuasion and a manifestation of one's freedom of
speech and expression.ls Bandhs on the other hand have been declared
unconstitutional.l(' Bandhs, unlike general strikes, often lead to destruction
of public proper-ty and there is interference with the fundamental freedoms
or mouth or through audio-visual instrument. Right of public speech
is one form oJ'expression v,hich is also a part offreedom of speech
and expression. Demonstrations ure also a mode ofexpression of the
rights guaranteed under Article l9(l)(a). Demonstrotions whether
political, relisious or sociol. or other demonstralions which creole
33 Bimal Gurungv. lJnion oflndio,(2018) I5 SCC 480: (2019) I SCC (Cri) 887.
ra Mahendra Pal Singh (ed.), VN. Shukla's Constiturion of Indio l3l (Eastern Book Company, l4th edn.,2022)1
Rqj Nqrain v. stote, AIR l96l All 531.
rt M. P Jain, I Indian Constitutional Law 145 l -52 (LexisNexis, New Delhi, 6'h edn., 2013).
36 Bhorat Kumqr K. Palicha v. State of Kerala, AIR 1997 Ker 29 | . ,,y)
llw'

2.4. Article 5l A which enshrines the "Fundamental Duties" of the citizens of
India also becomes pertinent to be noted in the context of protests. One of
the eleven fundamental duties imposed upon the citizens of India under the
framework of the Constitution is "to safeguard public property and to
abjure violence". Article 51A(i) reads:
"51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India-
(i) to safeguard public property and to objure violence;"
(B) The Prevention of Domoge to Public Properff Act, 1984
2.5. The Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984 is an Act to
provide for prevention of damage to public property and for matters
connected therewith. Section 3 of the PDPP Act deals with "Mischief
causing damage to public property". Section 4 deals with "Mischief
causing damage to public property by fire or explosive substance." The
relevant sections, Sections 2 to 6 of the PDPP Act, have been extracted
below:
, M. P Jain, I ln(lian Constitutional Luu' 1452 (LexisNexis, New Delhi, 6'\ edn.,2013); ,lames Mqrtin v. Stqte of
Kerolq, (2004)2 SCC 203.
18 The Communist Pony of lndiq (M) v. Bharat Kumar AIR 1998 SC 184.
$ M. P Jain, I Indian Constitutionat Law 1450 (LexisNexis, New Delhi, 6'h edn., 2013)
t2
of other citizens.3T The Supreme Court has held that the fundamental rights
of people as a whole are not subservient to the fundamental rights of an
individual or ofa section ofpeople.rs Bandhs invade and endanger the life,
liberty and property of citizens and public, enabling anti-social forces to
gain control resulting in all-round destruction with counter-productive
results at the expense of public order and public peace.se
q".

"2, Definitions.-
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
a. "mischief' shall have the same meaning as in Section 425 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);
b. "public property " means any property, whether immovable or
movable (including any machinery) which is owned by, or in the
possession of, or under the control of-
i. the Central Government; or
ii. any State Government; or
iii. any local authority; or
iv. any corporation established by, or unde4 a Central,
Provincial or State Act; or
v. any company as defined in Section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956 (l of 1956); or
vi. any institution, concern or undertaking which the
Central Government may, by notification in the fficial
Gazette, specify in this behalf
Provided that the Central Government shall not specifi any
institution, concern or undertaking under this sub'clause unless
such institution, concern or undertaking is financed wholly or
substantially by funds provided directly or indirectly by the Central
Government or by one or more State Governments, or partly by the
Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments.
3. Mischief causing damage to public property.-(l) ll/hoever
commits mischief by doing any act in respect of any public property,
other than public property of the nature referred to in sub-section
(2), shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to.five years and with fine.
(2) Whoever commits mischief by doing any act in respect of any
public property being-
a. any building, installation or other property used in
connection with production, distribution or supply of wate4
light, power or energl;
b. any oil installation:
c. any sewage work;
d. any mine orfactory:
e. any means of public transportation or of tele-
communications, or any building, installation or other
property used in connection therewith,
l3 G,,

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend
to five years and with fine.
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in its
judgment, award a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
six months.
4. Mischief causing clamage to public property by jire or explosive
substance.-
Woever commits an offence under sub-section (l) or sub-section
(2) of section 3 byfire or explosive substance shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one
year, but which may extend to ten years and with fine;
Provided that the court may, for special reasons to be recorded in its
judgment, award a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
one year
6. Saving.- The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, the provisions of anlt other law for the time being
in force, and nothing contained in this Act shall exempt any person
from any proceeding (whether by way of investigation or otherwise)
which might apartfrom this Act, be instituted or taken against him. "
(C) The Indion Penol Code
2.6. Section 2(a) of 1'he Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984,
defines the expression "mischiefl' as having the same meaning as in
Section 425 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter, referred to as
t4
5. Special provisions regarding bail.-
No person accused or convicted of an offence punishable under
section 3 or section 4 shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on
his own bond unless the prosecution has been given an opportunity
to oppose the application for such release.
$/

"IPC").+o Hence, Section 425 of the IPC and Sections 426 to 440 dealing
with several categories of mischief are also relevant in this context. The
relevant sections, Sections 425 to 440 ofthe IPC are extracted below:
"425. Mischief,-lfhoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he
is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to the public or to any
person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change
in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes
its value or utility, or affects it injuriously, commits "mischief '.
Explanation l.-lt is not essential to the offence of mischief that the
offender should intend to cause loss or damage to the owner of the
properly injured or destroyed. It is sfficient if he intends to cause,
or knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to any
person by injuring any property, whether it belongs to that person or
not.
Explanation 2.-Mischief may be committed by an act affecting
property belonging to the person who commits the act, or to thal
person and others jointly.
426. Punishment for mischief,-lilhoever commits mischief shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description .for a term
which may extend to three months, or withfine, or with both.
427. Mischief causing damoge to the amount of -frfty rupees.-
Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the
omount of fifty rupees or uptards, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend lo
two years, or withfine, or with both.
428. Mischief by killing or moiming unimol of lhe volue of len
rupees.-Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming
or rendering useless any animal or animals of the value of the ten
rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
429. Mischief by killing or nruiming c lle, elc., of ottlt vulue or un1'
onimal of the value of -fifty rupees.-llhoever comntits mischie/'by
killing. poisoning, ntainting or rentlering u.veless, onv elephant,
ro Act No. 45 of 1860
l5
6-

camel, horse, mule, buffalo, bull, cow or ox, whatever may be the
value thereof, or any other animal of the value of fifty rupees or
upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend tofive years, or withfine, or with both.
430. Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully
diverting water.-Whoever commits mischief by doing any act
which causes, or v,hich he knows to be likely to cause, a diminution
ofthe supply ofwaterfor agricultural purposes, orforfood or drink
for human beings or for animals which are property, or for
cleanliness or for carrying on any manufacture, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either descriptionfor a term which may extend
to five years, or with fine, or with both.
432. Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public
drainage ottended with domoge.- llhoever commits mischief by
doing any act which couses or which he knows to be likely to cause
an inundation or an obstruction to any public drainage attended
with injury or damage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which ma1, extend to five years, or with fine,
or with both.
433. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful tr
light-house or sea-mork.- Whoever commits mischief by
destroying or moving any light-house or other light used as a sea'
mark, or any sea- mark or buoy or other thing placed as a guide for
navigators, or by any act which renders any such light-house, sea-
mark, buoy or other such thing as aforesaid less useful as a guide
for navigators, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, or withfine,
or with both.
434. Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark Jixed by
public authority.-Whoever comntits mischief by destroying or
moving any land-mark fixed by the authority of a public servant, or
l6
431. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel.-
Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which renders or which
he knows to be likely to render any public road, bridge, navigable
river or navigable channel, natural or artificial, impassable or less
safe for travelling or conveying property, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description .fbr a term which may extend to
five years, or with fine, or with both.
W/

by any act which renders such land-mark less useful as such, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
435. Mischief by Jire or explosive subslance with intenl to cause
damoge to amount of one hundred or (in case of agriculturol
produce) ten rupees.-ll'hoever commits mischief by .fire or any
explosive substance intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that
he will thereby cause, damage to any property to the amount of one
hundred rupees or upwards or (v",here the property is agricultural
produce) ten ntpees or upwards, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description .for a term which may extend to
seven years and shall also be liable tofine.
436. Mischief by fire or explosive substsnce h'ith inlenl to destroy
house, etc.-Whoever commits mischief by Jire or any explosive
substance, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby cause, the destruction of any building which is ordinarily
used as a place of worship or as a human dwelling or as a place for
the custody of property, shall be punished with imprisonmentfor ltfe,
or with imprisonment of either description .for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to.fine.
437. Mischief with inlenl to destroy or make unsafe a decked vessel
or one of twenty tons burden,-Whoever commits mischief to any
decked vessel or any vessel ofa burden of twenty tons or upwards,
intending to destroy or render unsafe, or knowing it to be likely that
he will thereby destroy or render unsafe, that vessel, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable tofine.
438. Punishment for the mischief described in section 437
committetl by fire or explosive substance. 
-Whoever 
commits, or
attempts to commit, byfire or any explosive substance, such mischief
as is described in the last preceding section, shall be punished with
imprisonment for ltfn.or with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years. and shall also be liable tofine.
439. Punishmenl for intentionilly running vessel aground or
oshore wilh intent to commit theft, etc.-Whoever intentionally
runs on)) vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit theft o/'any
property contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any
such property, or with intent that such theft or misappropriation of
l7
V

property may be committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either descriptionfor a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable tofine.
440. Mischief committed after preparalion madefor causing death
or hurt.-Whoever commits mischief, having made preparation for
causing to any person death, or hurt, or wrongful restraint, or fear
of death, or of hurt, or of wrongfttl restraint, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a lerm which may extend to
.five years, and shall also be liable to fine. "
2.7. The provisions pertaining to public nuisance must also be considered in
this regard here. Section 268 and 290 are relevant in that context and have
been reproduced below:
" 268. Pubtic nuisance.-A person is guilty of a public nuisance who
does any act or is gttilty of an illegal omission which causes any
common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people
in general who d,vell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which
must necessarily cause injury, obstruction, danger or annoyance to
persons who may have occasion to use any public right.
290. Punishment for public nuisonce in cases not otherwise
provided for,-Whoever commits a public nuisance in any case not
otherwise punishable by this Code, shall be punished withfine which
may extend to two hundred rupees. "
(D) The Bhoriliya Nyoya Smhita,2023
2.8. The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,2023tt (hereinafter, referred to as "BNS")
was passed by the Lok Sabha on 20'h December,2023 and by the Rajya
Sabha on 21'r December, 2023.It received Presidential assent on 251h
December, 2023. The BNS, once implemented, will replace the IPC'
I' Act No.4-5 of 2023
l8
w/

Hence, it becomes pertinent to consider the applicable provisions of the
BNS. The relevant provisions of the BNS have been mentioned below:
"270. Public nuisance.-A person is guilty of apublic nuisance who
does any act or is guilty of an illegal omission which causes any
common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people
in general who dwell or occltpy property in the vicinity, or which
must necessarily cause injury, obstruction, danger or annoyance to
persons who may have occasion to use any public right but a
common nuisance is not excused on the ground that it causes some
convenience or advantage.
292. Punishment for public nuisance in coses not otherwise
provicletl for.-Whoever commits a public nuisance in any case not
otherwise punishable by this Sanhita shall be punished with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees.
324. MischieJ-(l) Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that
he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to the public or to any
person, causes the destruction oJ- any property, or any such change
in any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes
its value or utility, or affects it iniuriously, commits mischief.
Explanation I .-It is not essential to the offence of mischief that the
offender should intend to cause loss or damage to the owner of the
property injured or destroyed. It is sfficient if he intends to cause,
or knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to any
person by injuring any property, whether it belongs to that person
or not.
Explanation 2.-Mischief may be committed by an act affecting
property belonging to the person who commits the act, or to that
person and others jointly.
(2) Whoever commits mischief shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine, or with both.
(3) Ihhoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to
any property including the property of Government or Local
Authority shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one year, or withfine, or with both.
(4) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to
the amount of twenty thousand rupees and more but less than one
lakh rupees shall be punished with imprisonment of either
l9
w/

description for a term which may extend to two years, or with rtne,
or with both.
(5) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to
the amount of one lakh rupees or upwards, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years, or withfine, or with both.
327. Mischief with intent to destroy or moke unsafe a rail, aircraft,
decked vessel or ane of twenly lons burden.-(l) I4/hoever commits
mischief to any rail, aircraft, or a decked vessel or any vessel of a
burden of tnenty tons or upwards, intending to destroy or render
unsafe, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby destroy or
render unsafe, that rail, aircraft or vessel, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description.for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable tofine.
(2) I{hoever commits, or attempts to commit, byfire or any explosive
substance, such mischief as is described in sub-section (l), shall be
punished with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either
description.for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable toJine.
328. Punishment for inlenlionally running vessel oground or
ashore with intent to commit theft, etc.-Whoever intentionally
runs any vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit theft of any
property contained therein or lo dishonestly misappropriote an))
such property, or with intent that such theft or misappropriation of
property may be committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to.fine."
(E) Internatiottnl Obligations
2.9. In respect of right to dissent and protest, Article 19 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 and Article 19 of the Intemational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, become relevant and have been
reproduced below:
Universal Dcclaration of Human Rights. -
20 B/

Article 19 - Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and
expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without
interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas
through any media and regardless offrontiers.a2
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Article 19 - (l) Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions
without interference.
(2) Everyone shall have the right tofreedom ofexpression; this right
shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or
in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.
(3) The exercise of the rights protided for in paragraph 2 of this
article carries with it special duties and respons ibilities - It may
therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these shall onllt be
such as are provided by law and are necessary:
(a) For respect o/'the rights or reputations ofothers;
(b) For the proteclion of national security or of public order
(ordre public), or of public health.r3
rr Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, an. 19.
r3 Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 1966, art. l9
21
6/

3. RELEVANT JUDICIAL PRONOUNCEMENTS
3.1 Various judicial pronouncements of by the Supreme Court and the High
Courts passed over the years clearly indicate a consistently strong stance
taken by courts against any violent protest. While the courts have never
shied away from protecting the right to peaceful protests and have
assertively done so on many occasions, yet at the same time they have
come down heavily on any violent protest. Any violent protest that
endangers other citizens and stops them from exercising their freedoms or
liberties or leads to destruction of public or private property is antithetical
to the very idea of right to protest imbibed in our constitutional values and
what it seeks to achieve. Over the years, courts have expressed their
dissatisfaction over the inability of the current law to act as a sufficient
deterrent against violence during protests and destruction of public
property. The courts have time and again emphasized on the failure of the
state to act adequately to prevent such acts and reiterated the need to bring
people engaging in such acts ofvandalism and destruction to justice. Some
of these case laws have been discussed in the following paragraphs:
(A) In Re: Destruction of Public tnd Private Properties v. Stote of A.P,aa
3.2. In this case, the Supreme Court took serious note of various instances of
large-scale destruction of public and private properties in the name of
agitations, bandhs, hartals and the like and initiated suo motu proceedings
on 05.06.2007. The Supreme Courl appointed two Committees. One of the
Committees was headed by Justice K. T. Thomas, former Judge of the
Supreme Court. The other members of the Committee were Shri K-
$ AIR 2009 SC 2266: (2009) 5 SCC 2 l2
22 S/

Parasaran, Senior Advocate; Dr. R. K. Raghavan, Ex-Director of CBI; Shri
G.E. Vahanavati, the then Solicitor General of India; an officer not below
the rank of Additional Secretary of Ministry of Home Affairs; and the
Secretary of the Department of Law and Justice, Govemment of India. The
other Committee was headed by Shri Fali S. Nariman, Senior Advocate.
The other members of that Comrnittee were the Editor-in-Chiefs of the
Indian Express, the Times of India and Dainik Jagaran; Shri Pranoy Roy of
NDTV; an officer not below the rank of Additional Secretary of Ministry
of Home Affairs and the Ministry ol' Information and Broadcasting;
Secretary Department of Law and Justice, Govemment of India; Shri G.E'
Vahanavati, Solicitor General; and Dr. Rajiv Dhawan, Senior Counsel who
was appointed as amicus curioe.
3.3. The Supreme Court considered the recommendations of the Committees
headed by Justice K. T. Thomas and Shri Fali S. Nariman and also the
suggestions made by the learned amicus curiae. The Supreme Court,
thereafter, held as follows:
"4. The report submitted by Justice K. T. Thomas Committee has
made the fo I low in g rec o m mendat i ons :
(, The PDPP Act must be so amended as to incorporate a
rebuttable presumption (after the prosecution established the
twofacets) that the accused is guilty of the offence.
(ii) The PDPP Act to contain provision to make the leaders
of the organization, which calls the direct action, guilty of
abetment of the offence.
(iii) The PDPP Act to contain a provision for rebuttable
presumption.
(iv) Enable the police o//icers to arrange videography of
the activities damaging public properly.
The recommendations have been made on the basis of the
following conclus ions after taking into consideration the
materials.
23 v

l. ln respect of (i)
'According to this Committee the prosecution should be required to
prove,first thal public property has been damaged in a direct action
called by an organization and that the accused also participated in
such direct action. From that stage the burden can be shifted to the
accused to prove his innocence. Hence we are of the view that in
situations where prosecution succeeds in proving that public
property has been damaged in direct actions in which accused also
participated, the Court should be given the power to draw a
presumption that the accused is guilty of destroying public property
and that it is open to the accused to rebut such presumption. The
PDPP Act may be amended to contain provisions to that effect.'
'Next we considered how far the leaders of the organizations can
also be caught and brought to trial, when public property is
damaged in the direct actions called at the behest of such
organizations. Destruction of public property has become so
ramponl during such direct actions called by organizations. In
almost all such cases the top leaders of such organisations who
really instigate such direct actions will keep themselves in the
background and only the ordinary or common members or grass
root level followers of the organisation would directly participate in
such direct actions and they alone would be vulnerable to
prosecution proceedings. In many such cases, the leaders would
really be the main offenders being the abettors of the crime. If they
are not caught in the dragnet and allowed to be immune from
prosecution proceedings, such direct actions would continue
unabated, if not further escalated, and will remain a constant or
recurring alfair. Of course, it is normally dfficult to prove abetment
of the offence with the help of direct evidence. This .flaw can be
remedied to a great extent by making an additional provision in
PDPP Act to the effect that specified categories of leaders of the
organization which make the call for direct actions resulting in
damage to public property, shall be deemed to be guilty of abetment
of the offence. At the same time, no innocent person, in spile of his
being a leader of the organization shall be made to stffir for the
actions done by others. This requires the inclusion ofa safeguard to
protect such innocent leaders.'
24
2. Inrespectof(ii)
Gx/

3. In respect of(iii)
'After considering various aspects to this question we decided to
recommend that prosecutions should be required to prove (i) that
those accused were the leaders or office bearers of the organisation
which called out the direct actions and (ii) that public property
has been damaged in or during or in the aftermath of such direct
actions. At that stage of trial it should be open to the Court to draw
a presumption against such persons who are arraigned in the case
that they have abetted the commission of offence. However, the
accused in such case shall not be liable to conviction if he proves
that (i) he was in no way connected with the action called by his
political party or that (ii) he has taken all reasonable measures to
prevent causing damage to public property in the direct action
called by his organisation. '
4. In respect of (iv)
'The Committee considered other means of adducing evidence for
averting unmerited acquittals in trials involving offences under
PDPP Act. We felt that one of the areas to be tapped is evidence
through videography in addition to contemporaneous material that
may be available through the media, such as electronic media. ll/ith
the amendments brought in the Evidence Act, through Act2 I of2000
permitting evidence collected through electronic devices as
admissible in evidence, we wish to recommend the following:
i) If the fficer in charge of a police station or other law
enforcing agency is of opinion that any direct action, either declared
or undeclared has the potential of causing destruction or damage to
public property, he shall avail himself of the services of video
operators. For this purpose each police station shall be empowered
to maintain a panel of local video operators who could be made
available at short notices.
ii) The police officer who has the responsibility to act on the
information that a direct action is imminent and if he has reason to
apprehend that such direct action has the potential of causing
destruction of public property, he shall immediately avail himself of
the services of the videogt'apher to accompany him or any other
police officer deputed by him to the site or any other place
wherefrom video shooting can conveniently be arranged
concentrating on the person / persons indulging in any acts of
25
G/

violence or other acls
property.
causing destruction or damage to any
iii) If the fficer in charge of a police station or other law
enforcing agency is of opinion that any direct action, either declared
or undeclared has the potential of causing destruction or damage to
public property, he shall avail himself of the services of video
operators. For this purpose each police station shall be empowered
to maintain a panel of local video operators who could be made
available at short notices.
iv) The police fficer who has the responsibility to act on the
information that a direct action is imminent and if he has reason to
apprehend that such direct action has the potential of causing
destruction of public property, he shall immediately avail himself of
the services of the videographer to accompany him or any other
police fficer deputed by him to the site or any other place
wherefrom video shooting can conveniently be arranged
concentrating on the person / persons indulging in any acts of
violence or other acts causing destruction or damage to any
property.
v) No sooner than the direct action subsides, the police fficer
concerned shall authenticate the video by producing the
videographer before the Sub Divisional orExecutive Magistrate who
shall record his statement regardingwhat he did. The original tapes
or CD or other material capable of displaying the recorded
evidence shall be produced before the said Magistrate. It is open to
the Magistrate to entrust such CD / material to the custody of the
police fficer or any other person to be produced in Court at the
appropriate stage or as and when called for.
The Committee felt that offenders arrested for damaging public
property shall be subjected to a still more stringent provision for
securing bail. The discretion of theCourt in granting bail to such
persons should be restricted to cases where the Courtfeels that there
are reasonable grounds to presume that he is not guilly of the
o/fence. This is in tune u)ith 5.437 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and certain other modern Criminal Law statutes.
So we recommend that 5.5 maybe amended for carrying out the
above restriction.
26 @/

Thus we are of the view that discretion to reduce the minimum
sentence on condition of recording special reasons need not be
diluted. But, instead of'reasons' the Court should record 'special
reasons' to reduce the minimum sentence prescribed.
However, we felt that apart from the penalty of imprisonment the
Court should be empowered to impose afine which is equivalent to
the market value ofthe property damaged on the day ofthe incident.
In default of payment of fine, the offender shall undergo
imprisonment for a further period which shall be sfficient enough
to deter him from opting in favour of the alternative imprisonment.'
vi) The recommendations according to us are wholesome and
need to be accepted. "
3.4. Based on the recommendations made by Justice K. T. Thomas Comrnittee,
the Suprerne Court issued the following guidelines:
To effectuate the modalities for preventive action and adding teeth
to enquiry/ investigation following guidelines are to be observed:
"As soon as there is a demonstration organized:
l. The organizer shall meet the police to review and revise
the route to be taken and to lay down conditions for a
peaceful march or protest;
II. All weapons, including knives, lathis and the like shall be
prohibited:
lll. An undertaking is to be provided by the organizers to
ensure a peaceful march with marshals at each relevant
junction;
lY. The police and State Government shall ensure
videograph of such protests to the maximum extent
possible:
V. The person in charge to supervise the demonsffation
shall be the SP (if the situation is confined to the district)
and the highest pol ice fficer in the State, where the
situalion stretches beyond one district;
YI. In the event that demonstrations turn violent, the
officer in charge shall ensure that the events are
videographed through private operators and also
request such further information from the ntedia and
27 @/

3.5. The Committee headed by Sri. Fali S. Nariman, recommended, inter alia,
the following:
"Where persons, whether jointly or otherwise, are part of a protest
which turns violent, results in damage to private or public property,
the persons who have caused the damage, or were part of the protest
or who have organized will be deemed to be strictly liable for the
damage so caused, which may be assessed by the ordinary Courts
or by any special procedure created to enforce the right. This
Committee is of the view that it is in the spit"it of the observation in
M. C. Mehta v. Union of Indial5 that this Court needs to lay down
principles on which liability could be fastened and damages
assessed in cases in which due to behaviour of mobs and riotous
groups public and private property is vandalized and loss of I ife and
injury is occasioned lo innocent persons. These are clearly'unusual
situations', which have arisen and likely to arise in future and need
to be provided for in the larger interest of justice. It is on the
principles set out above that (it is suggested) that the Hon'ble Court
should frame guidelines and venture to evolve new principles (of
liability) to meet situations that have already arisen in the past and
are likely to arise again in future, so that speedy remedies become
available to persons affected by loss of lfe, injury and loss of
properties, public or private, as a result of riots and civil
commotions.
... ....The Law Commission of Australia has also concluded, after a
fairly evenly balanced consultation, that exemplary damages should
r5 1987 (r) scc a95 : 1987 scc (L&s) 37: AIR 1987 SC 1086
28
others on the incidents in question.
YIl.The police shall immediately inform the State
Government with reports on the events, including
damage, if any, caused.
YIII. The State Government shall prepare a report on the
police reports and other information that may be
available to it and shall file a petition including its report
in the High Court or Supreme Court as the case may be
for the Court in question to take suo motu action."
6,

be retained where the defendant "had deliberately and outrageously
disregarded the plaintiff's rights. "
15. In the absence of legislation the following guidelines are to be
adopted to assess damages:
(I) Il/herever a mass destruction to property takes place due to
protests or thereof, the High Court may issue suo motu action and
set up a machinety to investigate the damage caused and to award
compens ation re I ated t her eto.
(lI) Where there is more than one state involved, such action may be
taken by the Supreme Court.
(III) ln each case, the High Court or Supreme Court, as the case may
be, appoint a sitting or retired High Court Judge or a sitting or
retired District Judge as a Claims Commissioner to estimate the
damages and investigate I iability.
(lV) An Assessor may be appointed to assist the Claims
Commissioner.
(V) The Claims Commissionet' and the Assessor may seek
instructions from the High Court or Supreme Court as the case may
be, to summon the existing video or other recordings from private
and public sources to pinpoint the damage and establish nexus with
the perpetrators of the damage.
(YI) The principles of absolute liability shall apply once the nexus
with the event that precipitated the damage is established.
(VII) The liability will be borne by the actual perpetrators of the
crime as well as organisers of the event giving rise to the liability -
to be shared, as finally determined by the High Court or Supreme
Court as the case may be.
(VIII) Exemplary damages may be awarded to an extent not greater
than twice the amount of the damages liable to be paid.
(IX) Damages shall be assessedfor:
(a) damages to public property;
(b) damages to private property;
(c) damages causing injury or death to a person or persons;
29
G,.,

(d) Cost of the actions by the authorities and police to take
preventive and other actions.
(X) The Claims Commissioner will make a report to the High Court
or Supreme Court which will determine the liability after hearing
the parties. "
3.6. Accepting the Reports submitted by the Comrnittees, the Supreme Court
held thus:
"20. The recommendations of Justice K. T. Thomas Committee and
Mr. F. S. Nariman Committees above which have the approval of
this Court shall immediately became operative. They shall be
operative as guidelines."
(B) Kodungallur Film Society v. IJtriott o.f Indiat6
3.7 . ln Kodungallur Film Society v. Union of India, the principal relief sought
for by the petitioners was to issue directions to the States/Union of India to
strictly implement the decision of the Supreme Court in In Re: Destruction
of Public and Private Properties v. State of Andhra Pradesh.a1 In the
course of arguments, the Supreme Court took note of the following
submission made by the Shri K. K. Venugopal, the leamed Attomey
General:
"6. Mr Venugopal is unequivocal in his submission that violent
protests which lead to loss of life and damage to public and private
properties are against the spirit of democracy. He submits that
pursuant to the judgment in In Re: Destruction of Public and Private
Properties (supra), the Union of India has acivised the responden!
stotes to .follow the guidelines laid down therein vide
letter dated 6th May, 20 I 3."
ri (2018) lo scc 7 t3
{r (2009) 5 SCC 2 t2.
30 v

3.8. The Supreme Court also held:
"9. There is a broad consensus that the recommendations made and
directions given in In Re: Destruction of Public and Private
Properties (supra), at paragraph 3 hereinabove are comprehensive
to deal with the issue of large - scale destruction of private and
public properties which unwinds during violent protests and
demonstrations. We find that the Committee's recommendations
noted in the said judgment traverse the length and breadth of the
issue at hand and, if implemented in their entirety, would go a long
way in removing the bane of violence caused against persons and
property. As far as implementation of the said recommendations, is
concerned, and as stated earlier, the learned Attorney General's
submission is that the Union is mindful of the dictum in In Re;
Destruction of Public and Private Properties (supra), and has
advised the States to follow the same in its letter and spirit and also
drafted a bill for initiating legislative changes in conformity with the
recommendations of this Court, namely, The Prevention of Damage
to Public Property (Amendment) Bill, 2015, which is currently being
examined in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice. "
"For the time being, we do not wish to comment on the fficacy of
the proposed legislative changes including as to whether it would
fttlly address the points noted in the guidelines / recommendations
in In Re: Destruction of Public and Private Properties (supra). We
keep that issue open to be decided in appropriate proceedings ifand
when the occasion arises. We hope that the said Bill will be taken to
its logical end in the right earnest.
10. On the issue of whether additional measures need to be
introduced, the learned Attorney General hcts also made certain
suggestions which can be implemented as interim measures, pending
the outcome of the aforestated Bill, to fasten accountability and
prescribe timelines for the law - enforcement agencies. The same are
set out hereunder:
" 12. While the Union oJ lndia is still considering the
3l
3.9. The Supreme Court quoted the Prevention of Damage to Public Property
(Amendment) Bill, 2015 and held:
V

amendments, as an interim measure, it is suggested that this
Court may consider issuing the following directions:
a. The offence is covered under 5.3 of the PDPP Act, which
provides that whoever commits mischief by doing any act in
respect of any public property shall be punished with
imprisonment and fine. Mischief has been defined under S.
425 of the Indian Penal Code as - "whoever with intent to
cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or
damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction
ofany property, or any such change in any property or in the
situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or utility,
or affects it injuriously, commits "mischief '.
b. This Court may consider the example of the Delhi
Development Authority, where, in order to deal with illegal
encroachments, the DDA has divided the city into various
zones and placed them under dffirent officers who would be
held responsible in case there were building law violations in
their respective zones. This has had the result of improving
accountability and reduced instances of illegal
encroachment.
c. The liability for compensation has to be fixed on the
organizer(s) irrespective of whether he was himself the
perpetrator of the oct which caused the damage.
d. In addition, the actual perpetrators who caused the damage
will also be liable to pay compensation.
e. Accordingly, the State Governments may be directed to pin
the responsibility of maintoining law and order during such
protests, bands, etc. on the Senior Superintendent of police in
charge of that district. If this is done, in all future
cases, the Courts can seek a response directly from the SSP
regarding video recordings, details of FIRs filed, steps taken
etc.
f. ln addition, the Court may direct, each police station to
maintain a panel of local video operators who could be made
available at short notices to videograph the incidents of
violence and damage to public property etc.
g. Further, the States can consider setting up helplines to
specifically deal with instances of violence or damage to
property caused during such protests, and have a force that
immediately deals with complaints made on such helplines. "
): @"

3.10. The Supreme Court also issued several guidelines. It is apposite to note
that one of the guidelines relates to granting of bail, which reads as follows:
"c) A person arrestedfor either committing or initiating, promoting,
instigating or in any way causing to occur any act of violence which
results in loss of life or damage to property may be granted
conditional bail upon depositing the quantified loss caused due to
such violence or furnishing security for such quantified loss. In case
of more than one person involved in such act of violence, each one
of them shall be jointly, severally and vicariously liable to pay the
quantified loss. If the loss is yet to be quantified by the appropriate
authority, the judge hearing the bail application may quantify the
amount of tentative damages (which shall be subject to final
determination thereof by the appropriate authority) on the principle
stated in paragraph 15 of the decision in In Re: Destruction of
Public and Private Properties (supra), after hearing the submissions
of the State / agency prosecuting the matter in that regard."
3. I L The petitioners in the instant case had given certain suggestions in order to
ameliorate and curb the occurrence of such events. In this regard, certain
suggestions made in respect to reporting ofcases and police action become
noteworthy. The same have been reproduced below:
" I l. The police shall immediately conduct an investigation into the
genuineness of the audio and video content within a period of three
days and if contents are prima facie found to be true, the accused
shall be arrested again (if already released on bail) who shall
thereafter be entitled for bail only in the event of depositing the
amount commensurate with the loss/damage, caused by such act/s
directly and indirectly, as assessed by the police.
12. State shall take steps to establish sfficient number offorensic
labs to verify the authenticity of social media content and
audio/video content which may be in issue in such cases. "
JJ
G-

(C) Kosh1, Jocoh v. IJnion of Indial8
3.12. ln Koshy Jacob's case, the petitioner in the Writ petition sought direction
for implementation of guidelines issued by the Supreme Court in In Re;
Destruction of Public and Private Properties v. State of Andhra pradesh.ae
The petitioneq an Advocate, complained that he was forced to spend more
than twelve hours on road to reach his home after having been discharged
from hospital after surgery, on account of an agitation which was going on
in the place.
3.13. Referring to the decision in Re: Destruction of Public and private
Properties v. State of Andhra Pradesh, the Supreme Court held thus:
"4. Committees appointed by this Court in the above case
recommended statutory amendments for making those sponsoring
such agitations accountable and punishable under the criminal law
and also requiring preventive and remedial actions such as
videography of all the activities and award for damages. tn spite of
such recommendations, no legislation or speedy mechanism has
been put in place so far which appears to be the reason for this
petition.
5. In pursuance of notice issued by this Court in this matter,
affidavits have been filed by dffirent States as well as by Union of
India. In the alfidavitfiled by the Union of India, it is submitted that
the process has been initiated for amendment of the Prevention of
Damage to Public Property Act, 1984 in consultation with the
Ministry of Law and Justice. A draft has been prepared and
published on the website seeking comments of the public and other
stake - holders. Union of India has also sent a letter dated 6th May,
2013 to all the States and Union Tbrritories advising the action to
be laken os soon as there is a demonstration. "
18 (20t8) Il scc 756
r'q (2009) 5 SCC 2 t2.
34
hr,

3.14. During the course of arguments, the court took note of the submissions
made by the leamed Attorney General:
"6. Mr K. K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India, has
submitted that in spite of the guidelines, situations have been created
wherein peaceful agitation turns into violent, causing loss of lives
and destruction of public property. At times, central forces are
deployed to aid the law and order machinery. He fairly
states that there is undoubted need for preventive and remedial
measures to be adopted to deal with such situations. A mechanism is
necessary tofix accountability of anyfailure to take preventive steps
as well as to provide for punishing the guilty and compensation to
the victim. "
3.15. Noticing the arguments of the learned Attomey General, the Supreme
Court held:
"9. Since no law has been framed even though 8 years have passed
after the matter was dealt with by this Court in the aforesaid
judgment, the petitioner has approached this Court, as noted earlier.
10. In view of the stand in the counter ffidavit and the statement of
learned Attorney General, we do hope that the law now proposed by
the Union of India is brought into.force within a reasonable time to
address all concerned issues. Learned Attorney General has very
fairly stated that the law may provide speedy mechanism forcriminal liability, action for administrative failures as well as
remedies to the victims. A suggestion has been made that one or
more district / additional district Judges can be appointed by the
State Government in consultation with the High Court to deal with
such issue either on whole - time basis or on part - time basis, as
the situation may require. In such cases cadre strength ofthejudicial
fficers may require suitable temporary or permanent increase. This
suggestion can be considered in tlrc course of making the proposed
law."
35
6/

(D) Bharat Kumtr K. Policha v. Sttte of Kerala5t)
3. 16. In Bharat Kumar K. Palicha v. State o/'Kerala, a Full Bench of the Kerala
High Court held that calling of a bandh and holding of it is unconstitutional
and illegal.
3.17. The petitioners therein contended that apaft from denying the fundamental
rights of the citizens under Articles l9 and 2l of the Constitution of India,
with a view to purvey terror, the organisers of the bundh also indulge in
wanton acts of vandalism like destruction of Govemment property and
transport vehicles and even private cars and two wheelers.
3.18. The Full Bench held thus:
" 17. No political party or organisation can claim that it is entitled
to paralyse the industry and commerce in the entire State or Nation
and is entitled to preyent the citizens not in sympathy with its view
point, from exercising their fundamental rights or from performing
their duties for their own benefit orfor the benefit of the State or the
Nation. Such a claim would be unreasonable and could not be
accepted as a legitimate exercise of a fundamental right by a
political party or those comprising it. The claim for relief by the
petitioners in these Original Petitions will have to be considered in
this background.
18. The contention that no relief can be granted against the political
parties in these proceedings under Art.226 of the Constitution
cannot be accepted in its entirely. As indicated already, this court
has ample jurisdiction to grant a declaratory relief to the petitioners
in the presence ofthe political party respondents. This is all the more
so since the case of the petitioners is based on their fundamental
rights guaranteed by the Constitution. The State has not taken any
steps to control or regulate the bundhs. The stand adopted by the
Advocate General is that the Court cannot compel the State or the
Legislature to issue orders or make law in that regard. As we find
50AIR 1997 Ket.29l : ILR t997 (3) Ker.445 :1997 (2)Kerata Law Times 287 (F.8.).
36
6,,

that organised bodies or Associations ofregistered political parties,
by their act of calling and holding bundhs, trample upon the rights
of the citizens of the country protected by the Constitution, we are of
the view that this court has sufficient jurisdiction to declare that the
calling of a 'bundh' and the holding of it, is unconstitutional
especially since, it is undoubted, that the holding of 'bundhs, are not
in the interests of the Nation, but tend to retard the progress of the
Nation by leading to national loss production. l[/e cannot also
ignore the destruction of public and private property when a bundh
is enforced by the political parties or other organisations. l(e are
inclined to the vietv that the political parties and the organisations
which call .for such bundhs and enforce them are really liable to
compensate the Government, the public and the private citizen .for
the loss suffered by them.for such destruction. The State cannot shirk
its responsibility of taking steps to recoup and of recouping the loss
from the sponsors and organisers of such bundhs. We think, that
these aspects justify our intervention under Art. 226 of the
Constitution. In view of our discussion above, we allow these
Original Petitions to the extent of declaring that the calling for a
bundh by any association, organisation or political party and the
edorcing of that call by it, is illegal and unconstitutional. We direct
the State and its fficials, including the law enforcement agencies,
to do all that is necessary to give effect to this declaration. "
(E) Communist Party of India (M) v. Bharat Kumaf t
3.19. Herein, the Supreme Court while confirming the judgment of the High
Court of Keralain Bharat Kumar K. Palicha v. State of Kerala,,52 held that:
"There cannot be any doubt that thefundamental rights of the people
as a whole cannot be subser-vient to the claim of fundamental right
of an individual or only a section of the people. It is on the basis of
this distinction that the High Court has rightly concluded that there
cannot be any right to call or enforce a "Bandh" which interfere with
the exercise of the fundamental freedoms of other citizens, in
addition lo causing national loss in many ways. We may also add
that the reasoning given by the High Court, particularly those in
5r I998 (l) SCC 201
5r AIR 1997 Ker. 291
AtR 1998 SC 18.
ILR 1997 (3) Kel445:1997 (2) Kerala Law Times 287 (F.8.)
37
6/

Para. 12,13 and 17 for the ultimate conclusion and directions in
Para. l8 is correct with which we are in agreement. "
(F) George Kuritn v. Stnte of Keralasl
3.20. In this case, the writ petitions were filed in public interest vexed by the fact
that despite various judgments of the High Court of Kerala and the
Supreme Court, there were frequent bandhs, forced hartals and general
strikes in the State harassing general public causing trouble,
inconvenience, loss and injury to them and a situation is created by
unscrupulous, anti-national and anti-people groups who force majority of
the people not to move about and force them in illegal detention in their
own house by threat, coercion and force.
3.2 I . With respect to destruction of public property, the Full Bench held thus:
"ln the guise of hartals and general strikes, bandhs were actually
observed depriving majority of the citizens their fundamental rights
and the State was a silent spectator Many of the State owned
transport vehicles were damaged and on declaration ofhartal, State
Road Transport Corporation itself had stopped plying of the vehicles
which itself shows that even the Government is unable to protect its
own vehicles or unable to give protection to its vehicles."
3.22. The Full Bench further held:
" 10. lt is clear to us from the ffidavits and counter ffidavits filed
in those cases and past experience that whenever hartal is called by
the political parties or organizations, they are putting the State to
ransom. The fundamental rights of the citizens are violated and
Government is not able to give adequate protection to the citizens.
In the light of the past experience, it is for the persons who call
rr 2004 Kerala High Court Cases (KHC) 660 :2004 (2) Ker.LT 758 :2004 (2) Ker.LJ 88 : ILR 2004 (2) Ker
48 r(FB).
38
h,

hartals or general strikes to see that their followers are not using
force or threat for preventing others from moving about and
fundamental rights ofothers are not curtailed. Instead of stating that
milk supplies, hospital etc. will be exempted as if others will not be
allowed, in future notices calling of hartals and general strikes it
should clearly state that nobody will be compelled to participate in
the hartal or in the general strike and those who are willing to do
their normal duties, can do so. Those who want to open the shops or
ply the vehicles can do so and no persons will be prevented or
obstructed and noforce, coercion or violence will be used. It is also
learned from the past experience that even though there may not be
any call for using violence in the call for hartal, violence spreads
and people are put tofear psychosis. Therefore, for damages caused
during the strike and hartal days, people who are calling strike or
hartals are vicariously liable to pay damages as held by the Full
Bench and approved by the Apex Court in Bharat Kumar's case.
I l. State is responsible to pay damages to the citizens as damages
to the citizens are caused due to the failure of the Government to
give adequate protection. The State functionaries responsible for
culpable default of negligence ought to be made personally liable by
invoking the principle of strict liability combined with the fact that
the defence of sovereign immunity no longer available to the State
oficials. The concept of compensation by the State by invoking the
principles of strict liability was first evolved by the Supreme Court
in Rudul Sah v. State ofBihar and Another (AIR 1983 SC 1086) and
later developed in the case of Sebastian M. Hongray v. Union of
India (AIR 1984 SC 1026) follotued by a string of authorities
including Nilabati Behere v. State of Orissa and Others (1993 (2)
SCC 746) of the Apex Court. Government is unable to give
protection even to run its own vehicles. A situation is being created
so that even State Transport vehicles are not allowed to run and the
students have to write C.B.S.E., I.C.S.E. examinations etc. under
threat and in ddficult circumslances. Patients are unable to go to the
hospital and workers on daily y)ages are denied their wages etc. If
such a situation is there, it will amount to constitutional breakdown.
As admitted in the counter ffidavit, if police is unable to cope up
with the situation, they should call the help of Army. There are
sfficient provisions in the Constitution .for requesting the Army to
help. Chapter X of the Code of Criminal Procedure also prescribes
the procedure to be adopted by the authorities for maintenance of
public order and tranquility. S. 130 and l3l of the Code of Criminal
Procedure also authorize the District authorities to call the Army
39
@,/

for help. The Government should authorize the District Oficers to
call Army or para-military forces as and when necessary. (Jnless
strict measures are taken, threat to the citizens cannot be abated. It
is for the State Government to consider whether help is neededfrom
the Union Government under Art.355 of the Constitution of India if
it is unable to control the situation. It isfor the State Government to
take proper stern action to control lawlessness in the State which
may lead to constitutional brettkdown, a situation which may attract
Art.356 of the Constitution."
3.23. The Full Bench issued the fbllowing directions:
"(l) Ilhenever a hartal or a general strike is called, the Government
should take adequate measures to see that normal tife of the citizens
is not paralysed. That is to be done not by declaring holidays or
postponing examinations; but, by giving effective protection to those
who are not participating in such hartals or strikes. Government
should be able to deal with the situation with strong hands.
Considering the past experience, if the Government is feeling that
they are unable to give adequate protection, it should request the
Centre for deputing Army or para-military forces so that there
should not be any constitutional breakdown and violation of
fundamental rights of the citizens;
(2) The District Administration should be given suficient direction
to avail para-militaryforce as provided under Chapter X of the Code
of Criminal Procedure to maintain public services if law and order
problem arises during the hartal or general strike by unlawful
assembly of hartal or strike supporters,'
(3) In cases of damage to public properly, action should be taken to
recover the damages from the persons who actually cause damages
and alsofrom the political parties, organizers and persons who give
actual call for such hartal or general strikes. In view of the
happenings in the past, they cannot say that they did not visualize
such a situation which was created by anti social elements and
directions issued in this regard in Para. I8 of Bharat Kumar's case
which is affirmed by the Supreme Court shall be followed strictly
and if no proper action is taken, it should be realized from the
defaulting fficers and stern action should be taken against such
fficers;
40 G/

(4) Effective action should be taken under the Prevention of
Damages to Public Property Ac| 1984 and circular dated
17.12.2003 (produced as Ext.Rl(d) in W.P.(C) No. 20078 of 2003)
shall be implemented strictly:
(5) Those who call for hartals or strikes by whatever reason should
make it clear in their call that nobody will be compelled to
participate in the hartals or strikes, that trafic will not be obstructed
and those who are willing can go.for work and that fundamental
rights of others to move about will not be affected. They should also
instruct their supporters to see that no coercion or force is used for
compelling others to participate in the strike or hartal;
(6) With regard to the injuries and damages caused to the private
persons and their properties, Government should adequately
compensate them immediotely as Government has failed to fulfill its
constitutional obligation to protect lives and properties of the
citizens and the Government should take steps to recover the same
from the persons who caused such damages or injuries and also
from the persons and political parties or organizations who called
for such hartals or general strikes. Criminal cases also should be
taken against the offenders as well as the abettors to the offence.
Such criminal cases registered should be pursued with enthusiasm
and it should not be withdrawn merely on political pressure and
investigation should be conducted fairly not with a purpose offiling
a subsequent refer report as undetected;
(7) Government should see that an atmosphere is created so that
citizens can move about on the roads freely without fear and
vehicular trffic is not obstructed and public transport can ply
without any hindrance;
(8) Damages caused to the pttblic or private properties etc. and
recovery steps initiated should be published by the Government.
Circular dated 17.12.2003 issued by the Government regarding
recovety of damages should be implemented fully;
(9) Government should also take appropriate action against the
District Administration and Police authorities if effective steps are
not taken by them against the persons who use force or who are
trying to impose their will on others to deprive the fundamental
4l &/

3.24.
rights of majority of the citizens in the guise of hartals and general
strikes. "
(G) Jomes Mortin v. Stde of Keralda
The cases arose out of criminal appeals decided by the High Court of
Kerala. On a Bharat bandh day, some incidents took place in which two
persons lost their lives. The mill and house of the accused were set ablaze
by the activists of the political parties which made the bandh call. The
second accused opened fire at them and two persons lost their lives. The
trial court and the High Court held that the accused, the owner of a mill
and house, exceed his right ofprivate defence. The Supreme Court reversed
the judgment of the High Court, set aside the conviction and sentence and
acquitted the accused. While disposing of the case, the Supreme Court
held:
" Before we part with the case it needs to be noted that in the name
of hartal or bandh or strike no person has any right to cause
inconvenience to any other person or to cause in any manner a
threat or apprehension of risk to life, liberty, property of any citizen
or destruction of life and property, and the least any
Government or public property. Ir is high time that the authorities
concerned take serious note of this requirement while dealing with
those who destroy public property in the name of strike, hartal or
bandh. Thosewho at times may have even genuine demands to make
should not loose sight of the overall situation eluding control and
reaching unmanageable bounds endangering life, liberty and
property of citizens and public, enabling anti-social forces to gain
control resulting in all around destruction with counter productive
results at the expense of public order and public peace. No person
has any right to destroy another's property in the guise of bandh or
hartal or strike, iruespective of the proclaimed reasonableness of the
cause or the question whether there is orwas any legal sanction for
the same. The case at hand is one which led to the destruction of
5r (2004) 2 SCC 203
42 w/

property and loss of lives, because of irresponsible and illegal acts
of some in the name of bandh or hartal or strike. (Jnless those who
organize can be confident of enforcing effective control over any
possible turn ofevents, they should think nuice to hazard themselves
into such risk prone ventures endangering public peace and public
order. The question whether bandh or hartal or strike has any legal
sanctity is of little consequence in such matters. All the more so when
the days are such where even law-enforcing authorities/those in
power also precipitate to gain political advantage at the risk and
cost of their opponents. Unless such acts are controlled with iron
hands, innocent citizens are bound to suffer and they shall be the
victims of the highhanded acts of some fanatics with queer notions
of democracy and freedom of speech or association. That provides
.for no license to take law into their own hands. Any soft or lenient
approachfor such ofibnders would be an affront to rule oflaw and
challenge to public order and peace."
(II) Kerah Vyapari V1'ovasayi Ekopano Samithi v. Stute of Keralass
3.25. The Division Bench of the Kerala High Court, dealing with the aspect of
destruction of public and private properties during hartals and bundhs, held
thus:
"2l. Even in Bharat Kumar v. State of Kerala (1997 (2) KLT 287),
the Full Bench had suggested that it is for the authorities to initiate
action for recovery of the damages caused to the State property by
the supporters o.f a bundh call since no one had a right to destroy
public property at the cost of the Nation or the State. It is not seen
thatwhen destruction is caused by the supporters of hartal to public
property - the buses of the Kerala State Road Transport Corporation
and Government Ofices and institutions appear to be the prime
targets - the State or the concerned authority or Corporation has
chosen to initiate any action for recovery of the loss caused to the
exchequer or to the particular Corporation or entity, so as to
mitigate the damage caused to public property. lt is argued by the
petitioners that i/'the State and the various authorities are prompt in
taking such action for recovery ofsuch damages, the enthusiasm for
destroying public property would be considerably dampened and a
direction may be issued to the State and its officers and the
55 AIR 2000 Ker. 389 : 2000 Kerala High Coun Case (KHC 382) : 2000 (2) Ker.LT 430
43
ILR 2000 (3) Ker. 173
W

Corporations under it to take action for recovery of damages.
Learned Government Pleader submitted that the destruction of
public property was not justified but the State has desisted from
taking action for recovery of the damages caused because of the
dfficulty in identifying the persons who actually caused the
damages. The plea that the miscreants can never be identified
cannot be accepted. But assuming that this argument of the
Government Pleader is correct, even then, it is clear that those who
have calledfor the hartal would be liablefor the damage caused to
public property and we do not see why they cannot be sued on the
principle of compensation or on tort. Obviously, the fficers of the
State have the duty to protect and preserve public property. The
performance of that duty also involyes the recovery of compensation
when a public or State asset is wantonly destroyed. So, in addition
to initiating action under the Penal law including the Prevention of
Damage to Public Property Act, 1984, the State can also sue the
wrong doers and their instigators for recovery of damages.
25. Similarly, the submission of the petitioners in O. P. 18478 of
1999 that organisations have no right to create a blockade of
Municipal office so as to prevent people from going to these ofices
for attending to their business, also deserves to be accepted once we
accept the principle that no party or organisation has a right to
compel others to toe its line unless these others want to do it
voluntarily. On that principle, it has necessarily to be held that the
contesting respondents in O. P. 18478 of 1999 have no right to call
for a blockade of the office of the local authority so as to prevent
people from approaching that authority in exercise of their right of
free movement and as part of their personal freedom.
26. Similar is the situation regarding the plying of private vehicles
on the roads on the day of hartal. It is not proper for the authorities
to say that when people throw stones at vehicles they may not be
able to prevent lhe same. Obviously, the police authorities have
sufficient power under law including the Police Act, to take
preventive steps in that regard. It is for them to resort to such steps
to ensure that citizens are not prevented from using the roads or
taking out their vehicles on to the roads for their own bus inesses and
in exercise of their right of .free movement guaranteed by the
Constitution."
44 N",

3.26. The Division Bench issued the following direction, among other:
"14'e direct the State, District Collectors, all other fficers of the
State and Corporations owned or controlled by the State to take
immediate and prompl action, for recovery of damages in cases
where pursuant to a call /br hartal, public property or property
belonging to the Corporation is damaged or destroyed, from the
perpetrators of the acts leading to destruction/damage and those
who have issued the call for hartal."
(I) The State of Kerolo u K. Ajiths6
3.27. The incident involved in the case took place in the Kerala Legislative
Assembly in 2015 when the then Finance Minister was presenting the
budget for the financial year 201 5- I 6.
3.28. On l3 March,20l5, the then Finance Minister was presenting the budget
for the financial year 2015-2016 in the Kerala Legislative Assembly. The
accused, who at the time were Members of the Legislative Assembly
belonging to the parfy in opposition, disrupted the presentation of the
budget, climbed over to the Speaker's dais and damaged fumiture and
articles including the Speaker's chaiq computer, mike, emergency lamp and
electronic panel, causing a loss of Rs. 2,20,093. A crime was registered for
offences punishable under Section 447 and Section 427 read with Section
34 of IPC and Section 3( I ) of the Prevention of Damage to Public Property
Act. On completion of investigation, final report was submitted and
cognizance was taken by the Chief Judicial Magistrate. At that stage, an
application was filed by the Public Prosecutor under Section 321 CrPC
seeking sanction to withdraw the case on the ground that the 'protest' by
the MLAs was protected by the immunities and privileges under Article
56 AIR 202 t SC 3594
45
V

194(3) of the Constitution and that an offence which is committed in the
Assembly, during a session or in its vicinity by MLAs, cannot be registered
by the police without the permission of the Speaker. The Chief Judicial
Magistrate declined to give consent to the application of the prosecutor.
Aggrieved, a revision petition was filed before the High Court. The High
Court dismissed the petition holding that the conduct of the MLAs did not
warrant the invocation of the immunities and privileges granted to MLAs
and that there is no provision that mandated the police to seek permission
or sanction of the Speaker befbre registering a crime against the MLAs.
The decision of the High Couft was called in question before the Supreme
Court. The Supreme Coun dismissed the appeals.
3.29. The Supreme Court held:
"50. The gravity of the offence involving a destruction of public
property was considered by this Court in Re: Destruction of Public
and Private Properties (2009 (2) KHC 374 : 2009 (1) KLD 664 :
2009 (2) KLT ss2 : (2009) s SCC 212 : AIR 2009 SC 2266 : 2009
CrilJ 2807 : 2009 (5) SCALE 638 : (2009) 2 SCC (Cril 629), where
it took suo motu cognizance to remedy the large - scale destruction
of public and private properties in agitations, bandhs, hartals and
other forms of 'protest'. The Court formed two committees chaired
by Justice K. T. Thomas (former Judge of this Court) and Mr. Fali
S. Nariman, Senior Counsel and adopted the recommendations of
both the committees in laying down specific guidelines for
investigation and prosecution of offinces involving destruction of
public property, assessment of damages and determination of
compensation in cases involving destruction of property. In the more
recent decision Kodungallur Film Society and Another v. Union of
India (2018 (5) KHC 297 : (2018) 10 SCC 713), this Court noted
that the guidelines in Re: Destruction of Public and Private
Properties (supra) have been considered by the Union of India and
a draft Bill for initiaring legislative changes along the lines of the
recommendations is under cons ideration. The Court also issued
guidelines on preventive measures to curb mob violence,
determining compensation and fixing liability for offences, and in
46 h"'

regard to the responsibility of police fficials for investigation of
such crimes.
51. Based on the above, it is evident that there has been a growing
recognition and consensus both in this Court and Parliament that
acts of destruction of public and private property in the name of
protests should not be tolerated. Incidentally, the Kerala Legislative
Assembly also enacted the Kerala Prevention of Damage to Private
Property and Payment of Compensation Act, 2019 (Act No.09 of
2019) to complement the central legislation, Prevention of Damages
to Public Property Act, 1984, with a special focus on private
property.
52. The persons who have been named as the accused in the FIR in
the present case held a responsible elected ffice as MLAs in the
Legislative Assembly. ln the same manner as any other citizen, they
are subject to the boundaries of lautful behaviour set by criminal
law. No member of an elected legislature can claim either a privilege
or an immunity to stand above the sanctions of the criminal law,
which applies equally to all citizens. The purpose and object of the
Act of 1984 was to curb acts of vandalism and damage to public
property including (but not limited to) destruction and damage
caused during riots and public protests.
59. On the touchstone of these principles, there can be no manner of
doubt that the CJM was justified in declining consent for the
withdrawal of the prosecution under 5.321. The acts complained of
which are alleged to constitute o/fences punishable under 5.425,
5.427 and 5.447 of the IPC and under 5.3(l) of the Prevention of
Damages to Public Property Act, 1984 are stated to have been
committed in the present case on the Jloor of the State Legislature.
Committing acts of destruction of public property cannot be equated
with either the freedom of speech in the legislature or withforms of
protest legitimately available to the members of the opposition. To
allow the prosecution to be withdrawn in the face of these
allegations, in respect ofwhich upon investigation afinal report has
been submitted under S. 173 of the CrPC and cognizance has been
taken, would amount to an interference with the normal course of
justice for illegitimate reasons. Such an action is clearly extraneous
to the vindication of the law to which all organs of the executive are
bound. Hence, the mere finding of the High Court that there is no
absence of good faith would not result in allowing the application
47w

as a necessary consequence, by ignoring the cause of public justice
and the need to observe probity in public life. The members of the
State Legislature have in their character as elected representatives
a public trust impressed upon the discharge of their duties. Allowing
the prosecution to be withdrawn would only result in a singular
result, which is that the elected representatives are exempt.from the
mandate of criminal law. This cannot be countenanced as being in
aid ofthe broad ends oJ'publicjustice."
(J) Hemanth Kumor v. Sub Inspector of PolicesT
3.30. The offences alleged against the petitioners/accused were under Section
143, Section 147 and Section 452 read with Section 149 of the IPC and
Section 3(l ) of the PDPP Act. The prosecution case was the following: On
l2-08-2011, the accused forcibly entered into the Govemment Vocational
Higher Secondary School, Chathamangalam in connection with a political
strike by one of the students' unions and the accused destroyed the
fumiture, computer etc. belonging to the school, thereby causing a loss of
Rs.23,000/- to the State. The petitioners were not students of the
Govemment Vocational Higher Secondary School, Chathamangalam, but
they were outsiders. It was submitted by the leamed counsel for the
petitioners that though they were outsiders, they were also students in some
other educational institutions.
3.3 1. The Kerala l-ligh Court held:
"6. The allegation is that the petitioners destroyed the valuable
articles available in the school, which are intendedfor the use of the
students. It is stated that the petitioners are also students. If so, they
must understand the value and utility of the articles and materials
available in the school. The petitioners had no business to enter into
the compound of the school where the offence was committed.
5' 20'12 CriLJ 1297:2011 (4) Kerala High Court Cases (KHC 89: 201 I (4) Ker.LT 288
48
ILR 201I (4) Ker. 26l
w,

Therefore, their alleged entry was illegal. Destruction of public
property is to be viewed very seriously. Very often, under the guise
of strikes, hartals and other political adventures, public properties
are being destroyed unmindful of the consequences. Public property
means the property belonging to the public. Every citizen has a right
in the public property. lt cannot be destroyed by anybody under the
guise of strike or protest, whatever may be the reason for the strike
or protest. Even if the strike or protest isfor a genuine cause, nobody
can say that destruction of public property would be part of that
genuine cause. There can be no justificationfor destruction of public
property, whatever may be the cause sought to be espoused for the
same. "
8. I am of the vierv that in cases where public property is destroyed,
the value ofthe same or even more should be directed to be deposited
by the accused as a condition for granting bail to them. Otherwise,
the loss sustained to the State would not be realised at all. Courts
cannot be mute spectators to the wanton destruction of public
property. Nobody should be allowed to destroy public property and
claim success of the strikes on the basis of the quantum of loss
sustained to the State. It is easy to destroy; but it is not so easy to
make.
9. lf the accused are found not guilty and they are accordingly
acquitted, they would be entitled to get refund of the amount
deposited by them. If the Court comes to the conclusion that the
accused are liable to pay any fine, the amount in deposit can be
utilised for payment of fine. "
3.32. The Bail Application was allowed on conditions. One of the conditions was
the following:
"The petitioners shall together deposit a sum ofRs.50,000/- (Rupees
Fifty Thousand only) before the Court of the Judicial Magistrate of
the First Class, Kunnamangalam. The petitioners shall be released
on bail only on such deposit. If the petitioners were to be acquitted
finding that they are not guilty, they would be entitled to get refund
of the amount. Otherwise, the amount would be at the disposal of the
Court trying the case. "
49
t+-

(K) Hemachondran M. T. Cgl Komalesh v. Sub Inspector of PolicesE
3.33. The offences alleged against the accused were under Sections 143, 147,
148,332,333,326,506(i), and 307 read with Section 149 ofthe Indian
Penal Code and Section 3(2)(e) of the Prevention of Damage to Public
Property Act. The prosecution alleged that about 25 political activists
attacked the police party resulting in injuries to the policemen. The mob
also destroyed a policejeep. The accused persons were arrested. The High
Court considered their bail applications.
3.34. The Kerala High Court held, inter alia,thus:
"24. The PDPP Act was enacted with a view to curb acts of
vandalism and damage to public property, including destruction and
damage caused during riots and public commotion. The PDPP Act
is an Act to providefor prevention ofdamage to public property and
for the motters connected therewith. The Act
defines "public property". 5.2 (a) of the PDPP Act provides that
unless the context otherwise requires, "mischief' shall have the same
meaning as in 5.425 of the Indian Penal Code. Chapter WII of the
Indian Penal Code deals with offences against property. 5.425 to
440 of the Indian Penal Code deal with "mischief'. Punishment
under these Sections vary from imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three months to a term which may extend to ten years.
Irrespective of the term of imprisonment as punishment, all the
offences under Chapter XVII ofthe IPC are covered by 5.a37 (3)
CrlPC. 5.5 of the PDPP Act provides that "no person accused or
convicted ofan offence punishable underS.3 or 4 shall, ifin custody,
be released on bail or on his own bond unless the prosecution has
been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such
release. The fourth proviso to 5.437 CrIPC provides for opportunily
of hearing to the Public Prosecutor only if the offence is punishable
with death, imprisonment "fo, l,fn, or imprisonment for seven years
or more. 5.6 of the PDPP Act states that the provisions of the Act
shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the provisions of
any other law .for the time being in force. The scheme of the
58 2012 CriLJ 1328:2011 (4) KHC 689 :201I (4) KLI 841 : ILR 20ll (4) Ker. 841
50 6,,,,

PDPPAct when considered alongwith 5.437 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, it would be clear that in the matter of granting bail, a
rigorous approach is contenrplated when the offences alleged are
under the PDPP Act. Such rigorous approach is required in the
matter of imposing conditions for granting bail also. A conditionfor
deposit of the loss sustained to the Government as a condition for
granting bail to the accused would be justified under 5.437 and
5.439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The decision of the
Supreme Court in In Re Destruction of Public &Private Properties
v. State ofAndhra Pradesh 2009 (2) KLT 552 : 2009 (5) SCC2l2,
2009 (2) KHC 374 : AIR 2009 SC 2266 : 2009 (t) KLD 664 : 2009
CriLJ2807 : 2009 (5) SCALE 638 would also support such a view.
For the reasons mentioned above, I am not inclined to accept the
contention of the Petitioners that the decision in Hemanth Kumar
and Others v. Sub lnspector of Police, 2011 (4)KHC 89 : 201I (4)
KLT 288 : 201t (2) KLD 701 : 201 t (4) Ku 296 : ILR 20t l (4)Ker.
261 requires recons ideration.
25. As rightly pointed out by the State Prosecutor, destruction of
public property cannot always be compensated in terms of money.
For example, if the documents kept in a Village Office, Taluk Office,
Collectorate or Surveryor's Office are destroyed, the public would
be put to untold misery. Even the Civil Courts wouldfind it dfficult
to decide the civil disputes between parties if such documents are
destroyed. The after effect of such destruction would last even for
several decades. The actual loss caused by such destruction could
not be estimated in terms of money. A rigorous approach is required
in the matter of granting bail and also in the matter of imposing
conditions while granting bail, in the cases involving destruction of
public property. Otherwise, the object sought to be achieved by the
PDPP Act would become illusot'y. "
3.35. The prosecution case was that the petitioner demolished the
bund of a lift irrigation canal and caused a loss of Rs. I ,21 ,000 to the
Government. The petitioner/accused filed application seeking pre-arrest
r'' 2019 (5) KHC 467 :2019 () r\r1124 : ILR 2020 (l) Ker.66
51
(L) (Jmmer P. C. u State of Kertlase
h.,

bail before the Court of Session, Manjeri. The leamed Sessions Judge
allowed the application on certain conditions. One of the conditions was
that the petitioner shall deposit a sum ofRs. 1,21,000 in the court below
which is equal to the amount of loss caused to the Government. Aggrieved
by the aforesaid condition, the accused approached the High Court under
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for modifring / deleting it.
3.36. The High Court dismissed the petition, relying on the decisions of the
Kerala High Court in Hemanth Kumar v. Sub Inspector of Policeio and
Hemachandran M. T. @ Kamalesh v. Sub Inspector of Police.6l
(M) Shanif K. r,. St e of Kerola62
3.37. The prosecution case was that disciplinary action was initiated by the
Principal of a college against certain students for
indulging in ragging and for collecting money without receipts. This was
questioned by a group ofstudents owing allegiance to a particular students'
organisation. The Principal,, however, did not budge to their strong arm-
twisting tactics. Instead of pursuing their grievance in a legal manner, the
accused nos. 1to 5 formed an unlawful assembly and in prosecution of
their common object, trespassed into the college premises and went on a
rampage. They destroyed glass panes of about 75 windows and brought
down the notice boards installed in the college campus. The public address
microphone and equipment, two computer monitors, two desktops, LED
display boards and a modem were destroyed. They then targeted their
attention to two cars which were parked inside the college, one of which
60 2012 CriLJ 129'l :2011 (4) Kerala High Court Cases (KHC) 89
61 2012 CriLJ 1328 : 201I (4) KHC 6E9.
6:2018 (5) KHC 272:2018 (4) KLT 766 : ILR 2018 (4) Ker 982.
52
V

was of the college Principal. After causing wanton destruction, they left the
campus.
3.38. Disposing of the Bail Application, the Kerala High Court held:
"8. At the same time, thefact that the applicants and the lJnion they
represent are responsible for initiating, promoting and instigating
the violence inside the campus persuades me to impose a condition
directing them to deposit a portion of the quantified loss caused due
to such violence. Necessary directions and guidelines have been
issued by the Apex Court in Destruction of Public and Private
Property, In re v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Others, 2009 (2)
KHC 374 : 2009 (5)SCC 212 : 2009 (l) KLD 664 : 2009 (2) KLT
552 : AIR 2009 SC 2266 : 2009 CriIJ 2807 : 2009 (5) SCALE 638
: 2009 (2) SCC (Cri) 629 with a vie'A) to put an end to the rampant
destruction of public and private properties in the name of
agitations, bandhs, hartals, etc.. In continuation thereto, in
Kodungallur Film Societyv. Union of India, 2018 KHC 6775 : 2018
SCC Online 1719 the Apex Court had issued guidelines to goyern
the measures that are required to be taken in addition to the
recommendations / directions in In re: Destruction of Public and
Private Properties (supra)....... "
9. Thus there cannot be any doubt that the applicants herein are
entitled to conditional bail only upon deposit of the proportionate
quantified loss caused due to such violence. The total loss has been
tentatively calculated by the Investigating Officer as Rs.2,55,000/-
as is evident from the order passed by the learned Magistrate. After
going through the materials, I concur with the tentative calculation
ofthe loss and it appears to be reasonable. The amount deposited as
aforesaid can be used to mitigate the loss and damages caused to
the college as per the provisions of the Code at the appropriate
stage. The F.I.R in the instant case shows thatfive persons have been
arrayed as the accused. The applicants are thus bound to deposit a
sum ofRs.50,000/- each before thejurisdictional Court."
3.39. One of the conditions for granting bail was the following:
53
WY/

" l). The applicants shall deposit a sum of Rs.50,000/- each before
the Court having jurisdiction. lf after trial, they are acquitted of all
charges, the amount shall be refunded or else the amount will be at
the disposal of the Court trying the case for payment of
compensation and for mitigation of damages. "
(N) Amit Sahni (Shtheen Btgh, In re) v. Stote6s
3.40. The Supreme Court in the case of Amit Sahni (Shaheen Bagh, In re) v.
State,6l taking a dim view of occupying public ways for protests made
fol lowing observati ons-
" 17. However, while appreciating the existence of the right to
peaceful protest against a legislation (keeping in mind the words of
Pulitzer Prize winner, Walter Lippmann, who said "ln a democracy,
the opposition is not only tolerated as constitutional, but must be
maintained because it is indispensable " ) , we have to make it
unequivocally clear that public ways and public spaces cannot be
occupied in such a manner and that too indefinitely. Democracy and
dissent go hand in hand, but then the demonstrations expressing
dissent have to be in designated places alone. The present case was
not even one of protests taking place in an undesignated area, but
was a blockage of a public way which caused grave inconvenience
to commuters. We cannot accept the plea of the applicants that an
indeterminable number of people can assemble whenever they
choose to protest. K.K. Mathew, J. in Himat Lal case [Himat Lal K.
Shahv.State, (1973) ISCC 227:1973 SCC (Cril 280J had
eloquently observed that : (SCC p. 248, para 70)
"70. ... Streets and public parks exist primarily for other
purposes and the social interest promoted by untrammelled
exercise offreedom ofutterance and assembly in public street
must yield to social interest which prohibition and regulation
of speech are designed to protect. But there is a constitutional
dffirence between reasonable regulation and arbitrary
exclusion. "
54
6r (2020) l0 scc 439. N,

18. Furthermore, we live in the age of technologt and the internet
where social moyements around the world have swiftly integrated
digital connectivity into their toolkit; be it for organising, publicity
or effective communication. Technolog,,, howeyer in a near
paradoxical manner, works to both empower digitally fuelled
movements and at the same time, contributes to their apparent
weaknesses. The ability to scale up quickly, for example, using
digilal infrastructure has empowered movements to embrace their
often leaderless aspirations and evade usual restrictions of
censorship; howeven the /lip side to this is that social media
channels are often fraught with danger and can lead to the creation
of highly polarised environments, which often see parallel
conversations running with no constructive outcome evident. Both
these scenarios were witnessed in Shaheen Bagh, which storted out
as a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act, gained
momentum across cities to become a movement of solidarity for the
women and their cause, but came with its fair share of chinks - as
has been opined by the interlocutors and caused inconvenience of
commuters.
19. We have, thus, no hesitation in concluding that such kind of
occupation of public ways, whether at the site in question or
anryhere else for protests is not acceptable and the administration
ought to take action to keep the areas clear o.f encroachments or
obstructions. "
(O) Kaniz Falimo v. Contmissioner of Police6'
3.41. This was a review petition seeking review of the order delivered in Amit
Sahni (Shaheen Bagh, In Re) v. Stote.The same was dismissed as the court
was of the opinion that the impugned order did not suffer from any error
apparent warranting its reconsideration. The Court observed that:
" ll/e have considered the earl ier judic ial pronouncements and
recorded our opinion that the Constitutional scheme comes with a
right to protest and express dissent but with an obligation to have
65 Review Petition (Civil) Diary No(s). 2455212020 in C.A. No. 3282/2020.
55

certain duties. The right to protest csnnol be anytime and
everywhere. There may be some spontaneous protests but in ctse o
prolonsed dissenl or Drolesl, there cfinnot be continued occupolion
of ouhlic oloce lins rishts of otlters. "
(emphasis added)
56
V

4. STATUTORY PROVISIONS AND JUDICIAL DECISIONS
RELATING TO THE ISSUE OF WILT'UL OBSTRUCTION
4.1 . Wilful obstruction is a tough situation to define. It can be understood as a
situation where a public way or place is obstructed wilfully, thus disturbing
the normal course of public life at that place. There are several aspects of
obstruction including the location, permanence, reason for such obstruction
among others. Mostly, such obstructions are put in place with a view to
compel the administration to comply with the demands of the group of
protestors who have resorted to such obstruction.
4.2. Before going into the jurisprudence as to whether such acts can be
criminalised or restricted/regulated by law, a look at the current legal
scheme is important, considering the backdrop that right to protest is a right
recognised under Article 19 of the Constitution. There is lack of a
comprehensive legislation or a general law on wilful obstruction. There are
specific laws dealing with specific situations and subject matters. In this
regard, two legislations specifically provide that wilful obstruction can
indeed constitute an offence,viz.,the National Highways Act, 1956 and the
Railways Act,, 1989.
(A) Nrrtionul Highwoys Act, 1956
4.3. Section 88 of the National Highways Act, I 956 reads as follows:
"88- Punishment for mischief by injury to national highway. '
Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which renders or which
he knows to be likely to render anv national highway referred to in
sub-section (l) of section 8A impassable or less safe for travelling
or conveying proper0), shall be punishedwith imprisonment of either
57 \,,

description for a term which may extend tofive years, or with afine,
or with both. "
4.4. The Tripura High Court dealt with the question of whether
obstruction/blocking can lead to an offence under Section 8B of the
National Highways Act, 1956.66 The Court noted that in order to appreciate
the arguments of the petitioners relating to their rights under Article I 9 of
the Constitution, it was relevant to identifo the place where the agitation
had taken place. It noted that the cause of action and unlawful assembly
was at National Highway-08. The Court, thereafter, noted that:67
"... 10. In view of the specific prohibition under Section 88 of the
National Highway Act, 1956, the action of the petitioners in the
manner in which they have blocked the National Highway cannot be
appreciated. ln the broader aspect with regard to Article l9 of the
Constitution of India is concerned, there is no doubt that the
petitioners are having their full fundamental rights and liberty to
express their freedom ofspeech and as well as assemble peacefully
without arms. The said .fundamental right is granted by way of
reasonable restrictions. ln view of the said restrictions, Section 8B
of the National Highway Act comes into play. llthether ony violence
hos taken ploce and whether it was an unlowful assembly is
immoleriol bul once the Notionil Highway itself has been blocked
by the petitioners it amounts to a clear violation of Section 88 of
the Notionol Highway Act and the petitioners cannot claim
immunity under Article l9(1)(o)(b) of the Constitution of Indio.
Further, no document is placed before this Court to say that in order
to exercise their rights under Article l9 of the Constitution of lndia,
the petitioners have approached any competent authority seeking
permission to exercise their fundamental right by identifuing the
place, time, and date for their assembly. In absentia, any assembly
in contravention to Section 88 of the National Highway Act and also
unlawful assembly at any public place, this Court feels that it is a
gross violation of Article (19)(1)(a)(b) and misconceiving the
fundamental rights " (emphasis added)
6 Tripuro People's Front v. Stqte ofTripura, (W.P. (Crl.) No. 0212021)
67 ld
58
s(,/

4.5. Prior to the consideration by the Tripura High Court, the Rajasthan High
Court, in RaTveer Singhv. State of Rajasthan6s, while consideringthe scope
of Section 88 of the National Highways Act, 1956, held that blocking the
same would amount to an offence under the said section. The relevant
portion is reproduced below:
"...5. A bare reading of the said proyision reveals that any act, by
which, the National Highway is made impassable or less safe.for
travelling or conveying property is an offence punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years, or with afine or with both.
6. A bare reading of the FIR reveals that the petitioner and his
companions blocked the National Highway by putting stones, bricks
and vehicles etc. on the road. As a result of the conduct/act of the
accused, the National Highway became impassable and less safe for
the public for travelling and the property also could not be conveyed
thereon properly. The act of the accused thus definitely is covered
under the purview of the offence defined under Section 88 of the
National Highways Act, 1956.
7. As a result of the aforesaid discussion, this Court has no hesitation
in arriving at a conclusion that the accused petitioner as well as his
companions are prima facie responsible for the offence under
Section 88 of the National Highways Act, 1956."
4.6. Similarly, the Gauhati High Court had commented on the issue of road
blockades as part ofthe larger call for 'bandhs'by observing that blocking
a national highway would be an offence under the National Highways Act,
1956 as enforcing a bandh or blockade may attract Section 8B ofthe said
Act.6e
(B) Railwoys Act, 1989
4.7. Coming to the Railways Act, 1989, multiple provisions need to be adverted
to in the context of the present issue. Section 146 criminalises obstruction
59
68 Rajveer Singh v. State of Rajasthan,20l2 SCC Online Raj 3624.
6e Lower Assam lnter District Stage Cqrriage Bus Owner's Association y, Stqte ofAssam,2019 SCC Online Cau
1482.
6-,

of a railway servant from performing his duties.70 Section 147 provides for
the punishment of the offence of trespass and refusal to discontinue such
trespass.Tr Section 150 elucidates the offence of maliciously wrecking or
attempting to wreck a train and the punishment thereof.T2 Section 151
criminalises damage and destruction to certain railway properties.T3
Section 174 makes the obstruction of a running train an offence.Ta
10 146. Obsttucting railway servant in his duties.- If ony person wilfully obstructs or preyents any railway
servanl in the discharge of his dulies. he shall he punishable with imprisonment for a term which muy extend to
six monlhs, or withJine which mdy extend to one thousond rupees, or with both.
1t 147. Tresposs snd rclusal to desi$ frun tespass- l) If a person enters upon or into dny pqrt o{ a railway
without l$ul authority, or hoving lowfully entered upon or into such part misuses such prcperty or refuses to
leave, he shall be punishqble with inprisonmenl for a term v,hich mt ) e\tend to six uonths, or with Jine which
may exlend lo one thousand rupees, or with both.
Provided that in the absence ofspecial and adequdte reqsons to the conlrqry lo be mentioned in thejudgtnent of
the Court, such punishmenl shall not be less than qfine o{Jive hundred rupees.
2) Any person refered lo in sub-section (l) nay be renoted.f|ou lhe railwtw by any railwqy servqnt or by any
other person whon such railwqt servant mqy c.tll to his qid.
11 t50. Maliciously wrecking or otlem?ting lo wrcck s truht. (t) Subject to the provisions oJ'sub-section (2), if
any person unlolfully,
(q) puts or lhrows upon or across any railway, ony wood, slone or other maller or thing; or
(b) lakes up, removes, loosens or displctces any rail, sleeper or olher matter or things belonging to any railwoy:
(c) turns, moves, unlocks or diverts afi) poinls or other nachinery belonging to dny railwdy; or
(d) makes or shov,s, or hides or renroves, uny signol or light upon or near to any railway: or
(e) does or cdu^\es to be done ot altempts to do any other act or thing in relation to any railway, with intent or
with knowledge thot he is likely to endanger the saJety oJ any person trayelling on or being upon the rail*,ay, he
sholl be punishable with imprisonmenl.for lift, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend lo ten
yeqrs:
Provided thql in the absence ofspecial and adequate reasons to the contrdry to be mentioned in thejud4nent of
lhe courl, where a person is punishoble with rigorous imprisontenl, such imprisonment shall not be less than
(a) three years, in the case of a conviction for the first offence: and
(b) setenyears, in the case ofcomticlionfor the second or suhsequent olfence.
(2) lf any person unlawfully does atry oct or thing referred to in any ofthe clattses ofsub-section (l)
(a) with intent to cquse the death ofony'person and lhe doing ofsuch act or thing causes the death ofany person:
(b) with knowledge thot such act or thing is so imminently dangerous that it m st in all probability cause the death
of any person or such bodily injury to qny person as is likely to couse the death of such person, he shall be
punishable with death or imprisonment.for life.
1i l5l. Damtge lo ot deslruclion of ce ain railway prupe ies. - (l) lJ'any person, wilh intenl to cause, or
knov,ing lhal he is likely to cause damage or destruction to any property of a railway referred to in sub-seclion
(2), cuuses byfire, explosive substance or otherwise, dantage to such property or destruction ofsuch property, he
shall be punishable with imprisonmentfor a term which may exlend lofive yedrs, or withfine, or with both.
(2) The properlies oJ a railway referred to in sub-section (l) are roilway track, bridges, stdtion buildings qnd
installations, carriages ot ')ogons, locomotives, signallittg, telecommunicotions, electic trqction and hlock
equipments and such other properties as the Centrql Government heing of the opinion thqt dqmqge thereto or
destruction thereofis likely to endanger the operotion of o rctilwal,, moy, lry notifcation, specify
14 174, Obsttucting running of train, etc- If any railway servant (Ilhether on d ty or otherwise) or any olher
person obstructs or causes lo be obstructed or attempts to obstruct qny train or other rolling stock upon a railwqt, -
a) by squatting or picketing or during any rail roko agitqtion or bondh; or
b) by keepingwithoul quthorily ony rolling stock on the railway; or
60 W,,

4.8. The Madras High Court had occasion to deal with the above offences. In
Ezhilarasan v. The State,15 the Court held:
"7. The combined reading of these provisions makes it clear that
squatting on a railway track and obstructing the running of train is
an offence punishable under this Act. The submission of the learned
counsel for the petitioner that petitioner is not part of the agitating
member and that he did not squat on the plaform No. l, cannot be
considered now in the absence of any tangible and acceptable
material shown to the Court. "
4.9. The Gauhati High Court also commented on rail blockades as part of a
larger call for 'bandhs', observing that "enforcing a railway blockade
would attract provisions of the Railways Act, 1989 ".76 Obstructing or
preventing any railway servant from attending to his duties would attract
Section 146, while trespassing into railway property would be an offence
under Section 147.77 In addition, in case of violence or even anticipated
violence where there is an attempt to wreck a train or damage/destroy
railway property, Sections 150 and 15,l would become applicable.Ts In case
of any attempt to cause hurt to railway passengers or which endangers
safety ofrailway passengers, Sections 152 and 153 may be attracted.Te That
apart, in the event of any railway blockade or bandh obstructing or
attempting to obstruct running of trains etc., Section 174 would be
attracted.8o
c) by tanpe.;r* *7h, discoruteclirtg ot' inlerfering in any olher mqnner wilh its hose pipe or lanpering*ith signal
gear or othcrv'ise, he shall bc punishable with imprisonment for u tcrm v,hich nu!- exlend lo lrro yeors, ot n,ilh
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.
'5 Ezhilurusan v. The St.tte,Ctl. O.P No. 261I of2023.
16 Lower Assam Inter District Stage Carriage Bus Owner's Associotion v. State ofAssam,20l9 SCC OnLine Cau
t482
71 ld.
1" l rl-
1e ld.
80 ld.
6l
6-'

4.10. In many of the circumstances, such obstructions are either to achieve an
aim which relates to an individual or a srnall group; which is ordinarily
much smaller in comparison to the group to which inconvenience is caused
due to such obstruction. The advocates of individual rights or the rights of
such smaller groups may term such obstructions a necessary evil, but it has
to be understood that a balance has to be struck between individual rights
(smaller protesting groups treated as individuals in contrast to larger
groups) and group rights.
4.12. There may be situations where a road is not a designated national highway,
but the blockade of the same may lead to considerable loss to the general
public due to restrictions on mobility of people and goods. There may be
other possible scenarios where such blockade or obstruction is not of a
road, but of a public place of importance' In all such situations, there might
not be actual damage in terms of darnage to public property, but the loss in
sr See, l// lndiq Bank Enployees Associution v. National lndustial Tribunal. AIR 1962 SC l7l; Kanesh\rar
Singh v. Stote of Bihar, AIR 1962 SC ll66; Rodhey Shyan Sharnta v. Pos! Master General, AIR 1965 SC 3 I l.
81 iee, Destruition oJ'Public and Priv(tte Properties. ln Re v. State ol An<lhra Prodesh (2O09) 5 SCC 212;
Communist Party of lndio (M) v. Bharat Kumar (1998) I SCC 201 (afllrming Bharat Kumar K. Palicho v. Srare
oJ Kcrala. AIR 1997 Ker 291).
62
4.11. It would be apt to quote Sydney Harris herein who opined, "Once we
assuage our conscience by calling something a 'necessary evil', it begins
to look more and more necessary and less and less evil. ". The rights under
Anicle l9 of the Constitution include right to protest, however, the said
right does not include the right to strike.sr The Supreme Court, in a catena
of decisions, has held that calling for all out 'bandhs' is illegal and
unconstitutional.82 The rights under Article I 9( I )(a) and (b) are also subject
to reasonable restrictions under Article 19(2) and (3) respectively, both of
which include 'public order'as a ground to impose such restrictions by law.
h",

terms of inconvenience, delay, opportunity, time etc. cannot be ignored.
Furtheq in light of the above, attention may also be drawn to 'The Kerala
Prevention of Damage to Private Property and Payment of Compensation
of Act, 2019'. Under the said Act, the definition of 'damaging act' includes
blockade of road traffic.83
4. 13. In order to balance the conflicting rights, resort may be taken to the scheme
contemplated inArticle l9 itself. There is no denial that people have a right
to protest, but such protests must be held at designated places, as held by
the Supreme Court in Amit Sahni (Shaheen Bagh, In re) v. State.84
4. 14. Furthermore, the expression used in Clauses (2) and (3) of Article l9 is 'in
the interest of public order', which is broader than 'maintenance of public
order', which means that a law can be made addressing not just instances
directly intended to incite disorder, but also those that have the tendency to
lead to disorder.85 When it is well established that restriction can include
anticipatory action to prevent disruption or disorder,86 then there is no
ground to argue that a law cannot be made restricting an actual disruption
or disorder-which is not a lawful assembly.
4. 15. While wilful obstruction of national highways or the railways may be
covered as an offence under the National Highways Act, 1956 and the
Railways Act, 1989, it is pertinent to note that the scope of these specific
legislations is very limited as they apply to only to the cases where such an
incident has taken place on a designated national highway or railway.
8r The Kerala Prevention ofDamage to Public Property and Payment ofCompensation ofAct,2019, sec.2(a).
84 (2020) I0 scc 439.
85 See, Romji Lal Modiv. State of U.P, AIR 1957 SC 620.
86 Babulal Pdrate y. Stqte of Maharashtra, AIR l96l SC 884 Mqdhu Limaye v. Sub-Sivisional Magistute,
Monglryr AIR l97l SC 2486.
63 S./

(C) Inlernotional Perspectives
4.16. Legal provisions addressing wilful obstruction can be found across various
jurisdictions. For instance, in the United Kingdom, the Police, Crime,
Sentencing and Courts Act, 202287 has provisions which enhance
punishment for wilful obstruction of highwayss8 as provided under Section
137 of the Highways Act, 1980. The Act further prohibits obstruction of
vehicular access to the Parliamentary Estate.se Further, in Germany, the
right to peaceful assembly is restricted near the German Bundestag, the
Bundesrat and the Federal Constitutional Court.e0
4.17. In the United States of America, the state of Tennessee criminalises
"intentionally, knowingly or recklessly obstructing a highway, street,
sidewalk, railway, waterway, elevator, aisle, or hallway to which the public,
or a substantial portion of the public, has access; or any other place used
for the passage of persons, vehicles or conveyances, whether the
obstruction arises from the pelson's acts alone or from the person's acts
and the acts ofothers."er Further, Tennessee passed a law in April 2017e2
amending Section 307 of the Tennessee Code and introduced a further
penalty of two hundred dollars if "the obstruction prevents an emergency
vehicle from accessing a highway or street, the obstruction prevents a first
responder from responding to an emergency, or if the obstruction prevents
i? Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022,2022 chap.32.
88 /d, sec. 80.
8e ld, sec.76,
e0 Annex: Questions on best practices that promote and protect the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of
association, qvoilable 0l:
https://www.ohchr.org,/sites/defau lt/fi les/Documents/lssues/FAssociation/Responses20 I 2/MemberStates/Cerman
y.pdf(last visited on Jan 3l,2024).el Tennessee Code. 2021, sec. 39-17-307, available at: hups://lawj ustia.com/codes/tcnnessee/2021ltille'
39lchaptellT lpatt-3lsection-39- I7-307l (last visited on January 30,2024).
e2 Tennessee Senate Bill902, wailable ur. https://legiscan.com/TN/texVS 80902/20 I 7 (last visited on January 30,
2024t.
64
6,

access to an emergency exit."e3 In the U.S. State of Arizona, the Crirninal
Code penalises obstructing a highway or other public thoroughfareer as
well as the act of public nuisancees. Public nuisance has been defined as
anything that is "injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses or an
obstruction to the free use of property that interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighbourhood or
by a considerable number of persons"e6; or "to unlawfully obstruct the free
passage or use, in the customary manner, ofany navigable lake, river, bay,
stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or highway."eT
ei lbid.q Arizona Revised Statutes, sec. 13-2906,
https://www.azleg.gov/viewdocumenV?docName=https://www.azleg.gov/ars/13/02906.htm
January 30, 2024).
e5 Arizona Revised Statutes, sec. 13-2917,
hups://www.azleg.gov/viewdocumenl/?docNqme-httpsl/wwn.azleg.gov/ars/ I 3/02917.htn
January 30, 2024).
x /4 sec. l3-2917(A)( I ).
e1 Id, sec. 13-2917(A)(2).
65
alailable
(last visited on
available ctl:
(last visited on
6,/

5. SOME INCIDENTS OF VIOLENCE: A TALE OF SCALE OF LOSS
AND DESTRUCTION
5.1. Public property is the bedrock of a nation's infrastructure, providing the
essential framework for economic, social, and cultural development.
However, the deliberate and unlawful damage inflicted upon public assets
has emerged as a huge concern highlighting a profound challenge to the
legal and developmental landscape. The sustainable development of a
nation is inherently linked to the health and vitality of its public
infrastructure. Public property, comprising roads and bridges to public
buildings and utilities, serves as the lifeline for the progress of a nation.
Unfortunately, instances of damage to public property have become a
grorving phenomenon, posing a significant threat to the overall
development of an individual as well as the whole nation. Such acts not
only disrupt the smooth functioning of essential services but also
undermine the collective efforts aimed at uplilting economic growth, social
cohesion, and public welfare.
5.2. Damages to public property inflict a heavy toll on the economy of a nation.
The resources required for repairing or replacing vandalized infrastructure
could otherwise be allocated to development, job creation,, and other
avenues that contribute to economic advancement. Public property, such as
transportation systems and utilities, plays a vital role in ensuring the
efficient movement of goods and people. Any damage to public property
leads to disruption of services, causing inconvenience to citizens,
hampering daily activities, and impeding the smooth flow of commerce.
The destruction of public spaces and amenities also negatively impacts the
quality of life of citizens as parks, recreational areas, and cultural
66 tu,

landmarks contribute to the social fabric of a nation, fostering community
engagement and well-being.
5.3. From an economic point of view, it also hampers foreign investment, as
persistent damage to public property conveys an unstable and insecure
environment, thereby creating a negative image in the minds of potential
investors. This inevitably acts as a psychological barrier and prevents
investors from investing in such an environment.
5.4. Another dimension of the grave national loss that is suffered on account of
such indiscriminate acts of vandalism is the undermining of environmental
efforts. Infrastructure projects are often designed with sustainability in
mind. Damage to such structures not only undermines environmental
effons but also results in long-term ecological consequences which affects
the progress towards a greener and more sustainable future.
5.5. The National Crime Records Bureau (hereinafter, referred to as "NCRB"),
in its successive reports, has mentioned the statistics of crime involving
damage to public property. The reports specifically highlight the number
of cases that have been recorded under the PDPP Act. The data recorded
by NCRB is year-wise and the same is shown below in form of a table:
S. No. Yca r Cases Crime Rate
1 20t5 4941
) 2016 5 825 2.5
J 2017')8 7910 0.6
1 201 8 7127 0.5
e8 National Crime Records Bureau, "Crime in India 2017" (2017)
67
0.4
e/

5 20l gee 6170 0.5
6 2020 4524 0.3
7 2021 4089 0.3
8 2022100 4403 0.3
5.6. It is observed that there are wide number of incidents that occur every year.
The violence that happens not only affects the social fabric of different
communities, but also hampers the development. These incidents involve
mass destruction of public property and the inadequacies of the present
legislation makes it easier for the perpetrator to get away with the crime.
To emphasize the severity of the issue, some reported incidents of damage
to life as well as public and private property have been discussed in this
Chapter. These incidents clearly highlight the magnitude of loss suffered
as a direct consequence of such violent protests and the need to strengthen
the existing legal framework in order to effectively curb such disruptions.
(A) Muzttfforntgar Riots (2013)
5.7. The Muzaffarnagar riots of 2013 were a series of violent clashes that
occurred in the Muzaffamagar district of Uttar Pradesh between the Hindu
and Muslim communities. This communal violence was triggered by
murders of two Hindu Jat boys and a Muslim boy. The actual cause of
rioting is still disputed, with contradictory claims arising from both
sideslol. The real cause altemates between an incident of eve-teasing, and
e National Crime Records Bureau, "Crime in India 2019" (2019).
rm National Crime Records Bureau, "Crime in lndia2022" (2022).
ror"The Mystery of Kawwal: Were Muzaffarnagar Riots Based on Distortion of Facts?", NDfrl, Sept. 14,
2013, qvqilable a/: hftps://wwwndtv.com-/india-news/the-mystery-of-kawwal-were-muzaffamagar-riots-based-
on-distortion-of-facts-534608 (last visited on Jan. 24. 2024).
68

an incident of traffic accident, which allegedly got out of control and led
to killing, Iynching and violent protests.r02
5.8. The riots resulted in widespread violence, with incidents of murders, brutal
attacks on individuals, rape, robbery, arson and significant damage to
public and private property. Both Hindu and Muslim communities suffered
casualties. Around 60 persons were killed during this violencer0r and more
than 60,000 people were displaced.roa Public property, including houses,
shops, and places of worship, suffered extensive damage during the riots.
Private vehicles were also set on fire.l05 The violence led to the destruction
of infrastructure, disrupting nomal life in the affected areas. The economic
impact was significant, with businesses and livelihoods being severely
affected. As per reports, more than 50 commercial establishments were
sealed by the Muzaffarnagar police, some of which were sold to
compensate damages to public property during the riots.r06
(B) Ptrtirlsr Reservotiotr Agitation (2015)
5.9. The agitation arose in Gujarat in the month of July,20l5 by the Patidar
community in order to seek the status of Other Backward CIass. There were
I0r "Muzaffarnagar Riots: How BJP, SP and BSP Fanned the Flames", Firstpost, Sept. 16,2013, qvailable ot:
hnps://www.firstpost.com/politics/rnuzaffarnagar-riots-how-bj p-sp-and-bsp-fanned-the'flames- I I I0023 html
(last visited on Jan. 24,2024).
r0r "Covemment Releases Data of Riot Victims ldentifoing Religion", The Timcs oJ lndia. Sept. 24.
2013, uyuilable ut'. hnps://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Govemment-releases-data-of-riot-victims-
identilying-religion/articleshow/22998550.cms (last visited on Jan. 24,2024).
r04 *Has MHA Something to Hide on Muzaffarnagar Riots?", /ndia tuday, Feb. 17, 2014, availuble at.
https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/muzaffarnagar-riot-nrha-upa-government- 160882-2014-01-01 (last visited
on lan.24,2024).
t05 "Timeline of Muzaffarnagar Riots: Eve-Teasing lncident Led to Murders, Then Riots", lndia Tl', Sept.08'
2013, qvailable at https:,//www. indiatvnews.conl/news/india/timeline-of-muzaffarnagar-riots-eve-teasing-
incident-led-to-mur-2757 | .html (last visited on Jan. 24,2024).
rG *Who Will Compensate Damagc to Private Properry by Cops During Muzaffarnagar Violence?: S
Saiduzzaman", Fris tpost, Dec. 24, 2014. avoilable ol. https://www.firstpost.com/india'/who-will-compensate-
damage-to-private-propeny-by-cops-during-muzaffamagar-violence-s-saiduzzaman-782 I l0l.html (last visited
on lan- 24,2024).
69
+\-

large scale demonstrations in the State and the largest one was held in
Ahmedabad which had the gathering of over 5 lakhs people.r0T
5. 1 0. Violent incidents and confrontations were reported in Ahmedabad and
various parts of the State, including incidents of buming of police vehicles
and local transport buses. A total of fifteen clashes and arson cases were
documented. In another instance, a violent mob attempted to sabotage
railway tracks near Ranip,, causing damage to numerous vehicles.
Additionally, there were reports of assaults on both police and media
personnel. In response to the escalating unrest, a curfew was imposed in
the city under Section 144 CrPC. The Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation
incurred a loss of{12 crores, including the torching of33 local transport
buses.los
5.11. Curfew had to be imposed in Surat for three days as the violent mob
torched buses, ATMs, van, fire station and other public property.roe It not
only led to destruction of public properly but also caused severe trouble to
individuals. The general movement and the safety of public was
jeopardized when six buses were damaged and a total of 1554 bus trips had
to be cancelled.rr0 In Rajkot, several bus stations were attacked and bumt.
There was a massive damage to public and private property which was
estimated to be t 1 .47 crores.r I I
5.12. The unlawful protests causing damage to public property led to instabitity
in the State and a huge number of security personnel were deployed to
l0' "Patef s Hold Massive Rally Demanding OBC Status and Reservation", The H indu, Aug. 25,2015.
l08 "Cujarat Tense as Patel's Rally for Reservation 'l'urns Violent", The Tribune, Aug.26,2015.
loe "Quota Violence: Two ATM Burnt: Rs.48 t,akhs Turned into Ashes", The lndian Express, Sept.08,2018.
rl0 "Patel Agitation for OBC Quota: GSRTC Cancels I ,554 Bus Trips", The Times of lndio, Aug. 27, 2015.
| | | "Patidar Agitation; Uneasy Calm in Violence Hit Gujarat, Death Toll Rises to 10". The Tines of lndia, Aug.
2'1 .20t 5.
70
6,,

stabilize the situation. ln this particular protest, 3,500 paramilitary force
personnel and 93 companies ofthe State reserve police were deployed and
ten people lost their lives in the violence.rr2 There was a huge disruption in
the life of normal citizens. For five days, educational institutions statewide
remained closed, and a six-day restriction on mobile internet services,
including platforms like WhatsApp and Facebook, was implemented.r13
Westem Railways reported danrage to tracks at eight locations due to mob
activities, leading to the cancellation of 5l trains. Operations of 26 trains
were impacted, with 15 trains being re-routed out of the State. A total of
340 police cases were filed across the State, with 40 cases in Ahmedabad
alone, and 230 cases were on behalf of the Government. The Police
department incurred damages amounting to t200 crores.lll
Irz "Gujarat Claims 9 Lives, State Govemment Seeks Army Help", Thc Tines of Indio. Aug. 2'l ,2015-
rri "lnternet Services Restored in Ahmedabad at Midnighf', The lndiun Etpress, Aug. 3 I , 2015.
rrr "Anandiben Patel Hits at Patidar Quota Agitators, Invokes Cast Riots of Past", The lndian Erpress, Sept. 18,
20t5.
7t
(C) J Reservation Agitation (2016)
5.13. There were a series of protests by Jats seeking their inclusion in the OBC
category in order to become eligible for reservations. These protests mainly
took place in the state of Haryana, and spread out to the states of Uttar
Pradesh, Rajasthan and the NCR region. Initially these protests were
peaceful and only involved road blockades; however, later they turned
violent when a group of counter-protesting non-Jats got involved in a
violent scuffie with a group of lawyers protesting against JNU sedition
controversy, mistaking it to be a pro-Jat quota protest. Later, they also
clashed with a group of students protesting for Jat quota, wherein stones
were pelted against each other and several vehicles, business
h,,,

establishments and petrol pumps were set on fire in Rohtak and adjoining
districts. Police personnel were also reportedly assaulted.rri Railway lines
were blocked and, in many places, railway tracks were damaged and
uprooted. Highways and other roads were blocked. A statue of Rao Tula
Ram, an Ahir king was vandalized. In Bhiwani, the house of a BJP MP was
vandalized, several buses and police outposts were set on tire, AIMs, and
official records of a cooperative bank were bumt. In Sonipat, a railway
station, hotel and a college owned by a MP were vandalized, and the
protestors also set ablaze a rice mill. Several shops and vehicles were also
bumt in Sonipat. Water canals were shut down by rioters, due to which
severe water crisis took place in Gurgaon and Delhi. Road and rail traffic
was disrupted which hit the supply of essential commodities such as fuel,
milk and vegetables.r r6
5.14. The army and paramilitary forces had to be deployed in large numbers
across northern India to tackle the riots. Around 30 people died during
these riots.rrT The Jat quota agitation also led to a huge loss of economic
activity across northern India. As per few reports, these protests led to
Rs. 34,000 crores worth loss to public and private property, and economic
activity in the state of Haryana. Many companies withdrew their plants
from the State of Haryana leading to severe economic loss to the State.
rr5 "Jat Quota Stir: How Violence Started; a Protest on JNU Row, Hostel Raid by Cops", The lnr.lian Exprass,Feb.
25, 2016, u"-itilqble at: hftps://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india-/jat-quota-stir-how-violence-
staned-a-protest-on-jnu-row-hostel-raid-by-cops (last visited on Jan. 24, 2024).
lf6 "Jat Agitation: Arson. Violence Continue Unchecked; Hope from Meeting with Home Minister", The Trihune,
Feb. 21, 20l6,available qt. htrps://www.tribuneind ia.com/news/arch ive/nation/j at-agitation-arson-spreads-
despite-army-6-more-dead- 199157 (last visited on Jan. 24, 2024).
rr7 *2. I l0 FIRs, 567 Anested for Jat Quota Violence, t{aryana Tells High Court", The Hindustqn Tines. Apr. 03,
2Ol6, available qt: hnps://www.h industantimes.com/india./2- I l0-firs-567-arrested-for-jal-quota-violence-
haryana-ells-high-courti story-4TlOTXxGgnfFM I ZTqdQYSl.html (last visited oo lan.24.2024).
72
M,

5. I 5. Further, around 2,3 I 4 trains were disrupted due to the protests which also
impacted the States beyond north India. As told by the then Railway
Minister Shri Suresh Prabhu in Lok Sabha, Railways suffered a loss of
around Rs. 55.92 crores due to loss ofproperty and cancellation oftrains.rrs
(D) Saharanpur Wolence (2017)
5. I 6. A series of communal clashes took place in and around Saharanpur district
in the State of Uttar Pradesh. The incidents occurred between May and June
201 7, resulting in significant damage to public property and a tense
atmosphere in the rcgion.
5.17. The underlying cause of the violence was reported to be longstanding
social and economic tensions between the Dalit and Thakur communities
in the region. The conflict occurred on May 5,20117, when a Dalit group
objected to a procession by Thakurs celebrating the birth anniversary of
Rajput King Maharana Pratap. This led to confrontations between the two
communities, during which two persons were killed and several others
were injured. As alleged, more than 46 houses and shops were bumt. The
situation worsened with incidents of stone pelting, arson and clashes
between the communities, leading to a breakdown of law and order in the
region. A police base and various vehicles were allegedly set ablaze.rre The
rioters also indulged in stone pelting, forcing markets to be closed.r20 The
r13 "Railways Suffered Rs 55.92 Cr Loss Due to Jat Agitation: Suresh Prabhu", Business Slondurd, Mar.09,
2016, qyaildble at: https://www.business-standard.com/artic le/pt i-stories/railways-suffered-rs-5 5-92-cr-loss-due-
to-jat-agitation- | 160i0900388 I .html (last visited on Jan. 24. 2024).
rre ..Daf t croup calls for Protest at Jantar Mantar". Ilre Hindu. May I8, 2017. dvuiloble 4r'.
hftps://www-thehindu.com,he\vs/national/other-states/dalit-group-calls-for-protcst-at-jantar-
mantar'article I 84763 I 5.ece (last visited on Jan.24,2024).
rro "UP's Saharanpur Tense After Dalit Man Killed in Fresh Clashes with Thakurs", The Hindustan Times, May
30, 201'? . a,ai!able ar: hnps://www. h industantimes.com/india-news/one-person-killed-in-fresh-violence-in-up-s-
saharanpur/story-XfdbSs8zAVQmKlV38snHVK.html (last visited on Jan.24,2024).
73
6/

violence resulted in significant damage to public and private property.
Public infrastructure, including roads and transportation, was also affected.
(E) Riots After Conviction of Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh (2017)
5.18. In 2017, Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh, the religious leader of Dera Sacha
Sauda, was convicted lbr the offence of rape, after which riots erupted in
north Indian states of Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi. Even
before pronouncement of the judgment, around 2,00,000 supporters of
Ram Rahim gathered in Panchkula, due to which some parts of Haryana,
Punjab and Chandigarh were put under a security lockdown, and heavy
armed contingent was deployed. Mobile intemet services were also
suspended and Section 144 CrPC was imposed in these areas.r2l
5 . 1 9. After the j udgment was pronounced, the supporters of Ram Rahim went on
a rampage, and set fire to vehicles including public buses and trains,
government buildings, petrol pumps,, television vans and railway stations.
The violence also spread to other areas of Haryana, Punjab and Delhi. In
Rajasthan, the office of station rnaster of Bohra railway station was set on
fire. Armed forces were deployed in Haryana in large numbers to prevent
loss of life and damage to public/private property. r22 Around 1 01
companies of paramilitary were deployed in the State of Haryana.r23 Two
railway stations were set ablaze at Malout and Balluana in Punjab and two
rzr "Ram Rahim Conviction Leads to Violence; 30 Killed; Dera ChiefJailed in Rohtak", The Hindustan Tiues.
Aug. 25, 20 1 7, at'ail(1ble at https://www.h industant imes.com/pun iab/gurmeet-ranr-rah im-rape-verdict-live-dera-
sacha-sauda-chief-to-appear-in-panchkula-coun-punjab-haryana-on-high-alert/story-
YO4q3FLriRRV8zpaL0ZfAO.html (last visited on Jan. 24. 2024).
rzr "Ram Rahim Singh's Supporters Riot After Rape Conviction",,4I Jazeera. Aug.25,2017. dvaildble uti
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/201 7/8/25lram-rah im-singhs-supporters-riot-after-rape-conviction (last yisited
on lan- 24,2024).
r2i "Death Toll in Haryana Violence Rises to 36, Thirteen Bodies ldentified", Huffpost, Aug.27,2017, available
at https;//www.huffpost.com/arch ive/in/entry/dcath -toll-in-haryana-violence-rises-to-3 6-th irteen-bodies-
identified in 5cl I P120e4b0508b2 I 3 64c28 (lastvisited on Jan.24,2024).
74
&/

empty train coaches of Rewa Express were set on fire in Delhi. A telephone
exchange was also torched by protestors in Bamala in Punjab.r2a An
Income Tax building and two police vehicles were set on fire in Mansa in
Punjab.r25 A local goverxment office was torched near Faridkot. A Vita
milk plant and a power station were also destroyed in Sirsa in Haryana.126
5.20. News Reporters of channels like PTC News and NDTV News were
attacked. In these protests, around 38 people were killed,r2T and more than
300 others were injured.r28 As per official estimates, public and private
properties worth Rs. 118 crores were destroyed in the violence that took
place after conviction of Gurmeet Ram Rahim. This figure includes loss of
revenue and expenses for providing services, including security and
paramilitary forces in the State of Haryana.r2e
(F) Incidents of Arson ond Vandolism After Reletse of Movie 'Padmaavat'
(2018)
5.21. Before the release of the movie 'Padmavat'in 2018, there were incidents
of vandalism and arson, primarily led by fringe groups opposing the film.
I21 "Ram Rahim Guilt-v of Rape: What Happened Through the Day", Indio foda-t,, Aug. 25. 201'7 , available at:
https://www. indiatoday. in/india/story/live-updates-gurmeet-ram-r ahim-dera-sacha-sauda-panchkula-sirsa-
1 03 128'7 -2O 1 7 -08-24 (last yisited on J an. 24. 2024).
r25 "Dera Sacha Sauda Chief Gurmeet Ram Rahim Found Guilty of Rape", The Tintes of lndia, Aug.25,
2017, available 4r: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com./india/dera-sacha-sauda-chief-gurmeet-ram-rahim-found-
guilty-otrape-cbi-court-ruling-comes-after- l4-years/artic leshow/6022 I I l9.cms (last visited on Jan. 24,2024).
116 "ln Sirsa, 4 Killed, 6 Hurt in Police Firing", The Tribune, Aug. 26, 20lT,available at:
https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/arch ive/haryana/in-sirsa-4-killed-6-hun- in-po lice-firing-4574 I 9 ( last visited
on Jan.24,2024).
r27 "Families Tom Apan in Haryana Violence", Tha Hindu, Aug. 2'1, 2017, dvdilable at.
https://wwwthehindu.com/news/national/other-states/families-torn-apan-in-haryana-
violence/anic 1e6204 I I79.ece (last visited on Jan.24,2024).
r28 'Baba Behind Bars, Followers Run Riot", The Times of tndia. Aug. 26, 2017, ayailable ati
https:r'ltimesofindia. indiatimes.com/india/baba-behind-bars-followers-run-riot/articleshow/602282 l3.cms (last
visited on Jan. 24,2024).
rrn "20l7 Dera Violence: 2 Years On, No Damages Recovered for Destruction of Property Worth Rs Il8-
Ctorc", The lfldian F)ipress, Jan. 01. 2020, avoilahle at: https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/chandigarh/dera-
sacha-sauda-201 7-violence-properry-damage-6 | 9405 I / ( last visited on Jan. 24, 2024).
75
fi,,,

These groups, mainly associated with the Rajput community, objected to
the portrayal of historical characters, particularly Rani Padmini, which was
alleged to be inappropriate. Protests were held in several states including
the states of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, and Madhya Pradesh. Film
sets were vandalized in pursuance of the protest and the director of the
movie was also assaulted on the film set.l30 The film set where the movie
was being shot was attacked by several people and was set ablaze, also
injuring animals and destroying several costumes. In the State of Haryana,
several vehicles including a school bus were attacked. In Ahmedabad,
roads were blocked, more than 150 vehicles including public buses were
damaged, around 4 malls and theatres were attacked. Extra forces were
deployed for the release of the rnovie in the States of Rajasthan and
Uttarakhand.r3l
(G) Bhima Koregoon Riots (2018)
5.22. ln 2018, the commemoration of the bicentenary of the Battle of Bhima
Koregaonr32 sparked tensions and initiated violence between different
groups. The incidents led to protests, arrests, and massive violence in that
area. During the violence, there were reports of destruction and loss to
property. The violence primarily affected the villages surrounding Bhima
Koregaon in Maharashtra. Several vehicles were damaged or set on fire,
and there were instances of stone-pelting and clashes as well.
ri0 "Padmaavat: Why a Bollywood Epic LIas Sparked Fierce Protests", BBC News, Jan.25,2018, dvailable at
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-42048512 (last visited on !an.24,2024).
rrr 'Padmaavat Release: Ahmedabad Malls Vandalised, Vehicles Set on Fire; Section 144 in Gurgaon". The
Hindustan Tines, Jan. 24,2018, wailoble at https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/padmaavat-release-
ahmedabad-malls-vandalised-veh ic les-set-on-fire-section- 144-in-gurgaon/story-
4vSNjtuPx5TFnQtuOSqAFJ.html (last visited on Jan. 24. 2024).
'!rr The Baftle of Bhima Koregaon took place on January I , I 818, between the British East lndia Company and
the Peshwa faction ofthe Maratha Confederacy. The British, with a predominantly Dalit (lower-caste) contingent,
successfully defended against the Peshwa forces. Over the years, the battle has come to be seen as a syrnbol of
Dalit pride and resistance.
76
6-

5.23. The violence led to disruptions in normal life, and there were economic
implications for businesses and individuals in the affected areas. The
violence led to a halt in business as well. It was stated by the president of
the Federation of Retail Welfare Association that more than Rs. 700 crores
worth of business was lost due to the protest. It was estimated that more
than Rs. 35 lakhs licensed businesses in the city were affected by the strike
due to this. It also affected the movement as the protests blocked 350 to
400 trucks.r33
5.24. A PIL u,as filed before the Bombay High Court to recover the loss or
damage caused to public property. A total of Rs. 9 crores was estimated to
be the cumulative loss due to the strike and bandh that were imposed during
the protest. lra
(H) Anti-CAA Protests (2019)
5.25. The Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests were a response to the
enactment of the Citizenship Amendment Act on December I 1 , 20 19. The
CAA intended to provide expedited citizenship to undocumented non-
Muslim migrants from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Pakistan who had
entered India before December 31,2014.
5.26. The demonstrations took place in various cities across the country, with
notable protest sites such as Shaheen Bagh in Delhi. The protesters
demanded the repeal of the CAA, the withdrawal of the proposed National
rrr "Business Suffers as Mumbai Comesto Halt", NDT| News, lan.01,2018.
rra "Bhima Koregaon Violence: PIL Seeks Action Against Those Involved in Bandh. Violen ce", lndiq Tbdq), Mar,
07,2018.
77
&/

Register of Citizens (I.IRC), and the rejection of the National Population
Register (I.JPR).
5.27. The violent protests in New Delhi against the CAA claimed 53 lives and
left 47 3 civilians and 1 08 cops injured. In addition to the tragic loss of life
and injuries, the protests and riots resulted in extensive destruction of
public infrastructure, with rioters setting vehicles, shops, and citizens'
homes on fire. The protests significantly disrupted essential public
services, such as those provided by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
(DMRC) and Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC), leading to substantial
financial losses for these Govemment-run entities. In a PIL filed before the
Delhi High Court pertaining to compensation on account of damage caused
to public property during the anti-CAA,/NRC protests, the counter affidavit
filed by the Delhi Police before the Court had stated that there were 518
cases registered against the people for causing damage to public
property.r35 Furthermore, the unrest forced the postponement of CBSE
Board exams for Class X and XII at numerous centers in North-East Delhi.
There were a total of 242 arson calls that were received by the fire
department. It is also reported that five buses were damaged which resulted
in a loss of more than Rs. 2.5 lakhs and almost the same amount was lost
due to disruption in services.
r15 "535 Cases for Damage to Public and Private Properties Registered During Anti-CAA,NRC Protests: Delhi
Police to HC", The lndian Express, Sept.22,2022.
116 *Delhi Riots Chargesheet: Govt suffered a loss of over Rs 20 crore due to Anti-CAA Riots" Swa/ ab,a, Oct. 5,
2020.
78
5.28. The data was received from the Sub-divisional Magistrates by the Delhi
Police, wherein estimated loss incurred by a few north-eastem districts was
given. The data is as follows:r36
q,

S. No. Locality Amount Disbursed by the State
Govt. Against the Damage
I Yamuna Vihar Rs. 6,49,67,539
2 Shahdara Rs. 69,68,590
3 Seelampur Rs. 65,00,000 (In total for deceased)
Rs. 12,00,000 (In total for injured)
S. No. No. of Incidents Nature of
Property
Valuation for
Damages
I 241 Commercial Rs. 3,82,21,637
2 124 Residential Rs. 3,09,70,000
5.29. ln addition to that, there were 117 cases still left to be assessed for claims
which amounted to more than Rs. 1.4 crores.
5.30. Moreover, these numbers do not account for the damage incurred by the
DMRC or the personal hardships faced by millions of citizens as a result
of road blockages which lasted for more than three months. It also excludes
the financial impact on businesses in areas like Shaheen Bagh which
remained shuttered for several weeks. Moreover, compensation has not
been extended to all victims of the riots, nor to the families of those who
lost their lives or suffered injuries. When these additional factors are taken
into consideration, the govemment's financial responsibility is naturally
expected to be increased.
79
6-

@ Farm Lsws Repeal Prolests (2020)
5.31. The protests against farm laws in India have been a contentious issue. The
protests revolved around three agricultural reform laws passed in
September 2020, i.e., the Farmers Produce Trade and Commerce
(Promotion and Facilitation) Act, the Farmers (Empowerment and
Protection) Agreement on Price Assurance and Farm Services Act, and the
Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act. A significant section of the
farming community, especially in states like Punjab and Haryana,
vehemently opposed these laws.
5.32. There are different modes to protest, wherein some may take violent means
while other might pursue it peacefully. Even when a peaceful medium is
pursued, the repercussion of the same leads to widescale disruption due to
bandh and obstruction on public ways. In this particular case, there were
massive protests in state of Haryana and Punjab. It was reported that
railway services had to remain suspended in Punjab for over two months.rsT
The protestors took over highway toll plazas in Haryana and held their
protests from there itself. r18
5.33. Another major incident of disruption relates to the parade with a large
convoy of tractors heading towards the Red Fort. The protestors not only
exceeded the time limit as was permitted by the Delhi police but also
breached the designated route. There were around 7000 tractors that had
gathered, and more than 2,00,000 people had participated. The forceful
ri7 Editorial, Explained: "The Railways network in Punjab and how it has been impacted by the ongoing protests"
The Indian Lrpress, Nov. 25, 2020.
rr8 "Farmers lay siege on toll plazas in Haryana, allow free movement of vehicles" Hindustqn Times, Dec. 12,
2020
80 6",

entry in the Red Fort was made through breaking barricades which led to a
clash, wherein 394 policemen were reported injured and 30 police vehicles
were damaged.l3e
(J) Wolence After Remarks Made on Prophet Mohommul (2022)
5.34. After some derogatory remarks were made about Prophet Muhammad on
May 27, 2022 by one of the spokespersons of a political party, violent
protests took place in some parls of India, leading to several deaths and
injuries.
rie "Farmer leaders betrayed Delhi Police, 394 cops injured, l9 arrests made: Commissioner", lndia Today, lan.
28.2021.
lao "Kanpur Violence: 36 Arrested, 3 FIRs Filed, Property to Be Bulldozed, Say Cops", The Hindustan Times.
lJne 04,2022, ayailable ar. hftps://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/kanpur-violence-36-arrested-property-
will-be-demolished-says-top-cop-reporl-10165431'7 134314.htm I ( last visited on lan. 24,2024).
t4t *2022 Prayagrajyiolence: HC Grants lnterim Bail to Javed Mohd for Daughter's Wedding", Legolly Speaking,
Oct. 19, 2023, available ar. https://legally-speaking.in/lrigh-court/2022-prayagraj-violence-hc-grants-interim-
bail-to-javed-mohd-for-daughters-wedding/ (last visited on lan.24,2024).
tal .Jwetl Mohamntatl (ti), Ptrmp v. State o/ lJttqr Pradesh, Cr\minal Miscellaneous Application No. 53834 of 2022.
rar"Nupur Sharma: Houses of Muslims Demolished in Uttar Pradesh After Protests", BBC Nelr.r, June 13,
2022, qvqilable qt:https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-61 777306 (last visited on Jan. 24, 2024); "lndian
State Razes Muslim Homes After Riots Over Prophet Remarks", The Auardian, June 12.2022, qvailable ut.
hftps://wwwtheguardian.com/world/2022ljux,l12lindian-state-demolish-muslim-homes-riots-prophet-remarks
(last visited on Jan. 24.2024).
8l
5.35. In Kanpuq Uttar Pradesh, stone-pelting was done by Muslim protestors at
police personnel and vehicles. Crude-bombs were thrown at the police.
Around six police officers were injured in this violence.r40 In Prayagraj,
after Friday prayers, a mob allegedly pelted stones and hurled bombs on
police vehicles and a truck and several motorcycles were set on fire. l4l In
the incident, some police personnel also sustained injuries, public property
was damaged, and law and order was severely disturbed.la2 As per reports,
punitive demolition of illegal buildings and homes of people accused of
involvement in riots in Uttar Pradesh was done by the State Govemment
as a consequence of violence in the State.ras
w,

5.36. In Ranchi, Jharkhand, stones were pelted on a temple by a mob.raa In
Howrah, West Bengal, arson and violent protests were reported, as a
consequence of which roads and railway tracks were blocked. Stones were
pelted by a mob causing damage to vehicles on highways. Burning tyres
were placed on roads, and a police kiosk and some local party offices ofa
political pafty were set on fire. Highways and railway tracks were also
blocked by protestors, intemrpting traffi c. ra5
(K) Protests Against Agnipilh Scheme (2022)
5.37.ln 2022., the Central government unveiled the 'Agnipath'scheme for
recruitment of soldiers in the Army, Navy and Air Force, on a contractual
basis for a short four-year period, without any pensionary benefits. Soon
after the announcement of Agnipath scheme, violent protests erupted
against the scheme by Army aspirants in several States including Bihar,
West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh.
5.38. In Bihar, national highways were blocked, and train bogeys were set ablaze
in Kaimur and Chhapra districts, disrupting the road and rail movement.
Around 22 trains were cancelled in a day in the State. The protestors bumt
railway station furniture on the tracks and damaged other railway
properties. Stones were pelted on the police and railway personnel posted
at the railway stations.ra6 The house of Deputy Chief Minister was
r4i "A Muslim Teenager was Killed at a Protest in lndia. His f'amily Wants Answers", CNN. June 22.
2022. oailable at: https://edition.cnn.con/2022l06l22lindialmuslim-teenager-shot-islam-protest-police-intl-hnk-
dst/index.html (last visited on lan. 24, 2024).
r15 "Bengal: Violence Erupts During Protests Over Prophet Remarks, Guv Appeals for Peace", The Print, June 10,
2022. avuilable ar: https://theprint.inlindiay'bengal-violence-erupts-during-protests-over-prophet-remarks-guv-
appeals-for-peace/99201 0/ (last yisited on lan. 24. 2024).
146 "Protests Continue in Bihar Over Central Covernment's 'Agnipath' Scheme", I/?e Hindu, lune 16,
2022. ttvailable at: https://wwu,.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/protest-erupts-across-bihar-over-
central-governments-agnipath-scheme/artic le65 5 3 2441 .ece (last visited on Jan. 24,2024).
82
Wr/

attacked. Internet services were suspended in l8 districts of Bihar during
the protests.
5.39. In the State of Uttar Pradesh, a mob set fire to a coach of a train and also
damaged the property of the railway station in Ballia. Protests also took
place in Varanasi, Firozabad and Amethi districts, wherein government
buses and other public properties were also damaged. Protestors blocked
roads and also targeted private vehicles.raT In Varanasi, around 36 buses
were damaged by the protestors which led to a loss of over Rs. 12 lakhs to
the govemment.r48 A 19-year-old boy was shot dead and over 15 people
got injured in Telangana.rae In the state of Haryana, protestors pelted stones
at vehicles in Ballabhgarh, squatted on railway tracks in Jind, thus
disrupting the railway movement in the State, and bumt tyres in Rohtak.r50
5.40. As reported by the Railways, 5 trains, coaches of around 60 trains, along
with I i engines were set on fire in Bihar. Vandalism was reported in more
than 15 districts of Bihar. Movement of over 300 trains was affected.214
trains were cancelled, I I trains were diverted and 90 were terminated short
of their destination. More than 60 crore passengers cancelled their railway
tickets.l5r Disruption of rail movement and damage to railway property
r17 " 12 Trains Bumt, Stations Vandalised in 'Agnipath' Protests: l0 Facts", NDT( June 18, 2022, twailable .tt'.
https://www.ndtv.com/india-news/agnipath-protest-2-coaches-of-passenger-train-set-on-fire-by-mob-in-bihar-
3074583 (last visited on Jan.24,2024).
ra8 "Agnipath Stir: Damage to Public Property Will Be Recovered from Protesters, Says Varanasi DM",lndia
Toda1,, June 20, 2022, waihble dt: hnps://www. ind iatoday. in/india/story/agnipath-protest-varanasi-
administration-ro-recover-damages-to-public-properties-from-protesters- I 9645 04-2022-06-20 (last visited on
lan. 24,2024).
r1' "12 Trains Burnt, Stations Vandalised in 'Agnipath' Protests: l0 Facts". NDTV, June 18, 2022, mailqble at
https://www.ndtv.com/india-news/agnipath-protest-2-coaches-of-passenger-train-set-on-fire-by-mob-in-bihar-
3 074 5 83 ( Iast v isite d on Jan. 24, 2024) .
150'"Agnipath' Protests: Defence Minister Holds Meeting with Service Chiefs", NDTV, June 18,2022. avqil.tble
a/: https://www.ndtv.com/india-news/agn ipath-protests-buses-targeted-during-bihar-bandh-260-arrested-in-up-
307?902 (last visited on Jan.24,2024).
l5r "Agnipath Protests: Railway Property Worth Nearly Rs 700 Crore Damaged, 718 Arrested in Bihar", lndiq
Tctday, June 19, 2022..Nailable at: https://www.indiatoday.ini india/story/agnipath-protests-railway-property-
damaged-bihar-1964060-2022-06- l8 (last visited on Jan. 24, 2024).
83
W

resulted in huge financial loss of Pts. 259.44 crores to the Indian
Ra ilways. 
I 5l
5.41. On July 31,2023, communal clashes broke out in Nuh district of Haryana
during a Vishwa Hindu Parishad procession. Stones were pelted on the
procession. Homes and shops of local Hindu community were set ablaze,
liquor shops were looted and around 50 vehicles were also set on fire by
an armed mob.r53 The participants in the procession were forced to flee to
a temple, which was later besieged by the mob and shots were fired and
stones were thrown on the temple.r5a Roads were blocked by the mob. A
bus was rammed into a cyber-police station of Nuh district.r55 Various
public locations including local bus stand, local market and locai grain
market were also attacked by the rioters who pelted stones and robbed
shops at these places.156 Two mosques in Nuh district were also attacked
on which bombs were hurled.l5T In Gurugram, a mosque was set ablaze by
r5r "lndian Railways Suffer Rs 259.44 Cr Loss Due to Agitations Against Agnipath Scheme". Ihe Ecorutmic
Times, July 22, 2022, cvailable at'. https://infra.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/railways/indian-railways-
suffer-rs-25 9-44 -cr- loss-due-to-agitations-against-3gn ipath-scheme/93 05445 8 (last visited on lan. 24,2024).
r5r "Nuh Temple Priest Refutes Haryana Home Minister's Claim that People Were'Held Hostage"', The ll/ire, Aug.
01, 2023, available qt: https:llthewire. in/communalism/nuh -temple-priest-refutes-haryana-home-ministers-
claim-that-people-are-held-hostage (last visited on Jan. 24, 2024).
r54 "Rioters on Hillocks, Shots and Stones Fired: Nuh Temple's Hours of Horror". N DTl, Aug.01,2023, twailable
at https://www.ndtv.com/india-news/gurugram-clashes-nuh-communal-violence-haryana-communal-clash-
monu-manesar-50-km-ftom-torched-haryana-mosq ue-a-mob-attacked-2-500-trapped-in-temp le-42 5 8306 (last
visited on Jan. 21,2024).
r55 "Exclusive: Intel Oversights, Anger Against Cow Vigilante Fueled Violence in Haryana's Nuh".lndia Today,
Aug. 01, 2O23, available al: https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/haryana-nuh-communal-clashes-intel-
oversight-inadequate-force-fue led-vio lence-24 | 4928-2023-08-0 I (last visited on Jan.24,2024).
156 "Nuh Violence: Temple, Hospital, Police Station Targefted by Unruly Mob", The Statesnon, Aug. ol.
2023, uvailable a/: . https://www.thestatesman.com/india/nuh-violence-temple-hospital-police-station-targetled-
by-unruly-mob-1 503207 l29.html# (last visited on Jan. 24. 2024).
'5? -Haryana Nuh Violence Highlightsi 141 Arrested, 55 FlRs Registered", Mint, Aug.05, 2023, enailable or:
https://www.livem irrt.corn/nervs/india4raryanas-nuh -vio lence-live-updates-stones-pelted-at-re ligious-process ion-
solrna-mewat-schools-shut-in-gurugram- I I 690850667688-page-2. htm I (last visited on lan. 24,2024).
84
(L) Htrytno Riots (2023)
6-

a mob which also killed the mosque's naib imam.r58 Over four shops were
vandalized and cars were set on fire. 
I 5e
5.42. Section 144 CrPC was imposed in Gurgaon, Faridabad and Palwal. All
educational institutes were ordered to be closed in these areasl60. Seven
persons including two homeguards were killed,r6l and over 70 were
allegedly injured.
(M) Manipur Wolence (2023)
5.43. An ethnic violence erupted in the State of Manipur between Meitei people
and the Kuki-Zo tribal comrnunity. The issue originated out of an order by
the Manipur High Court, wherein it was directed to the State Govemment
to send a recommendation to the Central Government for a demand of
Meitei community to get the status of a Schedule I'ribe. In reaction to this,
a peaceful protest march was conducted by All Tribal Students Union on
3'd May, 2023, which later turned violent.
5.44. The issue caught fire across the State and the situation got so drastic that a
curfew had to be imposed across 8 districts and a shoot at sight order was
issued the next day itself.r62 This involved mass scale destruction of public
lts "Haryana Communal Violencc Updates CM Khattar Seeks Additional Central Forces". frc Hindu, Aug.02,
2023, a,ailable ar: hfips://www.thehindu.conr/news/national/haryana-communal-violence-live-updares-delhi-
police-increases-security-in-sensit ive-areas,'article6T I 48963.ece ( last visited on lan. 24.2024).
r5e "Nuh Violence Spreads to Gurugram", Tre Trihune, Aug. 01, 2023, wailoble qt'
https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/haryana/nuh-violence-spreads-to-gurugram-5308 I I (last visited on Jan. 24,
2024).
160 "Clashes Break Out Between Two Groups During VHP Procession in Haryana's Nuh; Prohibitory Orders
lmposed". The Hindu, Aug. 01. 2023, aruiluble qr: https;//www.lhehindu.com/news/national/other-
states/haryana-nuh-gurugram-c lashes-violence-j u ly-3 I -202 3/anicle67142736.ece ( last visited on )an. 24,2024).
16r "Hindu-Muslim Riots Expose Risk at Major lndian Business Hub", Rerrcrs' Aug. 03. 2023, .Nqilqblc dt:
https://www.reuters.com./world/india/hindu-muslim-riots-expose-risk-major-indian-business-hub-2023-08-03/
(last visited on Jan. 24,2024).
l"r "Many killed in Manipur riots: State government issues shoot.tt sight order" The Hindu' May.4. 2023.
85
@/

properties, houses and religious structures, leading to a major deployment
of army and CAPF. l63
163 'l 75 killed, over I 100 injured in four mouths of Manipur violence: Police" The H indu, Sepl. I 5, 2023.
86 q/

6. CONCLUSION: URGENT NEE,D TO AMEND THE PREVENTION
OF DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY ACT, I984
6. l. It cannot be disputed that destruction of public property is unfortunately
rampant in our country. Public property means the property belonging to
the people. The resources of the common man constitute the foundation
for the existence of any public property. Tax payers'money is utilized for
acquiring, making, constructing or procuring public property. Apart from
it being the fundarnental duty ofevery citizen to safeguard public property,
it is in his interest also to secure and safeguard public property. Public
property cannot be allowed to be destroyed by anybody, whatever may be
the reason for the same. It is easy to destroy; but it is not easy to make.
Public property is our national asset. Every citizen has a share in it.
Destruction of public property should be viewed seriously and the culprits
should be punished. Apart from punishing the guilty, it is also in the
interests of the State to recover the loss sustained from the person who is
instrumental in the destruction of concerned public property.
6.2. Time and again, the Supreme Court of India and various High Couns have
voiced against the menace of destruction of public property. The Supreme
Court has issued several guidelines to deal with the instances of destruction
of public property and as to how it should be prevented. The courts have
expressed the view that cases relating to destruction of public property
should be viewed seriously. The courts have even held the position that the
loss occasioned to the State should be recovered from the culprits.
6.3. In most of the bandhs, hartals and public agitations, it is an undeniable fact
that pubtic property is the casualty. [n utter disregard of law and order, the
organisers ofsuch agitations seem to be unconcemed about the destruction
87
@/

of public property in furtherance of such agitations. There must be a
mechanism to recoup the loss occasioned to the State as a result of
destruction of public property.
6.5 Fear of conviction and sentence in criminal cases relating to the offences
under the PDPP Act may not act as a sufficient deterrence against
destruction of public property. Compelling the offenders to deposit the
estimated value of the public propefty as a condition for granting bail
would definitely be a sufficient deterrent against destruction of public
propefty.
6.6. In the light of the decisions of the Suprerne Court and various High Courts
mentioned above, it is highly expedient to suitably amend the PDPP Act.
t64 2012 CtiLJ 1297 : 20ll (4) Kerala High court Cases (KHC 89: 201 I (4) KerLT 288
165 2012 CriLJ 1328 : 201 I (4) KHC 689 : 201 | (4) KLT 84 I : ILR 201 I (4) Ker. 841.
88
ll.R 20ll (4) Ker 261
6.4. In the State of Kerala, as a result of the decisions of the Kerala High Court
in Hemanth Kumar v. Sub lnspector of Policet6a and, Hemachandran M. T.
@ Kamalesh v. Sub Inspector of Police,t65 the criminal courts insisted on
depositing the estimated value of the public property damaged as a
condition for granting bail. As a result of this, instances of destruction of
public property in connection with bandhs, hartals and other public
agitations have become practically nil. The political parties started
instructing their followers not to destroy public propeny under any
circumstances, since the political parties were compelled to shoulder the
burden of depositing money for getting their followers released on bail.
N"'

7. RECOMMENDATIONS
7.1. Majority of the amendments suggested hereunder are those contained in
The Prevention of Damage to Public Property (Amendment) Bill, 2015.
7.2. In the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984, (hereinafter,
referred to as "the Principal Act"), in Section 2, after clause (b), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(d) "fine" shall mean and include the amount which shall be
equivalent to the market value of the public property damaged or
where the value of the property damaged is not capable of being
assessed in terms of money, such amount as the Court may Jix taking
into account the.facts and circumstances of the case.
7.3. In Section 3 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the proviso, for the
words "for reasons", the words "for special reasons " shall be substituted.
7.4. After Section 4 of the Principal Act, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:
"44. Presumption agoinst accused.- Where an offence under this
Act has been committed and it is shown that public property has been
damaged as direct consequence of such offence and the accused
participated in the commission of strch offence, it shall be presumed
unless the contrary is shown that the accused had committed such
oLfence.
89
48. Abetment of mischieJ- Where damage to public property is
coused in consequence of demonstration, hartal or bandh called by
any organisation, the office bearers of such organisation, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the commission of the offence of abetment of
6,,

an offence punishable under this Act and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such
ffice bearer liable to any ptmishment provided in this Act, if he
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that
he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission ofsuch
offence.
4C. Punishment for obetment of mischief.- Whoever abets an
offence punishable under this Act shall be punished with the
punishment provided.for that offence under this Act.
4D. Procedure for videography of incidents of demonstration elc.-
Where a call for demonstration, hartal or bandh has been given by
an organisation and the fficer-in-charge of a police station has
reasons to believe that damage to the public property is likely to be
caused or there is imminent danger of such damage, he shall,-
(i) make such arrangements for the videography of the
area where the demonstration, hartal or bandh is
proposed to be held;
(ii) deposit the soft copies ofvideography in such manner
with the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or Executive
Magistrate concerned who may entrust the same to the
said police fficer or any other person;
(iiil get the statement of the videographer recorded before
the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or Executive Magistrate
in such manner as may be prescribed. "
7 .5. In Section 5 of the Principal Act:
(i) after the words and figure "or section 4", the words and figure "or
section 48" shall be inserted;
(ii) after the words "for such release", the words "and there are
reasonable grounds to believe that he is not guilty of the said
offence" shall be inserted.
(iii) Section 5 of the Principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section ( I ),
and the following shall be inserted as sub-section (2):
90
q",/

"(2) A person accused of an offence punishable under section 3 or
section 4 or section 48 shall be released on bail on condition of his
depositing in Court the amount equal to the estimated market value
of the property damaged, within such time as the court directs.
Provided that where the value of the property damaged is not
capable of being assessed in terms of money, such amount as the
Court may fix taking into account the focts and circumstances of the
case, shall be deposited as a condition for releasing such person on
bail;
Provided further that where there are two or more accused persons
in the case, the amount to be deposited by each of them shall be in
proportion between or among them;
Provtded also that the amount, if any, deposited as aforesaid shall
be taken into account by the Court while imposing fine and if the
accused is acquitted of the charges under the Act, the amount
deposited by him shall be refunded to him. "
7.6. After Section 6 of the Principal Act, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:
"6A. Power lo muke rules.- (l) The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particulati and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely,
(a) the atangement for videography under section 4D; and
(b) the manner of depositing the soft copies of videography
and recording the statement of the videographer under section
4D."
68. Rules to be laid before Porliamenl.- Every rule made by the
Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session,for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sesstorzs, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
9l b-

modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. "
7.7. In order to address the issue ofdamage to private property, a separate law
can be brought in such as the Kerala Prevention of Damage to Private
Property and Payment of Compensation Act, 2019 enacted in the State of
Kerala. The same can also be achieved by amending and adding to the
applicable sections of IPC or the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita.
7.8 Another related aspect that remains ignored is the prolonged obstruction of
public spaces and property such as highways, roads, railway lines, etc. This
also causes widespread inconvenience to the general public and economic
loss. While the scope and ambit of the PDPPAct does not cover acts of
"obstruction" as the Act has been enacted with the view to "prevention of
damage to public property and for matters connected therewith" ., howeveq
there are other Acts that deal with obstruction of public property or spaces.
Blockade of a highway will attract the National Highways Act, 1956166 and
that of railways will attract the Railways Act, 1989. r67 Blockade of railways
and highways undoubtedly attracts penal consequences under special laws
enacted for the same.168 While there are some state laws as well that deal
with the issue of obstruction of state highways, however, the penalty
prescribed therein for removing the encroachment is woefully
inadequate.r6e Further, it is also pertinent to note that many states do not
166 The National Highways Act, 1956, Act No.48 of 1956.
167 The Railways Act, 1989, Act No. 24 of 1989.
t68 Tripuro People's Front v. St.tb of Tripura, (W.P (Crl.) No.0212021); Lower Assam lnter District Slage
Corriage Bus Owner's Association v. State ofAsson and Ors.,?019 SCC Online Gau 1482; Raiveer Singh v.
State of Rajasrhan,2012 SCC Online Raj 3624.
r6e The West Bengal Highways Act, 1964, sec. l6: The Maharashtra l-lighways Act. 1955, sec. 57; The Cujarat
Highways Act, 1955, sec. 57.
92
w,

even have a law dealing with the obstruction or encroachment of state
highways.
7.9. 1'he question that arises for consideration is what if the public pathway
being wilfully obstructed is neither a national highway, a railway or a state
highway. The utility of the same cannot be said to be less than that of a
national highway or railway. Such prolonged obstructions often end up
causing huge inconvenience to the smooth movement of even essential and
emergency services such as availing of medical facilities, mobility of
ambulance and fire brigade, efficient discharge of administrative and
judicial functions, schools, colleges, etc. In such a scenario, it is
worthwhile to consider if such a prohibition on protracted obstructions can
also be enforced with respect to public properties and pathways apart from
national or state highways and railways.
7.10. Wherever, such protests are not in designated places and tend to create
wilful obstruction and blockade of public spaces and roads for prolonged
periods, a comprehensive law should be put in place to address them so
that they cannot get ignored and continue to cause tremendous hardships
to the general public in the guise ofabsence of legislation.
7. I l. The Commission, therefore, recommends that either a new comprehensive
law dealing with the same be enacted or a specific provision pertaining to
the same may be introduced in the IPC/BNS by way of an amendment.
The Commission recommends, accordingly.
----xxx----
93
&*

1n2,\
[Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi]
Chairperson
"-l
IPro r.) Anand Paliwall
Member
IProf. D.P. Vermal
Member
[Justice K.T. Sankaran I
Member
?L
[Dr. Niten Chandra]
Member (Ex-OlJicio)
[Mr. M. Karunanithi]
Pan-tirne Mernber
(*^"--'
[Dr. Rajiv Manil
Member (Ex-Officio)
[Prof. (Dr.) Raka Aryal
Part-tinre Member
94
fur-

Annexure-A
The Supreme Court vide an order dated l8-06-2007 (in the mafter of Writ
Petition (Crl.) No.7712007), had set up a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Mr. Justice K T Thomas, former Judge of the Supreme Court, to examine
modalities to be adopted to make the Prevention ot Damage to public property
Act, 1984 (PDPP Act, 1984) more effective and also suggest suitable changes.
which could make the Statute more meaningful.
2. The Committee concluded that the present law was inadequate and
ineffective to deal with the increasing number of instances of public property
damages and made some recommendatlons for amendment in the Prevention of
Damage to Public Properties Act, 1984. Accepting the recommendations of the
Justice K T Thomas Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs has proposed
amendments in the PDPP ACT, 1984. Proposed amendments seek to deter the
prospective violators from vandalizing and destroying public/private property during
agitations and other forms of protests. lmportantly, the proposed amendments will
also deter the office-bearers of these organizations.
3. The present provision of the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act,
'1984 is at Annexure-l and the proposed draft Prevention of Damage to public
Property Act (Amendment) Bill, 2015 is al Annexure-
4. The suggestions/comments on the proposed draft pDpp Acl
(Amendment) Bill,2015 from the Public and other stakeholders are soliciled on or
before 20rh July 2015 and the same may be sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs,
CS Division, 5h Floor. NDCC Building, Jai Singh Road, New Delhi-l 1 00 The
suggeslion could also be sent on e-mail: dircs'l-mha@mha.gov.in
umar A\
95
Joint Secretary
F No. 24013/'t 2/C.C./201 3-CSR.ilt
Government of lndia
Ministry of Home Affairs
(CS Division)
NDCC-Il Building, Jai Singh Road, New Dethl
Dated 20th May 2015
SUBJECT:-Suggestions regarding Amendment to the prevention of
Damage to Public Property Act 1984 by the prevention of
Damage to Public Property Act (Amendment) Bill, 201S
W./

Annexure-l
PR EVEN OF DAMAGE TO PUBI.IC PROP RTY ACT, 1984 (3 oF 1984)
An Act to ptovide for prevention ol domage to public propetty ond for motters connec,ed thetewith,
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth year of the Republic of lndia as follows :-
1. Short title, extent and commencement, -
1. This Act may be called the prevention of Damage to public property Act, 1994
2. lt extends to the whole of lndia except the State ol Jammu and Kashmir .
3. lt shall be de€med to have come into force on the 28th day oflanuary, 1984.
2. Definitions.-
ln this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
a. "mischief shall have the same meaning as in section 425 of the tndian Penal Code
(as of 1.860);
b. "public property" means any property, whether immovable or movable (including put any machinery) which is
owned by, or in the possession of, or under the control of -
i. the Central Government; or
ii. any State Government; or
iii. any local authority; or
iv. any corporation established by, or under, a Central, Provincial or State Act or
v. any company as defined in section 517 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); or
vi. any institution, concern or undertaking which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify in this behalf:
Provided that the Central Government shall not specify, any institution, concern or undertaking under this
sub-clause unless such institution, concern or undertaking is financed wholly or substantially by funds
provided directly or indirectly by the Central Government or by one or more State Governments, or partly
by the Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments.
3. Mischief causing damage to public property. -{1)Whoever commits mischief by doing any act in respect of any
public property, other than public property of the nature referred to in sub-section (2), shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine.
(2) Whoever commits mischief by doint any act in respect of any public property being -
2 The Prevention of Damage to Public Prope.ty Act, 1.984
a, any buildin8, installation or other property used in connection with the production, distribution or
supply of water, light, power or energy ;
b. any oil installation;
c. any sewage work;
d. any mine or factory;
e. any means of public transportation or of tele-communications, or any building, installation or other property
used in connection therewith shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than six months, but which may extend to five years and with Iine:
96
Gr-

Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in its judgment, award a sentence of imprisonment ror a
term of less than six months.
4. Mischief causing damage to public property by fire or explosive substance.-
Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 3 by fire or explosive substance
shall be punished with ritorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may
extend to ten years and with fine:
Provided that the court may, for special reasons to be recorded in its judgment, award a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year.
5. Special provisions regarding bail.-
No person accused or convicted of an offence punishable under section 3 or section 4 shall, if in custody,
be released on bail or on his own bond unless the prosecution has been given an opportunity to oppose
the application for such release.
6.saving.-
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in dero8ation of, the provisions of any other law
for the time being in force, and nothing contained in this Act shall exempt any person from any
proceeding (whether by way of investigation or otherwise) which might apart from this Act, be instituted
or t3ken against him.
7. Repeal and saving.-
The Prevention of Damage to Public Property Ordinance, 1984 (Ord. 3 of 1984), is hereby
repealed.
NotwithstandinB such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall
be deenred to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
1
2
97
G--

Annexure-ll
DRAFT BILL TO AMEND THE PREVENTTON OF DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPE RTY ACT
(PDPPA), '1984
Provisions of
PDPPA
ITHE PREVENT|oN OF OAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to amend the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, '1984
BE it enacted by Parlrament in the Sixty-fjfth year of the Republic of lndia
as follows:-
Short title and
commencement
1 . (1) This Ac1 may be called the Prevention of Damage to Public
Property (Amendment) Act, 2015
(2) lt shall come inlo force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoant.
Li
endment
Act 3 of
1 984
Amendment
of section 2
Amendment
of section 3.
lnsertion of
new seclions
4A,48,4C
and 4D
Presumption
against accused
2. ln the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), after the words "and with fine", wherever
they occur, the words "which shall be equivalent to the market values ot
the public property damaged" shall be inserted.
3. ln the principle Act, in section 2, after clause (a). the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
'(aa) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;'
4. ln section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the proviso, for
the words "for reasons", the words" for special reasons'' shall be
substituted.
5. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:-
"4A. Where an offence under this Act has been committed and it is
shown lhat public property has been damaged as direct consequence of
such offence and the accused participated in the commission ot such
offence, il shall be presumed unless tlte contrary is shown that the
accused had comnritted such offence.
48. Where damage to public property is caused in consequence of
demonstration, hartal or bandh called by any organisation, the office-
bearers of such organization, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
3 of 1984
Abetmenl of
mischief
98
s,,

lcommlssron
this Act and
accordingly
of the offence of abetment of an offence punishable under
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any
such office bearer liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if
he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
Punishment
for abetment
of mischief
Procedure for
Videography
of incidents of
demonstration
etc
(i) make such arrangenrents for the videography of the area wlrere
the demonstration, hartal or bandh is proposed to be held;
(ii) deposit the soft copies of videography in such manner, with the
concerned Sub-Oivisional Magistrate or Executive Magistrate
who may entrust the same to said police officer or any other
person;
(iii) get the statement of the videographer recorded before Sub-
Divisional Magistrate or Executive Magistrate in such manner,
as may be prescribed.: "
Amendment
of Seclion 5
(i) after the words and figure "or section 4", the words and figure'or
section 48" shall be inserted:
(ii) after the words "for such release", the words 'and there are
reasonable grounds to believe that he is not guilty of the said offence"
shall be inserted.
lnse(ion of
new sections
64 and 68
64. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in t
4C. Whoever abets an offence punishable under this Act shall be
punished with the punishment provided for that offence under this Act.
4D Where a call for demonstration, hartal or bandh has been given by an
Organisaiton and the officer-in-charge of a police station has reasons to
believe that damage to the public property is likely to be caused or there
is imminent danger of such damage, he shall,-
6. ln Section of the principal Act:-
7. After section 6 of the principal Act. the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:-
Power to
99
he Offic
L
L___i
I
w,/

make rules
Rules to be
laid before
Parfiament
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act
(21 ln partacular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:-
(a) the arrangement for vldeography under section 4D; and
(b) the mar:ner of depositing the soft copies of videography and
recording the statement of the videographer under Section 4D.
68. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and rf, before the expiry of the session immediately following
lhe session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be wilhout preiudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule."
r00
I
I
h--