r]-Iri,t a?;t
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
THE LAW ON CRIMINAL DEFAMATION
Report No. 285
Jantary,,2024

The 22'd Law Commission was constituted by Gazene Notification for a period of three
years vide Order No. F No. 45021/l /2018-Admn-lll(LA) dated 21't February, 2020 issued
by the Covemment of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Depanment of Legal Affairs,
New Delhi. The term ofthe 22nd Law Commission was extended vide Order No. FA No.
600 I I /225 12022- Admn.lll(LA) dated 22,,d February. 2023.
The Law Commission consists of a Chairperson, three full-time Members. Member
Secretary, two Ex-ofclo Members and two Part-time Members.
Chairoerson
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Full-time Members
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Prol (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Prof. D.P. Verma
Ex-ofljcio Members
Dr. Niten Chandra, Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs
Dr. Rajiv Mani, Secretary, Legislative Department
Part-time Members
Shri M. Karunanithi
Prof. (Dr.) Raka Arya
Law Oflicers
Smt. Varsha Chandra, Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri Atul Kumar Gupta, Deputy Law Officer
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Gaurav Yadav
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Ms. Priya Rathi
Ms. Ruchika Yadav
Ms. Deepika Chaudhary
Shri Kumar Abhishek
Shri Anubhav Dubey
The Law Commission is located at:
2'd and 4ih Floor, 'B' Wing
Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market
New Delhi-l l0 003.
The text ofthis Report is available on the Website at:
www.lawcommi ionofindia.nic.in
@ Government of India
Law Commission of India
Legal Consultants
&/

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Fom€r ChierJustice of High Cou( of Kamataka)
Chairperson
22"0 Law Commission of lndia
D O, No. 6( 3
qrqtrd rg rrv er{€fr
M+gr 5e qrq6v. o-cf-o BE qrfrq)
qqH
qrrf, + 22t frB srrfr.r
G-.qti aqd
)
75=
3{Igl-{Iar.
3rTdq-6rs{316/2017-LC (LS) Date: 3 1" January. 2024
k^LL g A'"1",^ Re,* vt,.rtx-tn:U U Ul" 
N*,r,.-*sr, \
I am pleased to forward you Report No. 285 of the Law Commission of India on ,.The Law
on Criminal Defamation." The Law Commission received a reference from the Ministry of
Law & Justice, vide letter dated 04th August, 2017, requesting the Commission to examine
various issues relating to the Defamation laws and make recommendations thereon.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court had the occasion to examine the constitutionality ol criminal
defamation in Subramanian Swamy v. Union of India l(2016) 7 SCC 2211. Having examined
the issue at length, the Hon'ble Supreme Court dismissed the challenge to Section 499 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, and held it to be constitutionally valid on account of it being a
reasonable restriction under Article l9(2) to the freedom of speech and expression enshrined
in Article I 9( I )(a).
In pursuance of the same, lhe 22nd Law Commission undertook an extensive study, analysing
the history of the law of defamation, its relationship vis-A-vis the right to freedom of speech
and expression, and the various judgments rendered by the Courts across the country. The
Commission, inter alia, also studied the relationship between right to reputation and the right
to freedom of speech and expression, and how the two need to be balanced. Further, the
Commission looked into the treatment of criminal defamation across various jurisdictions.
Having considered the above in-depth, the Commission recommends that criminal defamation
be retained within the scheme of criminal laws in the country. In this regard, it is important to
keep in mind that right to reputation flows from Article 21 of the Constitution of India, and
being a facet of right to life and personal liberty, needs to be adequately protected against
defamatory speech and imputations. Accordingly. this Report is being forwarded for your kind
perusal.
With warmest regards.
Yours sincerely,
2/
6\ \)'o
(Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi)
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (lndependent Charge)
Ministry of Law & Justice
Govemment of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi -l 10001.
orql+q rrar : aqcl i. 4os, irgel n-a. t' fifq, ato qrq6 ftrq, €ri qrh''c, T{ ffi-ttooog
Offce Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New D6lhi-'110003
olrErfrq rrf,r : drrirr d. a. drs .r+e0 cr.f, T{ frd-rroorr
Residenc€ : Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Marg, N€w Delhi-11O01'l
email : rituraj.arvaslhi@gov.in Tsl. : 011 -24654951 (O), 2/+310202, 2434,0203

The Commission would like to express its sincere gratitude to all those who
contributed to the completion of this Report on "The Law on Criminal
Defamation".
We are thankful to the numerous legal experts, scholars, and practitioners who
generously shared their knowledge and perspectives during interviews and
discussions. Their inputs have enriched the content ofthis Report and provided
valuable context to the complex issues surrounding criminal defamation laws in
India.
Further, we acknowledge the diligent efforts of Mr. Rishi Mishra, Mr. Gaurav
Yadav, Mr. Shubhang Chaturvedi, Ms. Priya Rathi, Ms. Ruchika Yadav,
Ms. Deepika Chaudhary, Mr. Kumar Abhishek, and Mr. Anubhav Dubey,
who worked as Legal Consultants. Their incisive and vital inputs in the research
and drafting of this Report is worthy of special mention. Their dedication and
commitment has been essential in ensuring the accuracy and comprehensiveness
ofthe content presented herein. We place on record our heartfelt appreciation for
their painstaking efforts in the preparation ofthis Report.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
h",-
I

TABLE O F CON'TENTS
I. INTRODUCTION I
IA. Reference to the Commission
B. Background 2
C. Issues to be Analysed 4
2. DEFAMATION IN CONCEPT, TFIEORY & LAW 7
A. History of Law of Defamation 7
B. Definition of Defamation ll
C. Defamation as an Offence t4
D. Defamation in Indian Law t6
3. RIGHT TO REPUTATION VIS-A-VIS FREEDOM OF SPEECH &
EXPRESSION 3l
A. Freedom ofSpeech and Expression 31
B. Right to Reputation 37
Right to Reputation as a Basic Human Right 7t
ii. Right to Reputation and Judicial Pronouncements 39
C. Striking Balance Between Reputation and Freedom of Speech 43
Balancing of Fundarnental fughts by CourtsI
II
43
&*-

ii. Proportionality Test 50
4. JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 55
5. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF CRIMINAL DEFAMATION LAWS65
A. Countries Having Legal Provisions on Criminal Defamation 66
Japan 66
ii. China. 68
iii. Canada 69
iv. European Countries 72
B. Countries where Defbrnation has been Decrirninalised 8l
6. CONCLUSION 87
A. Constitutionality of Criminal Defamation 87
B. Misuse of Criminal Defamation 90
C. Necessity of Criminal Defamation 95
Arguments for Retaining the Law of Criminal Defamation 96
D. Inadequacy of Civil Defamation 98
E. Recommendation by 42nd Report of Law Commission of India 103
7. RECOMMENDATIONS
t
I
105
U,-

A
I. INTRODTICTION
Reference to the Commission
The 2l't Law Commission received a reference vide letter dated 04th
August, 2017 from the Ministry of Law & Justice, wherein, the
Commission was requested to examine the subject of Defamation laws and
the issues incidental thereto. The reference arose from a letter dated 0l.t
September, 2016 by a then Member of Parliament, wherein, a request was
made to the Ministry of Law & Justice to review and deliberate upon the
defamation laws. While accepting the need for the law on civil defamation,
it was stated therein that the request pertains to the need for a review related
to the impact of the law of criminal defamation on the freedom of speech
and expression.
I
1.2. The said reference suggested a need to reform the law on defamation,
stating that existing laws neither serve the interests of the aggrieved person
nor the principle of free speech. The law of criminal defamation is
enumerated in Sections 499,500,501 and 502 ofthe Indian Penal Code,
1860 (hereinafter, "IPC"). It was stated in the reference that criminal
defamation traces its origin from the colonial era and is in conflict with the
democratic values and free speech as enshrined under Article l9(1)(a) of
the Constitution of India.
1.3. Accordingly, the 22d Law Commission decided to take up this issue and
review the law relating to criminal defamation in light of the existing
criminal laws, including the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, as well as the judgments
concerning the subject matter.
I
U*-

B. Bockground
1.4. A broad, panoramic view of the contemporary constitutional discourse
suggests that most constitutions in their text provide for the scope of
constitutional right and secondly, implicitly or explicitly, provide for
limitations to which such right is subjected to.r While the scope delineates
the area, content and the boundaries of the right, the limitations set forth
the conditions under which these rights may be less than fully realized.
These conditions allow for the constitutional rights to be limited, in a
reasonable manner, by a sub-constitutional norm.2 These limitation
clauses, thus, make explicit the process of limitation necessary for
translating indeterminate constitutional rights into determinate rights
suitable for application.3
1.5. These limitations, thus, often assist the courts in balancing the delicate task
of adjudicating upon the competing claims ofthe right-holders. In this vein,
the law of defamation has been described as 'a tale of two interests.' In the
first, the right holders possess the constitutional right of'free speech' that
stands as a beacon of democratic values, fostering open dialogue and the
exchange of diverse ideas; and on the other end, lies the crucial right to
reputation. The law of defamation, thus, becomes an arena where these
competing interests converge, demanding a nuanced examination of the
boundaries that should govern speech to ensure a fair equilibrium between
the protection of reputations and the preservation of robust public
discourse. Thus, the issue has been a focal point of widespreadjudicial and
I Aharon Barak, "Proportionality (2)", in Michel Rosenfeld, Andrris Saj6 (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of
Comparqlipe Constitutional Low 739 (Oxford Academic, Online Edn., 2012).
r GCN Webber, 'lntroduction: On the Limitation of Rights" in The Negttiable Constitution: On the Lini,qtion of
2
R€rrs l-12 (Cambridge University Press.2009)

scholarly attention to reconcile, harmonize, and compromise the
overlapping and confl icting interests.
1.6. In a democratic society, the right to free speech and expression is revered
as a foundational tenet. However, as the Indian jurisprudence unfolds, it is
evident that the protection of individual reputations is not a mere tangential
concem but a fundamental facet of human dignity. The need for a legal
provision addressing criminal defamation arises from the essential task of
balancing these constitutional values. The fabric of a vibrant democracy
relies on open discourse and the exchange of ideas, yet it also demands the
protection of individuals from malicious falsehoods that can tarnish their
character.
1.7. Criminal defamation, as enshrined in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, emerges
as a response to this inherent tension, acknowledging that the right to
express oneself freely should not come at the expense of irreparable
damage to personal reputation. A crime affects the society. It causes harm
and creates a dent in social harmony. It is the 'public' element that is
inherent in the language of Section 499 of IPC that strives to protect the
reputation ofan individual in the eyes ofthe public at large. It needs to be
emphasised that public wrong is not a wrong that injures the public, but as
one that violates the shared value that normatively defines the political
community.
I See, The Constitution of lndia, Preamble, arts. 21. 5l-A. For e.g.. see 1r'ilgi,,irr Bar.4ssociotion v. T.K.
Mahalingam and Anr., AIR 1963 SC 1088; Board of Trustees of the Porr of Bonboy v. Dilipkunar
Raghavendronath Nadkorni, ( I983) I SCC 124:' Umesh Ku qr v. Stqte cf Andhra Pradesh & Anr., (2013) l0
SCC 591; Subrunanian S\raur v. Union o/ lndia, (2016) 7 SCC 22I
3
1.8. The constitutional values enshrined in the Constitution, among other
things, seek to promote dignity.{ Against this backdrop, Article 19(2)
fu,-'-

imposes certain reasonable restrictions to enable right-holders to enjoy the
rights guaranteed under the Constitution rlore meaningfully. Moreover,
the Intemational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which
India is a signatory, expressly recognise 'reputation of an individual' as a
restriction upon the right of expression.5
C. Issues to be Analysed
1.9. The right of freedom of speech and expression is protected under Article
l9(l)(a) of the Constitution of India and the reasonable restrictions have
been prescribed in Article 19(2). Article l9(2) enumerates grounds on
which restrictions on the freedom of speech and expression can be
imposed, one of which is defamation. The offence of defamation as
provided under Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, seeks to
protect the reputation of an individual. As held in a catena of judgments,
the right to reputation is an integral part of the right to life and liberty under
Article 21.6 Thus, it is imperative to scrutinise whether the limitation or
restrictions imposed are constitutionally compliant or not. The issue does
not require the prevalence ofa particular right, rather it evaluates whether
one's right of unrestricted speech encroaches upon other's right to
reputation.
'Arriclc l9 ofthe ICCPR provides that:
19. (l) Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference.
(2) Everyone shall have the right to freedom ofexpression; this right shall include freedom to seek.
receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or
in print, in the form ofart. or through any other media ofhis choice
(3) The exercise ofthe rights provided for in Para (2) ofthis Anicle carries with it special duties and
responsibilities. lt may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as are
provided by law and are necessary;
(a) for respect ofthe rights or reputations ofothersl
(b) for the protection of national security or of public order (order public), or of public health or morals.
1
6 Supra note 4

1.10. The issue necessarily entails the balancing of competing interests. A long
well established jurisprudence settles the precarious relationship of these
competing interests by taking recourse to proportionality enquiry. As long
as the law satisfies the principles of proportionality, it is deemed to be
falling within the permissible limits for violating the constitutional right.T
The Indian Supreme Court in K.S. Puttaswamy (Privacy-9J.) v. Union of
India,s has laid down the test for proportionality; i.e., (i) The action must
be sanctioned by law; (ii) The proposed action must be necessary in a
democratic society for a legitimate aim; (iii) The extent of such
interference must be proportionate to the need for such interference; (iv)
There must be procedural guarantees against abuse of such interference.
Therefore, a review of criminal defamation which has also been adjudged
by the Supreme Court in the case of Subramanian Swamy v. Union Of
India,e wlll also involve analysis of criminal defamation as given in the
IPC and the importance and comparison of right to reputation vis-ir-vis
right ofspeech and expression.
1.1 1. The legal issue to be enquired is whether the law of defamation as
defined/punished in IPC is an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental
right to freedom ofspeech and expression and whether only a civil remedy
for the impingement of reputation of a person is sufficient to make up for
the loss of an aggrieved person. This examination will provide a response
to the question of whether the possibility of penalty/imprisonment for
criminal defamation acts as an undue restriction on the freedom of
expression. Another factor that must be carefully considered is the
significance ofan individual's reputation, which is considered essential to
7 R. Alexy, I Theory ofconstitutionol Rights (Oxford University Press, Oxford University Press,2002)
8 (20 t7) l0 scc t.
, AIR 2016 SC 2728.
5 A--

their right to life under Article 21, as well as the balance between the "right
of freedom ofspeech and expression" and the "right to reputation."
6
Ur.,-'

2. DEFAMATION IN CONCEPT, THEORY & LAW
A. History of Law of Defamation
2.1. The law of defamation professes to protect personal character and public
institutions from destructive attacks, without sacrificing freedom of
thought and the benefit of public discussion. The estimate formed of the
relative importance ofthese objects, and the degree ofsuccess attained in
reconciling them, would be an admirable measure of the culture, liberality,
and practical ability ofeach age.
2.2. The law of defamation is not the deliberate product of any period. It has
grown by aggregation, with little intervention from legislation. Special
peculiar circumstances have from time and again shaped its varying course.
In the ancient Roman law, abusive chants were dealt with through capital
punishments. In the Middle Ages, reputation was amply protected in
England by combined secular and spiritual authorities. Thereafter, the
jurisdiction of defamation went to the Judges in Courts.
2.3. In the early seventeenth century, when the potentialities of printing press
dawned upon the absolute monarchy, the emergency was met through
direct importation from the Roman law. In Roman law, sufficient scope
was given to a man's character and remedy was awarded for verbal
defamation in the form of civil damages.
2.4. The original Common Law doctrine of defamation, based upon the nature
of the imputation, stereotyped as the law of spoken defamation or slander,
inherited from Roman law and became the law of written and printed
7
S",-

defamation.r0 The popular action in the case of De Scandalis Magnatum
brought defamation to the fore. It was directed against political scandal and
the law was administered in the Star Chamber. This cognizance of
defamation considered as a political and criminal offence was repeatedly
confirmed and it had a greater influence upon the making of the laws.
2.5. Defamation was codified in English law as early as thirteenth century
during the reign of Edward I and thereafter in seventeenth century, during
the reign of James I under Attomey General Edward Coke who started a
series of libel prosecutions. In Common Law, defamation remained faintly
protected by the courts against the wishes of the Church and the Crown. It
was later that the courts started differentiating between the words
actionable per se and words actionable only on the proofofspecial damage.
2.6. The jurisprudence on defamation was, " ll/here words spoken do tend to the
infamy, discredit or disgrace of the party, there the words shall be
actionable."tt The case De L ibellis Famosisl2 was the formal starting point
of the English law on libel. Through this, a new form of actionable
defamation based on mere form was introduced in English law. Earlier,
what was generally brought under the scope oftreason or sedition was now
dealt separately under libel.
2.7. Lord Campbell's Libel Act of 1843 led to codification of the English law
on Defamation. Thereafter, Defarnation as an offence reached other settled
nations. The Common Law on Defamation found reflection in United
States where the First Amendment to the Constitution gave freedom of
r0 Van Vechten Veeder, "The History and Theory ofLaw ofDefamation", 3(8) Col. L. Rev.546-57i (1903)
tt Small y. Hammord I Bulstrode 40
12 .t rpra note 10.
8
W-

press. In New York Times v Sullivant3, the law on defamation was laid
down by the US Court as the charge by a public figure could be sustained
only if the offending statement was made with "actual malice".ra The law
on defamation, therefore, deepened its roots across nations.
2.8. The genesis of defamation laws in India can be found as early as in the
Manusmriti.lt had emphasised on the harm to reputation due to ill speaking
against a person. During the British rule, laws such as the Vemacular Press
Act, 1878 and the Newspaper (lncitement to Offences) Act, 1908, etc. were
enacted in order to curb criticism against the imperial British Government.
Most of the laws were inspired from the Common Law.
2.10. India's defamation law has evolved in response to changing social and
political conditions. After being drafled in 1837. the criminal defamation
laws were eventually codified into the Indian Penal Code in 1860.
According to Section 499, any false statement made about a person-
whether verbal, written, or otherwise-that is likely to harm that person's
reputation is illegally defamatory. There has been a visible shift from
prosecuting mass media and newspaper publishers in pre-independence
t3 Nev'YorkCo. v. Sullivan,376 US 524 (1964).
r4 "Defamation", 4vclilable qt: lrttps://www.britannica.com/topic/defamation (last visited onDec.24,2023)
9
2.9. The British Govemment was eager to control the press, but they never
succeeded in passing a single press regulation law. Instead of the
legislations specifically targeting newspapers that supported yellow
joumalism, regulations were put in place to restrict the newspapers that
reported the real public opinion.
fu.-

2.1 l. In 1898, the Indian Penal Code was amended to include Sections l24A and
l53A following the foundation of the Indian National Congress.
Subsequently, the Indian Press Act, 1910, a harsh legislation, was
implemented. It was reported that more than a thousand newspapers were
prosecuted, five hundred publications were proscribed and almost five lakh
rupees were handed over to the government in lieu of securities and
forfeiture. Later on, the Indian Press Emergency Powers Act, 193 I was
also passed.
2.12. These laws were brought about with the covert intention of suppressing
criticism of the state in vemacular languages.r6 The law of sedition, which
has been deemed by judges to constitute both a criminal offence as well as
defamation of the govemment, was also used by the colonial government
as a tool to supress the voice of the critical thinkers.rT In lieu of the above
modes of suppressing dissent, the law of defamation was also used as a
mechanism to suppress the unfavorable voices against the imperial rulers.
2.13. The law of defamation has a changed connotation with the development of
social media and fora of mass influence. It is used not to suppress
unfavorable opinion but in order to protect the right to reputation of
individuals or organizations. The reputation of a person has become
lt David S. Ardia, "Freedom of Speech, Defamation and Injunction",55 Will. & Mary L. Rev. (2013-2014).
available at: https://scholarship.la\y.wm.edu/wmlr/vol55/iss l/2/ (last visited on Dec. 24,2023).
16 Reba Chaudhuri, "The Story of the lndian Press", EPW, (March, 1955), available at:
https://www.epw.in/system/files/pdt7l955 7/ll/the story of'the indianlrress.pdf (last visited on Dec. 26,
2023).
t1 New York Times y. Sullivan, 376 U.5.254,2'16 (1964)
l0
times to prosecuting individuals expressing views on social media and
other platforms.r5
Uh-

vulnerable as the same is subj ect to opinion of a huge viewership online. It
has expanded its application to safeguard the honour and dignity ofthe
members of society and ensure protection to them against malicious
publications.
B. DeJinition of Defamation
2.14. A manrs acquires fame and repute in society through his hard work. He
wishes to protect his reputation, honour, dignity and character in the
society just as much as his right to enjoyment of property, health, liberty,
etc. An injury to his reputation in the society is termed as defamation. The
philosopher in Aristotle inspired him to give preference to reputation even
in the ancient times. He had stated " Be studious to preserve your
reputation; ifthat be once lost,youare like a cancelled writing, of novalue,
and at best you do but survive your own funeral " .
2.15. Defamation is the publication of a statement which reflects on a person's
reputation and tends to lower him in the estimation of right-thinking
members of the society generally or tends to make them shun or avoid
him.re According to the classical definition of the term 'defamation', as
given by Justice Cave in Scott v. Sumpson2o, defamation means a false
statement about a man to his discredit. In other words, defamation can be
explained as publication of a statement without justification or excuse of
that which is calculated to injure the reputation ofanother, tending to bring
him into hatred, ridicule or contempt2r in the estimate of right-thinking
members of the society.
rB Man, here, includes woman and the third gender; 'He' includes her and the third gender.
re W.V.H. Rogers & PH Winfield, llinJield and ,lolowic: on Torl 515 (Sweet & Maxwell. London, l7'h edn.,
2006).
ro t8E2 eBD 491.
2t R. v. Robinson, (1971) I QB 357
ll
k\-

2.16. As stated in the Draft Penal Code2z, defamation consists of the tendency to
cause pain, which is felt by a person who knows himself to be the object
of the unfavourable sentiments of the fellow creatures and those
inconveniences to which a person, who is the object ofsuch unfavourable
sentiments, is exposed. 23 This right is acknowledged as an inherent
personal right and is ajus in rem i.e., a right good against all persons in
the world. One can exercise this right against individuals as well as against
the society collectively.
2.17. As per the Black's Law Dictionary, defamation means "The offence of
injuring a person's character, fame, or reputation byfalse and malicious
statements" . 2a Therefore, the inherent definition of defamation has
remained the same over the years but its horizon has expanded based on
human inventiveness. It has expanded from statements related to character,
competence, social disease to disagreeable opinions and ridicule.
2.18. The law of defamation is founded on the principle that every man is entitled
to the good name and to the esteem in which he is held by others and has a
right to claim that his reputation shall not be disparaged by defamatory
statements about him to a third person without lawful justification or
excuse.25
2.19. Libel and Slander are legal sub-categories of defamation. Libel rs
defamation in some pennanent form such as written, printed, etc., and
rr The First Draft Penal Code was proposed by the First Law Commission. chaired by Thomas Babington
Macaulay in 1834. lt was submitted to the Govemor General of India in 1835.
rr Draft Penal Code, Note R, I 75- I 77.
24 'Achal Gupta, "Defamation - A Tort", SCC Online Blog, available qt:
hftps://www.scconline.com.&log/post/2021102/12/defarnation-2/ (last visited on Dec.26,2023)
r5 28 Halsbury's Laws of England 3 (LexisNexis UK, 4'h Edn.,l997).
t2 Sh.--

2.20. The aim of the law of defamation is to protect one's reputation, honour and
dignity in the society. It is both a crime and a civil wrong. A criminal
prosecution as well as a civil suit for damages can be filed. In civil law,
defamation falls under the Law of Torts, which imposes punishment in the
form of damages awarded to the claimant. In case of criminal law,
defamation is the act of offending or defaming a person by committing a
crime or offence. While the law of criminal defamation is codified in
Sections 499 to 502 of the Indian Penal Code, the law of civil defamation
is uncodified and largely based on case laws.
2.21. The intemational human rights treaties have time and again emphasised on
the right to reputation. The foundation is laid through Article 12 of the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights, 1948, which clearly stipulates
that no one shall be subjected to attack on his honour and reputation.26
2.22. Similarly, Article l7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (hereinafter, "ICCPR") provides for protection against unlawful
attacks on a person's honour and reputation.2i Article l9(3) of the ICCPR
also makes reference to the rights and reputation of others as a legitimate
ground for limitation of the right to freedom of expression. Reputation is
16 Charter of The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, rnuilable at: https://www.un.org/en/about-
usluniversal-declaration-of'human-rights (last yisited on Dec. 21, 2023).
rTCharter of ICCPR , a|ailable at. https:/'/www.ohchr.org/en/instrunrents-mechanisms/instruments/intemational-
slander is defamation through spoken words or gestures. In libel, the
statement is addressed to the eyes and it is actionable per se irrespective of
the proof of actual damage. However, in slander, the statement is addressed
to the ears and it is not actionable unless proof of actual damage exists.
covenant-civil-and-political-rights (last visited on Dec. 27, 2023).
l3 fu-,'

therefore, the underlying basis in any claim of defamation, whether slander
or libel.
2.23. Similarly, Articles 8 and l0 of the European Convention forthe Protection
of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (hereinafter, "ECHR")
provides that everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
life, his home and his correspondence. The intemational covenants
explicate that the individual honour and reputation is of great value to
human existence being attached to dignity and constitute an inalienable
part of a complete human being.28
C. Defamotion as an Offence
2.24. The offence of defamation is based on certain essential characteristics. It
is only when the act falls under the following criteria does it amount to
defamation. Firstly, the statement must be defamatory. Defamatory content
is defined as one calculated to injure the reputation of another by exposing
him to hatred, contempt or ridicule. However, the test of a right-minded
citizen is applied where meaning of the content is considered to be what a
common, ordinary man will comprehend it to be.
2.25. Secondly, the defamatory statement must refer to the plaintiff. The content
must be clearly addressing a particular person or a very small group for it
to be defamation. A statement referring to a larger group like a profession
is nor defaming. The court has stated that such collection of individuals
must be an identifiable body so that it is possible to say that with
2sSubramanian Swamy v. lJnion of lndia, WP(Crl.) 184 of20l4, 79
t4
k--

definiteness that a group of particular persons, as distinguished from the
rest of community, was defamed.2e
2.26. Thirdly, the statement must be published, i.e., it must be communicated to
at least one person other than the claimant.l0 An act that fulfils all the above
essentials will be classified as an offence of defamation.
2.27. Defamation is not an absolute offence. The respondent is entitled to certain
defences in order to prevent miscarriage ofjustice. In order to establish that
not all statements could be defamatory, certain defences can be availed by
the respondent. For instance, it is not defamation to impute anything, which
is true, concerning any person.3r No defamation suit can be brought against
someone if he imputes something true or for public good.r2 It has been
accepted that if a newspaper report is true and accurate or if the accused
had a bonafide belief that the version of someone is true and on that basis
published the reporl in good faith, it cannot be said that he intended to harm
the reputation of the complainant.3s
2e C. Nerasimhan & Ors. etc. v. T.V. Chokappa, AIR 1972 SC 2609.
30 Mahender Rqm v. Hqrnandan Prasad. AIR 1958 Pat 445.
3t Alexonder y. N.E. Rly., (1865) 6 B&S 340.
r2 The Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Act 45 of 1860), g 499, exception I .
3l.lawaharlal Dctrdq v. Manoharro Ganpatrao Kqpiskqr, (1998)4 SCC Il2
3a Slin v. Dqil, Telegroph, (1968) | All ER 497.
l5
2.28. Similarly, a fair comment, i.e., a comment which is a fair expression of an
opinion and is made in public interest, is also a defence against a suit for
defamation. Fair comment must be expression of opinion rather than
assertion of fact. The comment must be fair and must also be made in
public interest.3a
'p.r"'

Likewise, a privileged communication is exempted from defamation as it
is protected by law. A defence lies with the accused as he is protected by
law from disclosing ceftain communications such as Parliamentary
proceedings, communication with judges and advocates, etc. A
communication can fall under absolute privilege, i.e.,, there is absolute
immunity from a law suit on charge of defamation such as in case of
defence and j udicial communication. It could alternatively fall under
qualified privilege where the defence would lie only if it is made without
malice, i.e., in the course of legal, social or moral duty.
2.30. Defamation has various facets and connotations. Its scope has expanded
with the evolution of society and technological advancement. It is still in
accordance with the freedom ofspeech and expression and it protects the
reputation of law-abiding individuals of society.
D. Defomation in Indion Low
2.31. Defamation is an all-encompassing term which can stretch from
aspersions, statements, malicious publications injurious to reputation, fame
and social image. Due to its vast length and breadth, the law of defamation
haS found its existence in the Indian laws since the British introduced it
during the colonial era.
2.32. The Indian Constitution contains provision for defamation in the form of a
reasonable restriction. The right to uninhibited freedom of speech
conferred by Article l9(l)(a) is basic and vital for the sustenance of
parliamentary democracy. The "reasonable restrictions" are those which
are meant to prevent the expression of a thought which is intrinsically
dangerous to public interest. Contempt of court, defamation and incitement
t6
2.29.
h.-

to an offence are some exceptions. Apart from the Constitution, defamation
is an offence under the criminal law.
2.33. The Indian Penal Code, 1860 has comprehensive provisions pertaining to
criminal defamation. Chapter XXI contains Sections 499-502, which
exclusively deal with the offence of defamation. Defamation against the
state is contained in Section l24A as the offence of Sedition, Section 153
of the Code provides for defamation of a class i.e., community, while
Section 295,4' deals with hate speech with regards to outraging religious
sentiments.
2.34. According to Section 499,"Whoever by words either spoken or intended
to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes
any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or
having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of
such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame
that person." 35 This makes it unlawful to communicate any false
information about an individual with the intention of harming their
reputation or having reasonable suspicion that doing so will lead to
lowering the reputation of that person.
2.35. The aforesaid section provides four explanations and ten exceptions. In
Mohd. Abdulla Khan v. Prakash K. 16 , the Supreme Court examined
Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code in detail and enumerated irs
essentials. To constitute an offence of defamation, it requires a person to
make some imputation concerning any other person.
r5 The Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Act 45 of I 860), g 499
16 (2018) I SCC 6 t5.
t7
s---

2.37. In essence, the offence of defamation is the harm caused to the reputation
of a person. It would be sufficient to show that the accused intended or
knew or had reason to believe that the imputation made by him would harm
the reputation of the complainant, irrespective of whether the complainant
actually suffered directly or indirectly from the imputation alleged.le
2.38. The difference between imputation and publication is that if 'X' tells 'Y'
that 'Y' is a criminal 
-'X' 
makes an imputation, whereas if 'X' tells 'Z'
that 'Y' is a criminal 
- 'X' publishes the imputation. The essence of
publication in the context of Section 499 is the communication of
defamatory imputation to persons other than the persons against whom the
imputation is made.
2.39. An imputation can be said to harm a person's reputation if that imputation
directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others-
2.36. Any material in order to qualifu as a criminal defamation must be
communicated through various mediums, such as spoken words, written
content, or gestures, with the condition that it is made known to a third
party. There must be an imputation and such imputation must have been
made with the intention of harming or knowing or having reason to believe
that it will harm the reputation of the person about whom it is made.37 It is
vital to understand that intention plays a significant role in constituting the
offence of defamation and no defamation shall occur if the alleged
wrongful acts were not committed without the necessary mens rea.38
17 Jelfrey J. Diermeier v. Srote of l,y.B., (2010) 6 SCC 243.
18 Mohd. Abdullq Khany. Prqkqsh K, (2018) I SCC 615.
3e Jelhq, J. Diermeierv. Srate of W.8., (2OlO) 6 SCC 243.
t8
U\-

Lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or
Lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his
calling, or
Lowers the credit of that person, or
Causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome
state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful.ao
2.40. lf an imputation is made regarding a deceased person, having the tendency
to harm the reputation of that person as if he were living, it may amount to
defamation, if it is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or
other near relatives. al An imputation expressed in the altemative or
expressed ironically may also amount to defamation.a2
2.41. Imputation conceming a company or an association of persons or
collection of persons may also amount to defamation under Section 499 of
IPC4I, if such imputation fulfills other essential ingredients of the offence
of defamation as discussed hereinabove.
"Explanation 2 to the section 499 lays down that it may amount to
defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an
association or collection ofpersons. But such a collection ofpersons
must be an identifiable body, so that, it is poss ible to say with
a
a
a
a
l9
2.42. ln G. Narasimhan & Ors. v. T. V. Chokkappaaa, the Supreme Court while
deciding whether a conference sponsored and organised by Dravida
Kazhagam was a body which could come within the scope of Explanation
2 ofSection 499, observed that:
40 The Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Act 45 of I 860). g 499, Exp. 4.
'r The lndian Penal Code, I E60 (Act 45 of I 860), g 499, Exp. I .
a? The Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Act 45 of I860), g 499, Exp. 3.
{r The lndian Penal Code, I 860 (Act 45 of 1860), g 499, Exp.2.
1r AIR t972 SC 2609.
&y.-

definiteness that a group of particular persons is distinguished from
the rest, of the community, was defamed. Therefore, in a case where
Explanation 2 is resorted to the identity of the company or the
association or the collection ofpersons must be established so as to
be relatable to the defamatory words or imputations. tf a well-
defined class is defamed, every particular member of that class can
file a complaint even if the defamatory imputation does not mention
him by name.
The test whether the members of a class defamed are numerous or
not would not be apt in a criminal prosecution where, technically
speaking, it is not by the persons injured but by the state that
criminal proceedings are carried on and a complaint can lie in a
case of libel against a class ofpersons, provided always that such in
class is not indeterminate or indefinite but, a definite one. There is
no diference in principle between this rule of the Common Law of
England and the rule laid down in Explanation 2 to s. 499 I.p.C.
The conference sponsored and organized by Dravida Kazhagam
clearly was not an identifiable or definitive body so that all those
who attended it could be said to be its constituents, who, if the
conference was defamed, woutd, ii their turn, be said to be defamed.
It is impossible to have any definite idea as to its composition, the
number of persons who attended, the ideas and ideologies to which
they subscribed, and whether all of them positively agreed to the
res olution in question."
2.43. Further,in M.P. Narayana Pillai & Ors.v. M.P. Chacko & Anra5,the
Kerala High Court held that:
"There cannot be defamation against a community as such.
Community as such may not have a reputation, but the reputation will
only be of individual members. When the defamatory matter affects
each and every member of an ascertainable class or group each of
them or all of them could set the law in motion. If actually a collection
or class of people is ascertainable with definiteness it could be said
that the specific group ofpersons as distinguishedfrom the rest ofthe
community-was defamed. Identity of the collection of the people will
{5 1986 cri t-J 2002.
20
G*-

have to be established in relation to the defamatory imputations.
Where persons in the association or collection as such are
ascertainable and the words or imputations are shown to be against
all the persons in the association or collection as such, any one of the
members could make a complaint. The cardinal rule is that the offence
consists in using language which others lorcwing the circumstances
would reasonably think to be defamatory of the person complaining
of and injured by it."
2.44. For every offence, certain defences, in the form of general or special
exceptions are available to the accused. Similarly, for the offence of
defamation, in addition to general defences, several exceptions are
provided under Section 499 ofthe IPC itself. These exceptions define the
circumstances where the act of the accused alleged to be defamatory shall
not amount to the offence of defamation.a6 The courts have time and again
stated that the exceptions mentioned under Section 499 are exhaustive and
no defence can be permitted beyond what is mentioned in the Code.aT
2.45. The defences for defamation as provided under Section 499 ofthe IPC are:
Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or
published.
Public good is a question of fact. Good faith also has to be
established as a factas. ln Chaman Lal v. State of Punjable, the
Supreme Court elaborated on scope ofthe First Exception to Section
499 ofthe Penal Code and held that:
a6 Baburqo Shankateo Chqvon v. Biban Baban Pohelv'an, (1984) I Bom CR 194
a1 Tiruvengada Mudali v. Tripurosundari Ammol, (1926) 5l MLJ ll2.
aE Chqman Lol v. State ofPunjab, (1970) I SCC 590.
4e lbid.
2t
I
W-

50 Chamqn L(rl v. Srare of Punjab, (1970) I SCC 590.
5t J. Sudhir Chqndrashekhar v. T. Lokaprakash,2O0 I SCC Online Kar 210
5' (1998) 4 SCC I 12.
"ln order to comewithin the First Exception to Section 499 of
the Penal Code. 1860 it has to be established that what has
been imputed concerning the respondent is true and the
publication of the imputation is for the public good. The onus
of proving these two ingredients, namely, truth of the
imputation and the publication of the imputation for the
public good is on the appellant."
Expression of any opinion in good faith respecting conduct of a
public servant in discharge of his public functions or respecting his
character, so far as such character appears in that conduct.
22
.
Good faith requires care and caution and prudence in the background
of context and circumstances.50 In order to establish good faith, it
has to be shown that the publication was made honestly in the belief
of its truth and there were reasonable grounds for such a belief.
Further, it needs to be shown that publication was made after the
exercise of such means to verifo its truth, as would be taken by a
man of ordinary prudence under similar circumstances. The plea of
good faith implies the making of a genuine effort to know the truth.
A mere belief in the truth, without any reasonable grounds for such
belief, is not synonymous with good faith.5l
ht Jawaharlal Darda v. Manoharrao Ganpatrao Kapsikal2, a news
item was published disclosing an accurate and true report of
proceedings of Legislative Assembly, consisting of a statement of a
Minister disclosing misappropriation of govemment fund. In such a
statement, name of the complainant was mentioned as one of the
persons involved in such misappropriation. It was held that the news
6-

lll.
lv.
vl.
vl l.
vlll.
Expression of any opinion in good faith respecting conduct of a
person touching any public question, and respecting his character,
so far as such character appears in that conduct.
Publication oftrue reports ofproceedings ofa Court ofJustice, or of
the result ofany such proceedings.
Expression ofany opinion in good faith respecting merits of a case
decided by a Court ofJustice, or respecting conduct ofa person as a
party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting character of
such person, as far as such character appears in that conduct.
Passing censure in good faith on the conduct ofa person by a person
having authority over that person, either conferred by law or arising
out of lawful contract.
Preferring accusation in good faith against any person to any person
having lawful authority over that person with respect to subject-
matter of accusation.
lx.
23
report was published about public conduct of public servants for
public good, in good faith, believing the statement to be true. Hence,
the publishers weren't held Iiable for the offence of defamation.
Expression in good faith of any opinion respecting merits of any
performance submitted by the author to the judgment of the public
or respecting character of the author so far as his character appears
in such performance.
Making imputation in good faith over character of another for
protection of interests of maker or any other person or for public
good. \
e"-

The difference between the Eighth Exception and the Ninth
Exception was elaborated by the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal v.
State of Punjabrr, wherein the Court stated that:
"Under the Eighth Exception, statement is made by a person
to another who has authority to deal with the subject-matter
of the complaint whereas the Ninth Exception deals with the
statement for the protection of the interest of the person
making it. Interest of the person has to be real and legitimate
when communication is made in protection of the interest of
the person making it."5a
The Delhi High Court in Standard Chartered Bank v. Vinay Kumar
Soods5, discussed the scope ofNinth Exception to Section 499 and
observed that:
"9th Exception relates to private communication which a
person makes in good faith for the protection of his own
interest. This exception covers not only such allegations of
facts as can be proved true but also expression of opinions
and personal inferences. Ninth exception has been
incorporated to protect the interests of the parties in their
business transaction which are generally done bonafidely
and, therefore, the rule of public good on which this principle
is based is, that honest transaction of business and social
intercourse would otherwise be deprived of the protection
which they should enjoy."
While dealing with the nature and scope of onus of proof which the
accused has to discharge in answer to charge of defamation, while
taking plea of defence of Exception 9, the Supreme Court in
5r (t970) I scc 590.
5a Konw(rl Lal y. Srare Of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC l3l7
55 2009 scc onLine Det 227: (2009) l08 DRJ 709.
24
u-

Harbhajan Singh v. State of Punjab56, has laid down following
principles:
"The nature and scope of the onus of proofwhich the accused
has to discharge in seeking the protection of Exception 9 to
Section 499 is as under:-
(i) If it N shown that the accused has led evidence to show that
he acted in good faith, and by the test of probabilities that
evidence establishes his case. he will be entitled to claim the
benefit ofException 9.
(ii) The proof of truth of the impugned statement is not an
ingredient of the Ninth Exception as it is of thefirst; under the
Ninth Exception it is not necessary, and indeed it is
immaterial, to consider whether the accused has strictly
proved the truth of the allegations made by him.
(ii) It is true that the mere plea that the accused believed that
what he stated was true by itself, will not sustain his case of
goodfaith under the Ninth Exception. Simple belief or actual
belief by itself is not enough. lt must be shown that the belief
in the impugned statement had a rational basis and was not
just a blind simple belief. That is where the element of the due
care and attention plays an important role. If before making
the statement the accused did not show due care and attention,
it would defeat his plea of good faith. But it must be
remembered that good faith does not require logical
infailibility.
(iv) It is not possible to lay down any rigid rule or test for
deciding whether an accused person acted in good faith under
the Ninth Exception. The question has to be considered on the
facts and circumstances ofeach case, what is the nature of the
imputation made, under what circumstances did it come to be
made, what is the status of the person who makes the
imputation; was there any malice in his mind when he made
the said imputation, was any enquiry made by him before he
made it, are there reasons to accept his story that he act with
due care and attention and was satisfied that the imputation
56 AIR t966 sc a7.
25
e\--

x
was true? These and other considerations would be relevant
in deciding the plea of goodfaith under the Ninth Exception.
(v) Absence of personal malice may be a relevant fact in
dealing with the accused's plea of good faith, but its
significance or importance cannot be exaggerated. The
accused will have to show that he acted with due care and
attention, even in the absence of personal malice."
Further, it has been held that "where to the charge of defamation
under Section 500, Penal Code, the accused invokes the aid of
Exception (9) to Section 499, goodfaith and public good have both
to be established. The failure to prove good faith would exclude the
application of the Ninth Exception in favour of the accused even if
the requirement of public good is satisfied." 57
Conveying caution in good faith to one person against another for
good of the person to whom it is conveyed or of some person in
whom he is interested or for public good.
lnJeffrey J. Diermeier v. State of W.B.s8, while discussing the scope
of tenth exception to Section 499 of IPC, the Supreme Court held
that:
57 J. Su<lhir Chandrqshekhar y. T. L<*aprukosh, 200 1 SCC Online Kar 2l0
58 (2010) 6 scc 243.
26
"lt is trite that where to the charge of defamation under
Section 500 IPC the accused invokes the aid of Tenth
Exception to Section 499 IPC, "good faith" and "public
good" have both to be established by him. The mere plea that
the accused believed that what he had stated was in "good
faith" is not suficient to accept his defence and he must justify
the same by adducing evidence. However, he is not required
to discharge that burden by leading evidence to prove his case
beyond a reasonable doubt.
Ah,-

The question has to be considered on the facts and
circumstances of each case, having regard to the nature of
imputation made; the circumstances on which it came to be
made and the status of the person who makes the imputation
as also the status of the person against whom the imputation
is allegedly made. These and a host of other considerations
would be relevant and required to be considered for deciding
the appellants'plea of"goodfaith" and "public interest". All
these are questions offact and matters for evidence."
2.46. Section 500 of the Indian Penal Code specifies the punitive measures,
including imprisonment for a period extending up to two years, a fine, or a
combination of both.
2.47. Section 501 ofthe Code defines and punishes the 'printing or engraving
the matters known to be defamatory'. It says that whoever does the above
said act with the intention or with a reason to believe that such matter is
defamatory, "shall be punishedwith simple imprisonmentfor a term which
may extend to fwo years, or with fine, or with both. "
2.48. Section 502 punishes the sale or an offer for sale of any such printed or
engraved substance. It also contains the same punishment as in Section
50r.
2.49. The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (hereinafter, ..BNS,,), has been
recently introduced as a replacement of the long standing Indian penal
Code, 1860. The last chapter of BNS, i.e., Chapter XIX contains offences
related to criminal intimidation, insult, annoyance and defamation.
2.50. Section 354 of the BNS defines defamation and corresponds to Section 499
of the IPC. Unlike four distinct sections as given in IpC, the new Act
27 S"-

provides for one single offence under section 354. It comes with the same
number of explanations and exceptions as were given in section 499 of
IPC. The only amendments that have been made in the criminal law of
defamation is with respect to the punishment.
2.51. Section 354(2) prescribes the punishment of criminal defamation as
"Whoever defames another shall be punishedwith simple imprisonmentfor
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both or with
c o mm un ity se rvice." (ernphasis added)
2.52. The Code of Crirninal Procedure,, 1973 provides for prosecution for
defamation. Section 199 of the Code provides that defamation is a bailable,
non-cognizable and compoundable offence. Therefore, the police cannot
start investigation of defamation without a warrant from a magistrate. The
accused also has a right to seek bail. Funher, the charges can be dropped if
the victim and the accused enter into a compromise to that effect, even
without the permission of the court. The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita,2023 (hereinafter, "BNSS") has the same provision under Section
222 under the head "Prosecutionfor defamation".
2.53. The application of criminal defamation statutes has not been without
contestation. Some claim that these rules could unintentionally violate
people's fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression since
' people may be afraid offacing legal consequences for publicly expressing
their thoughts.5e Furthermore, worries about possible abuse, i.e., the use of
defamation laws to suppress reasonable criticism or dissent have sparked
5' Article I 91 I ya; of the Constitution of India enumerates the right to fieedom of speech and expression.
28 6,,-

conversations about re-evaluating a balance between preserving
reputations and defending the democratic ideal of free speech.
2.54. The criminalization of defamation remains a topic of debate intemationally
as well, with some advocating for a shift towards civil remedies to address
reputational harm while others emphasising on maintaining the stringent
protection against one's reputation.
2.55. Section 499 IPC (or Section 354 of BNS) read with the Exceptions
provided therein, incorporates all the three classical elements of a crime
while penalizing certain forms of speech and expression. The provision
criminalizes only that speech which is accompanied by malicious intention
to harm or with knowledge that harm will be caused or with reckless
disregard. The requirement of guilty intention, knowledge or proof of
recklessness (absence of good faith) that form the bedrock of various
provisions of IPC is also incorporated in the law of defamation as given in
the Code6o.
2.56. Libel is not merely an actionable tort but also a criminal offence. But
slander is only a civil injury. The distinction between libel and slander has
not been recognized and followed with unanimity in Indian courts. In
Hirabai v Dinshaw6t, the Bombay High Court took the view that imputing
defamation is punishable both civilly and criminally without proof of
special damages. Similarly, other courts have also held that slander is
actionable even without proof of damages.62 In India, civil and criminal
@ Subramaniqn Swamy v. Llnion of lndia, (2016) 1 SCC 221
6r AIR 1927 Bom 22.
62 Rahim Bakhshv. Bachchalall, AIR 1929 AII 214.
29
W-

proceedings can be instituted simultaneously against a person for
publication of defamatory news items.63
2.57. ln the case of State of Gujarat v. Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat,6athe
court opined that an honour which is lost or life which is snuffed out cannot
be recompensed. Therefore, reputation plays a very crucial role in
safeguarding social order and harmony.
63 Servants of lhe Peoples Society v. pyori Mohon Mohapotra, AIR 2006 Ori 75.
64 (1998) 7 SCC 392.
30
W-

3. RIGHT TO REPUTATION VIS-A-VIS FREEDOM OF SPEECH &
EXPRESSION
A Freedom of Speech and Expression
The freedom of speech and expression is a right which is explicitly
provided in Article 19(l)(a) of the constitution of India. It is a natural
right65 recognized and guaranteed by the Constitution and cannot be
curtailed except through legislation passed by the laid down procedure66.
It is a basic right which is recognized as a natural right ofevery citizen.6?
It finds its immaculate reflection in the oft-quoted statement by voltaire,
"l may not agree with what you have to say, but I will defend to the death
your right to say it."
3.1
3.2- various intemational conventions,, such as the International covenant on
civil and Political Rights68, the European convention on Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms6e, and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights70, guarantee the freedorn to speak and express freely.
3'3. The imponance of freedom of speech and expression has also been
underlined by Bhagwati, l. in Maneka Gandhi v. lJnion of IndiaTt:
65 Mane*q Gandhi v. union Of lndio, 1978 SCR (2) 621 .
6OH Phillips & Paul Jackson, Constitutional qnd Adminislrative Zaw (Sweet & Maxwell, London, 7rh Edn.,1987).
61-State ofllest Bengal v- Subtxlh GopalBose, AIR 1954 SC 92.d Article l9(2) ofthe International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides that,', Everyone shal! hoeth: richt- t? Jleedon ofexPression: this righr shall inclucle freedom to ieek,'receive onrl intport infornation andidc.as of al.l kinds, regordless offrontiers, eilher orally, in w ting or in print, in lhe |orm if art, Lr through anyorher uedia of his choice."
6e-Article lo(l) ofthe European convention on Human Rights Fovides tha t,,,Everyone has the righr bfreedomofexpression. This right sholl includefreedon to hold opiiioni ond to receive qnd impart informiion ind ideaswilhout inlerference by public authority ond regordlesi offronriers. This Article shall nr" pr*"ri s,it"" 1'"o,requiring the licensing ofbroadcqsting, teleyision or cinemq enterprises.,,?0 Article l9 of the universal Declaration of Human nights provijes iha t,,, Everyone hrrs the right to freedom ofopinion and expression: lhis right includesfreedon to hold ipinions without intirference and toseek, ieceiye andimpart information ond ideas through any media and regariless ofJiontiers,,,
'r (1978) I SCC 248i AtR t978 SC 59?.
3l
M,/

"ln a democratic system, the only means of cotecting government
activity is through Ji"ee debate and open discussion. Every person
must have the right to porticipate in the democratic process if
democracy is defined as the government ofthe people, by the people,
andfor the people."
3.4. It has been made clear by the court that Article l9 only deals with certain
particular rights, which in their origin are attributes of freedom of person.
In other words, freedorn of person is not the outcome of Article 19 itself.72
3.5. Before getting into the wide horizon of freedom ofspeech and expression,
the purpose and jurisprudential essence of this article must be explored.
This right is a foundation without which many of the ancillary rights cannot
be enjoyed. These rights, including attainment of self-fulfillment,
participation in decision making, discovery of truth, etc. cannot be
achieved unless freedom of speech is utilized in a bonafide way. This
allows individuals to contribute in good governance, raise dissent and work
for the.iust cause.73
3-6. This right guarantees to every citizen the right to state his views, opinions
and convictions. l-lnder this right, a person is free to express his views by
word of mouth, writing, printing or any other way. As held by the Supreme
court in various judgments, this right consists of the following rights
amongst others:
. Right to propagate one's views as well as view of others
o Freedom of Press
o Freedom of commercial advertisement
. Right to telecast
72 A.K. Gopalan v. State of Mqdras, AIR 1950 SC 27.
73 V. Govindu, "Contradictions in Freedom ofSpeech and Expression',, 72(3) IJPS 641-650 (2OI l)
32 N/

Freedom of silence
Right to know
Right to demonstration but not right to strike
Right against imposition of pre-censorship on a newspaper
3.7. According to Justice Hidayatullah in Ranjit D udeshi v. State of
MaharashtraTa,"Freedom of speech and expression is that cherished right
on which our democracy rests and is meant for the expression of free
opinions."
3.8. ln Romesh rhapar v. state of Madras,ii the Supreme court dealt with the
ban by the Madras Government on entry and distribution of ,Red Cross',,
an English Journal in Bombay, and held that the order was unconstitutional
as it was a violation of the freedom of speech and expression as,,without
freedom of distribution, publication would be of little value.,, The court
also observed that, "freedom of speech and expression includes freedom of
propagation of ideas which is ensured by the freedom of circuiation.,'
3.9- In another landrnark judgment of the Supreme court in Bennett Coleman
& Co. v. (Jnion of IndioTl', the Court struck down a government policy
restricting the irnport of newsprint and allocating it among newspapers in
a discriminatory manner as unconstitutional. It was observed by the court
that:
"lf as a result of reduction tn pages, the newspapers will have to
depend on advertisements as the main source of their income, they
will be denied dissemination of news and views. That will also
a
a
a
a
7{ AIR t965 sc 88 | .
75 AIR t95o sc 124.
7u AIR t973 sc l06.
JJ
q-,

deprive them of their freedom of speech and expression. On the
other hand, if as a result of restriction on page limit, the newspapers
will have to sacrifice advertisements and thus weaken the limit of
financial strength, the organisation may crumble. The loss on
advertisements may not only entail the closing down but also affect
the circulation and thereby infringe on freedom of speech and
expression."
3.10. In S Rangarajan v. P. Jagjivan RamTi,aban on a film depicting inter-caste
marriage and communal violence was challenged. The Supreme Court held
this ban to be unconstitutional as it violated the right to receive and impart
information and ideas, which is a part of wider freedom of speech and
expresslon.
3. 1 1 . This right is used by media, press, individuals and any other entiry which
have the freedom to express and opinionate. The exercise of this right has
originated for the protection of rights of people who may not raise their
voice and for raising voice against the unjust. This has roots in the
democratic structure of the country and cannot be compromised except by
restriction given under the Article itself. This right has such broad
connotations and itjust cannot be limited to targeting a person's reputation
and dignity. Speech includes words and statements, which if used in a right
way, can motivate people for centuries and if used negligently, can lead to
a loss of life as well.78
3.12. The Indian philosophy has stressed on the importance of true and fair
speech. A quote in Sanskrit says:
77 (t989) 2 scc 574.
73 Japanese wrestler Hana Kimura took her own life after bullying and insults on social media. Thereafter, the
Japan's Parliament amended the criminal law ofdefamation and increased the penalty and fine for the same.
34 w/

It means that "Speak what is true; speak what is pleasing; Do not speak
what is unpleasant, even if it is true; And do not say what is pleasing, but
untrue; this is the eternal law."1e
3.13. Another quote was given by the great Tamil poet-saint Thiruvalluvar in 3l
BCE, in his classic work "Thirukkural ", which when translated comes out
as:
*lnJlesh byfire inJlamed, nature may thoroughly heal the sore:
In soul by tongue inJlamed, the ulcer healeth never more.,,
3.14. lt is not in dispute that even when there was no law, the right of free speech
was still restricted by certain advices and moral injunctions. Therefore, it
cannot be said that the unlimited exercise ofthe right offreedom ofspeech
and expression has always been the norm.
3.15. Article l9(1)(a) is limited by restrictions which are prescribed in Article
l9(2), which states as follows:
"Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (l) shall affect the operation of
any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in sofar
as such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the
right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity oflndia, the security ofthe State, friendly
relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or
in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an
offence."
7e Kaushal Kishore v. State of I./.P & Ors., (2023) 4 SCC I
35
Satyam bruyat priyam bruyan na bruyat satyam apriyam 
I
Priyary ca ndnrtam bruyad esa dharmalt sanatanafu ll
M

3.16. In N.K. Bajpai v. (Jnion of India8l, the Supreme Court commented on
reasonable restrictions under Article 19, and observed that:
"Part III of the Constitution is the soul of the Constitution. The
fundamental rights are basic rights, but they are neither
uncontrolled nor without restrictions. In fact, the jiamers of the
Indian Constitution themselves speh out the nature of restriction on
such rights. (,...) lt is dfficult to anticipate the right to freedom or
liberty without any reasonable restriction.
Imposition of restrictions is a concept inbuilt into the enjoyment of
thefundamental rights, as no right can exist without a corresponding
reasonable restriction placed on it."
3.17. The term 'reasonable restrictions' seeks to strike a balance between the
freedorn guaranteed by any of the sub-clauses of clause (1) of Article l9
and the social control permitted by any ofthe clauses (2) to (6).
3.18. As held in Anuradha Bhasin v. [Jnion of India\l , the Supreme Court
observed that:
"The rights provided under Article l9(l) of the Constitution have
certain exceptions, which empower the state to impose reasonable
restrictions in appropriate cases. Ll/ith respect to the freedom of
speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a), restrictions are
provided under Article l9(2) of the Constitution. The ingredients of
Article l9(2) are that : (a) the action of the state must be sanctioned
by law; (b) the proposed action must be a reasonable restriction; (c)
such restriction must be in furtherance of the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the state, friendly
relations with foreign states, public order, decency or morality or in
relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an
80 (2012) 4 SCC 653
8r (2020) 3 SCC 637
36
W-'

offence.....Reasonability of a restriction is used in a qualitative,
quantitative and relative sense."
3. I 9. The claim or the goal that the right of freedom of speech should be absolute
is very much questionable. While the robust protection of right to freedom
of speech and expression seryes as a cornerstone in fostering diverse
viewpoints and enabling societal progress, yet it unavoidably intersects
with the equally significant right to reputation. And it is imperative to strike
a delicate balance between these rights, acknowledging that the exercise of
one should not unjustly infringe upon the other.
B. Right to Reputatiotr
i. Right to Reputation as a Basic Human Right
3.20. The society has always been governed by the regulations as prescribed by
the law of the land. Every jurisdiction has certain code of conduct which is
made as per the respective culture and tradition. When we talk about the
basic human rights of an individual, we look upon Article 2l of the
Constitution of India. But even before Article 2 I came into being,
individuals enjoyed basic inviolable rights in the society such as the right
to food, water, shelter, etc. One such right that has been around since time
immemorial is the 'right to reputation' of a human being.
3.21. Human beings are distinguishable from all other living creatures as they
are the only ones who are capable of free critical and analytical thinking,
feeling and expressing. An individual is the one who is capable enough to
exercise rights and claim the remedy too. When seen from a legal point of
view, the study ofa legal system is conducted from the understanding of
human nature as the law is made to preserve the benefit of a human being.
37 w,

An individual being a free and social animal is allowed to express and
propagate whatever he wants. His conduct is as per his own free will and
the same is unrestricted unless its regulated by the rule of law. As per
Hitopadesha Prastavika, human beings and animals enjoys certain
common pleasures of eating, sleeping and enjoyment. However, the
distinctive attribute of a human being is the capability to obey the
'Dharma ', which is the law made to regulate the natural conduct of a
human.82 Therefore, the limits to one's actions are given in the law and the
protection to one's dignity has also been safeguarded under the same.
3.22. The right to reputation is a part of right to decent and dignified life which
is an inalienable right. The rights that stem from an individual's inherent
value and sovereignty are presumably universal, constituting, at the very
least, fundamental human rights. Instead of responding to what is best for
the individual (i.e., what is in his interest), we could argue that certain
rights are a response to the good (value, importance, dignity) of the person
and his sovereignty over himself.s3 It can be funher said that a right can
simply be a duty of another person to exercise his respective right in a
reasonable manner. It can be said that like other basic human rights, right
to reputation has its origin in the concept of natural law. Natural law theory
with time has led to the theory which is intrinsic to modem human rights,
i.e., that basic human rights are inherent in one's personality. These rights
are inviolable and cannot be legally taken from that person since any denial
or deprivation of these human rights leads to a violation.8a This is similar
82 Rama Jois, Seeds of Modern and Public Low in Ancient Indian Jurisprudence 4(Eastem Book Company, 2nd
Edtion,2000).
8r Jules Coleman and Scott Shapiro (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Jurisprudence and Philosophy of Lan
(Oxford University Press. 2004).
8a Manoj Kumar Sinha, lmplementotion ofBasic Human Righri 5 (LexisNexis, l" Edn., 1999).
38
w,

to any other fundamental right and a right to maintain one's name or
reputation is also a right conferred naturally upon a person.85
ll. Right to Reputation and Judicial Pronouncements
3.23. The courts in various jurisdictions have recognized the existence of right
to reputation as an integral part of one's life. Justice Brown, while
emphasizing on the importance of the right to reputation, in D.F. Marion
v. Minnie Davls86, observed that:
"The right to the enjoyment of a private reputotion, unassailed by
malicious slander, is of ancient origin, and is necessary to human
society. A good reputation is an element of personal security, and is
protected by the Constitution equally with the right to the enjoyment
of life, liberfii, and property. The foundatian of an action for libel or
slander is a malicious injury to reptiation, and any false and
malicious imputation of crime or moral delinquency by one
published of and concerning another, which subjects the person to
disgrace, ridicule, odium, or contempt in the estimation of his friends
and acquaintances, or the public, with resulting damage to his
reputation, is actionable either per se or per quod."
3.24. A three-judge bench of the Supreme Court, in the case of Kiran Bedi &
Ors v. Cbmmittee of Inquiry and Anr87 , emphasized on the importance on
the issue ofone's reputation and referred the right as one's personal right.
The court cited the definition of'person' as"the term "person" includes
not only the physical body and members, but also every bodily sense and
personal attribute, among which is the reputation a man has acquired. "88
The Court further observed that:
85 Roscoe Pound, Jarisprudence 56 (Lawbook Exchange Ltd., Reprint, 2000)
86 55 American LR l7l-
8? I989 AIR 714 : 1989 SCR (l)20.
88 77 Corpus Juris Secundum 268 (Thomson west, 201 7).
39 $-/

"A man's reputation is a part of himself, as his body and limbs are,
and reputation is a sort offight to enj oy the goods opinion ofothers,
and it is capable of growth and real existence, as an arm or leg.
Reputation is, therefore, apersonalfight, and the right to reputation
is put among those absolute personal fights equal in dignity and
importance to security from violence. The laws of the ancients, no
less than those of modern nations, made private reputation one of
the objects of their protection.(.....) Detraction .from a man's
reputation is an injury to his personality, and thus an iniury to
reputation is a personal injury, that is, an injuty to an absolute
personal right."
3.25. The court, in State of Maharashtra v. Public Concern of Governance
Trusfe, held that the right to life, liberty, and property were all guaranteed
by the Constitution, and maintaining a good reputation was one aspect of
personal protection. It has been decided that the right extends to a person's
reputation during and after his death. In light of this, Article 21 would
surely apply to any improper conduct by the state or its authorities that
damages the reputation of a good person.
3.26. ln State of Bihar v. Lal Krishna Advani,e0 a two-member committee was
constituted on October 24, 1989, to investigate the communal unrest in the
district of Bhagalpur. The respondent's reputation as a public figure was
damaged by the comments the committee made in the report, all without
giving him a chance to be heard. According to the apex Court's ruling, it
was abundantly evident that everyone has the right to safeguard their
reputation in addition to having the right to have and maintain one.
40
3'q AIR 1989 sc 714.
,0 AIR 2003 SC 3357.
w,

3.27. In Gian Kaur v. State of Punjabet , the court observed that the right to
reputation is a natural right.
3.28. In Mehmood Nayyar Azam v. State of Chhattisgarh and Othersez, the court
discussed the importance of life and the glory of reputation associated with
it. The coun observed that:
"A human personality is endowed with potential infinity and it
blossoms when dignity is sustained. The sustenance of such dignity
has to be the superlative concern ofevery sensitive soul. The essence
of dignity can neyer be treated as a momentary spark of light or, for
that matter, "a brief candle", or "a hollow bubble". The spark of
Itfe gets more resplendent when man is treated with dignity sans
humiliation, for every man is expected to lead an honourable life
which is a splendid gift of "creative intelligence". When a dent is
created in the reputation, humanism is paralysed.... "
3.29. In Vishwanath Agrawal v. Saral Vishwanath Agrawale3, the court observed
that reputation is not only the salt of life, but also its purest gem and most
priceless fragrance. It generates income for both the here and now and for
future generations.
3.30. In lJmesh Kumar v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Anotherel, a two-judge
bench of the apex Couft noted that a person's right to reputation is one of
their personal rights. As a component of personal security, a good
reputation is guaranteed by the Constitution along with the right to life,
liberty, and property. For this reason, it has been deemed essential to a
citizen's right to life under Article 2l of the Constitution. The right to
.,r ( 1996) 2 SCC 648.
er (20 t2) 8 SCC L
!,r (2012) 7 SCC 288.
'ql (20 t3) l0 scc 591
11
B/

freedom ofexpression and the right to hold opinions are recognised by the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966, under Article
19, subject to the right ofothers to have their reputations protected.
3.3 l. In Nilgiris Bar Association v. T.K. Mahalingam and Anotheres, the court,
again interpreting the legal definition ofperson, held that:
3.32. ltcan be thus be concluded that the coufts have undoubtedly kept the right
to reputation at a very high pedestal. The courts have acknowledged the
value of reputation of an individual and the importance attached to it. It is
of no debate that the right of reputation is an internal facet of Article 21.
The courts have accepted it as it has been persevered and valued by the
society since time immemorial. The courts work based on the conscience
of the society and reflect the same in the judgments. Therefore, it can be
"5 AIR l96t SC t088
42
"The term "person" includes not only the physical body and
members but also every bodily sense and personal attribute among
which is the reputation a man has acquired. Reputation can also be
defined to be good name, the credit, honour or character which is
derived from a favourable public opinion or esteem, and character
by report. The right to enjoyment ofa good reputation is a valuable
privilege of ancient origin and necessary to human society.
"Reputation" is an element of personal security and is protected by
the Constitution equally with the right to enjoyment of life, liberty
and property. Although "character" and "reputation" are often
used synonymously, but these terms are distinguishable.
"Character" is what a man is and "reputation" is what he is
supposed to be in what people say he is. "Character" depends on
attributes possessed and "reputation" on attributes which others
believe one to possess. The former signifies reality and the latter
merely what is accepted to be reality at present. ..."
ts-

said that the right to reputation, being intrinsic to right to life and liberty,
is upheld both by the courts and the society.
C. Slriking Bolance Belween Reputotion and Freedom ofSpeech
3.33. It is well settled that both right to reputation and freedom of speech and
expression are fundamental to one's freedom. The freedom of speech is
vital to one's freedom to give opinion, thoughts and to meaningfully
participate in democracy, while reputation is something which has been
associated as the most precious asset to an individual. Further, it has been
already discussed that the right to freedom of speech has limitations too.
The right can be limited on the basis of the restrictions as specified in
Article l9(2) and it also must not encroach on the right of any other person
as rvell. On this basis, balancing of the two fundamental rights is done in
order to give a harmonious construction to both. This part will analyse that
whether the existence of law of defamation for the protection of right to
reputation is a reasonable restriction on the right of freedom of speech and
expression.
i. Balancing of Fundamental Rights by Cou rts
3.34. The Indian jurisprudence on the flrndarnental rights emphasises on
sustenance and balancing of separate rights. The argument of giving more
weight to a particular right does not stand tall. The concept of counter-
weighing fundamental right does not have to be done as a fundamental
right cannot exist in isolation or in a watertight compartment.e6 The co-
existence of a fundamental right in harmony with another fundamental
% Acharya Mohorajshri Narendrq Pr.tsqdji Anandprasodji Maharaj and Ors. v. The Stqte ofGujorat and Ors.,
(1975) l SCC lt.
43 S./

right or duty is in interest of the social welfare of the society. The courts
have time and again reiterated that all the fundamental rights individually
are part of an integrated scheme in the Constitution and they all must be
mixed to obtain the optimum flow of complete and impartial justice.eT The
courts have explained the spirit of maintaining balance by stating that its
necessary to mediate balance between past traditions and present's
convenience, between the society's need for stability and the requirement
of change.es
3.35. The court, in Mr. X v. Hospital Zee, had the duty to decide between
fundamental right to life and fundamental right to lead a healthy life. The
court, giving way to fundamental right to health over privacy, held that
such a right has to be advanced which gives way to public morality or
public interest. The court added that the judges cannot sit like mute
structures and should act considering the morality of the present day.
3.36. The court in another case, while striking a balance between Article 15(4)
and l6(4) ofthe Constitution, held that any fundamental right cannot be
ignored and relevant considerations have to be placed in order to proceed
objectively in balancing them.r00
3.37. Justice Krishna Iyer in the case of Maneka Gandhi v. (Jnion Of Indiatot,
had opiniated that:
e1 Delhi Transport Corporationv. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress ond Ors., l99l Supp (l) SCC 600.
eE St. Stephen's College v. uniyersity of Delhi (1992) I SCC 600.
,e ( t998) 8 SCC 296.
t@ Post Graduqle Institule of Medical Educqtion & Research, Chandigarh v, Facuhy Associalion and Others
(19e8) 4 SCC r.
ror t978 scR (2) 621
44 M

"....... the law is now settled, os I apprehend it, that no article in Part
III is an island but part of a continent, and the conspectus of the
whole part gives the direction and correction needed for
interpretation of these basic provisions. Man is not dissectible into
separate limbs and, likewise, cardinal rights in an organic
constitution, which make man human have a synthes is. The
proposition is indubitable that Article 2I does not, in a given
situation, exclude Article l9 if both rights are breached. "
3.38. The courts through their interpretation take an expansive approach so as to
expand the ambit of the right rather than curtailing it. The courts have many
a times acknowledged that their duty is not only to safeguard the
fundamental rights but also to maintain a balance between the rights in
harmony subject to social control. The apex Court, emphasising on the
nature of fundamental rights, held thatr02:
"Freedom of expression is not an absolute value under our
Constitution. It must not be forgotten that no single value, no matter
exalted, can bear thefull burden of upholding a democratic system
of government. Underlying our constitutional system are a number
of important values, all ofwhich help to guarantee our liberties, but
in ways which sometimes conJlict. Under our Constitution, probably,
no values are absolute. All important values, therefore, must be
qualified and balanced against other important, and often
competing, values. This process of definition, qualification and
balancing is as much required with respect to the value of freedom
of expression as it is for other values."
3.39. The court, while dealing with issue of criminal defamation vis-ir-vrs
freedom of speech in the case of Mohd. Arif alias Ashfaq v. Registrar,
Supreme Court of India and Otherst$3, had encountered a similar issue. The
court was posed with the argument that:
tol rahara lndia Real Estate Corporution Ltd. v, Securities & Etchange Boord of lndia & Anr.,2013 (2) SCC
732.
ror (2014) 9 SCC 737
45 w,,

Continuance of criminal defamation is constitutionally inconceivable
as it creates a dent in freedom of speech and expression;
That criminal defamation is a pre-Constitution law and is completely
alien to freedom of speech.
3.40. The court in the aforesaid case, while rejecting both the contentions, held
that no fundamental right is absolute and in such a case, balancing of
fundamental rights becomes a constitutional necessity. In such cases, the
court must ensure that balancing is done in a way that the values enriched
in each of the rights are sustained. The court held that right to reputation is
an inextricable aspect of right to life under Article 21 and the State being
responsible for the safety of everyone, has kept the remedial safeguard
under Section 499 of IPC. The court rejected the second argurnent by
stating that the purpose of defamation as a law is to safeguard what is
protected under Article 2l and in the name of freedom of speech and
expression, the right and reputation ofan individual cannot bejeopardised.
3.41. The Supreme Court, in another landmark judgment, held that no
fundamental right is absolute and no one can be compelled to forbear the
repercussion of other's act based on unjustified use of their right. One
cannot, while exercising their fundamental right, encroach upon others'
right and liberty. The court stated that "Article l9(l)(a) cannot be pressed
into service for defeating the fundamental right guaranteed by Article
2 l" .104
3.42. The two possible altematives to resolve friction are either to compromise
a right in light of the other or to give way to both by balancing them. It is
a
a
tu ln Re: Noise Pollrrrbn, 2005 (8) SCC 796
16 S/

seen in various judgments that the courts instead of counterweighing a
right, have balanced both by justifiing the essence of both of the rights.
The courts, while balancing, have also analysed the restriction to be
feasible or not. This is seen to be as a conclusion that a balance is struck
between both the rights by adjudicating the law of criminal defamation as
a reasonable safeguard to protect one's reputation. Therefore, it was
reasonable for the court to hold that applying the principle ofbalancing of
fundamental rights, the presence of defamation as a criminal offence is not
beyond the ambit of Article l9(2) of the Constitution, especially when the
tenn 'defamation' has been specifically rnentioned as a restriction therein.
3.43. The rights under Article 2l and under Article l9(l)(a) have been read and
balanced by the courts on several past occasions. Article 19(2) lays down
specific limitations on the right of freedom ofspeech and expression under
19( I )(a). Any legislation that aims to restrict the right under Article
19( I )(a) must inevitably adhere to the restrictions as outlined in Article
l9(2). In case of a friction between the two fundamental rights, the coun
strikes a balance so that each right can be exercised meaningfully.
3.44. The court, in the case of Thalappalam Service Cooperative Bank Ltd. v.
State of Keralalor, struck a balance between two interests emerging from
Article l9(l)(a) and Article 21, respectively. The case related to seeking
information through a RTI from a society under the administrative control
of Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Kerala (ROCS), which neither came
under the definition of "State" under Article 12 nor under the definition of
"public authority" under section 2(h) of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
The court on one hand, encountered the right to know under Article
ro5 2013 ( t6) scc 82
47
fuP'

l9(l)(a) and on the other hand, the right to privacy and personal
information under Article 21. The court observed that both the rights are
not absolute and can be regulated in the larger public interest. The court,
while balancing, gave way to Article 2l and held that disclosure that is not
in public domain is an unwarranted infringement of privacy to which an
individual is entitled. The court further held that the right to information
and privacy are not unbridled and can be restricted whenever impinged
mutually.
3.45. In the case of R. Rajagopal alias R.R. Gopal v. State of Tamil Nadut06,the
court again maintained a neat balance between both the rights. The case
related to an attempt by the prison official to prevent the magazine from
publishing the autobiography ofa prisoner. The petitioner challenged the
same on the ground that it is a restriction on the fieedom of speech and
expression of the prisonerr0T as well as of the petitioner's magazine. The
officials took a plea that the content of the magazine is defamatory and can
hurt the reputation of the officials. The court applied the principle of
balancing and held that the state and its officials cannot have an option to
impose a pre-restriction on the publication on the apprehension that it may
be defamatory to them. The court stated that their right to sue for
defamation will still be alive and will arise after publication is done. Hence,
the court fuelled life to both the fundamental rights and balanced the
dignity ofboth the parties.
!G AtR 1995 sc 264.
r07 The prisoner had given prior permission to publish his auto-biography in the magazine
48 h*'

3.46. The court, in People's Unionfor Civil Liberties v. tJnion of India & Ors.t08,
analysed the relationship between the two fundamental rights. The case
related to the constitutional validity of Section 5(2) of the Telegraph Act,
1885 which permitted 'phone-tapping' in certain situations, without the
permission of the person concerned. This also lacked procedural
safeguards for fair exercise of the process. The court observed that the
telephonic conversations were safeguarded under the right of speech and
expression and interception of the same must be through a reasonable
restriction as mentioned under Article 19(2). The court held that the same
was done without any nexus with the restriction and was a serious violation
of Article 21.
3.47 . lt is pertinent to note that the court has given weight to the right to privacy
over anything. The courts' judgements reflect the ideology of the society
which also treats the right to life and liberty as paramount. The courts, in
various judgments, have safeguarded the interest of an individual by
incorporating it under the umbrella of Article 2 I . It is also seen that the
courts get more vigilant and protective when the right of an individual is
violated.
3.48. A similar situation is also observed in the cases where right to reputatlon
of an individual is affected. In the case of Ram Jethmalani v. Union Of
India, the court held that:
ro3 AIR 1997 sc 568
49
"Right to privacy is an integral part of right to life. This is a
cherished constitutional value, and it is important that human beings
be allowed domains offreedom that arefree ofpublic scrutiny unless
s.-

3.49.
they act in an unlawful manner. (...) The solutionfor the problem of
abrogation of one zone of constitutional values cannot be the
creation of another zone of abrogation of constitutional values. The
rights of citizens, to effectively seek the protection of fundamental
rights, under Clause (l) of Article 32 have to be balanced against
the rights of citizens and persons under Article 21. (...) That right
cannot be extended to being inquisitors of fellow citizens. An
inquisitorial order, where citizens' .fundamental right to privacy is
breached by fellow citizens is destructive of social order. The notion
offundamental rights, such as a right to privacy as part of right to
life, is not merely that the State is enjoined from derogating from
them. It also includes the responsibility of the State to uphold them
against the actions of others in the society, even in the context of
exercise offundamental rights by those others."
. P ro po rtio n a I i t), Test
The proportionality test is one of the approaches that has been used in
various jurisdictions to justifu the limitations on the fundamental freedoms.
Proportionality has been adopted by constitutional courts for adjudicating
the viability of limitations on fundamental rights. It is a tool which is used
to determine the constitutional validity of an action which is aimed to limit
a fundamental right.r0e ln a traditional proportionality test, the reason for
limiting a right has to be a good and sound reason, what otherwise can be
called as 'public reason'.r r0 It means that the reasons for restrictions have
to be through the use of values and standards that are publicly available
and acceptable. It is of value as the reason has to be accepted by both
majority and minority groups, giving it a constituent element of equality.
The proportionality test includes four elements, the first being that the state
must serve a 'compelling' and 'legitimate' interest while restricting the
tt") Banh Mellur v. HM Treasuq,(No 2), [2014] AC 700, 790-91 (UK Supreme Coun).
I lt' J Rawls. Polit ical Liberelis nt 212-2554 (Columbia Un iversity Press, New York, 2005 )
50 w,

right.lrrThe second relates to the'suitabilify test', which says that there
must be a reasonable nexus between the measure used to limit the right and
the legitimate interest. The third element gives the 'necessity test' that
prescribes that the lneasure must be necessary in advancing the interests
that have been safeguarded. Then the fourth and final being the
'proportionate test' which talks about weighing the level of the right which
has been curtailed against the interest that has been advanced.rr2 The
proportionality test is used in different jurisdictions with different modus
operandi. In German Federal Constitutional Courts, the balancing comes
at the last stage, while the Canadian Supreme Court considers balancing at
an earlier stage. I ll
3.50. The Indian Supreme Court also follows the four-stage proponionality
mechanism, wherein the test of balancing comes at the last. I r{ The present
analysis encounters the proportionality between right to reputation and
right of freedom of speech.rr5 The first stage ofthe test includes the
analysis of right to reputation as a legitimate and compelling interest while
restricting the freedom of speech and expression. It has been previously
discussed that right to reputation is a natural human right and is integral to
one's right to life and liberty. The interest being compelling on the ground
that the reputation is safeguarded by the apex Court in various judgments.
An interest is compelling when it is fundamental to an individual.
rrr LB Tremblay, "An egalitarian defence of proportionality-based balancing", l2(4).lntl. J. ofConst. Law 864-
890 (2014)l FJ Urbina. "ls it Reallv That Easy? A Critique of Proponionality and 'Balancing as Reasoning"',
27(l) Canadian Joumal ofLaw & Jurisprudence 167-192 (2014) .
r12 J Rivers, "Proportionality and Variable lntensity ofReview",65 Carnbridge La\v Joumal l'14-207 (2006).
rrr D Grimm, "Proportionality in Canadian and Cerman Constitutional Jurisprudence", 57 University of Toronto
Law Joumal 383-39'7 (2007).
rr! Aparna Chandra, "Proportionality in India: A bridge to Nowhere", 3(2) University of Oxford Human Rights
Hub Joumal, available et: https://ohrh.law.ox.ac.uk/wp-content,/u ploads/2l21/04/lJ-of-OxHRH-J-
Proportionality-in- lnd ia- I .pdf. (lasr visited on Jan. 10,2024).
f rr G Letsas..,l Theon' of Interprctot ion of the Europeon Cowention on Human Rights (Oxford University Press,
2007).
5l s/

Reputation as a right has been dear to an individual since time
immemorial. r16 In early times. the purpose of giving punishment also
included the offence ofdefaming the person as it directly affected the right
to reputation of that individual. It is of no question that fundamental rights
are not absolute and a sensitive right of speech and expression cannot be
given absolute interpretation as an individual cannot be permitted to say
anything regardless the circumstances.r r7 Therefore, it can be said that the
right to reputation is a compelling and legitimate interest which makes it
justifiable to restrict the freedom of speech reasonably. The second test
talks about the modus operandi which has been used to limit the right. The
element beneath the suitability test is that there must be a reasonable nexus
between the right and the restriction. As far as the concept of restriction is
concemed, the judiciary has specifically mentioned in judgments that the
restriction must be reasonable. Article l9(2) contains the limitation of
freedom of speech and overtly lays down defamation as a restriction of the
freedom ofspeech. The courts have alsojustified the nexus and have stated
that the State, in pursuit of protection and preservation of the reputation of
an individual, has kept the provision under Section 499 IPC as part ofthe
criminal law. It has also been held that the fundamental point is the
permissibility of criminal defamation expticitly acting as a justif,rable
reasonable restriction under Article I 9(2) of the Constitution. I r8
3.51. Thereafter comes the 'necessity test', wherein it has to be shown that the
measure is necessary in order to achieve the legitimate interest, i.e., the
measure of criminal defamation as a restriction is necessary to protect the
52
r16 Grdgoire Webber, "Proportionality and Limitations on Freedom of Speech", Queen's Law Research Paper
Series 2019.
rr7 Laurent B. Frantz, "ls The First Amendment Law? A Reply to Professor Mendelson", 5l (4) Califonria Law
Review 750 ( 1963).
118 Mohd Arif alias Ashfaq v. Registrar, Supreme Court of l,rdia and Others, (2014) 9 SCC 737.
s,

right of reputation of an individual. This comes down to proving the
necessity of criminal defamation for restoring the harm caused to one's
reputation. The court in Subramanian Swamy v. (Jnion Of India, have
upheld the constitutional validity of criminal defamation stating that
criminal defamation is a valid provision which does not unreasonably
restrict the fundamental right of speech. The petitioner in the
aforementioned case had drawn attention towards a bunch of judgments
wherein the Supreme Court had examined on the question of validity of
defamation laws in India.rre The relevant concepts for the consideration of
the court were the ideas of defamation vis-i-vis reputation, freedom of
speech and expression and reasonable restrictions. The two questions that
needed to be considered were whether criminal defamation was an undue
constraint on the right to freedom of speech and expression and whether
the criminal defamation laws included in sections 499 and 500 are
arbitrary because of their ambiguous language. The absence of public
harm in criminal defamation was also an argument put forward for
decriminalization of the offence. The court, while deciding the issue, held
that right to reputation is a fundamental aspect of Article 2l and the
restrictions under Article 19(2) are necessary to strike a balance between
the two fundamental rights. Further, the court held that the defamation of
an individual is a public wrong as what affects the individual affects
society as a whole. Hence, it is valid to treat defamation as a public wrong.
It held that criminal defamation is not a disproportionate restriction on free
speech, because protection of reputation is a fundamental right as well as
a human right. The court observed:
tt' RR. Copal & Another v. State of Tamil Nadu & Others, (1994) 6 SCC 632 N. Rqvi & Others v. Union of
lndiq & Orhers. (2007) l5 SCC 63 l.
53 w,

"Protection of reputation is a fundamental right, it is also a human
right. (.....) Reputation of a person was intrinsic to most precious
right to life guaranteed under Article 2l and for its protection,
Parliament has kept intact Sections 499 and 500 of IPC.
Cumulatively, it serves social interest. Each person is entitled to
dignity ofperson and ofreputation. Nobody has a right to denigrate
others' right to person or reputation."
3.52. Therefore, the Court concluded that section 499 is not an excessive
restriction on the fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression
by observing that, *lt is extremely dfficult to subscribe to the view that
criminal defamation has a chilling effect on the freedom of speech and
expression."
3.53. Further, the Court heldthat Sections 499 and 500 of IPC are notvaguely
worded or ambiguous. Using the Constituent Assembly Debates to
understand what the framers of the Constitution meant by the word
"defamation" in Article l9(2), the Court held that the word has its own
independent identity. It stands alone and defamation laws have to be
understood as they were when the Constitution came into force.
54 v,

4. JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS
4.1. Defamation is the wrong done by a person to another's reputation by
words, signs, or visible representations. A statement or representation is
defamatory when it can injure a person's reputation. A defamatory
statement is one which exposes a person to contempt, hatred or ridicule, or
tends to injure him in his profession or trade, or causes him to be shunned
or avoided by his neighbours or society.r20
4.2. The constitutionality of laws surrounding criminal defamation has been
questioned several times at the touchstone of freedom of speech and
expression.
4.3. The right of freedom of speech and expression shares the stage with
another indispensable facet ofthe Constitution, the right to reputation. The
Supreme Court has time and again reiterated the importance and
significance ofright to reputation as a very integral part ofa person's right
to life under Article 2l.In fact, the right to reputation has always been
considered higher than life from time immemorial, across cultures in the
oldest known texts. r2l
4.4. In Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay v. Dilipkumar
Raghavendranath Nadkarnll22, it has been ruled that right to reputation is
a facet of right to life of a citizen under Article 2l of the Constitution.
t1o J. Sudhir Chandrashekhar y. T. Lokaprakash, 2001 SCC Online Kar 210.
t2t Subrqmanian Swamy v. Union of lndia & O$., (2016) 7 SCC 221.rr, ( 1983) I SCC t24.
55 V

4.5. In the case of Kiran Bedi v. Committee of Inquiryt23, the Supreme Court
while observing that the reason for the importance attached with regard to
the matter of safeguarding the reputation of a person being prejudicially
affected is not far to seek, reproduced a passage from D..F. Marion v.
Davist2a:
*25. 'The right to the enjoyment of a private reputation,
unassailed by malicious slander is of ancient origin, and is
necessary to human society. A good reputation is an element of
personal security, and is protected by the Constitution equally with
the right to the enjoyment of life, liberQ and properry."
4.6. However, in R. Rajagopal v. State of Tamil Nadut25, the Supreme Court
tried to find a balance between the freedom of press and the right to
privacy. In this case, the prison authorities forcibly tried to prevent a
magazine from publishing an autobiography written by a prisoner. The
court concluded that the magazine had the right to publish the
autobiography, and that the state can't place prior restrictions on the
publication of materials that may defame the state. The court stated that:
"Applying the above principles, it must be held that the petitioners
have a right to publish, what they allege to be the life
story/autobiography of Auto Shankar insofar as it appears from the
public records, even without his consent or authorisation. But if they
go beyond that and publish his life story, they may be invading his
right to privacy and will be liable for the consequences in
accordance with law. Similarly, the State or its fficials cannot
prevent or restrain the said publicalion."
rI ( t989) I SCC .194.
rri (t927) 55 ALR l7l (Alabama).
rrr ( 1994) 6 SCC 632.
56
s,-

4.7. The court also noted that the remedy of the affected public officials/public
figures, if any, is to sue for defamation after the article is published.
4.8. Then, in R. Rajagopal v. J. Jayalalithat26, the Madras High Court
emphasised on the fundamental right to freedom ofspeech against public
officials temporarily conducting the affairs of the govemment. The court
observed that:
"In a free democratic society those who hold office in government
and who are responsible for public administration must always be
open to criticism. Any attempt to stiJle or fetter such criticism
amounts to polilical censorship of the most insidious and
objectionable kind."
4.9. Similarly, in Petronet Lng Ltd. v. lndian Petro Grouptz7, the plaintifls
request for a permanent injunction prohibiting the defendant news provider
from publishing confidential or deceptive material was denied by the Delhi
High Coun. The plaintiff claimed that its right to confidentiality of
information and privacy had been violated. The Court denied the plaintiffs
claim for privacy, ruling that even if the plaintifT had a right to
confidentiality of information, publications by defendant were protected
speech and could not be suppressed by an injunction. According to the
Court, it was necessary to "carry out a balancing operation, weighing the
public interest in maintaining confidence about a countervailing public
intere s t favour in g d i s c I os u re."
r16 AIR 2006 Mad 312.
rr? (2009) t58 DL'f 759
57
S--

4. 10. But then, in Vishwanath Agrawal v. Sarla Vishwanath Agrawal t28,
although in a different context, while emphasising on the importance of
right to reputation,, the Supreme Court observed as follows,
" ........reputation which is not only the salt of lde, but also the purest
treasure and the most precious pedume of life. It is extremely
delicate and a cherished value this side of the grave. It is a revenue
generator for the present as well as for the posterity."
4. 1 1. In 2015, in Shreya Singhal v. (Jnion of Indiat 2e, the Supreme Court while
striking down Section 664,Ir0 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 in
its entirety on the ground that it is violative ofprovisions of Article 19( I )(a)
and not protected under Article l9(2) of the Constitution, attempted to
strike a compromise between the rights protected by Article l9(1)(a) and
the reasonable limitations allowed by Article l9(2). The Supreme Court
noted in its judgement that"when it comes to democracy, liberty of thought
and expression is a cardinal value that is of paramount significance under
our constitutional scheme."
4.12. The conflict between freedom of speech and expression and defamation
was finally adjudicated by a two-judge bench of the Supreme Court in
Subramanian Swamy v. (Jnion of India 1rl , wherein the Court upheld
Sections 499 and 500 of IPC that defines the offence of defamation and
provides punishment for it, respectively. The Court held that defamation is
r,8 (2012) 7 scc 288.
r2, AtR 2015 SC 1523.
rr0 Section 66(4) of the Act penalised the sending of offensive messages through a computer or other
communication devices. Under this provision, any person who by means of a computer or communicqtion device
sends ony information thqt is: grassl), offensive: falsc and meant for the purpose of causing qnnoyqnce,
inconvenience, dqnger, obstuction, insult, injurf, crimindl intimidqtion, enmity, hatre.l or ill will; meont to
deceive or mislead the recipient obout the origin of such nessages, etc-, shall be punishable ,tei,h imprisonment
up lo lhree years and withline.
rrr (2016) 7 SCC 221.
58
h,-

a reasonable restriction on the right to freedom of speech and expression
under Article l9(2) of the Constitution of India. The Court, commenting
on right to reputation being a part of Article 21, stated that:
" Reputation being an inherent component of Article 21, we do not
think it should be allowed to be sullied solely because another
individual can have its freedom. It is not a restriction that has an
inevitable consequence which impairs circulation of thought and
ideas....... the balance between the two rights needs to be struck.
" Reputation " of one cannot be allowed to be crucified at the altar
of the other's right offree speech.-t32
4. 13. Laws surrounding defamation maintain this delicate equilibrium by
penalising those who, under the guise of exercising free speech' damage
the reputation of another, and concurrently, protecting those who
communicate truth or make statements in good faith or public good.
4.14. In Subramanian Swamy v. (Jnion of Indiat33, several politicians who had
been charged with the offence of criminal defamation had filed petitions
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India challenging the same as
provided in Sections 499 and 500 ofthe Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
Sections 199(l) to (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, arguing
that it inhibited their right to freedom ofspeech and expression.
4.15. The judgment was delivered by Dipak Misra, J. with whom Prafulla C.
Pant, J. concurred. The court analysed the terms 'defamation' and
'reputation' and observed that:
"Reputation has its innate uniyersal value
constitltent of life and /s not limited
It is a cherished
or restricted by
1.1 tbid.
t'3 lbid.
59
q-

time......International covenants explicate that individual honour
and reputation is of great value to human existence being attached
to dignity and all constitute an inalienable part of a complete human
being."
4.16. The Court found that the concept of 'defamation' was included in the
protection of 'dignity', which was part of right to life under Article 2l of
the Constitution of India.
4.17. The Supreme Court also recognized the sanctity and significance of the
right to freedom ofspeech and expression as a highly treasured value under
the Constitution and that the voice and dissent or disagreement has to be
respected and not to be regarded as unpalatable criticism. However, the
Court further pointed out that as all rights, right to freedom ofspeech and
expression is not absolute and is subject to reasonable restrictions. Such
restrictions should not be excessive and must be in public interest. The
legislation by which restrictions are imposed should not invade the rights
and should not smack of arbitrariness. rla
4.18. Recognising the necessity to balance fundamental rights, the court
observed that:
"lt is the duty of the Court to strike a balance so that the values are
sustained....... We have already held that reputation is an
inextricable aspect of right to life under Article 2l of the
Constitution and the State in order to sustain and protect the said
reputation of an individual has kept the provision under Section 499
IPC alive as a part of \aw....... It is an individual's fundamental right
and, therefore, balancing of fundamental right is imperative. In the
name of f"eedom of speech and expression, the right of another
cannot be jeopardised." It was further stated that, " Reputation being
an inherent component of Article 2l, we do not think it should be
134 Subrqm(mian Swamy v. ()nion of lndia, (2016) 7 SCC 221
60
q--

allowed to be sullied solely because another individual can haye its
freedom. It is not a restriction that has an inevitable consequence
which impairs circulation of thought and ideas. Infact, it is control
regard being had to another person's right to go to court and state
that he has been wronged and abused. He can take recourse to a
procedure recognised and accepted in law to retrieve and redeem
his reputation. Therefore, the balance between the two rights needs
to be struck. "Reputation" of one cannot be allowed to be crucified
at the altar of the other's right offree speech. The legislature in its
wisdom has not thought it appropriate to abolish criminality of
defamation in the obtaining social climate."t3s
4.19. The Court observed that the legislature has kept criminal defamation on
the statute book as in the existing social climate, it subserves the collective
interest because reputation of each is ultimately inhered in the reputation
of all.
4.20. The Court also addressed the question as to whether the criminal
defamation provisions were vague or arbitrary, and after examining the
Explanations to Section 499, concluded that these were neither vague nor
ambiguous:
"Court can strike down a provision, if it is excessive, unreasonable
or disproportionate, but the Courl cannot strike down a provision, if
it is unnecessary or unwaruonted. ........ Reasonableness is examined
in an objective manner from the standpoint of the interest of the
general public and not from the point of view of the person upon
whom restrictions are imposed. ...... Criminal defamation law in
form ofSection 499 and 500 IPC is not a restriction onfree speech
that can be characterised as disproportionate. Right to free speech
cannot mean that a citizen can defame others."
B5 lbid.
6l
A\,,-

4.22. However, recently, the Delhi High Court in Vinai Kumar Saxena v. Aam
Aadmi Partytrs, followed the judgment in Subramanian Swamy v. lJnion
of Indiat3e, and held that the fundamental right to freedom of speech has
to be counterbalanced with the right of reputation. The Court stated that:
"Article 19(1)(a) ofthe Constitution afford the right offreedom of
speech and expression to all persons. However, the same is subject
to restrictions under Article l9(2), which includes defamation.
Therefore, the right to freedom of speech and expression is not an
unfettered right in the garb of which defamatory statements can be
made to tarnish the reputation of a person. Thefundamental right to
freedom of speech has to be counterbalanced with the right of
reputation of an individual, which has been held to be a basic
element of the right to I ife consecrated in Article 2l of the
Constitution of lndia "
'16 2o2o (3) M.L.J. (ctl) 241 .
t31 3'16 u.s-2s4,2'to.
Ir3 2022 SCC Online Del 3093
t.e Ibid.
62
4.21. The Madras High Court, in Grievances Redressal Officer, Economic Times
v. V.V. Minerals Pvt. Ltd.t36, sought to limitthe use ofcriminal defamation
as a tool to stifle free speech. The court made note of the importance of
freedom of press and the function of higher judiciary as the defender of
rights. In this judgment, the Court referred to the judgment of US Supreme
Court in New York Times v. Sullivant3T in which it was held that an eror
does not make a statement defamatory unless accompanied by actual
malice, i.e., unless it is made in a malicious manner. The US Supreme
Court also emphasised on the fact that "free speech needs a breathing
space to make error and mistakes", which is important for democracy.
u",

4.23. The law of defarnation aims at safeguarding the reputation of an individual
in society. The examination of judgments pe(aining to criminal
defamation underscores the intricate balance between protecting freedom
of expression and safeguarding an individual's right to reputation. The
right to reputation has been upheld as an inherent facet of human dignity
at multiple instances. While the courts have emphasised upon the
importance of freedom of speech and expression in a democratic society in
a multitude ofjudgments, they have also acknowledged the potential harm
caused by defarnatory statements, stressing upon the need for
accountability and responsibitity in speech.
4.24. The law of criminal defamation provides a legal mechanism which can be
initiated by a person when his right to reputation and dignity is violated by
the malafides of any person, and therefore, it is important to provide penal
consequences and liability for such person who violates the dignity and
reputation of an individual, and along with that disturbs the peace in the
society. Through a nuanced analysis. it becomes evident that criminalizing
defamation serves as a crucial deterrent against malicious or false
statements that could severely damage one's reputation, social standing,
and livelihood.
4.25. Further, while advocating for freedom ofexpression, courts have reiterated
that this freedom is not absolute and lnust not infringe upon the
fundamental right of individuals to protect their reputation from
unwarranted attacks. Criminalizing defamation acts as a deterrent against
the rnisuse of speech to spread falsehoods or engage in character
assassination, thereby fostering a more responsible exercise of free speech.
63
h,-

4.26. ln essence, the above analysis reinforces the necessity of the offence of
criminal defamation, highlighting the intrinsic connection between
protecting one's reputation and maintaining societal harmony. It
underscores the significance of balancing rights, emphasizing the need for
legal measures that deter defamation while safeguarding freedom of
expression within reasonable bounds. This holistic approach aligns with
the broader objective of preserving the dignity and integrity of individuals
in a democratic society.
61
e-

5. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF CRIMINAL DI.]FAMATION LAWS
5.1 The issue of criminal defamation ernbodies the delicate balance between
protecting an individual's reputation and ensuring the unfettered flow of
information and expression. As societies navigate through their cultural,
legal, and social norms, the treatment of defamation as a criminal offence
remains a contentious and multifaceted subject.
5.3. Examining these divergent approaches reveals different thresholds and
criteria for criminalizing defamation. From penalties and sanctions to the
role of intention, truth as a defence, and considerations of public interest,
each legal system paints a unique picture, shaping the contours of legal
provisions on defamation.
5.4. This Chapter endeavours to explore criminal defamation provisions within
select countries, where defamation constitutes a criminal offence. Through
this exploration, it seeks to elucidate the definition, punitive measures, and
handling of criminal defamation cases, providing a comprehensive
65
5.2. Across continents and cultures, nations have devised distinctive
approaches to tackle defamatory acts. The global landscape boasts a
spectrum of legal nuances, from stringent criminalization in certain
countries like Germany, to decriminalisation in countries like United
Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand, and to a more balanced interplay
between civil and criminal aspects in Italy. While India grapples with
debates surrounding the conflict of defamation laws and free speech, Japan
showcases a more rigorous example of maintaining the delicate balance
between individual reputation and freedom ofexpression.
At-,'

understanding of the legal foundations underpinning the criminalization of
defamation and its ionsequential effects. This Chapter will also deal with
countries which have totally or partially decriminalised defamation.
A, Countries Having Legol Provisions on Criminal Defamilion
5.5. The Japanese Constitution promises freedom of speech under Article XXI.
It provides that, "freedom of... speech, press and all other forms of
expression are guaranteed. No censorship shall be maintained, nor shall
the secrecy of any means of communication be violated."tao
5.6. The Japanese law treats defamation on the basis of the effect it has on
reducing respect for the individual in the community, or lowering the
person in the estimation of others.rar This treatment is based on Japan's
cultural emphasis on group cohesion over personal autonomy, which is
evident in the remedies available to the injured parties under Japanese law,
including public apology. ra2
rr0 The Constitution ofJapan, an. xXI.l{r Masao Horibe, "Press Law in Japan" in Pnina Lahav Press Law in Modern Democracies: A Comparative Study
3 r5,334 (te8s).
r{: Ellen M. Smith. "Reporting the Truth and Sening the Record Straight: An Analysis of U.S. and Japanese Libel
Laws", l4 Mich. J. Int'L L. 87 | ( 1993).
rlr Hiroshi ltoh & Lawrence W. Beer (eds.), The Constitutional (lu.re Law of Jopan: Selected &tprcme Court
Decisions: 196l-70.8 (University of Washington Press, 1978). Japan's pre-1945 Constitution and laws were
heavily intluenced by the French and Cerman legal traditions. The country's presentjudicial system was designed
by U.S. and Japanese Occupation agencies afier World War II
66
i. .lapan
5.7. Japan operates under a civil law system,la3 hence, defamation and libel
receive detailed attention under both the Japanese Civil and Criminal
Codes.

5.8. The Japanese Penal Code holds the defamer strictly liable for defamation,
regardless of the circumstances.r44 Under Article 230, paragraph 1 of the
Japanese Penal Code, it is provided that, "a person who defames another
person by making allegations in public, regardless of whether such facts
are true or false, is punished by imprisonment or imprisonment without
workfor not more than 3 years or afine of not more than 500,000 yen."ta5
5.9. In 1969, the Supreme Court of Japan in Kochi v. Japanta6 tried to
harmonize Article 230 of the Japanese Penal Code with the guarantee of
legitimate speech under Article XXI of the Japanese Constitution. It held
that the press could avoid punishment for defamation on showing that it
had a reasonable belief that the statements were true, in light of the
surrounding circumstances. In other words, the courts will not impute
criminal intent, and therefore will not find criminal liability, if the media
defendant can prove that it believed that the libelous statements regarding
public matters were true,r47 and had made a good faith effort to ensure they
were in fact true.
5.10. Punishments for defamation were made more stringent in June 2022 by
amendments in the Criminal Code of Japan. These amendments enhanced
the punishment for the offence of insults. A person who insults another
person in public, whether the accusation alleges facts or not, can be jailed
for up to one year or fined 300,000 yen, or a detention or a fine.ra8 It is a
significant increase from the former punishment of detention for fewer than
30 days and a fine ofup to 10,000 yen.
r{ Srpra note l4l.
ras Penal Code (Act no.45 of l9O7), art. 230, para. l.
ra6 Kochi v. Japan, Saikosai [Supreme Coun], 23 Keishu 7, Judgment ofJune 25, 1969.
t41 Id, at 259.
rr8 Penal Code (Act no. 45 of 1907), an. 231.
67 A\-

5.1 1. The distinction between defamation and insult crimes lies in whether the
act constituting offence involves stating factual information. Initially, the
severity of harm to an individual's reputation determined the heavier
statutory punishment for defamation. However, looking at the actual
situation of slanderous acts that damage a person's honour on the intemet,
imposing significantly different punishments based on factual assertions
came to be considered inappropriate. Consequently, to deal strictly with
particularly malicious insults, the statutory punishment for insult crimes
was increased to align with the punishment prescribed for defamation.
However, detention and fines remain prescribed penalties, aiming not to
punish all insults uniformly heavily, including those with low malice.
ii. China
5.12. Defamation laws in China are predominantly regulated through both civil
and criminal law statutes, emphasizing the protection of individual
reputations and societal harmony.
5.13. The Constitution of People's Republic of China confers on cirizens the
right to protect one's reputation, wherein the personal dignity of citizens
of the People's Republic of China is inviolable. Insult, libel, false charge
or frame-up directed against citizens by any means is prohibited under the
same.rae Further, right to privacy is also guaranteed whereby the freedom
and privacy of correspondence of citizens is protected by law. Individuals
and organizations are prohibited from infringing the freedom and privacy
ofcitizens' correspondence except to meet the needs ofstate security or of
investigation into criminal offences, public security. r50
rre Constitution ofPeople's Republic ofChina (PRC). an. 38
r50 Constitution of PRC. art. 40.
68
6,,

5.14. Under the Chinese Penal Code, defamation is deemed a criminal offence,
encompassing acts that harnt an individual's reputation through false
information or statements. Those who openly insult others by violence or
other means or fabricate facts to slander others, if the circumstances are
serious, are liable to a sentence of fixed-term imprisonment of not more
than three years, criminal detention, public surveillance, or deprivation of
political rights. ri r The severity of penalties often correlates with the
perceived impact on social stability and public order.
5.15. These provisions aim to safeguard public order and social stability,
reflecting the state's emphasis on maintaining social harmony. It is
pertinent to note that both online and offline defamation constitute criminal
offences in China.
5.16. Intent plays a crucial role in determining culpability in defamation cases.
Accusations deemed intentionally malicious or harmful to societal
harmony carry more significant penalties. Verification of truth as a defence
is also availabie, however it is not a complete defence. Even if the
information is accurate or not completely false, it must not contain words
that are outrageously insulting. r52
iii. Canada
5.17. Canada's Criminal Code contains provisions criminalizing blasphemous
libelr5l and defamatory libelr5a. Section 298(1) of the Canadian Criminal
15r Criminal Law ofPRC 1997, an.246.
r'2 Henry Liao, Danhua Huang et.al., "Protecting Reputation Rights from Online Defamation: China" Thomson
Reuters, Jan 1,2020 qvailable at:
http://www.sch inderslaw.com/uploads/uploads/file/2020/01/2 l/c56643 e8be3 8b2c56 I b5 I b6 I 5cdf8220.pdf (last
visited on Jan. 29, 2024).
[r Canada Criminal Code (R.S.C., 19E5. c. C-46). rs 296
rra Canada Criminal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46), S 29S
69
6-

Code describes 'defamatory libel' as a"matter published, without lcnuful
justification or excuse, that is likely to injure the reputation of any person
by exposing him to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or that is designed to
insult the person of or concerning whom it is published." r55 A defamatory
libel is punishable by up to two years in prison, or up to five years where
the person publishes a defamatory libel that he knows is false. 156
5.18. In addition to general defences (e.g., duress) available to defendants, the
Criminal Code establishes a number of defences against claims of
defamatory libel, including truthls7, absolute privilege, which normally
applies to the communication between state officialsr58 and also includes
publication and fair reporting of the proceedings of the courts or
parliamentary papers, qualified privilege, if the publication was invited or
necessary, provides answers to inquiries or gives information to interested
personsl5e for public benefitl60, fair comment on a public person or a work
of artr6r, and publication in good faith for the redress of a wrong162.
5.19. Canada's criminal defamation laws have a very broad application, without
making any distinction between media so long as the libelous information
was exhibited in public, or it was caused to be read or seen, or shown to
(or intended to be shown to), the person whom it defames or any other
person.l63
r55 Canada Criminal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46). g 298.
rs6 Canada Criminal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46), $ 300-301
r57 Canada Crim inal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46), g 3 I | .
t5t Dowson y. Conada, [1981] F.C.J. No. 426, at para 15.
r5e Canada Criminal Code (R.S.C., t985. c. C-46). I 3 15.
ro Canada Criminal Code (R.S.C., I985, c. C-46). $ 309.
16r Canada Crirninal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46), g 3 10.
16: Canada Criminal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46), $ 312-3 t4
163 Canada Criminal Code (R.S.C., 1985,c.C-46), I3l2-3l4
70
N-'

5.21. Regarding the objective of the defamation provision, it was found that
reputation protection was part of the purpose. On the point whether this
offence is minimally impairing of the freedom of expression, it was held
that the various limits on the offence including the requirement of
subjective intent to defame makes it less impairing, and it was easily
outweighed by the reputational objective.r66
5.22. The Supreme Court of Canada, in the landmark decision of Grant vs
Torstar Cort67, held that "freedom of expression" is not absolute. One
limitation on free expression is the law of defamation, which protects a
person's reputation from unjustified assault. However, the Court held that
the law of defamation does not forbid people from expressing themselves.
It merely provides that if a person defames another, that person may be
r( The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, $ 2(b)
t65 R. v. Lucos, [ 998] I S.C.R. 439, para 68.
t6 R. y. Steyens, I995] 4 WWR 153 (Man CA).
r6? (2009) 3 SCR 640.
71
5.20. ln 1982, the canadian charter of Rights and Freedoms was enacted which
provided the right ro freedom ofexpression under Section 2(b) which also
includes the freedom of the press and other media of communication. r6a In
1984, in the wake of the adoption of the canadian charter of Rights and
Freedoms, the Law Reform Commission of Canada published Working
Paper 35 on Defamatory Libel, advocating a complete abolition of
defamatory libel from the Canadian Criminal Code. The Canadian
Supreme Court, however, found criminal defamation (libel known to be
false) to be consistent with the requirements of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms, so long as the action required proof ,.beyond a
reasonable doubt that the accused intended to defame the victim.,,r65
fu-

iv. European Countries
5.23. In majority of the European nations, defamation laws serve a singular and
crucial role: safeguarding an individual's right to reputation, i.e., the
esteem in which one is justifiably held among one's peers or the public.
This principle resonates deeply in how criminal defamation is defined
within the legal frameworks of these countries. Subjectively, those targeted
by false and malicious accusations face substantial emotional, personal,
and vocational consequences. Without a fair opportunity to adequately
respond to these allegations, they might be wrongly mistrusted or shunned
by their community, or denied opportunities that they otherwise deserve.
5.24. In the European Union, out of the 27 member States, only four (Cyprus,
Ireland, Malta and Romania) have decriminalized defamation; but even
among those that have done so, Cyprus still has some sort of defamation-
related criminal offence in force r6e . In Cyprus, insulting the armed
forcesrTo, foreign heads of staterTr and libel against the memory of the
deceasedrT2 still remain criminal offences.
5.25. Among the 23 EU states where defamation still stands as a criminal
offence, 20 nations retain the option of imprisonment as a potential
168 Thiru N. Ran v.lJnion of India2020 (3)M.L). (Crl) 289.
r6e Centre for Media Pluralism and Media Freedom, "Decrim inalisation of Defamation" (January 20 | 9), availoble
ctt: https://cmpf.eu i.eu/wp-content/uploads/20 l9l01/decrim inalisation-of-defamation lnfographic.pdf. (last
visited on Jan. I1.2024).
r70 Cyprus Criminal Code, art. 50D.
r7r Cyprus Criminal Code, art.68.l': Cyprus Criminal Code. an.202A.
72
required to pay damages to the other for the harm caused to other's
reputation.l6s
G,

punishment. Notably, Bulgaria, Croatia, and France deviate from this norm
by imposing fines instead. On an average, the highest possible term of
imprisonment permissible for defamation across EU states is two yearsr73.
However, imprisonment is not the only punishment that remains on the
books. In select European nations, individuals convicted of defamation
may, under certain circumstances, face deprivation of political rights-
such as right to elect the members ofgeneral representative bodies and to
be elected as members of these bodies or hold public office (e.g., the
Netherlands, Spain)r----or the loss of the right to practice a particular
profession, as seen in cases within Bulgaria and the Netherlands, for
lnstance.
5.26. The table below outlines a compilation of few European countries where
criminal defamation is an offence, detailing the legal definitions of the
offence and the corresponding punitive measures.
r7r lnternational Press lnstitute, "Out of Balance: Defamation Law in the European Union: A Comparative
Overview for Joumalists, Civil Society and Policymakers", (January 20l5)
17{ Austrian Criminal Code (Str afgesetzbuch\, $ lll.
73
Cou ntry
Criminal
Defa m a tion
Provision
Legal Definition Punishment
Austria Defamation
(ilble
Nachrede)t7a
Accusing someone of a
disreputable
characteristic or
disposition,
dishonourable
behaviour or of a
behaviour offensive to
good morals that may
denigrate that person or
bring hirn/her into
Imprisonment up to
six months or fine;
(For defamation
committed through
print, broadcasting
"or by any other
means by which the
defamatory content
is made accessible to
a wider public" , the
6',

disrepute in the eyes of
the public.
possible punishment
is up to one year and
fine ).
Czech
Republic
Defamationl 75 Communication of false
information about
another person that is
capable of seriously
endangering his
reputation among fellow
citizens, in particular,
harming him at work,
and disrupting his
family relationships or
causing him some other
serious harm.
Imprisonment for up
to one year
(general);
Imprisonment for up
to two years or
prohibition from
practicing his
profession (for
defamation
cornmitted by way of
media or other
public manner).
Denmark Defamationl 76 Violating the personal
honour of another by
offensive words or
conduct or by rnaking or
spreading allegations of
an act likely to
disparage him in the
esteem of his fellow
citizens.
Imprisonment for up
to four months or
fine (general);
Imprisonment for up
to two years or fine
[Defamation
committed in bad
faith (maliciously) -
If a charge is made
or disseminated
against better
knowledge, or if the
perpetrator lacked
reasonable grounds
to believe it to be
true].
Finland Def-amationlTT Spreading
information or
"false
a false
Fine only (general);
Imprisonment for up
r75 Czech Criminal Code, $ 184.
r76 Danish Criminal Code. SQ 267-268.
177 Finnish Criminal Code. afis.24.9.24.10. &,,

insinuation of another
person so that the act is
conducive to causing
damage or suffering to
that person, or
subjecting that person
to contempt" or
"disparaging another
person in any other
manner".
to two years or fine
(Aggravated
Defamation - Act
that causes "greaf
suffering or
particularly
s ignificant
damage").
France DefamationrTs Any allegation or
accusation of a fact that
causes an attack on the
honour or consideration
of a person.
When directed at
private persons,
punishable with a
fine of€12,000;
When committed
against public
officials, maximum
fine increases to
c45,000.
Germany Defamation
(ilble
Nachrede)t1e
Asserting or
disseminating a fact
related to another
person which may
defame him or
negatively affect public
opinion about him.
Imprisonment for up
to one year or fine
(general);
Imprisonment for up
to two years can be
imposed if the act is
"committed publicly
or through
dissemination of
written materials" .
Greece Defamation and
Slanderlso
Clairning or
disseminating before a
third party facts about
another person that may
Imprisonment for up
to two years or a fine
or both (general);
Imprisonment of at
least three months or
r78 The Law on the Freedom of the Press of 29 July I E8 I, arts. 29-32 (France).
r7e German Criminal Code, art. 186.
r80 Greek Penal Code. ans.362-363.
75
6-

harm that person's
honour or reputation.
a fine (Slander - If
the defamation is
such in which the
information was
false and the
perpetrator knew it
to be false).
Hungary Defarnation
(ragalmazds)t8l
Engaging in the written
or oral publication of
anything that is
injurious to the good
name or reputation of
another person, or using
an expression directly
referring to such a fact.
Imprisonment for up
to one year
(general);
Imprisonment for up
to two years if the act
of defamation is
committed "for a
malicious motive or
purpose", is
published with great
publicity (media), or
causes
"coniiderable
injury'' to the
claimant.
lceland Defamation and
Slanderr82
Defamation - Making
insinuations about
anothel person of a
nature that would
damage his or her
reputation, or spreading
such insinuations.
Slander - Making or
disseminating a
defamatory insinuation
Fine or
imprisonment for up
to one year.
Imprisonment for up
to two years;
If an insinuation is
made or
r3r Hungarian Criminal Code, art.226.
18: Ceneral Penal Code, No. l911940, arts.235-236 (lceland)
76
St

disseminated
publicly even though
the person
making it had no
reason to believe it
to be correct, it shall
be punishable by
fine or imprisonment
for up to two years.
Italy Defamationls3 Injuring the reputation
of an absent person via
communication with
others.
Imprisonment for up
to one year or fine of
up to e1,032
(general);
If the act of insult or
defamation consists
in allegation of a
specific fact, the
punishment is
increased to
imprisonment for up
to two years or a fine
of up to €2,065;
If defamation is
committed by means
of press or otherwise
publicly, the
punishment is a fine
of at least €5 16 or
imprisonment from
six months to three
years.
L ithuan ia Libelrs l Spreading of 'false
information about
another person that
could arouse contempt
Imprisonrnent for up
to one year or fine.
I8r Italian Penal Code. an- 595.
r84 The Criminal Code ofRepublic ofLithuania, an. 154
77
against one's better
knowledge.
s,/

fo, this person or
humiliate him or
undermine trust in him" .
Netherlands Slander
(smaad),Libel
(smaadschrift)
and Aggravated
Defamation
(laster)t85
Slander - Intentionally
harming a person's
honour or reputation
through the allegation of
a particular fact with the
aim of making that fact
public.
Libel - An act of
defamation that occurs
by means of publicly
accessible writing or
images.
Aggravated Defamation
- An act of slander or
libel in which the
offender knows that the
statement or assertion in
question is false.
Fine or
imprisonment for up
to six months.
Fine or
imprisonment for up
to one year.
F ine or
imprisonment for up
to two years.
Poland Defamation r86 Imputing "to another
person, a group of
persons, an institution
or organisational unit,
conduct or
characteristics that may
discredit them in the
face of public opinion".
Fine or restriction of
liberty (general);
Fine or restriction of
liberty or
imprisonment for up
to one year, if
offence committed
through mass media.
Portugal Defamation
(difuma9do)187
Alleging a fact or
formulating a judgment
(or reproducing such)
Imprisonment
maximum
l8t Dutch Penal Code. arts.26l -262.
186 Polish Penal Code. art.2l2.
r87 Portugese Penal Code, ans. 180, 183
78
for
six
Gr-

about a third person that
is offensive to that
person's honour or
reputation.
months or fine
(general);
If the act concems
allegation of a
particular fact that
the offender knows
to be untrue or
committed with
publicity, the penalty
is increased by one-
third;
If the act is
committed through
media, the
punishment is
increased to
imprisonment for up
to two years or fine.
Defamation 188 Communicating false
information about
another person that can
seriously damage the
person's reputation
among fellow citizens,
the person's career,
business, and/or family
relations, or cause the
person serious harm.
Imprisonment for up
to two years
(general);
If the act of
defamation causes
substantial damage,
the maximum term
of imprisonment is
increased to five
years;
If the act results in
large-scale damage,
loss of employment,
or divorce, the
offender faces
imprisonment for a
r8E Slovak Penal Code. sec.373
79
S lovakia
h-

term of three to eight
years.
Slovenia Defamation,
and Slanderr8e
Slander - Asserting or
circulating something
about another person,
capable of causing
damage to the honour or
reputation of that
person.
Defamation - Asserting
or circulating something
untrue about another
person, capable of
causing damage to the
honour or reputation of
that person, knowing
that what he claims or
spreads is untrue.
Fine or
imprisonment for up
to three months
(general);
If the offence is
committed via
media, it is
punishable by fine or
imprisonment for up
to six months;
If the offence had
"grave
consequences" for
the offended party,
the maximum
punishment
increases to
imprisonment for up
to one year.
F ine or
imprisonment for up
to six months
(general);
If the offence is
committed via
media, it is
punishable by fine or
imprisonment for up
to one year;
If the offence had
"grave
consequences" for
aftthe offended
r3e Slovenian Criminal Code, arts. 159-160
80
S-

the maximum
punishment
increases to
imprisonment fbr up
to two years.
Turkey Insultleo Attributing an act, or
fact, to a person in a
manner that may
impugn that person's
honour, dignity or
prestige, or attacking
someone's honour,
dignity or prestige by
swearing.
Imprisonment for
three rnonths to two
years or a judicial
fine (general);
If the act is directed
against a public
officer due to
performance of his
public duty, or
committed in
response to a
person's religious,
political, social, or
philosophical
beliefs, the term of
imprisonment to be
imposed shall not be
less than one year.
B. Countries where Defamation has been Decriminulised
5.27. Defamation laws may serve as crucial safeguards against false statements
harming someone's reputation, but they can also be misused easily.
Criminalisation of defamation rnight jeopardize freedom of expression,
and may produce a 'chilling effect' on joumalistic freedom. Instead,
journalists and media should be able to operate and perform their duties
without any fearrer. With this aim in mind. since 1990s, a lot of countries
reo Turkish Criminal Code. art. 125
rer Slpra note 169.
8l
h*

5.28.
re2 The Constitution ofthe United States of America, Amendment I
pr 376 u.s. 2i4.
tna Ashton v. Kentucky,384 U.S. 195 (1966).
have decriminalised defamation provisions. United Kingdom, from where
India has borrowed most of its law, itself repealed criminal defamation law
in 2009. Few other countries which have decriminalised defamation
include Cyprus, Ireland, Malta, Romania, Australia, New Zealand,
Ukraine, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Norway, Zimbabwe and Kenya.
The United States of America does not have any uniform criminal
defamation law. There is no criminal defamation law at the federal level.
Each of its states as well as the District of Columbia, have their own set of
laws, which include a corpus of tort law that is mostly based on Common
Law but has been altered by state legislation and judicial oversight.
Nonetheless, the American constitution severely limits each state's ability
to customise its defamation laws. The First Amendment of the US
Constitutionre2 guaranteed freedom of speech and freedom of press, and
thus, provided a protection against defamation charges, but the same was
not used much in defamation cases until 1964, when in New York Times
Co. v. Sullivante3, the Supreme Court of USA established that a public
officials' ability to file a defamation lawsuit is limited by the First
Amendment's safeguards for free expression. In order to succeed, a public
official must not only prove the normal essentials of defamation but also
that the media outlet either knew that the information was wholly false or
that it was published with disregard to its truth or falsity. In 1966, the
United States Supreme Court held that most criminal libel laws violated
the First Amendment protection of free speech in Ashton v. KentuclE.tea
In some its states and territories, the criminal defamation laws at the state
level have either been repealed or struck down as unconstitutional.
82
q\-

5.29. The United Kingdom decriminalised defamation laws in 2009 by an
amendment in the Coroners and Justice Act,2009 which also repealed
criminal offences of sedition and seditious libel, defamatory libel, and
obscene libel in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.re5 The Act was
justified based on the argument that criminalization of defamation
provisions had set an example for other countries to restrict free speech.
5.30. Sri Lanka became one of the first countries in Asia to decriminalise
criminal defamation in 2002, due to strong opposition from civil society
organizations, professional organizations and trade unions which
advocated for full enjoyment ofright to freedom ofspeech and expression'
This movement also led the country to ratifu Intemational Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and Intemational Convention on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR).
5.3 I . In Kenya, the offence of criminal defamation was declared
unconstitutional by the High Court of Kenya in Okuta v. Attorney
Generalte6 for violating the right to freedom of expression. The court
reasoned that criminalizing defamation is unnecessary if there is a civil
remedy serving the same purpose' According to the court, invoking
criminal defamation was "disproportionate and therefore excessive"'
5.32. Defamation is not a criminal offence in Australia and New Zealand. The
remedy against defamation in both of these countries is a civil one. In
Australia, a unifonn defarnation legislation was introduced in 2005 vide
the Defamation ActreT, 2005 by which even the distinction between lihel
res The Coroners and Justice Act 2009. $ 73
r% 2017 SCC OnLine Ken l.
re? Defamation Act- Act 77 of2005.
83
At

and slander was abolished. The offence of defamation was decriminalised
in New Zealand in 1993 vide the Defamation Act of 1992re8.
5.33. Some legal entities at both international and regional levels, have
emphasised the significance of freedom of expression and opinion. They
have also supported the call to decrirninalize defamation.
5.34. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights has repeatedly affirmed
that criminal defamation violates the freedom of expression. For instance,
in the Herrera Ulloa v. Costa Ricatee, the Court emphasized that effective
freedom of expression is integral to democracy. It also noted the
importance of subjecting public figures to greater scrutiny than private
figures for the public interest. Moreover, in the case of Ricardo Canese v.
Paraguay2lj, the Court highlighted the necessity of allowing a wider
margin of tolerance for opinions expressed in public discourse and matters
concerning public interest.
5.35. Similarly, the ruling by African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights
in Lohe Issa Konate v. Burkina Faso2]t in 2014, prompted numerous
regional countries to decriminalize defamation. In this case, according to
the court, the laws restricting freedom ofexpression should not only serve
a legitimate govemment interest but also maintain proportionality
conceming the potential harms they address. The court found out that
sentence of imprisonrnent of twelve months and fine of $12,000 USD
imposed on a joumalist for publishing articles criticising local prosecutors
re8 Defamation Act, Act no. 105 of 1992.
lee Judgment ofJune2,2004, Series C, No. 107.
2@ Judgment ofAugust 31,2004, series C, No. | | l.
']"r 2015 scc onLine Ken 2823.
84 s,,

was excessively severe, violating both the African Charter on Human and
Peoples' Rights and the ICCPR. The court also opined that criminal
repercussions for defamation are never justified, advocating instead for
individuals to seek civil remedies.
5.36. In 2010, the African Commission on Human and People's Rights
adopted a resolution for repeal of criminal defamation laws in the
continent, as it leads to abuse and harsh consequences for joumalists and
media serving public interests.202
5.37. In delving into the criminal defamation provisions across diverse
jurisdictions, this Chapter has traversed a spectrum of legal frameworks,
penalties, and societal implications. Criminalizing defamation has been a
contentious subject, with diverse opinions worldwide. While some
jurisdictions lean towards decriminalization or emphasize civil remedies,
several countries advocate for retaining criminal provisions for
defamation.
5.39. The comparative analysis of criminal defamation provisions in these
jurisdictions highlights the rationale for advocating criminalization' By
202 Resolution on Repealing Criminal Defamation Laws in Aliica - ACHPR/Res.l69(XLVI ll) l0 (2010).
ror UNESCO, The Misusi of the Judicial System to Attack Freedom of Expression: Trends, Challenges and
Responses (2022).
85
5.38. According to data published by LINESCO, 160 countries in the world
criminalize defamation. In the last few years, a number of new laws have
been passed to combat cyber security, fake news and hate speech, whereby
several states have harshened or reintroduced provisions on libel,
defamation and insult.2or
&,/

imposing penalties, criminalization seeks to instill accountability, deter
wrongful defamation, and safeguard individual reputations. These
provisions have been tiequently justified on the grounds of their role in
preserving societal harmony, individual integrity, and upholding
accountability in the realm of public discourse.
5.40. Additionally, criminal defamation provisions have often bridged the gap
between legal deterrence and the protection of individual rights. While free
speech is a fundamental right, it is not absolute. Criminal provisions, when
applied judiciously, strike a balance between the right to express opinions
and the responsibility to respect the dignity and reputation of others.
5.41. Furthermore, the existence of criminal defamation laws underscores the
importance of ensuring accountability in the digital age. In an
interconnected world where information spreads rapidly across various
online platforms, legal measures are crucial to address the misuse and
abuse of communication channels that can lead to increase in defamatory
content.
5.42. While the debate on criminalisation of defamation persists, advocating for
these provisions involves recognizing their role in protecting individual
reputations, upholding accountability, preserving societal values, and
fostering responsible expression. It is also crucial to ensure that defamation
laws remain adaptable, equitable, and aligned with intemational human
rights standards.
86 &.

6. CONCLUSION
A. Constitutionality of Criminal Defomation
6.1. Criminal defamation laws in India have faced debates regarding their
constitutionality. While some argue that these laws restrict free speech
contradicting the constitutional protection of freedom of speech and
expression, others uphold them asserting that they protect reputation and
prevent abuse. The Supreme Court of India in Subramanian Swamy v.
Union of India2'r upheld criminal defamation, balancing free speech and
right to protect reputation, but the debate continues regarding its alignment
with constitutional freedoms.
6.2. It is evident that not all speech is worthy of protection, and this is especially
true of defamatory speech, which has the potential to do great harm. The
right of freedom ofexpression and the right to reputation, which are linked
to the right to dignity, must be balanced in accordance with the law of
defamation.205 It appears that the victim's right to dignity has been given
more weight by the courts in striking this balance. The present criminal
defamation legislation is primarily justified by the need to safeguard an
individual's reputation, therefore ultimately, the interest in freedom of
expression must be weighed against this social purpose.
6.3. The Supreme Court of Canada ruled in R v. Lucas that the criminal offence
of defamatory libel could legitimately restrict the right to freedom of
expression because it prevents harm to one's reputation from occurring,
,04 AIR 2016 SC 2728.
2o5 Nqtionql Mediq Lrd v. Bogoshi, 1998 (4) SA I 196 (SCA) 1207
87 fu-

which is a "legitimate goal of the criminal law," and because the value of
defamatory expression is "negligibls."ztt0'
" Defamatory libel is sofar removedfrom the core values offreedom
of expression that it merits but scant protection. This low degree of
protection can also be supported by the meritorious objective of the
[sections of the Criminal Code setting out defamatory libel]. They
are designed to protect the reputation of the individual. This is the
attribute which is most highly sought after, prized and cherished by
most individuals. The enjoyment of a good reputation in the
community is to be valued beyond riches."207
6.4. Skweyiya, J. addressed remarks regarding the chilling effect of defamation
actions in Dikoko v. Mokhatla20s by stating that:
"The chilling effect on freedom of expression envisaged in
defamation cases would play out in the following manner. A person
who suspects that they may possibly be about to defame someone
else is cognizant of the fact that f they do, there may be legal
consequences. As a result, they either refrain from making the
utterance or doing some background checkingfirst. So the kinds of
utterances which are chilled are those which an ordinary person
may suspect to be defamatory in nature. The chilling of this kind of
expression is by no means an undesirable result and is in line with
the framework of intersecting rights ... in which freedom of
expression may well have to take a back seat to dignity in certain
circumstances. ... Thus rather than being contrary to the
constitutional scheme for the protection of expression, 'chilling'
defamatory statements or those that may be suspected as such, are
precisely what the Constitution requires in light of its commitment
to dignity as a foundational value. "
6.5. The Supreme Court of Appeal in South Africa disrnissed an appeal against
the conviction on approximately 22 charges of criminal defamation in S v.
106 Carl F-ischer. -An Evaluarion Of The Constitut ionality Of The Common Law Crirne Of Criminal Defamation",
NMMU (2008), ayailoble ar: https://core.ac.uk/down load/pdf/ | 45044662.pdf. (last visited on Jan. 15,2024)
xo1 R v. Lucqs, U 9981 I SCR 439.
ro8 2oo7 (l) BCLR I (CC).
88 s-

Hoho2oe. The allegations against certain political office-bearers were
contained in a number of published pamphlets. The court especially
addressed the question of whether defamation was still a Common Law
wrongdoing and whether it was constitutionally sound. After reviewing
prior legal cases, a relevant South African Law Commission report,
academic writers' opinions, and the Electoral Act 73 of 1998's statutory
extension of the offence, the court found that the offence of defamation
does not contravene the Constitution. The court noted that restriction on
freedom of expression is valid and constitutional, if it strikes a balance
between protection of expression and protection of human dignity. Further,
the court also held that, "although a criminal conviction and the sanction
arising therefrom may be more severe than an order to pay damages the
limitation of the right to freedom of expression is, in my view, not."
6.6. The Constitutional Court, in Khumalo v. Holomisa2to, proceeded to hold
that the crime of defamation was not unconstitutional, and that it did not
agree with the views of some writers that it ought to be decriminalized.
Furthermore, the court argued as to why should it be that bodily injury
could be prosecuted in the form of assault, but injury to reputation in the
form of defamation could not.2rl
6.7. Criminal defamation serves to protect reputation and dignity of
individuals. Under Article l9(2) of the Constitution of India, reasonable
restrictions can be imposed in relation to defamation for safeguarding the
reputation of individuals. Criminal defamation acts as a deterrent against
ro, (2009 ( t) sAcR 276 (scA).
rro 2002 (8) BCLR 77 r (CC).
2tr Shannon Hoctor, "The Crime of Delhmation - Still Defensible in a Modern Constitutional Democracy".
OBITER20l3, avoilqble a,: https://journals.co.zaldoi/pdf/ 10. I 0520/E JC137225.
89 e\-

false and malicious statements, preventing damage to one's reputation that
civil remedies might not adequately address. Moreover, the law ensures a
balance between freedom ofexpression and right to reputation, essential to
maintain social harmony and protecting individuals from unwarranted
harm caused by defamatory statements.
B. Misuse of Criminal Defamation
6.8. The Indian Constitution and intemational treaties to which India is a
member guarantee the right to freedom of expression. Newspapers,
television, intemet, and social media often host heated debate between
politicians, activists, and the general people. Many govemments have
vowed to uphold the right to free speech.2r2 But it has been argued that the
criminal defamation laws, intended to protect individuals and entities from
false and damaging statements, have been increasingly subject to misuse
and abuse. while defamation laws serve to safeguard reputation and
prevent the spread of false information, their application in a criminal
context has been often seen as stifling free speech and impeding legitimate
criticism or expression.
6.9. One of the primary concerns regarding criminal defamation laws is their
potential to be weaponised by powerful entities, including corporations, or
influential individuals, to silence dissent, intimidate joumalists, and critics.
Such laws can be used as tools of censorship, hindering investigative
journalism and limiting public discourse on matters of significance'
rrr Human Rights Watch, Sr// ing Dissent: The Criminqlization of Peuceful Expression in lndia (2016)
90
S-

6.10. Moreover, criminal defamation can also have a chilling effect on freedom
of expression. While some prosecutions have resulted in convictions, most
of the prosecutions for criminal defamation laws have resulted in dismissal
or have been withdrawn213.
6. I I . The fear of legal repercussions can dissuade individuals from speaking out,
even when they have valid concems or evidence to support their claims.
This fear can hamper the exposure of wrongs and prevent the public from
accessing crucial information.
6.12. The misuse of criminal defamation laws has been observed in cases
involving powerful actors who seek to overwhelm the defendant through
protracted legal proceedings, excessive costs, and the related psychological
burden. SLAPPs (Strategic Lawsuits Against Public Participation) focused
on defamation charges are frequently used to discourage journalists from
advancing their work by preventing the publication or removal of certain
content and discouraging others from covering the same issues.2ll
6.13. Often, these cases are filed not necessarily to seek justice for damage to
reputation but to target whistle-blowers, journalists exposing corruption,
activists advocating for change, or ordinary individuals expressing their
opinions online. The misuse becomes evident when cases are filed for
rr3 In a study done by Supreme Court Observer on criminal defamation judgments delivered by the High Courts
in 2018, it was found that out of all the judgments delivered with respect to Section 499 of lPC, only 14.29%o
resulted in conviction, whereas 57. l4% of the judgments resulted in dismissal.
rt{ UNESCO, "Defamation Laws and SLAPPs inreasingly "misused" to cunail Freedom of Expression", (last
modified April 20, 2023), available at: https://www.unesco.org/en/anicles/defamation-laws-and-slapps-
increasingly-m isused-curtai l-freedom-
expression?TSPD_l0l R0:080713870fab200006a1136fc89bf4aa2f|5357e5ac814692cc36bfc5639459439090b
a'7a5992'74b08af6c833 I 14300003a53 fd5893 f89765R0338e8E0a0b5f8422bce6575af5baf0593297ffd6a74'1922d
635d3 Red 1964745c2a4e08d8332. (last visited on Jan. 29,2024).
9l $,,

trivial mafters, or when disproportionate legal action is taken against those
expressing legitimate concems or attempting to expose corruption or
wrongdoing.
6.14. The Supreme Court, in Vijaykant v. City Public Prosecutor2t5, whTle
staying non-bailable warrants against a politician from opposite party in a
defamation case by the Tamil Nadu Government, remarked that
defamation cases should not be used as a political counter weapon against
critics of govemment. The court observed that, "The penal provision on
defamation should not be used to throttle dissent.......the court must step
in, if there are continuous efforts to harass persons by filing a number of
defamation cases." In the same case, the court also questioned the large
number of cases filed by the State Government against its critics.
"While the remedies of Indiabulls against any report, which
according to it may have contained incorrect or misleading facts,
were always available to them, to threaten criminal action for
publication of a research report was an extreme step.... Such a
reaction in the foce of publications and articles written by
2r5 Writ Petition (Crl.) No.4312016, Order dated 28.07.2016
'?r6 2019 scc online Del 8294.
92
6.15. In Indiabulls Real Estate Ltdv. Veritas Investment Research216, a research
report titled 'Bilking India' was published by Veritas Investment group, in
which an analysis of various companies of Indiabulls group was made,
after which the share prices of Indiabulls group fell sharply in the stock
market. Criminal defamation complaints were filed by Indiabulls against
Veritas group. The Delhi High Court, condemning the conduct of the
Indiabulls group, observed that:
w,,

researchers could have a "chilling effect" on publishing."
6. 16. In Thiru N Ram v. Union of India"/7, the Madras High Court, recognizing
the misuse of Section 199(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) in
prosecutions launched by the Public Prosecutors in cases of defamation of
the State, and while elaborating on the care and caution a Public Prosecutor
ought to take in criminal defamation proceedings, concluded that the State
should not be impulsive like any ordinary citizen in defamation matters and
invoke Section 199(2) ofCrPC. The court observed that:
6.t7. In Vijay v. Rajendra Ghisulal Gupta2t8, the Nagpur bench of the Bombay
High Court condemned the misuse of criminal defamation provisions,
while holding that a reporting of information in public domain by a
newspaper without any insinuation cannot justi! defamation charges. In
this case, a Marathi daily had reported on a First Information Report. The
person named in such FIR filed a criminal defamation complaint alleging
that the newspaper didn't act with due diligence as he was not named as an
accused in the chargesheet. The court observed that, "the freedom of
making a true report regarding the affairs which are in the public domain
is a right, which flows fi"om the freedom of speech. The action of
defamation about true and faithful reporting is unhealthyfor a democratic
setup. " The court further remarked that:
:" 2020 scc onLine Mad 1023.
rr3 Criminal Application No.393 of2022, Judgment dated 20.06.2022
93
"The Legislature would never have intended to launch prosecution
through a Public Prosecutor to serve the personal interest of the
public servant/constitutional authority alone, even if the said
defomation of the public servant/constitutional authority was made
in the discharge of his/her public functions."
s,

"Filing complaints about defamation on such news items are nothing
but an attempt to shut up and sti/le the Reporters /informants and to
force them to withdraw the report filed against the persons who are
allegedly defamed.... Continuation of such prosecution amounts to
abuse of the process of the Court and would not sustain in the eyes
of law."
6. 18. The misuse of criminal defamation, with its potential to muzzle dissent and
stifle free expression, is antithetical to democracy. When criminal
defamation provisions are exploited as tools to silence individuals,
journalists, or critics, it not only hampers the free flow of information but
also impedes the democratic principles of accountability and transparency.
Such misuse establishes a culture of fear, inhibiting the public from
engaging in discussions on matters of public interest and ultimately eroding
the democratic fabric by curtailing the exchange of ideas and viewpoints
that are integral to a vibrant and democratic society.
6. 19. This situation often raises a question, as to whether the criminal defamation
provisions are optimal solutions for safeguarding reputation, especially in
view of the fact that civil defamation remedies are also taken recourse of
to claim damages for harm to reputation.
6.20. To mitigate the misuse of criminal defamation laws, demands are made
time and again for legal reforms balancing the protection of individual
reputations with upholding the right to freedom ofspeech and expression.
Such reforms should discourage frivolous or malicious complaints, provide
safeguards against misuse, and encourage a more robust public discourse
without the fear of legal reprisal.
94
\,,

C. Necessity of Criminal Defomotion
6.21. One of the challenges in enforcing defamation laws is striking the right
harmony among the two conflicting rights to free speech and an unharmed
reputation. Lord Nicholls gave careful consideration to public concems in
the Reynolds v. Times Newspapers2te,, stating that when reputation is
harmed, "society as well as the individual is the loser" since safeguarding
reputation is beneficial to the public interest. The rules pertaining to title
to sue, publication, defamatory matter, defences other than the "new"
defence of "reasonable publication," onus of proof, fault, and remedies all
work together to provide a workable balance between the protection of
these two valued interests, i.e., reputation and free speech.220 It appears that
there is a significant difference in strategy between, on the one hand,
denying certain entity or person the chance to use the defamation law to
defend their reputations right away and, conversely, giving everyone,
excluding the State or Government, the right to file a defamation lawsuit.
However, everything hinges on the final compromise that is reached during
the trial between the right to free speech and protection of reputation.
Whether there is a difference in practice between these two seemingly
different approaches will depend on the concept of "reasonable
publication" and the balance struck between the competing rights of
reputation and free speech within each element of liability and its
correspond ing defences.
)t' Reynolds v. Times Newspapers Ltd and Others, [200112 AC 12'7.
rr0 Jonathan Burchell, Private Law and Human Righrs 180 (Edinburgh University Press)
95 w,

Arguments for Retaining the Law of Criminal Defamation
6.24. Public lnterest in Protectins Reputation: A person's reputation and general
well-being can be seriously impacted by defamation. Criminal prosecution
conveys a message stating that such injury is not acceptable and
acknowledges the public interest in protection of reputation. The US
Supreme Court recognized the public interest in vigorous debates on
subjects of public importance and set a high threshold for renowned
persons to win defamation actions in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan
(1964, USf22. Even when made against renowned persons, malicious and
blatantly false statements are nonetheless subject to criminal law.
2?t Supro note 10.
222 New York Times Co. v. Sullivan 376lJ.5.254 (1964)
96
6.22. lt is apparent that the conduct criminalized by the defamation law
safeguards a crucial personality interest - that of reputation. The ability to
express oneself freely, especially politically, is essential for achieving
dignity in areas like self-actualization, self-govemance, and the
recognition of human value. Also, whereas the right to political expression
is central to the concept of freedom ofexpression, the right to reputation is
closer to the periphery.22r
6.23. Stronser Deterrent Etfect'. Compared to possible monetary damages in
civil lawsuits, criminal punishment, such as fines or imprisonment, have a
greater deterrent effect against intentional and destructive defamation. This
can be crucial in situations where there are vulnerable parties or public
interest issues.
\"

Relevant extract of the albresaid judgment is as follows:
"The public official rule rests on the postulate that criticism of their
official conduct does not necessarily damage their reputation; or, ifit does, that they cannot complain because they have thrust
themselves into the vortex of public controversy. Thus, the central
meaning of this rule is that we would base liability for defamation
on the standard of 'actual malice'- that is, with knowledge offalsity
or with reckless disregard of whether it was.false or not. Debate on
public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open, and that
it may well include vehement, coustic, and sometimes unpleasantly
sharp attacks on government and public fficials. The New York
Times advertisement, even if its factual error had been highly
damaging to Sullivan's reputation, could not constitutionally justify
an award of damages without proof that it was published with
lcnowledge of its falsity or with reckless disregard of the truth."
6.25. Protectins Vulnerable Groul)s Criminal laws pertaining to defamation can
provide imporlant safeguards against discrimination and hate speech
directed towards marginalized cornmunities or minorities, among other
vulnerable groups. Criminal penalties rnay be justified by the public
interest in preventing such damaging comments.
6.26. A. court must consider the "axitudes, beliefs, and prejudices of the relevant
community" while evaluating the impact of reputational harm because it is
a socially created injury. In defamation trials, then, the jury's roleis"to act
as a tribune of the people: to be a popular institution with veto power oyer
government sanctions for speech. "223
6.27. Since monetary damages are a severely inadequate remedy and cannot
restore a reputation once it has been damaged or ease emotional distress
r2J Lyrissa Bamett Lidsky, "Defamation, Reputation, and the Myth of Community" Tl Washington Law Review
l3 (1e96).
97 $F,

once it has been experienced, it should be easier for a plaintiff to satisfu
the criterion of irreparable injury. However, such relief is rarely granted by
courts. Libel claimants are instead restricted "to less effective remedies
because we fear over enforcement of rules against tortious or criminal
speech" by the no in-iunction rule.22{
6.28. It may be argued that anyone making an assertion should be able to support
it with evidence, and the person making the accusation should have a
chance to refute it. Therefore, resolving the factual basis for the offensive
remark would be necessary for an acceptable remedy. But as the history of
defamation law demonstrates, this is no simple undertaking.
D. Inodequacy of Civil Defomilion
6.29. The risk that the civil tort system "under-punishes" and does not offer
sufficient compensation for wrongs committed is quite significant. The
factors that indicate why the criminal justice system, not just the civil law
system, should deal with the offence of defamation are that criminal
prosecution is not dependent on the victim's willingness to pursue justice;
criminal punishment is accompanied by shame and disgrace, something
that civil law does not provide. The purpose of civil law is to price
individuals out of driving, not to stop people from driving; rather, it seeks
to put an end to reckless and dangerous driving. Criminal law is designed
to guarantee that particular forms ofbehaviour cease entirely. Then, unlike
the civil law, the criminal law is able to impose morally binding guilt and
224 John Kelly, "Criminal Libel and Free Speech",6 University ofKansas Law Review 295 (1958).
98
l-
\&/

punishment. It effectively conveys the message that doing so is forbidden
for anything that has no societal value.225
6.30. It is argued that making all falsehoods and dishonest behaviour illegal
would be both impractical from an administrative and legal standpoint, and
it would not even be desirable. Here, such a stance is not being promoted.
After all, maximizing the general welfare and functionality of society is
one of the goals of the criminal law. This is one of the reasons alcohol is
not prohibited, despite the fact that it contributes to depression, domestic
violence, and general crime. It is also the reason why the speed restriction
on cars is x mph, even though a speed limit of less than x mph would be
better and would actually lower the number of accidents and fatalities. At
some point, the law decides- -consciouslv or unconsciously, perhaps-to
permit people to engage in potentially hazardous behaviours since outright
banning them could have a greater negative impact on welfare and general
happiness than tolerating them. It is ultimately a balancing act. For
example, using tobacco is not prohibited. But there are laws governing
smoking that limit who can smoke and where they can smoke based on
age.226 The penal code is not suited to correspond with the moral
denunciations of lying as we live in a pluralistic society with cont'licting
ideas of what is right and evil. But just because lying is so common in
society doesn't mean that it's right or appropriate behaviour. The fact that
lying is implicitly accepted in some situations and has become ingrained
in some people does not exempt it from criminal prosecution.
rr5 Bryan H. Druzin And Jessica Li, "The Criminalization Of Lying: Under What Circumstances, lf Any, Should
Lies Be Made Criminal?", l0l The Joumal of Criminal Law and Criminology 529-573 (2011).
11u lbid.
99 S"'

6.3 l. One argument against the defamation crime's existence is that the civil
remedy for the act is a forceful and successful way to make amends for the
harm done to a person whose reputation ha-s been unjustly attacked. In S
v. Hoho227 , the court took this issue into consideration and examined
academic writing to that end, but ultimately determined that the criminal
penalty was essential and crucial. 1'he Supreme Court of Canada reached
the same conclusion in considering the analogous offence of defamatory
libel in R v. Lucas2)8, where it was held that:
" ...while victims v,ho have been libelled deserve compensation,
perpetrators who wilfully and knowingly publish lies deserve to be
punished for their grievous misconduct... The fact that a person can
claim monetary compensation for ,Tamages does not exclude the
need for a corresponding public expression of society's profound
disapproval."
6.33. The Privy Council , in Worme v. Commissioner of Police of Grenada23l,
also emphasized that the need for the criminal sanction for libel was in no
,,? (2009 ( t) sAcR 276 (SCA)).
,r8 I9981 I SCR 439.
,r, (2009 ( l) SACR 276 (SCA).
zro [2004] UKPC 8.
100
6.32. ll was thus held by the Court in S v. Hoho2)e:
" Although it is important to recognize the right of the person
defamed to sue for monetary damages it is equally if not more
important that society discourage the intentional publication of lies
calculated tc expose another individual to hatred and contempt ...
Defamatory libel can cause long-lasiing or permanent injuries to the
victim. The victim may forever be demeaned and diminished in the
eyes of her community ... The harm that acts of criminal libel can
cause is so grievous and the object of the sectiotr to protect the
reputation of individuals is so meritorious that the criminal offence
is of such importance that the o/fence should be maintained. "
\',

way undermined by the existence of the civil law remedy:
"Of course the tort of libel provides a civil remedy for damages
against those who make such attacks, but this no more shows that a
crime of intentional libel is unnecessary than the existence of the tort
of conversion shows that the crime of theft is unnecessory."23l
6.34. Not only does the crime of defamation serve a legitimate and important
goal of the crirninal law by protecting a person's reputation from the
intentional publication of a lie, but it provides protection in cases where
the civil remedy would be deficient. Thus, the civil remedy does not
provide a practical alternative where the victim does not have the financial
means to pursue it, or where the offending party does not have the means
to satisfu an order of payment of monetary damages to the victim.
6.35. The irony for those who suffer reputational harm is that money is an
especially inadequate remedy for defamation. This is because reputational
injuries are not readily translatable into monetary relief as money can
neither restore a diminished reputation nor make a plaintiff s emotional
distress go away. Furthermore, because of the procedural protections
available to libel defendants, a plaintiff must incur substantial legal costs
to see a defamation lawsuit through to completion, but very few libel
plaintiffs suffer enough provable pecuniary loss to justifr litigating their
case.
6.36. In Citizens Light, Heat & Power Co. v. Montgomery Light & Water Power
Co.232, the court refused to enjoin a libel and stated:
rrrShannon Hoctor, The Crime of Defamation - Still Defensible in a Modern Constitutional Democrac,y ",
OBITER 2013, qvailable ar: https:/4oumals.co.zaldoi/pdf/10.10520lEJC137225.
:I l7l F. 553 ( 1909), United States Circuit Coun of M.D. Alabama.
I0l h-

"Defendant has a right to have the truth or falsity of the issue
determined by a jury trial as at Common Law. That it cannot get in
o court of equity. A person cannot be enjoined from doing any act
unless it is fairly apparent the act is wronglful, or the person sought
to be enjoined has no right to do that act. How can a court of equity
be satisfied where the right lays in the matter of the alleged false
statements? It cannot try the question for itself, or determine the
right in advance of the law court. "
6.37. The political theorist, Joel Feinberg, in his principle of "mediating
maxims" states:
"Generalizing then from the clearest cases of legitimate or proper
criminalization, we can assert tentatively that it is legitimate for the
state to prohibit conduct that causes serious private harm, or the
unreasonable risk of such harm, or harm to important public
institutions and practices. In short, state interference with a citizen's
behaviour tends to be morally justified when it is reasonably
necessary (that is, when there are reasonable grounds for taking it
to be necessary as well as ffictive) to prevent harm or the
unreasonable risk ofharm to parties other than the person interfered
with. More concisely, the need to prevent harm (private or public) to
parties other than the actor is always an appropriate reason for
legal coercion.233 "
6.38. Couns have considered issuing an injunction against defamatory speech in
the great majority of situations, but have declined to do so on the grounds
that doing so would constitute an unlawful prior restraint. Most people
agree that the prior restraint theory prohibits speech limits imposed by the
government before they are published.234 While there are many different
types of govemment actions that qualifu as prior restraints, speech-related
injunctions are regarded as the quintessential example of prior restraint.
Chief Justice Burger noted the pernicious effect such orders have in
Nebraska Press Ass'n v. Stuart, in which the Court held that, "a state trial
rrr Larry Alexander & Emily Sherwin. "Deception in Morality and Law", 22 Law & Phil. 393, 396 (2003).
I{ David S. Ardia. "Freedom ofSpeech. Defamarion, and Injunctions",55 WM. & MARY L. REV. I (2013).
102 A*

judge's injunction prohibiting the news media from publishing or
broadcasting accounts of a criminal defendant's confession was an
imper m is s i b le pr i or res traint.2 
3 5
6.39. This draws attention to the three main objections against allowing judges
to enjoin speech before it is published: the need to protect free speech for
society as a whole, the unavoidable overreach of injunctions, and the lack
ofprocedural safeguards before subsequent civil and criminal penalties are
imposed.
103
E. Recommendolion by 42'd Report of Law Commission of Indio
6.40. The Fifth Law Commission of India, in its 42nd Report on the 'lndian Penal
Code', dealt with revision of the Indian Penal Code. The Law Commission
had floated a questionnaire seeking suggestions from the public, in which
it had pointedly asked whether defamation as an offence should be retained
in the Indian Penal Code, as it is a restriction on the fieedom ofspeech and
expression. Mostly, the answer to this question was that it should be
retained. As per the Report, the reason was that, "if the sanction of criminal
law is removed, the only remedy left to a defamed person would be a suit
for damages, which is not only expensive but also in many cases useless.
Many such persons guilty of defamation are men of no substance and
nothing can be recovered from them. Further, public servants are being
frequently defamed and the criminal law alone can effectively deal with
such law breakers."216
235 Nebraska Press Ass'n. v. Stuart,427 U.S.539.
136 Law Commission oflndia, 12nd Report on lndian Penal Code 330 (June, t97l).
So,

6.41. In the aforesaid Report, the Law Commission recommended that Section
500 of the Indian Penal Code, which punishes the offence of defarnation,
should be amended to provide that the nature of imprisonment provided
under the section should be altered to 'imprisonment of either description',
rather than 'simple imprisonment' as is currently provided in the section.
Similarly, the nature of imprisonment provided under Sections 501 and 502
of the Indian Penal Code, which provide punishment for printing and
engraving defamatory matter, and for selling the printed or engraved
defamatory matter respectively, was also recommended to be altered to
'imprisonment of either description'.237 It was further suggested that sub-
section (2) be added to Section 500 to empower courts to order publication
of fact of offender's punishment in newspaper in cases where the
defamatory statement is published in a newspaper and thus made known to
a large number of persons. Sub-section (3) was also recommended to be
added to Section 500 to provide that the cost ofsuch publication shall be
recoverable from the convicted person as a fine. It was reasoned that such
a step would afford more satisfaction to the innocent victim than the mere
punishment of the offender.238
li) td. at 332
238 kl, at 331
104
\Y'

7. RECOMMENDATIONS
7.1 . It may be argued that criminal prosecution for defamatory statements is
opposed to the right of freedom of speech and expression. However, the
protection of reputation is not the only impetus behind criminalising
defamation as avoiding public disturbances is an equally important
motivation. Publications that hann a person's reputation are an inherent
part of the political process in a democracy, and stifling the same would be
endangering the political process. Consequently, it is absurd to argue for
states to have the unchecked authority to prosecute publishers ofany such
material because their publications constitute defamation. Any form of
speech should not be illegal in general unless there are very specific and
unusual circumstances. Indeed, utmost caution needs to be exercised while
doing so. Speech, ought to be illegal only wherr it is meant to do substantial
harm and when such harm materializes.
7.2. Remarkably, the main goal of all these arguments is deterrence, and they
are all consequentialist in nature. It is not appropriate to limit behaviour
that could seriously harm someone else to civil law consequences. While
it is perfectly acceptable for the act to result in tort consequences, it should
also be appropriately considered in the context of criminal law, since this
is the legal framework in which such behaviour can be appropriately
condemned and punished.
7.3. Therefore, an inference can be drawn from the above analysis that
reputation being an integral facet of Article2l,,it cannot be allowed to be
jeopardised just because an individual has to enjoy his freedom of speech
at the expense of hurting the sentiment of another. It is to be understood
105 s/

that the restriction is not completely on one's thoughts and ideas. It is a
protection that one can avail in a situation where his reputation is hurt.
There is no absoluteness in any of the rights and both have to be
harmoniously construed in its spirit to make the society peaceful and
liveable.
7.4. A report by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) lound out that forry-two ol the fifty-seven OSCE member
countries have criminal defamation provisions in oire form or other. It also
found out that nearly all OSCE member countries having criminal
defamation provisions, provide for imprisonment as a possible
punidhment, and that majority of these countries provide for imprisonment
for a period of up to two years. Most of the member-countries of the oSCE
are economically developed nations, and it is seen that the presence of
criminal defamation provisions in such countries has not hindered the
ecouomic and political development2re.
7.5. India is a country which skilfutly and blissfully sustains different
languages, ideas and thoughts. The social fabric is such that the people
want to enjoy their freedoin and also want to protect what is dear to them.
Reputation is something which can't be seen and can only be earned. It's
an asset which is built in a lifetime and destroyed in seconds. The whole
jurisprudence around the law on criminal defamation has the essence of
protecting one's reputation and its facets.
:re Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, Dejbmation qnd lns t Laws in the OSCE region: A
Comparati'e Study (March 201 7).
106 S*

7.6. The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,2023 has added a provision of community
service as an additional punishment. This law itself gives a balancing
approach, wherein it has safeguarded the interest of the victim and has also
neutralized the scope of misuse by giving an alternate punishment of
community service. The law acknowledges that harm to reputation is not
only an attack on an individual, rather an imputation on the whole society,
for which the perpetrator may be punished to serve the community as an
act of remorse. Through introduction of this punishment, Indian law has
shown the most balanced approach in protecting one's reputation and
speech too.
7.7. Therefore, the Commission recommends that criminal defamation as an
offence be retained within the scheme of criminal laws in our country.
The Commission recommends, accordingly.
----xxx----
i07
$,,

IJustice K.T. Sankaran]
Member
[J ustice Ritu Ra
Chairperson
,)
I Pro r.) Anand Paliwall
Member
NH
IProf. D.P. Vermal
Member
+L. C/.*,J,^
[Dr. Niten Chandral
Member (Ex-Officio)
[Mr. M. Karunanithil
Parl-time Mernber
f,r^;
[Dr. Rajiv Mani]
Member (Ex-Officio)
[Prof. (Dr.) Raka Aryal
Part-time Member
r08
_--