rfr{ilzlnfi
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
A COMPRE HEN SIVE REVIEW OF THE EPIDEMIC
Report No. 286
Febrtary,2024
DISEASES ACT. 1897

The 22nd Law Commission was constituted by Gazette Notification for a period ofthree
years vide Order No. F No. 45021/l /2018-Admn-l II(LA) dated 2 i.' February, 2020 issued
by the Covernment of India. Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs,
New Delhi. The term ofthe 22"d Law Commission was extended vide Order No. FA No.
600 1 I 1225 /2022- Admn. l l l( LA) dated 22"d February. 2023.
The Law Commission consists of a Chairperson. three full-time Members, Member
Secretary, two Ex-ofricio Members and two Part-time Members.
Chairoerson
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Member Secretarv
Dr. Reeta Vashishta
Ex-officio Member
Dr. Rajiv Mani, Secretary. Legislative Department and Secretary. Department of Legal
Affairs (Additional Charge)
Part-time Members
Shri M. Karunanithi
Prof. (Dr.) Raka Arya
Law Officers
Smt. Varsha Chandr4 Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri Atul Kumar Cupta. Deputy Law OfTicer
Lesal Consultants
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Gaurav Yadav
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Ms. Priya Rathi
Ms. Ruchika Yadav
Ms. Deepika Chaudhary
Ms. Diksha Kalson
Shri Govind Cupta
Shri Kumar Abhishek
Ms. Shanivi Singh
Ms. Ritu Thomas
Ms. Shivangi Shukla
Dr. Taruna Solanki
Ms. Swikriti Mahajan
Shri Anubhav Dubey
Shri Animesh Pareek
The Law Commission is located at
2"d and 4th Floor, 'B' 'Jy'ing
Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market
New Delhi- | l0 003.
The text ofthis Report is available on the Website at:
www.lawcommissionofi ndia.nic.in
@ Government of India
Law Commission of India
Full-time Members
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Proi (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Prof. D.P. Verma
@-/

,qrc$f ug lrq q{tfr
fffitta g{q qrq6{. o-qtc6 B-E qr{q)
SIENF
qrrfr + 22t frE srrdr.r
r(qfa a{d
76=
3Il-f,|-{Iar -sqdFerea @7'n February.2024
HsrrlL S- WPt^ a-+...sk*l
I am pleased to forward you Report No. 286 of the Law Commission of India on "A
Comprehensive Review of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897".
The COVID-19 pandemic unleashed an unprecedented challenge for the Indian health
infrastructure. In the course of dealing with this crisis, certain limitations in the legal
framework relating to health were realised. While the Govemment was quick to respond to the
emerging situation, it was felt that a more comprehensive law could have enabled a better
response to the crisis.
The immediate response to COVID-19 such as the imposition of lockdown was invoked under
the Disaster Management Act, 2005. Further, in light of the immediate challenges, especially
those faced by the healthcare workers, the Parliament amended the Epidemic Diseases Act,
1897 in 2020. However, these amendments fell sho( as critical gaps and omissions remained
in the Act.
In this highly globalized and interconnected world. future outbreaks of epidemics are a real
possibility. Further, given that the right to health is a fundamental right implicit in Article 2'l
of the Constitution and the State is duty-bound to ensure the same to the citizens, it becomes
imperative to revisit and strengthen the law in order to effectively tackle any such future health
emergency.
The 22"d Law Commission holds the view that the existing legislation exhibits significant
deficiencies in addressing the containment and management of future epidemics in the country
as new infectious diseases or novel strains of existing pathogens may emerge. Therefore, the
absence of a comprehensive law specifically addressing severe epidemics, which have
?rrqtmq qdr:orwr d. rcs, agei ffi, -fi'frf.r, dro crq-6 ftFI. EIIit qttr-c, T{ ftld-t tooos
Offce Address : Room No.405,4th Floor, 'B'Wing, Lok Nsyak Bhswan, Khan Mark€t, New D€lhi-i10003
orrsr$-q ctn; d,rar =i. e, ff€ ffi{ft qr4, r{ frd-rroorr
Reddgnc. : Bungalow No. 8, Te€s January MaIg, N6w Delhi-11OO'll
email : rituraj.awaslhi@govin Tel. : 011-24654951 (D't, 24UO202, 243/,0203
Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Fomer Chief Justice of High Court ol Kamahka)
Chairpercon
22^o Law Commission of lndia
D.O. No. 6(3) 339/2023-LC(LS)

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former ChiefJustice of Sigh Court of Kamataka)
Chairperson
22'o Law Commission of lndia
QTrc{tr *g tm amfr
(trt1a ge qffi{,6-+.6 Ba qr{dq)
IflEIIH
qrw A 22d frE e,TrdFr
s'atm a[d
Trog
3{l-Sl-{t+r -eqar-5l*-o
detrimental effects on the overall health and well-being of the population, necessitates
immediate attention.
In light of the foregoing, the Law Commission suo motu undertook extensive examination of
the existing legal framework on this subject. In the course of this analysis as well as in-depth
deliberations, the Commission identified key shortcomings in the law. The Commission has
recommended that either the existing law needs to be suitably amended to address existing gaps
or a new comprehensive legislation be enacted on the subject. Accordingly, this Report is being
submitted for your kind perusal.
With warmest regards,
Yours sincerely.
1'2 >+ >\t
(Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi)
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (lndependent Charge)
Ministry of Law & Justice
Govemment of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi -l10001.
irrqtdq rrdl : oqq;f. 405. Tgei ila. 'fi' ftf.r. ds nr{r6'rrFI, EIFI qltr-e, T{ Ri-od-t rooog
Ofrca Addrass : Room No. 405, 4th Flooc 'B' Wng, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, Nsw Oelhi-110003
oilrrd-q rril : irrin i. a, d-s ia-c-{fi qnf, q{ frofr-r toor r
Rssidencs : Bungalow No. 8, Te6s January Marg, Now Delhi-110011
emsll : ritural.arvasthl@govin Tol. : 011-24654951 (Ol, 213/,0202, 24UO2O3

The Commission wishes to extend its deepest gratitude to all those who have
generously contributed to finalising this Report on "A Comprehensive Review of
the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897".
We would like to thank the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for contributing
to the Commission's understanding on the issue. In particular, we appreciate the
efforts of Shri Subrata Hazra, Deputy Secretary and Shri Pradeep Khasnobis,
DDG, DM Cell of the Ministry who took out their valuable time to fumish their
comments and submissions on the subject at hand. We further extend our gratitude
to Prof. Aditya Prasad Dash who shared his domain expertise and gave excellent
insights on the subj ect.
The Commission also acknowledges the assiduous efforts of Mr. Rishi Mishra,
Ms. Priya Rathi, Ms. Ruchika Yadav, Ms. Deepika Chaudhary, Mr. Govind
Gupta, Ms. Ritu Thomas, Dr. Taruna Solanki, Mr. Anubhav Dubey, and Mr.
Animesh Pareek, who worked as Legal Consultants. We applaud their valuable
contribution towards the comprehensive research and drafting of this Report. We
place on record our heartfelt admiration for the diligent and painstaking labour
they have put in to materialise this Report.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
l

ABBREVIATIONS
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Background J
2. EXISTING CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK
A. Constitutional Mandate Related to Health l0
B. Existing Legal Framework Related to Epidemic Diseases............... l6
The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 l6
It. Other Relevant Legislative Proposals Related to Epidemic Diseases
l8
iii. The Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Act,,2020 19
3. LIMITATIONS OF THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, I897 22
4. LAWS ON EPIDEMIC DISEASES IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS.....29
A. United Kingdom 35
I
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Malaysia
Australia
41
43
New Zealand 47
Brazil 51
South Africa 53
5. CONSULTATIONS IIELD BY TI{E COMMISSSION........................ 59
1l
TABLE OF CONTENTS
lv
I
w

A. Consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(MoH&FW) 59
B. Consultation with Professor A.P. Dash
6. CONCLUSION & RECOMMENDATIONS: SUGGESTIVE
FRAMEWORK FOR EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT...............
A. New Definitions
B. Decentralization and Demarcation of Power
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
C. Duty to Frame an Epidemic Plan
Provisions for Quarantine and Isolation
ii. Provisions for Lockdown & Restriction on Movement.
iii. Provisions for Disease Surveillance
iv. Provisions for Disinfection and Decontamination.........
Control of Healthcare & Medical Supplies..........
vl. Provisions for vaccination, research & regulation of medicine and
67
67
69
70
73
75
78
80
81
vll.
vlll.
lx.
Provisions for proper Dissemination of Information..................... 84
Provisions for conducting Medical Testing and Examination ... 85
Provision for safe disposal of infectious waste & infected human
x Multi-Sectoral Emergency Relief Measures....................
Power oflnspection, Search and Seizure
D. Enhanced Penalty Provisions
86
88
89
90
ANNEXIJ,RE.I
lll
94
64
remalns
U/

ABBREVIATIONS
& and
AIR All India Reporter
AHMAC Australian Health Minister's Advisorv Council
AHMPPI The Australian Health
Pandemic Influenza
Management Plan for
AHPPC Australian Health Protection Principal Committee
AIPH Universitv Asian Institute of Public Health University
art Article
AUSMATs Australian Medical Assistance Teams
BNS Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita
CDINS Communicable Disease Incident of National
S ignificance
CDPLAN The Emergency Response Plan for
Communicable Disease Incidents of National
Significance
CESCR Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights
COVID-I9 Coronavirus disease of 201 9
CSIR The Council of Scientific & Industrial Research
CTMA COVID-l 9 (Temporary Measures) Act, 2020
DCGI Controller General of India
D.Sc. Doctor of Science
EDA Epidemic Diseases Act
EHOC Emergency Health Operations Centers
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research
ICSECR Intemational Covenant on Social, Economic and
Cultural Rights
IDSP Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme
IHR Intemational Health Regulations
IPC Indian Penal Code
Information Technology
MCO Movement Control Order
MERS Middle East Respiratory Syndrome
MHA Ministrv of Home Affairs
MoH&FW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing
Calibration Laboratories
lv
IT
h/

NatHealth
Arrangements
National Health Emergency Response
Arrangements
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority
NDMP National Disaster Management Plan
NHS Act National Health Security Act2007
NPPA National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority
NSC National Security Council
NZHC High Court of New Zealand
Ors. Others
Ph.D. Doctor of Philosophy
PPE Personal Protective Equipment
PPP Public-Private Partnerships
RRT Rapid Response Teams
SARS Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
SC Supreme Court
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
UK United Kingdom
Versus
wHo World Health Organization
h-,

I. INTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 pandemic brought the entire world to a stand-still. It
unleashed a challenge of an unprecedented magnitude on how to best
manage the emerging crisis. Even the most trusted systems and
resilient economies were overawed by the crisis that was unfolding
before them. While measures were taken under the current legal
framework, the same proved to be insufficient in some regards. This
experience has brought to light the limitations of the existing
intemational and national systems to respond to such emergencies.
There is unquestionable need to develop adaptable systems at both
national and international level in order to meaningfully respond and
contain such pandemics in the future. Such resilient systems and
capacity building are indispensable given that a new pandemic may
hit the world at any time. As the World Health Organisation Chief
Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said in his address at the 76th
World Health Assembly, "When the next pandemic comes loocking -
and it will -we must be rea$t to answer decisively, collectively, and
equitably;'
L2. Countries being the constituent units in the global order, any
meaningful and collaborative response requires national-level
planning, operational preparedness, capacity building and
coordination. Thus, it is imperative upon nations to reform their
national laws and policy in order to best contain and respond to such
infectious diseases if and when they emerge.
l.l
1
6,/

1.3. In the Indian context, going by the recent experience of managing the
COVID-I9 pandemic, it has been felt that the existing legal
framework to deal with such health exigencies falls short. It is clear
that significant changes are required to make the law holistic in its
approach and functioning. A consolidated approach in coordination
and planning is essential to prepare for an appropriate response to any
epidemic. Law has to be an intrinsic part of the healthcare system and
any insufficiency in the legal sphere to manage and control a public
health emergency like an epidemic, needs to be addressed urgently.
The COVID-19 pandemic has left an opportunity to re-examine and
revise India's response to such epidemics in the future.
1.4. The terms of reference of the 22d Law Commission inter-alia enloin
upon the Commission to make recommendations for the removal of
anomalies, ambiguities and inequities in the law. In pursuance of the
same, the 22nd Law Commission, suo moto engaged in a
comprehensive review of the existing laws in India pertaining to
epidemic diseases. The Commission undertook an in-depth perusal of
the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897,' International Health Regulations,2
model Acts and draft bills,r and deliberated on various aspects of
epidemic diseases. The Commission is of the opinion that there are
some critical areas that require immediate attention. These aspects can
be addressed through amendments in the existing Epidemic Diseases
Act, I 897 such as by including certain important terms that are
presently absent from the scheme of the Act and by incorporating
I Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (Act No.3 of 1897).
2 Intemational Health Regulations, 2005.
I The Model Public Health Act, 1987; The National Health Bill, 2009; The Public Health (Prevention,
Control and Management ofepidemics, bio-terrorism and disasters) Bill, 2017.
)
W

effective planning measures, or
legislation afresh.
by enacting a comprehensive
1.5. During the course of this review, the Law Commission held a
consultation with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
(MoH&FW), wherein it was brought to the notice of the Commission
that a Bill on Epidemic Diseases has been drafted in the year 2023 by
the Ministry. The MoH&FW not only made the said draft Bill
available to the Commission but also sought the Commission's
suggestions on the same. The Law Commission after perusing the said
Bill found some areas of improvement. In light of the same, the
Commission is proposing various suggestions that may be taken into
consideration while enacting an Epidemic Diseases Act afresh or
while amending the existing Act.
A. Background
1.6. Legal frameworks serve as an extraordinary tool to promote
individual well-being, social justice, economic development and
overall stability of the nation.a Protection of the health of the people
from epidemic diseases through a proper legal framework is of
paramount importance because a healthy society is a key component
of human development. India has witnessed the outbreak of many
infectious diseases in the past.s Epidemiological studies on the
1 Rule of Law and Development, available at: https://www.un.orglruleoflaw/rule-of-law-and-
development/ (last visited on January 26, 2024).
5 v. R. Mahammadh, "Plague Monality and Control Policies in Colonial South India, 190047" 40 South
Asia Research 323-343 (2020), qtailqble qtl
hnps://journals.sagepub.com/doi/tull/ l0 .l l7'110262728020944293 (last visited on lanuary 26,2024);
Muhammad Umair Mushtaq, "Public Health in British India: A Brief Account of the History of Medical
Services and Disease Prevention in Colonial India" 34 Indian Joumal of Community Medicine 6-14
J
e,t

colonial period depict that between 1896 and 1921, millions of people
fell prey to epidemic diseases.6 This period marked by the successive
spread of various diseases proved to be an alarming year for the
Colonial Government which had to adopt measures for prevention of
spread, disinfection of places as well as improvement of sanitary
conditions.
1.7 . The British Govemment enacted Epidemic Diseases Act, I 897 for the
first time in response to the outbreak of bubonic plague in Bombay
with the aim to ameliorate prevention of the spread of dangerous
epidemic diseases. This law granted special powers to the
Govemment to take measures to control the spread of epidemic
diseases. The Act empowered the Government to take anti-plague
measures. During this period, infected people were forced to segregate
themselves and to evacuate the place in order to get that place
disinfected.T Many historical evidences also reveal that while dealing
with the outbreak of plague, infected places were demolished and this
practice persisted till the end of the 196 century.E
1.8. Subsequently, even after independence, colonial-era legislation on
epidemic diseases has continued to be in force and has been invoked
to contain the spread of different infectious diseases such as Spanish
1
(2009), qvailable dt: hnps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articleslPMC2'763662/(last visited on January 26,
2024).
6 Suhail-ul-Rehman Lone, "What Epidemics from the Colonial Era Can Teach Us About Society's
Response" The llire, April 8, 2020, qrqilable al: https://thewire.in/history/colonial-era-epidemics-india
(last visited January 2?,2024\.
7 Muhammad Umair Mushtaq, "Public Health in British India: A Brief Account of the History of Medical
Services and Disease Prevention in Colonial India" 34 Indian Joumal of Community Medicine 6-14
(2009), ovailable dt https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/Puc2'1636621 (last visited on January 26,
2024).
3 Prashant Kidambi, "'An infection of locality': plague, pyhogenesis and the poor in Bombay, c. 1896-
1905" 3l Uban H islory 249 (20O4\, ovailable at: htlpsillwww j stor.org/stable/446 | 4l | 7.
G,/

flu, cholera, swine flu, dengue, malaria, smallpox, Nipah, SARS etc.
Over the years, this Act has been significant in shaping the legal
response of the Govemment to various epidemics and infectious
diseases. However, the 20'h Law Commission of India in its 248s
Report titled 'Obsolete Laws: Warranting Immediate Repeal',
identified the Epidemic Diseases Act,1897 as one of the existing
statutes that warrants further study with a view to assess its suitability
for repeal.e
1.9. In the past, multiple incidents ofdisease outbreaks have escalated into
an alarming situation and have prompted the Govemment to respond
with proactive measures on prevention, control and management of
diseases. A list of epidemics that have occurred in India have been
provided below:
LIST OF MAJOR EPIDEMICS TN INDIAIO
Year Epidemic
l9l0-l9l l Cholera
l9l8-1920 Spanish flu (Pandemic)
t974 Smallpox
1994 Plague
2002-2004
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
(Pandemic)
2006 Chikungunya
e Law Commission of India, "248'h Report on Obsolete Laws: Warranting Immediate Repeal (lnterim
Report)" (September, 2014), arailable at:
hftps://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3caOdaec69b5adc880fb464895726dbdf/uploads/2022/08/2022081643-
I . pdf ( last v isited January 27 , 2024).
'oAbhisek Mishra, Bijaya Nanda Naik, et.al., "Covid- l9; Catalyst for a Comprehensive Law to Combat
Potential Pandemics in lndia" 7 lndiqn Journql of l4edical Ethics ?31 (2022\, availoble at:
https://doi.orgl I 0.20 529/llME.2022.039 (last visited January 27,2024).
5 U"/

2009 Swine flu
Nipah
COVID-19
1.10. Recently in2020, in wake of the COVID-19 pandemic which wreaked
havoc throughout the nation, the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 was
invoked along with the Disaster Management Act, 2005, to control
and contain the spread of the COVID- l9 pandemic. To combat against
COVID- I 9, the strategy of nationwide lockdown was adopted through
regulated guidelines enforced under the Disaster Management Act,
2005 and Epidemic Diseases Act,l897. Another emerging aspect of
this epidemic was the threat to their own health and physical safety
that was being faced by the healthcare personnel. The healthcare
personnel on account of their close proximity with the patients who
had COVID-19, faced higher risk of contracting the virus themselves.
Further, there were many reported incidents of hostilities against
healthcare workers. In order to address these, amendments were
introduced to the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 in the year 2020 by
promulgation of the Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Ordinance
(later converted to Act) which included punitive actions for the
offences against healthcare personnel within the ambit of the Act.
Despite these amendments, the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897
continues to have limitations and ambiguities.
I .l 1 . A definitive and adaptive law on epidemic diseases plays a crucial role
in safeguarding public health and provides the legal basis for public
health interventions that prioritize the safety and well-being of the
6
2018
2020
O-/

community. The importance of a law with clear rules and regulations
cannot be understated in a fight to prevent, manage and control
epidemics such as COVID- 1 9 and its new variants. Timely and
coordinated responses are crucial to contain the spread ofdiseases and
mitigate their impact on the population. Any policy paralysis cannot
be afforded at such a critical point and can be avoided by the existence
ofa proper legal framework that provides a clear basis for government
intervention. Since, measures to contain an epidemic may involve
limitations on individual freedoms, such as restriction on movement
etc., having clarity as to which authority may implement the same will
bring in more legal certainty. Such clarity in law also helps in
communicating the importance of individual as well as collective
responsibility during the outbreak of an epidemic. The law dealing
with public health exigencies must include provisions that are in
consonance with public health needs, ethical considerations and
ensuring that interventions are proportionate as well as respectful of
individual rights.
1.12. Law is not static but dynamic. It continues to adapt and evolve so as
to be relevant and effective in the face of social, economic, political
and technological changes. Laws addressing public health and safety
are no exception and must also evolve to respond to a changing
environment. In a highly globalized and interconnected world, a
pandemic such as COVID-19 may not be a one-off occurrence. Even
if not on a global scale, infectious diseases may spread domestically
at a faster pace on account of various factors such as increased
mobility, trade etc. Therefore, it is of utmost importance that we
revisit and update our laws on epidemics in tune with the present
l w/

realities. Further, continuous review of epidemic law ensures that such
legal frameworks are well equipped to address the complexities of
epidemic diseases and to protect public health effectively. The
dynamic nature of epidemics, coupled with advancements in science,
technology and global interconnectedness, necessitates that health
laws should be adaptable and approaching to upcoming health
emergencies. Aspects pertaining to appropriate resource allocation,
funds, healthcare infrastructure and emergency response measures
need to be focused on and specifically addressed. Nature of every
epidemic may differ depending upon the underlying disease or virus.
An understanding as to how the new disease is emerging and how the
pathogens are mutating can assist in adopting the proper legal
measures to effectively manage such outbreaks.
1.13. "Public health services in general and environment health services in
particular, constitute a pure public good, and form a basic part of a
country's developmental infrastructure.llThe ultimate measure of
effective public health service delivery is that nothing happens- no
major disease outbreaks occur. Its hallmark is, planning to avert any
serious potential threat".r2 Lessons leamt from previous epidemics
and pandemic faced in the recent past reveal some areas for
improvement in the legislative framework to respond against such
emergent situations, which have been elaborately discussed in this
Report.
rl Monica Das Gupta, B R Desikachari, et.dl., "How Might lndia's Public Health Systems Be
Strengthened? Lessons from Tamil Nadu" 45 Economic and Political l|'eekly 46-60 (2010\, av.lilable dt:
8
http://wwwjstor.org/stabl€/25664 195 (last visited on January 30, 2024\.
t2 ld.
CI..,

) EXISTING CONSTITUTIONAL AIID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
RELATED TO BPIDEMICS
2.1. In this globalized world marked by changing dynamics, the pattern of
spread of diseases and its very nature has changed over the years.
Diseases like COVID-l9 pose a constant threat to the health care
system and its management strategies. Due to the increase in
intemational travel, migration from rural to urban spaces, global
connectivity and ecological imbalances, the natural resources have
also been left over-burdened. In the past, India has been successful in
eradicating, eliminating or significantly reducing many diseases such
as smallpox, polio and HIV. These successes are a direct result of
effective measures taken by the health care system. However,
responding to COVID-I9 posed a significant challenge for the
Country on account of the highly virulent nature of the disease as well
as the sheer scale of its impact that was previously unseen.
2.2. Public health services are conceptuatly distinct from medical
services.r3 The key focus of public health services is reducing a
population's exposure to disease through various measures such as
enforcing food safety and other health regulations; controlling
vectors, keeping an eye on the water system and waste disposal; and
providing health education to enhance individual health behaviours
and increase public demand for improved public health outcomes.14
While these services are largely invisible to the public, yet these are
rr Monica Das Gupt4 "Public Health in India; Dangerous Neglecf'40 Economic and Political lleeHy
5 r59-5165 (2005).
t! Id.
9

indispensable as any failure in public health system has grave
consequences for the public in terms of illness, debility and death as
well as significant economic costs.r5 Considering such ill effects, our
founding fathers have provided enough safeguards in our Constitution
to effectively deal with the health emergencies and protect the health
ofthe people.
A. Constitutional Mandate Related to Health
2.3. The Seventh Schedule of the Constitution clearly enumerates the
separate and joint legislative powers of the Centre and State
legislature by dividing various subject matters in three separate lists
v2. the Union List, the State List and the Concurrent List. Thus, there
is a clear demarcation between various subject matters within the
Constitution itself and power of the respective govemments to
legislate.r6
2.4. 'Public Health and Sanitation' is mentioned under Entry 6 of the State
list as provided in the Seventh Schedule. This empowers the State to
legislate on the issues and concems regarding public health and
sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries in the State.rT
2.5. Further, it is important to note that certain dimensions of "health" such
as those related to economic and social planning, mental health, drugs,
food safety, labour safety and welfare, prevention and control of
ts Id.
16 The Constitution oflndia, sch. VII,
17 14 Entry 6 oflist Il ofs;hedule vII
l0
q,

communicable diseases or vectors affecting humans, medical
profession, are covered within the purview of the Concurrent List in
the Seventh Schedule. Thus, both the Centre and States share the
authority to legislate on these subject matters as per Article 246.r8
2.6. According to Entry 29 of the Concurrent List, Parliament and the State
Legislative Assemblies are empowered to legislate for the purpose of
'prevention of the extension from one State to another ofinfectious or
contagious diseases or pests affecting men, animals or plants.'re
2.7. The Constitution obligates the State to guarantee the right to health to
all, without any discrimination. Similarly, the Directive Principles of
State Policy, contained in part IV of the Constitution, mandate that the
State shall endeavour to provide certain viable public health
conditions, and promote the welfare of the nation and its people by
securing a socially, economically and politically just social order.20
Article 42 enjoins the State to provide for just and humane conditions
of work and for matemity relief. Further, Article 47 places a duty on
the State to raise the standard of living and to improve public health.
2.8. Article 2l of the Constitution guarantees the right to life and personal
liberty. Thejudiciary has interpreted this right to include the right to
live with human dignity. Right to health and its underlying
determinants are intrinsically linked with the right to life and hence
holistically conceived by the Constitution. The evidence can be found
13 /d, List III of schedule vII.
'e /d, Entry 29 of List lll ofSchedule VII
20 |d, arl.38.
l1
h*/-

in various decisions of the Supreme Court. For instance, in Francis
Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, IJT of Delhi.,?/ the Supreme Court
held that the right to life includes the right to live with human dignity
and all that goes along with it, namely, the bare necessities of life such
as adequate nutrition, clothing and shelter.
2.9. ln Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. lJnion of India & Ors.,22 the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, on the anvil of Articles 39(e), 39(f),41 and 42 which
form part of the Directive Principles of State Policy, held protection
of health of workers to be included within the ambit of Article 2l .
2.10. In Vincent Panikurlangara v. (Jnion of India,23 the apex Court
highlighted that "mainterutnce and improvement of public health hqve
to rank high as these are indispensable to the very physical existence
of the community and on the betterment of these depends on the
building of the society which Constitution makers envisaged."
,r AtR t9Et sc 746.
,, AIR 1984 SC 802.
:r AtR 1987 sc 990.
:1 AIR 1992 SC 573 : (1992) I SCC 441.
t2
2.11. In C.E.S.C. Ltd. v. Subhash Chandra Bose,24 the Hon'ble Supreme
Court relied on intemational instruments and held lhat "The term
health implies more than an absence of siclcness. Medical care and
health facilities not only protect against sickness but also ensures
stable manpower for economic developmenl. Facilities of health and
medical care generate devotion and dedication to give the workers'
best, plrysically as well as menlally, in productivity. It enables the
worker to enjoy the fruit of his labour, to keep him physically fit and
U/

mentally alert for leading a successful, economic, social and cultural
1rf"...."t
2.12. ln Consumer Education and Research Centre v. Union of India,26 a
wider interpretation to Article 2l of the Constitution was given by the
Supreme Court. It was held that right to health of workers is an
integral facet ofa meaningful right to life. The Court further clarified
that the right to health and medical care is a fundamental right under
Article 21 read with Articles 39(e), 41 and 43 of the Constitution.
2.13. In State of Punjab v. Ram Lubhaya Bagga,27 the Supreme Court
observed that "When we speak about a right, it correlates to a duty
upon another, individual, employer, government or authority. In other
words, the right ofone is an obligation of another. Hence the right of
a citizen to live under Article 21 casts obligation on the State. This
obligation is further reinforced under Article 47, it is for the State to
secure health to its citizen as its primary duty. No doubt the
Government is rendering this obligation by opening government
hospitals and health centres, but in order to make it meaningful, it has
to be within the reach of its people, as far as possible, lo reduce the
queue of waiting lists, and il has to provide all facililies for which an
employee looks for at another hospital. Its upkeep, maintenance and
cleanliness has to be beyond aspersion. To employ the best of talents
and tone up its administration to give effective contribution. Also
bring in awareness in welfare of hospital staff for their dedicated
'?6 AIR 1995 SC 922 : ( 1995) 3 SCC 42.
'?? AIR 1998 SC 1703 ; (1998) 4 SCC I l7
l3
av/

service, give them periodical, medico-ethical and service-oriented
training, not only at the entry point but also during the whole tenure
of their service. Since it is one of the most sacrosanct and valuable
rights of a citizen and equally sacrosanct sacred obligation of the
State, every citizen of this welfare State looks towards the State for it
to pedorm its this obligation with top priority including by way of
allocation of sffic ient funds. This in turnwill not only secure the right
of its citizen to the best of their satisfaction but in turn will benefit the
State in achieving its social, political and economical goa|......"
2.14. ln Ashwani Kumar v. Union of India,28 the Supreme Court, while
expansively reading the right to life under Article 21 , held that right
to life encompasses several rights including the right to health which
is basic and fundamental. It was further held that the State is obligated
to ensure that this fundamental right is protected, enforced and made
available to all citizens.
2.15. Several other decisions have also reiterated that right to health is
implicit in Article 2l and have underscored the significance of this
fundamental right as well as shed light on its various facets.2e
2.16. Thus, the health of people is entrenched within the constitutional
mandate, emphasizing its utmost significance. Further, Article 253
,8 (2019) 2 SCC 636.
2e Balrqm Prqsqd v. Kunal Saha, (2014\ I SCC 384 : (2014) I SCC (Civ) 327; S/are o/ Punjab v. Mohinder
Singh Chawla, (1997) 2 SCC 83 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 294; Devika Bi$eas v. Union of lndia, (2016) l0 SCC
726; Arjun Gopal v. IJnion of India,(2017) l6 SCC 280; Union of India v. Moolchqnd Khqrqiti Ram Trusl,
(2018) 8 SCC 321; ,,1 rjun Gopal v. Ltnion of lndia, (2019) l3 SCC 523 : (2019) 4 SCC (Cri) 598 : (2020)
I SCC (Civ) 409; Occupational Health & Safety Assn. v. lJnion oflndia,(2014) 3 SCC 547; T.N. Medical
Ofrcers Assn. v. Union of lndia, (2021) 6 SCC 568.
t4 0/

empowers the Parliament to enact laws in order to fulfil India's
intemational obligations.
2.17. International treaties and agreements often influence domestic legal
framework to facilitate cooperation. Along with national,
collaborative efforts with international organizations and adherence to
intemational health guidelines also helps in promoting and updating
legal framework related to health. India is signatory to WHO's
International Health Regulation.
2.15. The World Health Assembly adopted Intemational Health
Regulations (IHR) in 1969 which were revised in the later years.30
Subsequently, IHR (2005) was adopted on 23'd May 2005 by the fifty-
eighth World Health Assembly and it came into force on l5th June
2007. The IHR (2005) provides an overarching legal framework
clearly defining rights and obligations of States in handling public
health emergencies that have the potential to cross borders in order to
ensure an adequate response.
2.16. The application of the IHR (2005) is not limited to specific diseases.
This is to ensure that the regulations will maintain their relevance and
applicability for a long time even in the face of continued evolution
of diseases and of the factors determining their emergence and
transmission.3r The provisions in the IHR (2005) update and revise
many of the "technical and other regulatory functions, including
l5
2005, availabler0 Intemational Health Regulations,
hups://www.who.int/publications/i/item/97 8924 I 580 4 I 0 -
tt Id.
U/

certirtcaks applicable to inlernational travel and transport and
requirements for international porls, airports and ground
crossings."32
B. Existing Legal Framework Related to Epidemic Diseases
2.17. The existing legal framework to deal with health exigencies such as
epidemic diseases flow out of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 which
was enacted during the colonial era. Subsequently, the law has been
amended to meet the evolving needs. Furthermore, various other
legislative frameworks have also been proposed over the years so as
to effectively respond to such crises. The relevant Act, proposals and
amendments have been briefly outlined in the following paragraphs.
The Epidemic Diseases Act' 1897t.
2.18. The Epidemic Diseases Act (EDA) is the main legislation on the
subject matter. The primary objective of EDA is preventing and
controlling the outbreaks of epidemic diseases. The Act was passed
urgently on 4th February, 1897, by the Governor General of India in
order to empower the provincial authorities to control and contain
bubonic plague of 1896. The EDA granted extensive powers to State
Govemments to regulate, prevent and control the dangerous epidemic
diseases.
2. 19. Originally, EDA consisted of four sections and was thus considered
as one of the shortest laws in India. Thereafter, one more section was
l6
CIv

inserted by an amendment to the Act. The provisions contained in the
EDA have been discussed in the following paragraphs.
2.20. Section 1 describes the title and extent of EDA. Section 2 provides
power to the State Govemment to take special measures and to
prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease. Section 2,A'
empowers the Central Govemment to take measure and to prescribe
regulations for the inspection ofany ship or vessel leaving or arriving
at any port in the territories or any person intending to sail therein or
arriving thereby to which this Act extends.
2.21. Further, Section 3 provides punishment under Indian Penal Code,
1 860 for disobeying any regulation or order made under EDA. Section
4 provides protection to persons acting in good faith under EDA from
any other legal proceeding.
2.22. The object of the law signifies the purpose it is made for. In the
absence ofa properly defined object, a law cannot serve the ultimate
purpose. This holds true especially of the EDA. Thus, the Epidemic
Diseases Act, 1897 is a mere skeletal legislation conferring powers to
Central and State Govemments.
2.23. In addition to the EDA, different States and Union territories have also
enacted their own public health laws and regulations. The provisions
of these legislations have the potential to address region-specific
challenges or emerging health crises.
t7
h"-

ll. Other Relevant Legislative Proposals Related to Epidemic
Diseases
2.24. Model Public Health Act 1987 : In order to bring a comprehensive
legislation on public health including epidemics in its purview. many
efforts have been made by the Govemment previously. One such step
was the Model Public Health Act, 1987, which was drafted first in the
year 1955 and updated later in the year 1987. While it is one of the
comprehensive legislative proposals on public health, yet some of its
provisions are outmoded as it is more than three decades old. The
powers conferred to health officers under this Act were very general
in nature to take appropriate measures to mitigate and to prevent a
disease.
2.25. National Health Bill. 2009: Another step in the right direction was
the National Health Bill, 2009 wherein a clear distinction between the
obligations of Centre and State with regard to health was described. It
also ideated the individual and collective right in the time of health
emergency. However, it was not passed due to certain limitations. One
of the major inadequacies was that the Bill did not list specific powers
related to health emergencies.
2.26. Public Health (Prevention. Control, and Management of
Epidemic s. Bio-Terrorism and Disasters) Bill.20l7: To filtthe gap
in Epidemic Diseases Act, I 897 and to replace it with one
comprehensive law, before the occurrence of COVID-I9, a draft of
Public Health (Prevention, Control, and Management of epidemics,
bio{errorism and disasters) Bill, 201 7 was prepared by National
l8 W

Centre for Disease Control and Directorate General of Health Services
for the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. Public comments were
also invited on the draft Bill but it could not be tabled before
Parliament. The draft Bill tried to define epidemic, bioterrorism and
health emergencies. It envisaged the terms like social distancing,
quarantine, clinical establishment,, isolation and provided a schedule
enumerating various categories of epidemic diseases. Further, it also
empowered the local govemments during situations like an epidemic.
iii. The Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Act,2020
2.27 . ln the light of COVID- 19, a few amendments were introduced in the
existing Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 in the year 2020 vide the
Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Act,2020. 13 A brief scheme of
Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 post the 2020 amendments has been
enumerated below:
Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (As amended in 2020)
Provision Description
Section I Short title and extent
Definition
Section 2 Power to take special measures and prescribe
regulation as to dangerous epidemic disease
Section 2A Powers of Central Govemment
Section 28 Prohibition of violence against healthcare
service personnel and damage to property
13 The Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Act, 2020 (Act 34 of2020)
l9
Section I A
hr/

Section 3 Penalty
Section 3A Cognizance, investigation and trial of offenses
Section 3 B Composition of certain offenses
Section 3C Presumption as to certain offenses
Section 3D Presumption of culpable mental State
Section 3E Compensation for Acts of violence
Section 4 Protection to persons Acting under Act
2.28. The amended Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 focused more on the
protection of healthcare workers in the light of violence and other
hostilities faced by healthcare workers during COVID-I9. Although
the amended Act gave a significant and required relief to the
healthcare workers at a crucial time, however it misses out many
points of consideration such as the criteria to declare a disease as
epidemic, definitions of necessary terms, duties of citizens etc. to deal
with such exigent situations.
2.29. ltwas not the first time that the Govemment took steps to bring forth
suitable legislation to deal with epidemic diseases. As explained
above, there have been efforts by the previous govemments to make
a comprehensive law on epidemics. In this regard, many private
member bills were also drafted highlighting the urgent need of a new
epidemic diseases law covering the considerable aspects such as
health emergencies, definition of epidemic, surveillance systems,
procurement of vaccines etc. However, none of these Bills could see
the daylight in Parliament. Therefore, it is the need ofthe hourto have
a single, consolidated legislation which is dedicated to the prevention,
20 fr\,/

control and management of epidemic diseases. Presently, legal
mechanisms under the domestic arena are absent with a flexible, clear
and unambiguous planning machinery to tackle health exigencies like
epidemics. 'Public health' is a generic term whereas outbreak of
epidemic/pandemic requires extra ordinary legal and health measures.
Hence, the law related to epidemic diseases must be strengthened to
address such emergent life-threatening situations.
21

3. LIMITATIONS OF THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, I897
3.1 Given the shifting social pattems and growing population, the
management, control and prevention of epidemic diseases cannot be
restricted to a century old law. The law as it was originally enacted
was not devised to meet the complex and manifold contingencies that
are prevalent in contemporary society. The original Epidemic
Diseases Act was enacted to implement anti-plague measures during
the late 19th Century. Having been drafted by the British, the Act of
1897 had a great potential for abuse by the colonial authorities. The
vast powers given by the Act during the colonial rule were misused
and it did not succeed to address the actual intent of the enactment of
Epidemic Diseases Act.3a Over the years, the variants of
communicable diseases have changed and mutated to bring forth new
challenges for the healthcare system. With the increased globalization
and connectivity, outbreaks ofcontagious and dangerous diseases can
rapidly convert into epidemics and further into pandemics, thereby
affecting several countries across the globe'
3.2. To strengthen the provisions of Epidemic Diseases Act 1897' a
comprehensive legislation to enwrap all the modem-day challenges is
the need of the hour. Although, during COVID-19, the Government
introduced amendments in the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897,
however, the amendment only addressed the aspect of protection for
healthcare workers. The amendment made in the year 2020, was only
ri p.S. Rakesh, -The Epidemic Diseases Act of 1897: Public Health Relevance in the Current Scenario" I
IruJian Journal of Meiical Ethics I 56 (20 l6 ), avqilahle at: https://ijme. in/articles/the-epidemic-diseases-
act-of- I 897-public-health-relevance-in-the-current-scenario/ (list visited on January 27 
' 2024)'
22
W,/

for a limited purpose and it did not deal with the other relevant issues,
which remain unaddressed. Therefore, it is necessary to identiff the
major areas of concern that must be considered to make India's health
emergency response robust in its operation and futuristic in its
approach.
3.3. The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (prior to the 2020 amendment)
contained no definitions and merely stipulated regulatory powers of
the Central and State Govemment. Even after the amendment in2020,
only 'act of violence', 'healthcare service personnel' and 'property'
were specifically defined.
3.4. The Epidemic Diseases Act,1897, does not define an 'epidemic'
disease or an 'infectious' disease. The existing Act does not
differentiate between an 'outbreak', 'epidemic' and 'pandemic' due
to which, there is no line of clarity on the criteria for declaring an
epidemic and invoking the said Act. The Act is also silent on several
other important definitions, which are necessary to understand the
emergent health hazard and the measures to be taken thereby. Not
defining terms specifically leaves ambiguity and thus the possibility
of lack of planning and preparedness to effectively manage the
epidemic.
3.5. The Epidemic Diseases Act does not appropriately decentralize and
demarcate the power between the Centre, State and local authorities
to regulate the epidemic situation. Currently, the Act confers very
wide powers on Central and State authorities. Due to the absence of a
proper enforcement mechanism as per the nature and gravity of the
2) Ut/

epidemic disease, implementation of prevention and controlling
measures get hampered, leading to uncoordinated response to combat
epidemic diseases. Lack of uniformity in the implementation of
various measures also lead to misconception and misinformation. The
Act is silent with respect to superseding powers and thus there is no
guidance as to whose power will supersede in case of disagreement or
conflict between State(s) and the Centre. Such unbridled and
incongruous powers may create ambiguity and conflicts during
execution and management of epidemics. The Act does not define
roles and responsibilities of various levels of the govemment in a
succinct manner and does not provide stafutory force to local
govemments.
3.7. There are no specific guidelines mentioned in the Act for effective
disease surveillance. India has developed an Integrated Disease
Surveillance Programme (IDSP), whereby several surveillance units
have been created across various States, which are managed by Rapid
Response Teams (RRTs). The Programme also has a wide network of
other data professionals and health experts who have the
responsibility to conduct surveillance activities and manage the
outbreak of epidemics. Since, IDSP is already effective throughout
24
3.6. The Epidemic Diseases Act does not specifically stipulate the
procedure and guidelines that will be followed pertaining to isolation
and quarantine. The Act is silent on identification of quarantine and
isolation facilities. No proper criteria are mentioned in the Act which
must be fulfilled before requisitioning a clinical establishment and
converting it as an isolation or quarantine centre.
q/

the Country, therefore, the Epidemic Diseases Act should clearly give
the power of disease surveillance under the system of IDSP.
Moreover, there is a lack of explicit legal framework for data sharing.
Sharing and collection of such data considering the principle of
proportionality in designing such a framework can ensure better
disease surveillance.
3.8. The disease surveillance system must be inter-connected with the
functioning ofdiagnostic laboratories for early detection and effective
tracking mechanism. The Act is silent on joint working of all the
laboratories including independently established diagnostic labs and
hospital aided laboratories.
3.9. Additionally, the Act lacks a synchronized framework between public
and private diagnostic laboratories and fails to address the primary
question as to who can conduct and regulate the diagnosis. During
COVID-I9, the Central Govemment by invoking the Disaster
Management Act, 2005 appointed ICMR as the apex body for
determining strategy for COVID-19 testing, which brought all the
private laboratories within the purview of ICMR to conduct COVID-
19 tests as well as to check commercial testing kits.35 It is to be
underscored that the delegation of power to ICMR by invoking
Disaster Management Act lacks clarity on the ground that Drugs &
Cosmetics Act, 1940 provides the power of approving diagnostic kits
to Drug Controller General of India (DCGI). Moreover, ICMR levied
rs Order F. No. 2.280l5/2312020-EMR, dated 2l s March, 2020 of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Govemment of India. qvqilable at:
https://www.mohflv.gov.in/pdflNotificationoflCMguidelinesforCOVlDl9testinginprivatelaboratoriesilnd
ia.pdf(last visited on January 30,2024).
25 A\."

many restrictions on private laboratories to conduct testing.36 Gaps in
regulatory framework leads to underutilization of the resource pool of
the Indian healthcare system. Thus, there is a need for a proper
mechanism for effective cooperation between public and private
health care institutions during an epidemic. Since the private
healthcare sector contributes significantly to deliver essential
healthcare services, it is necessary to streamline private healthcare
services for better utilization of available resources.
3.10. The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 needs to speci$ through a guided
framework the regulation and the distribution channel of essential
medicines, drugs and vaccines, price control of vaccines, medicinal
drugs and other primary healthcare facilities. Currently, there is no
specification in the Act which ensures the availability of essential
vaccines and drugs during epidemic situations. The Act must focus on
the Govemment's duties in controlling or regulating the production,
distribution, transportation and storage of necessary vaccines,
medicines and other medical equipment.
3.11. TheAct makes no mention of specific regulations for the safe disposal
of infectious medical waste and human corpses. Such infectious
medical waste and human corpses may act as catalysts in spreading
further infection and hence safe disposal of the same is required to be
addressed under the Act. Although there are allied Acts and Bio-
medical Waste Guidelines, the Epidemic Diseases Act should
16 Guidelines for'Strategy ofCovid-19 testing in India', dated l7'h March 2020, by Indian Council of
Medical Research, qvqilqble al:
hnps://www.icmr.gov.in/pdf/covid,/strategy/Strategy_COV I D I 9_testing_lnd ia.pdf ( last visited on January
30,2024).
26 b"/

nonetheless clearly give power to specific authorities for disposal of
such medical waste and corpses in accordance with the guidelines, to
be specified in the Act.
3.t2. The Act is also silent on authentic information dissemination systems
regarding epidemic diseases which become imperative to control
further spread and to noti$ current status of disease. Any epidemic
can be effrciently managed only with the cooperation of the
Govemment and citizens. The primary responsibility of making the
citizens aware about the epidemic situation, its consequences and
ways to protect, is upon the govemment. A cue can be taken from the
lessons leamt by South Korea, which in the wake of battling Middle
East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) updated its legal and policy
framework with respect to disclosure, publication or restriction of
information providing the basis for disclosing private information and
cooperation between Central and local authority. 'Right to know' is
guaranteed to the citizens ofSouth Korea as per the Infectious Disease
Prevention and Control Act of South Korea.37 Thus, it is important
that the legislation dealing with epidemics provides effective
mechanisms or clear guidelines to properly disseminate information.
3.13. The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 provides for punishment under
Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 for disobeying any
regulation or order made under this Act. This punishment was given
a statutory force keeping in mind the nature of British rule, whereby
citizens were punished for disobeying the Crown's orders. The
17 Infectious Disease Prevention and Control Act, 2009 (Act No. 9847 of2009); Quarantine Act,2009 (Acl
No.9846 of2009).
27
q,/

provision of punishment against the person violating the provisions of
the Act is outdated. In the present scenario, a fine of up to Rs. 1,000
or an imprisonment of up to six months may not prove to have
suffrcient deterrent effect.
28
s,-,,

LAWS ON EPIDEMIC DISEASES IN OTHER
JURISDICTIONS
4.1 It is essential to acknowledge that health legislations, or similar laws
in different countries, will differ depending on the unique
circumstances of each nation, the specific public health challenges
they face, and the evolving understanding of infectious diseases
within that particular country. The global landscape is undergoing
transformation due to the COVID-19 pandemic, impacting not just
public health but also introducing significant changes in social,
economic, and legal/constitutional aspects.
4.2 India is bound by its commitment as a signatory to numerous
intemational human rights conventions and its active involvement in
the World Health Organization. Notably, it has also pledged
adherence to the WHO's Intemational Health Regulations.
Additionally, in the realm of infectious diseases, India is obligated to
comply with the IHR and other guidelines promulgated by the
wHo.38
4.3 The IHR of2005 serves as regulatory standards that define the roles
and responsibilities of member states of the WHO in managing public
health emergencies of intemational concem.3e The IFm.2005 aims to:
"prevent, protect against, control and provide a public health response
to the intemational spread of disease in ways that are commensurate
r3 World Health Organization, Bdsic documents: lorty-ninth edition 28 (2020), avoilable at:
hnps;//apps.who.int/gb/bd/pdlfiles/BD_49th-en.pdf(last visited on January 30,2024).re Brigit Toebes, "lntemational health law: An emerging field of public intemational law" 55 tndian
Journal of International Lav 299-328 (2015\
4.
29 w

with and restricted to public health risks, and which avoid unnecessary
interference with international traffic and trade."ao Changes to IHR or
Guidelines, which may be issued by WHO, could prompt countries to
update their domestic legislation to align with intemational best
practices. While implementing the IHR 2005, State parties are
required to uphold the full respect for the dignity, human rights, and
fundamental freedoms of individuals.a I
4.4 In addition to the IHR 2005, India has also committed as a signatory
to the Intemational Covenant on Social, Economic and Cultural
Rights ('ICSECR'). General Comment No. 14 on the ICSECR
emphasizes the essential obligations of signatory States in ensuring
the realization of the 'Right to Health' under the ICSECR. This
includes the obligation to:
"(fl adopt and implement a national public health strategt and
plan of action, on the basis of epidemiological evidence,
addressing the health concerns of the whole population; the
strategl and plan of action shall be devised, and periodically
reviewed, on the basis of a participatory and transpalent
process; they shall include methods, such as right to health
indicators and benchmark:, by which progress can be closely
monitored; the process by which the strategt and plan of action
are devised, as well as their content, shall give particular
attention to all vulnerable or marginalized groups. "a2
4.5 This indicates that a rights-based legal framework capable of directing
the State in fulfilling its public health responsibilities, including
a0 Foreword, International Health Regulations, 2005.
ar lntemational Health Regulations, 2005, art. l( t).
a2 Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Righrs, "CESCR General Comment No. l4: The Right to
the Highesr Attainable Standard of Health (Art. l2)" Doc E/C.121200014 (August | 1,2000).
30 Wr/

addressing epidemic diseases, constitutes an integral aspect of the
State's international legal obligations regarding the right to health
which encompasses entitlements to medical care and protection from
illness.a3 Accordingly, it is the responsibility of the Indian State to
fulfil the people's right "to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health."aa This involves activities
such as the 'prevention, treatment, and control of epidemic, endemic,
occupational, and other diseases.'as Additionally, there is a duty to
'develop, strengthen, and maintain' capabilities for 'detecting,
assessing, notiffing, and reporting' disease occurrences, along with
the capacity to 'respond promptly and effectively to public health risks
and public health emergencies of intemational concem.'46 lndeed,
these intemational commitments are connected to constitutional
obligations, and Article 253 of the Indian Constitution. granting
Parliament the authority to legislate in line with intemational
obligations, serves as the foundation for the enactment of a law
addressing Public Health Emergencies to fulfil these commitments.
4.6 The authority necessary to confront significant threats to the countries
does not necessarily have to involve declaring a state of emergency.
Many countries have implemented laws to address different diseases,
either within their health Acts or by enacting specific legislation
aligned with their constitutional and legal principles. In fact, as
highlighted by Ferejohn and Pasquino,al many countries adopt the
a3 Vincent Paniktrlangaro v. lJnion of lndia arul Ors. AIR 1987 SC 990.
{ lntemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights., art, l2(l ).
a5 Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights., an. l2(2Xc).
a6 Intemational Health Regulations, 2005, arts. 5, 13.
a7 John Ferejohn and Pasquale Pasquino, "The Law ofthe Exception: A Typology of Emergency Powers"
2 Oxlord University Press and Nev York Unieersity School of Law 216-219 (2004).
3l Ah/

legislative model, where emergencies are addressed through regular
legislation that delegates "special and temporary powers to the
executive." Further, in managing COVID- 19, some nations even
adopted a legislative model as this approach facilitates thorough
legislative oversight of the executive's use of powers and establishes
a predefined conclusion to that delegation. The United Kingdom,
Malaysia, and Singapore followed this legislative model in response
to COVID-19.4E
4.7 For the purpose of this analysis, a few countries were selected based
on the presence ofpre-existing laws related to public health, infectious
disease control, and disaster management. The study encompasses
instances where existing legislation, including disaster management
laws, was implemented in response to the COVID- 19 pandemic.
Additionally, the study considers situations where new legislations
were specifically introduced to address the challenges posed by the
COVID -19 pandemic, along with any amendments made to existing
public health laws in order to combat COVID -19 effectively.
Countries Existing Legislations
Laws invoked or newly enacted
to deal with COVID-I9
pandemic
a3 Li-ann Thio, "Singapore and Pandemic Regulation" (November 14, 2020), @ail.tble al'.
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3766066 (last visited on January 19, 2024).
4.8 The table below shows how countries have used different sets of rules
during the COVID-19 pandemic:
32 W./

UK a. Public Health
(Control of Disease)
Act, 1984
b. The Civil
Contingencies Act,
2004.4e
a. Coronavirus Act, 2020
b. Health Protection
(Coronavirus) Regulations
2020 (revoked by the
Coronavirus Act 2020 which
largely made equivalent
provision)
a. The Immigration
Act, 1959
a. COVID-19
Measures) Act
b. The Infectious
(Temporary
(COVID-19 - Stay
Regulation 2020
Diseases
Orders)
Malaysia a. The Prevention and
Control oflnfectious
Diseases Act, 1988
b. The Police Act,
1967
A series of Movement Control
Order (MCO) were implemented
utilizing the Prevention and
Control of Infectious Diseases Act
1988 and the National Security
Council (NSC) assumed the role
of the coordinating body for the
Cabinet and the executive
branch's response to the COVID-
l9 situation.
ae Joint Committee on Human Rights, UK Parliament "The Govemment's response to COVID-19: human
rights implications" September 21, 2020, available at'.
https://publications.parliament.uk/paljt580l /jtselect/jtrights/265/26505.htm#_idTexAnchor005 (last
visited on January 22,2024).
33
Singapore
u,/

Australia a. Therapeutic Goods
Act, 1989
b.The National Health
Security Act,2007
c. The Biosecurity Act,
2015
There exists a CDPLAN which
has been developed under the
auspices of the National Health
Emergency Response
Arrangements (NatHealth
Arrangements 2009 and where no
disease-specific plan exists, it is
considered to be the primary
response plan.
New Zealand a. Civil Defence
Emergency
Management Act,
2002
b. Health Act, 1956
c. Epidemic
Preparedness Act,
2006
a. COVID-I9 Public Health
Response Act2020,
b. Social Security (CoVID-19
Income Relief Payment to be
Income) Amendment Act 2020,
c. Remuneration Authority
(COVID-I9 Measures)
Amendment Act2020,
d. Overseas Investment (Urgent
Measures) Amendment Act
2020,
e. Imprest Supply (Third for
2019120) Act 2020 (now
repealed),
f. COVID-I9 Response
(Taxation and Social
34
v

Assistance Urgent Measures)
{ct2020,
g. COVID-l9 Response
(Taxation and Other
Regulatory Urgent Measures)
4ct2020.
Brazil a.Law No. 6259 of
1975 (National
Immunization
Policy)
b.Law 8080 of 1990
(Organic Health
Law)
a. Federal Law No. 13,979 of
2020
South Africa a. National Health Act,
2003
a. Disaster Management Act,
2002
A. United Kingdom
4.9 The Govemment of the United Kingdom released its Coronavirus
action plan on March 3,2020, outlining reasonable, appropriate, and
evidence-based actions to combat the COVID-19 pandemic.s0 The
50 Coronavirus: action plan: A guide to what you can expect across the lJK, availqble at:
https://www.gov.uVgovernmenVpublications/coronavirus-action-plan/coronavirus-action-plan-a-guide-
to-what-you-can-expect-across-the-uk (last visited on Januaty 22, 2024\.
35 q-/

strategy also anticipated that legislative modifications might be
required to provide public bodies throughout the United Kingdom
with the resources and authority required to effectively respond to this
disaster. As an initial measure in addressing the pandemic early on,
the UK govemment responded to the pandemic early by introducing
the Coronavirus Act, 2020, which on March 25, 2020 received Royal
Assent and became law.5r Corresponding regulations were also
introduced under the Pubtic Health (Control of Disease) Act, 1984.52
Together, these two legislations have been indispensable in
minimizing the transmission risk in communities, safeguarding the
functionality of the NHS, and ultimately, saving lives. Public Health
(Control of Disease) Act, 1984 is an Act to consolidate certain
enactments relating to the control of disease and to the establishment
and functions of port health authorities, including enactments relating
to burial and cremation and to the regulation of common lodging-
houses and canal boats, etc.53
4.10 Laws vary across different regions of the UK, and the COVID-l9
legislations have been formulated to address their application in
England, Wales, Scotland, and Northem Ireland. The majority of
COVID- l9 related laws are considered secondary legislations, created
within the authority granted by primary legislation. For example,5a the
5r The Coronavirus A ct,2O2O,2O2O c,7.
52 Joint Committee on Human Rights, UK Parliament, "The Govemment's response to COVID- l9: human
rights implications" (September 21, 2020), avoilable at:
https://publications. parliament.uk/pa./jt580l/jtselect/jtrightsi265/26505.htm#_idTextAnchor005 ( last
visited on January 22, 2024).
53 Public Health (Control ofDisease) Act 1984, c.22.
sa Coronavirus Legislation, available at'. https://www.legislation.gov.uk/coronavirus (last visited on
lanuary 2,2024\.
36 a\/

two primary legislative elements encompassing emergency powers
conceming Coronavirus and health protection in England are:
. Coronavirus Act, 2020
. Public Health (Control of Disease) Act, 1984
4.I I . Similarly, the two primary legislative components containing
emergency powers related to Coronavirus and health protection in
Wales are:
. Coronavirus Act,2020
. Public Health (Control of Disease) Act, 1984
4.12. Additionally, the four primary legislative components containing
emergency powers relating to Coronavirus and health protection in
Scotland are:
. Coronavirus Act, 2020
r Coronavirus (Scotland) Act,2020: This legislation is designed to
address the emergency created by the COVID-I9 pandemic and
works in tandem with and adds to the provisions of the
Coronavirus Act 2020, which was enacted by the UK Parliament
on March 25, 2020, and received consent from the Scottish
Parliament on March 24,2020.
. Coronavirus (Scotland) (No.2) Act, 2020: This legislation
complements and enhances the provisions of the Coronavirus Act
2020, approved by the UK Parliament, and the Coronavirus
(Scotland) Act2020, ratified by the Scottish Parliament on April
1,2020.
37
V

a Public Health etc. (Scotland) Act, 2008: This is an Act of the
Scottish Parliament to restate and amend the law on public health;
to make provision about mortuaries and the disposal of bodies; to
enable the Scottish Ministers to implement their obligations under
the International Health Regulations; to make provision relating to
the use, sale or hire of sunbeds; to amend the law on statutory
nuisances; and for connected purposes.
4.13. Likewise, the two primary legislative components encompassing
emergency powers conceming Coronavirus and health protection in
Northem Ireland are:
. Coronavirus Act,2020
o Public Health Act (Northem Ireland), 1967: This legislation is
designed to streamline and modifu the statutes conceming the
notification and prevention of specific infectious diseases, while
also making amendments to certain laws pertaining to public
health.
4.14. The Coronavirus Act provides England, Scotland, Wales, and
Northem Ireland with the authority to effectively address the evolving
COVID- 19 pandemic, serving as a crucial facilitator of the
govemment's strategy in combating the crisis.ss The decision to set a
two-year duration for this legislation aims to maintain its capabilities
for a reasonable period without extending beyond necessity.56
55 Department of Health, UK, "Coronavirus Act analysis", available qt https://www.health-
ni.gov.uldcoronavirus-act-analysis (last visited on January 2, 2024).
s6 House of Commons Library, UK Parliament, "Coronavirus Bill: What is the sunset clause provision?"
(March 20,2020), dvailable att httpsillcommonslibrary.parliament.uk/coronavirus-bill-what-is-the-sunset-
clause-provisior/ (last visited on January 11,2024).
38 6r

B. Singapore
4.15. The initial response of Singapore was based upon two statutes that
were already existing. The first one was the Immigration Act, 1959,
which was used to impose travel restrictions and the other one was the
Infectious Diseases Act, 1976. Singapore already had a strong
legislative framework as the law was already amended and expanded
in 2003 after the SARS outbreak. The amendment in 2003 gave the
power to investigate, prevent and contain outbreak of infectious
disease to the Ministry of Health. Another set of amendments, passed
in April 2003, expanded the scope ofquarantine measures. Previously
limited to hospitals and other 'suitable' locations, the amendments
now included the option for 'home quarantine.' This allowed health
authorities to isolate and monitor individuals with infectious diseases
within their homes.57
4.16. The Govemment of Singapore realized the need of a further realistic
model of legislation and passed the much-needed COVID-I9
(Temporary Measures) Act,2020 i.e., CTMA on an urgent basis.58
The CTMA introduced temporary measures to offer relief to
individuals and businesses facing financial distress. It also addresses
various private and public law aspects of the crisis by amending
statutes like the Bankruptcy Act and the Companies Act. In terms of
public law, the CTMA empowered the Minister of Health to issue
control orders if there is a substantial threat to public health due to the
57 Jaclyn L. Neo and Darius Lee, "Singapore's Legislative Approach to the Covid-|9 Public Health
'Emergency"' l'erlBlog (Aptil 18, 2020), availqble at, https://verfassungsblog.de/singapores-legislative-
approach-to-the-covid- I 9-public-health-emergency/ (last visited on January 6, 2024).
58 94, l'arliamentary Debqles, on April '1, 2020, available qli
https://sprs.parl.gov.sg/searcfu #/sprs3topic?reportid:bill-intro-3 84 ( last visited on January I 6, 2024 ).
39 V

4.17. During the outbreak of COVID-19, the Govemment of Singapore
promulgated two regulations under the lnfectious Diseases Act, 1976.
The executive rule-making power played an important role while
dealing with the COVID- 19 situation as the regulations were
introduced through subsidiary legislation. The Control Order
Regulations established restrictions which included:60
o Restriction of movement outside the country,
. Prohibition on gatherings of persons except living in same
household,
o Criminalization of certain acts which violated social distancing.
4.1 8. Another regulation, the Infectious Diseases (COVID- 19-Stay Orders)
Regulation 2020, was introduced which laid guidelines for social
5e Covid-19 (Temporary Measures) Act 2020, s.34(l ).
60 Jaclyn Neo and Shirin Chua, "Singapore: Legal Response to Covid-l9" The Otlord Compendium of
Ndtional Legal Responses to Covid-I9 (May 2022), available at:
https://oxcon.ouplaw.com/display/ | 0.1 093/law-occ l9llaw-occ I 9-e3 0 ( Iast visited on lanuary 27 ,2024).
40 q,/
spread of COVID-19 in the community. These orders could involve
restrictions on movement, closure of premises, limitations on business
activities, and the prohibition or restriction of events or gatherings.
Additionally, the CTMA allowed the court proceedings to be
conducted using remote conferencing technology, adapting the legal
system to the challenges posed by the pandemic. The CTMA granted
the executive, particularly the Minister for Health, powers to enact the
control orders. These orders may include restrictions on leaving
specific places, regulating movement and contact between
individuals, closing premises, controlling business activities, and
managing events or gatherings.5e

distancing. It prohibited organizing certain events and also prohibited
gatherings of more than 10 persons. A strict fine of $10,000 or
imprisonment of up to 6 months were prescribed for the violation of
the same.6l
4.19. Another subsidiary legislation62 was introduced by the Ministry of
Health which laid specific rules and regulations for the protection of
migrant workers. It is also noteworthy that Singapore has a huge
population of migrant workers. About 300,000 migrant workers live
in dormitories, usually from China and other South Asian countries.
6l
4.20. There were more than 28 regulations that were passed under the
CTMA to cover a broad range of issues which arose due to the
COVID-l9 outbreak. The Executive through its power had also
established Multi-Ministry Taskforce to coordinate Singapore's
response to the pandemic.6a
4.21. To enhance the Ministry of Health efforts in keeping the spread and
mortality due to COVID-l9, under control, a Movement Control
6t Covid-19 (Temporary Measures) Act 2020, ss.34(7),35(ll\;94, Parliamentary Debates, on April l,
2020 av(!ilable at: https://sprs.parl.gov.sg/search/#/sprs3topic?reportid=bill-intro-384 (last visited on
January 16,2024).
62 (Temporary Measures) (Foreign Employee Dormitories Control Order) Regulations 2020 ('Foreign
Employee Dormitories Regulations').
6r Rebecca wai, "Singapore's Response to COVID-19, An explosion of cases despite being a 'Gold
Standard"'in Scott L. Greer, Elizabeth J. King et.al. (eds.), Col.onqeirus Polilics: The Comparative Politics
and Policy of COVID-19 163 (University of Michigan Press, 2021), available ati
https://wwwj sror.org/stable/l 0.3998/mpub.l1927713.11 (last visited on January 30,2024).
e Timothy Goh, "Singapore sets up task force to deal with Wuhan virus, MOH advises against travel to
Chinese city", The Straits Times, latuary 23,2020.
4l
C. Malaysia
v

Order (MCO) was implemented on March 18, 2020 under the
Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases Act, 1988 and the
Police Act, 1967 to control the spread of the virus.65
4.22. In Malaysia's efforts to address the challenges posed by COVID-19,
two primary mechanisms, one legislative and the other executive,
were identified. The tegislative aspect involves the utilization of the
Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases Act, 1988 by the
Federal Govemment. This legislation has been invoked to declare a
series of Movement Control Orders (MCOs) nationwide. Under the
Act, the Minister for Health is empowered to designate any area
within Malaysia as an 'infected local area' and prescribe, through
executive-issued subsidiary legislation, the necessary measures to
control or prevent the spread of infectious diseases. The Act also
grants extensive authority to authorized officers, allowing them to
instruct individuals to undergo isolation, observation, treatment, or
surveillance, and to implement 'any other measures deemed necessary
by the authorized officer to control the disease.'66
4.23. The executive component involves the National Security Council
(NSC), which has assumed the role of the coordinating body for the
Cabinet and the executive branch's response to the COVID-I9
situation. The Senior Minister (Defence and Security Cluster) had
6t Yin Shao Loong and Wan Amirah Wan Usamah, |'he Malaysian Economy and Covid-19: Policies qnd
Responses from January 2020 - April 2021 , UNCTADi BRI PROJECT/RP30, Ju,ne 2022, qvqilqble dti
chrome-extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://unctad.org/system/files/official-
document/BRI-Project_RP3O_en.pdf (last visited on January 29, 2024).
6 Wilson Tay Tze Vern, "Law-making and accountability in responding to COVID-19: The case of
Malaysia", Melbourne Forum on Constinnion-Building, available
hnps://law.unimelb.edu.au/_datrassets/pdf file/0008/3473765/l\4F20-Web2-Malaysia-WTay-
FINAL.pdf (last visited on January 2,2024).
,t1 frv

become the de facto spokesperson for the NSC, regularly conveying
the Federal Government's agenda, strategy, and directives through
daily interactions with the mass media. Simultaneously, the Director-
General of the Ministry of Health conducted daily briefings to address
operational matters, such as the daily count ofinfections, the locations
of new infection clusters, the condition of healthcare facilities, and
updated best practices that the public was expected to follow.67
4.24. ln general, the legislative and executive mechanisms appeared to
operate effectively as Malaysia managed the crisis without the need
to declare a state of emergency or tum to security legislation such as
the National Security Council Act, 2016.68
D. Australia
4.25. As a signatory, Australia has a range of obligations, including
reporting and maintaining certain core capacities at designated points
of entry. The Australian Govemment Department of Health is
responsible for planning for the management of national health
emergencies. Part of this responsibility is planning how the health
sector will respond to and manage communicable disease outbreaks,
epidemics or pandemics that threaten to impact human health and
67 Ain Umaira Md Shah, Syafiqah Nur Azrie Safri, el.al, "Covid-l9 Outbreak in Malaysia: Actions Taken
by the Malaysian Goyemmer'l" 97 lnternational Journal ol lnfectious Diseases 108-ll6 (2020), available
at: hnps://doi.org/ 10. l0 l6lj.ij id.2020.05.093 (last visited on J anuary 29,2024).
s Azmil Tayab and Por Heong Hong, "Malaysia: Improvised Pandemic Policies and Democratic
Regression", in Victor V. Ramraj (ed.), Covid-19 in Asia: Ldtr and Policy Contexts 321-334 (Oxford
Academic, January 21, 2O2l), available ar: https://doi.org/ | 0 .l093losol9780l9'155383 I .003.0022 (last
visited on January 29, 2024).
43 W

result in increased demand for health service delivery and healthcare
workers.
4.26. The Emergency Response Plan for Communicable Disease Incidents
of National Significance (CDPLAN) was developed by the
Communicable Diseases Network Australia, a standing committee of
the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee. CDPLAN was
endorsed by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee on
I lth August, 2016.6e CDPLAN has been developed under the auspices
of the National Health Emergency Response Arrangements
(NatHealth Arrangements 2009).70
4.27. tilhere disease-specific plans exist, such as the Australian Health
Management Plan for Pandemic Influenza (AHMPPD?' and the
National Polio Emergency Response Plan,72 these are the primary
plans used in response to specific incidents.
6q Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, Depanment of Health, Australian Government,
"Emergency Response Plan for Communicable Disease lncidents ofNational Significance", September
2016, available qt: https://www.health.gov.aulsites/default/fi les/documents/2022l07/emergency-response-
plan-for-commun icable-diseases-otnational-significance-cd-plan.pdf ( last visited on January 16,2024).
70 Australian Health Protection Committee, Depanment of Hcalth and Ageing, Australian Govemment,
"National Health Emergency Response Arrangements", November 201l, qvailable at:
https://www.health.gov.au/sites/defaulVfiles/documents/2020/05/national-health-emergency-rcsponse-
anangements.pdf ( last visited on January 16,2024).
7r Depanment ofHealth and Aged Care, Australian Covernment, "Australian Health Managemenl Plan for
Pandemic Influenza (AHMPPI)". qvqilqble ati
hnps://www.health.gov.au/resources/publications/australian-health-management-plan-for-pandemic-
infl uenza-ahmppi?language=en (last visited on January I 6, 202,1).
7r Otfice of Health Protection. Department of Health, Australian Govemment, "Poliovirus Infection
Outbreak Response Plan for Australia" January 23, 2019, qvailable at'.
https://www.health.gov.au/sites/defaulrfileVdocuments/2022l05/poliovirus-infection-outbreak-response-
pfan-for-australia.pdf ( last visited on January 16,2024).
44

4.28. Where no disease-specific plan exists, CDPLANT3 is considered the
primary response plan. The objective of this plan is to:
. Describe the context within which the Australian Government
Department of Health and state and territory govemment health
departments will function during any national communicable
disease related emergency.
. Clarify roles and responsibilities of the Commonwealth and state
and territory health authorities including inter-jurisdictional
committees and decision-making bodies.
. Describe the mechanisms through which a communicable disease
incident of national significance (CDINS) is declared, how this
plan will be escalated and stood down.
o Describe preparedness and response measures that may be taken
by the public health and healthcare system in anticipation of, or
during a CDINS.
4.29. Key areas of legislation in the health and emergency sectors include:
o The Biosecurity Act, 2015:74 This Act authorizes activities used
to prevent the introduction and spread of target diseases into
Australia. People reasonably suspected to have, or have been
exposed to these diseases can be ordered to comply with a range
of control activities including observation, examination,
segregation and isolation. The Govemor-General has the power to
7r Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, Department of Health, Australian Govemment,
"Emergency Response Plan for Communicable Disease Incidents of National Significance", September
2016, available qt: https://www.health.gov.aulsites/defau lVfi les/documents/2022l07lemergency-response-
plan-for-communicable-diseases-of-national-significance-cd-plan.pdf ( last visited on January | 6, 2024).
7a Biosecurity Act, 2015 (Act No. 6l , 2015).
45 qh/

a
o
a
authorize a broad range of actions to respond to an epidemic
(within the scope of the Act).
The National Health Security Act, 2007:1s This Act authorizes
the exchange of public health surveillance information (including
personal information) between the Commonwealth, states and
territories and the World Health Organization (WHO). The
National Health Security Agreement supporting the NHS Act
formalizes decision-making and coordinated response
arrangements that have been refined in recent years to prepare for
health emergencies.
Therapeutic Goods Act, 1989:76 This Act establishes a
framework for ensuring the timely availability of therapeutic
goods (i.e., medicines, medical devices and biological products)
that are of acceptable quality, safety and efficacy/performance.
There are provisions within the legislation that operate at an
individual patient level and at a program level (such as the
maintenance of a National Medical Stockpile) to allow for the
importation and supply of products that have not been approved
for use in Australia. These products may be required to deal with
an actual threat to individual and public health caused by an
emergency that has occurred or to prepare to deal with a potential
threat to health that may be caused by a possible future emergency.
Disaster and Emergency Acts: Each Australian jurisdiction has
a disaster or emergency Act. These Acts outline broad emergency
arrangements, conveying of special powers, arrangements for
Tt The Narional Healrh Security Act,2007 (Act No. 174,2007).
?6 Therapeutic Coods Act, I 989 (Act No. 2 l, I 990).
46 v

a
o
declaring a state of emergency and roles and responsibilities of
lead and support agencies.?7
Privacy Act, 1988:78 This Act enables information exchange
between Commonwealth Govemment agencies, State and
Territory Govemment agencies. private sector organizations, non-
govemment organizations and others (including community health
centres and local government) in an emergency or disaster for a
permitted purpose.
Other legislations: Agencies in other sectors will also have
relevant legislation, such as the Migration Act 19587e, the Air
Navigation Act 192080 and the Social Security Act l99l8r.
E. New Zealund
4.30. As a member of the World Health Organization (WHO), New Zealand
is bound by the Intemational Health Regulations 2005 (lHR), without
reservation, and has agreed to futly implement the regulations.s2
4.31. According to various measures, New Zealand's handling of the
COVID- 19 situation, initially focused on elimination and later shifted
77 Depanment of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Australian Govemment, "Australian Govemment Crisis
Managemcnt Framework", November 2022, qvailqble at:
https://www.pmc.gov.aulsites/defaulVfiles/resource/download/australian-governmenGcrisis-
management-framework.pdf (last visited on January I 7, 2024).
78 Privacy Act, 1988 (Act No. | 19, 1988).
7e Migration Act, 1958 (Act No.62, 1958).
80 AirNavigation Act, 1920 (Act No. 50, 1920).
3r Social Security Act, l99l (Act No. 46, l99l).
82 Ministry of Health, 'lnlernational Health Regulations 2005'i Ministry of Health, 'Background to the
Intemational Health Regulations' (updated December 2007\i Borrowdale v. Direclor-Generul of
Health (2020) NZHC 2090 (High Court ofNew Zealand) p. 37-42.
47 w/

to mitigation, stands out as one of the most effective globally.s3 On
March 25, 2020, a national state of emergency was proclaimed in
accordance with the provisions of the Civil Defence Emergency
Management Act, 2002.E4 In late March 2020, an epidemic notice
declaring the occurrence of a COVID-19 outbreak was additionally
issued under the Epidemic Preparedness Act, 2006.85 In May 2020,
the COVID-l9 Public Health Response Act,2020 was enacted to
grant targeted emergency health powers for addressing the COVID-
19 pandemic. This new framework was crafted to supersede the
specific powers outlined in the Health Act, 1956 aimed at combating
infectious diseases, although the latter powers were still retained.t6
The key avenues for the implementation of public health measures
through executive rule-making have been the authority to issue health
orders under the Health Act, 1956 and COVID-I9 orders under the
COVID-I9 Public Health Response Act, 2020,
respectively.8TAlthough New Zealand benefits from factors like
geographic isolation, a stable political environment, a robust Central
Govemment, a history of dealing with crises, disasters, and a small
8r Michael Baker and Nick Wilson, "New Zealand's Covid Stntegy Was One of the World's Most
Successful - What Can We Lsarn from It?" The Guardian (April 5, 2022), qvailqhle dt'.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/commertisfteel2l22/a$105/new-zealands-covid-strategy-was-one-
of-the-worlds-most-successful-what-can-it-learn-from-it (last visited on January 22,2024).
8a Declaration of State ofNational Emergency by Minister ofCivil Defence (March 25,2020\: Minister of
Civil Defence, Declaration by Minister Extending State ofNational Emergency (March 3l, 2020); Minister
of Civil Defence, Declaration by Minister Extending State of National Emergency (May 5, 2020);
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, 'State of National Emergency and National Transition
Period for Covid-19' (July 3l. 2020).
3r Epidemic Preparedness (Covid-19) Notice 2020 (March24,2020).
e J McLean, "Risk and Rule ofLaw" l6 Policy Quarterly ll (2020).
37 Dean Knight, "New Zealand: Legal Response to Covid-19" 'thc Oxford Conpendium of National l,egal
Responses to C ovid- I 9 (Ap(il 2021\-
48 w/

population, there are valuable lessons from its COVID-I9 response
that could be applied in different contexts.8s
4.32. Health related relevant legislations in New Zealand are
o Health Act, 1956: This Act contains a specific infectious diseases
regime.se Amongst other things, the Act gives medical officers of
health special directive powers in order to prevent the outbreak or
spread ofan infectious disease. These powers are activated when
a state of emergency has been declared, an epidemic notice issued
or when otherwise authority by the Minister of Health.eo These
special powers are traceable back to the turn of last century, then
used to combat outbreaks of the plague, polio, and tuberculosis.el
. Civil Defence Emergency Management Act, 2002: The Civil
Defence Emergency Management Act,2002 is the primary 'all
hazards' emergency regime. It allows for the declaration of states
of national or local emergency, if an emergency has occurred or
may occur.e2
r Epidemic Preparedness Act, 2006: The Epidemic Preparedness
Act, 2006 is a specific emergency legislation addressing
epidemics, supplementing general civil defence legislation. An
epidemic notice noti$ing an outbreak of COVID-l9 was also
83 Thomas Jamieson, "'Go Hard, Go Early': Preliminary Lessons fiom New Zealand's Response to Covid-
19" 50 American Review of Public Administrqtion I (2020), available ot'.
https://joumals.sagepub.corn/doi/ 10. I I77102'750'74020941?21 (last visited on January 16,2024\.
3e Health Act 1956, part 3.
s Health Act 1956, s. 70.
et Borrowdale v. Director-General of Hedlth (2020)NZHC 2090 (High Court ofNew Zealand), p.52.e'Civil Defence Emergency Management Act,2002, s.4.
49 w/

a
a
issued in late-March 2020 under the Epidemic Preparedness Act,
2006.e3
COVID-I9 Public Health Response Act, 20202 This Act was
passed in May 2020 to provide specific emergency health powers
to combat COVID-19.e4 The new regime was designed to
supersede the special powers to combat infectious diseases under
the Health Act, 1956, although the latter powers remained
available. The principal mechanism under the Act is the issue of
COVID-19 orders, requiring people to comply with public health
restrictions and measures. While the Health Act, 1956 regime had
been practically effective, the COVID-19 Public Health Response
Act,2020 is more bespoke, containing a wider range of powers
and is built on a more modern and robust deliberative framework.
The new Act also avoids the doubts that had been raised about the
legal underpinnings of some of the health orders made under the
Health Act, 1956.e5 The CoVID-19 Public Health Response Act
2020 is now the main legislative framework for imposing public
health measures and numerous COVID- l 9 orders have been
issued.e6
Other legislations: Other legislations were also passed to assist
with the response. Six budget-related statutes provided some
er Cazette of New Zealand, 2020-gol36E, "Epidemic Preparedness (Covid- l9) Notice 2020" March 24,
2020, qvailable al: Epidemic Preparedness (COVID-19) Notice 2020 - 2020-gol36E - New Zealand
Gaz€tte (last visited ot lanuary 22,2024).
er C Geiringer, "The Covid-I9 Public Health Response Act 2020" New Zealand Lan Journal 159
(2020); J Mclean, "Risk and Rule ofLaw" 16 Policy Quarterly ll (2o2ol, DR Knight, "Stamping Our
Covid- l9 in New Zealmd" Public Lan 24l (2021).
ei New Zealand Parliament Debates on May l2'h, 2020 available at.
https://www.parliament.nzlen/pb/hansard-debates/rhr/combined/HansDeb_20200512 2O20O512_34 (last
visited on January 22,2024).
% COVID-|g Public Heahh Response Act 2020, available ati
https://www.legislation.govt.n/acVpublicl2020l00l2llatestlLM5344l34.html (last visited on January 19,
2024).
50 h,,

economic and social assistance;e7 a number of other bills provided
further support or implemented temporary pandemic-related
govemance and administrative arrangements.eE
F. Bruzil
4.33. In response to COVID-19, the Brazilian federal govemment
implemented various measures, first of which was the declaration of
a state of Public Health Emergency ofNational Importance on January
10,2020.ee The Ministry of Heatth of Brazil activated the Emergency
Health Operations Centres ('EHOC'), coordinated by the Health
Surveillance Secretariat, to respond to COVID- 1 9 emergency by
coordinating action within the Unified Health System. The EHOCs
were also required to advise States and the federal govemment and
other health services with respect to contingency plans and response
measures. loo
4.34. After the identification of the first Coronavirus case in Brazil, the
National Contingency Plan was published by the Ministry of Health
on January 28, 2020 along with surveillance guidelines and
e7 Social Security lCovid-19 Income Relief Payment to be Income) Amendment Act 2020; Remuneration
Authority (Covid-19 Measures) Amendment Act 2020|. Overseas Investment (Urgent Measures)
Amendment Act 2020; Imprest Supply (Third for 2019/20) Act 2020; Covid-19 Response (Taxation and
Social Assistance Urgent Measures) Act 2020; Covid- I9 Response (Taxation and Olher Regulatory Urgent
Measures) Act 2020.
e8 Parliamentary Counsel Office, 'Covid- 19 Legislation' , dvailable ali https://www.pco.govt.n/covid- l9-
legislation/ ( last visited on January I 9, 2024).
e Ordinance no. 188 ofFebruary 3,2020, Brazil, dvailable at. https://perma.cc/ZU3A-3UX5 (last visited
on January 19,2024).
r00 Julio Croda, "COVID- l9 in Brazil: Advantages ofa Socialized Unified Health System and P.eparation
to contain cases", The Joumal of the Brazilian Society of Tropical Medicine (2O20\, available at:
hnps://www.scielo.br/j/rsbmt/a,/bwLKCs6ZfGhyFn3mp4RDhdQ/# (last visited on )anuary 19,2024).
5l W,/

recommendations for social distancing, hygiene practices, and the use
of personal protective equipment.
4.35. COVID-l9 was declared a public health emergency by Brazil on
February 3,2020 and the Ministry of Health approved the Federal
Law No. 13,979 of 2020 (the Quarantine Law) to provide for
measures to be determined by the States to respond to public health
emergency arising from COVID-19, including isolation, quarantine.
medical examinations and tests, medical treatments, use of personal
protective masks, exhumation, cremation, corpse handling,
restrictions on entry and exit from the country, interstate and intercity
transportation.r0r Under this law, the people affected by the measures
were assured of the right to be permanently informed about their
health status and assistance to their family, right to receive free
treatment, full respect for dignity, human rights and fundamental
freedoms of people as recommended in Article 3 of International
Health Regulations. r02
4.36. The Supreme Court of Brazil also played an active role to prevent the
spread of COVID-l9 and ordered the Health Ministry to 'fully
establish the daily dissemination of epidemiological data on the
52
r0r Law no. 13,979, of February 6, 2020, Brazil, available dt:
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato20l9-202212020/leilL l3979.htm (last visited on January 19,
2024\.
r02 lntemational Healrh Regulations, 2005, an. 3:
" 1. The implementation ofthis Regularion will be carried out with full respect for the dignity, human rights
and fundamental freedoms of people.
2. The implementation of this Regulation will comply with the Chartcr of the United Nations and the
Constitution of the World Health Organization.
3. The implementation of this Regulation will comply with the goal of its universal application, for the
protection ofall peoples ofthe world against the intemational spread ofdiseases.
4. States have, according to the Charter ofthe United Nations and the principles of intemational law. the
sovereign right to legislate and implement legislarion in order to fulfill their own health policies. When
exercising this right, they must observe the purpose ofthis Regulation."
&/

COVID-19 pandemic, on the Ministry's website.' Orders were also
passed to protect the indigenous population of Brazil from COVID-
l9 pandemic.r03
4.37. The Ministry of Health further announced recommendations to
prevent the spread of COVID-I9 vide Decree no. 356 of 2020. It
regulated the law of isolation and quarantine, whereby isolation could
only be ordered on the recommendation of doctors and
epidemiological surveillance agents or competent bodies. It further
provided that quarantine can be recommended only after a formal
administrative act by the Secretary of Health of State, Municipality or
Minister of State for Health, till the time health emergency is in
operation.loa
G. South Africa
4.38. South Africa is a parry to the Intemational Health Regulations, 2005.
However, it did not have a general legislation to provide emergency
provisions in response to COVID- 1 9 crisis. Basic framework
provided by the Disaster Management Act, 2002t05 was utilized to
deal with COVID-I9. This Act provides the primary legislative
framework for disaster management policy (including epidemics)
r0r "What should a public health emergency law for India look like? A White Paper" Vidhi Centre for Legal
Policy (March 2021) at p.24, avtilqble ar https://vidhilegalpolicy. in/wp-contenVuploads/2o2 I i03lWhat-
Should-a-Public-Health-Emergency-Law-forJ ndia-Look-Like.pdf ( last visited on !anuary 19,2024r-re "Follow-up ofthe evolution of COVID- l9 measures" COVID- l9 Observatory in Latin America and the
Caribbean, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America, qvailable dt;
hnps://statistics.cepal,org/forms/covid-countrysheet/index. htm I?country=BRA ( last visited on January 19,
2024\.
I0r Act No. 57 of 2002, South Africa, wailable at:
https://www.gov.za./sites/default/files/gcis document/2O 1409 1a57 -020.pdf (last visited on January 19,
2024\.
53 V

4.39. The provisions under the Disaster Management Act were
supplemented by the Regulations pertaining to Surveillance and
Control of Notifiable Medical Conditions which are notified under the
National Health Act, 2003t07 and govem measures relating to control
of infectious diseases.
4.40. Disaster Management Act provides for declaration of state of disaster
at different levels, including national, provincial or municipal.
National state of disaster must be declared when more than one
province is involved or when the disaster cannot be managed by a
single province in an effective manner. On declaration of this state,
the provincial and municipal disaster management authorities are
required to cooperate and aid the National Authority.
rG /d, s. l.r07 National Health Act, 2003, Act No. 6l of 2003, South Afric4 available at:
https://www.gov.za,/documents/acts/national-health-act6 I -2003-23-j ul-2004 (last visited on January 19,
2024).
54
including its prevention, reduction, mitigation, emergency provisions
and rapid response. Under this Act, the Minister of Cooperative
Govemance and Traditional Affairs has the authority to declare a state
of disaster which in the Act is defined 'disaster' as "a progressive or
sudden, widespread or localized, natural or human-caused occurrence
which causes or threatens to cause death, injury or disease; or damage
to property, infrastructure, or the environment; or disruption of the life
of a communiO" to6, and thus could be applied to the situation of
COVID-I9.
Wl

4.41. In March 2020, South Africa declared a national state of disaster in
response to the COVID-I9 pandemic. This declaration provided the
govemment with additional powers to take urgent and necessary
measures to address the crisis.r08
Section 27 of the Disaster Management Act,2002 empowers the
executive to prescribe regulations and issue directions with respect to
steps to prevent acceleration of disaster, releasing resources and
personnel of national govemment and regulation of movement of
persons and goods in disaster-struck areas. These powers may be
exercised only if they are necessary to protect the public, providing
reliefto the public, protecting property and dealing with the effects of
disaster.
4.42.
4.43. The govemment issued various regulations under the Disaster
Management Act to implement specific measures to curb the spread
of COVID- I 9. These regulations covered aspects such as social
distancing, restrictions on gatherings, mandatory mask-wearing, and
the closure of non-essential businesses.
4.44. Section 15 and 22 of the Disaster Management Act empowers the
National Disaster Management Centre to exercise consultative and
advisory powers and to publish guidelines and recommendations for
the national govemment.
r08 Petronell Kruger, Khulekani Moyo, Paul Mudau, Marius Pieterse, Amanda Spies "Republic of South
Africa: Legal Response to Covid-19" Oxford Constitutional Law, available all
https://oxcon.ouplaw.com/d isp layl 10. 1093/law-occ I9llaw-occ | 9-
e6#;-:text=s6.,measures%2oto%2oaddress%o2,theYo2}pandemic. (March 2023) (last visited on January
19,2024\.
55
q/

4.45. ln 2005, National Disaster Management Framework was prescribed,
which provides 'a coherent, transparent and inclusive policy on
disaster management appropriate for the Republic as a whole.'roe
Further, in 2010, Disaster Management Volunteer Regulations were
published which provide for setting up of units ofvolunteers to engage
in disaster management.l lo
4.46. Under the Disaster Management Regulations, the responsibility for
enforcement of regulations relating to lockdown has been put upon
the enforcement officers including peace officers. Their duties include
prevention of unauthorized gatherings, making arrests and detention
of persons who refuse to disperse from unauthorized gatherings,
medical examinations, treatment, isolation etc.
roe General Notice no. 654 of 2005, South Africa, qyqilable at:
https://www.gov.za,/sites/default/files/gcis_document/20 1409127 5340.pdf (last visired on January | 9,
2024).
!r0 General Notice Regulations no. l2l5 of 2010, Sourh Afiica, available at;
https://www.ndmc.gov.zalRegulations/Disastero/o20ManagementTo20Volunteef/o20Regulations%20(E-
Book).pdf(last visited on January 19,2024).
56
4.47. To combat COVID-I9, South Africa used a 'risk-adjusted alert
system', whereby public health measures were graded according to
the level of spread of COVID-I9 and preparedness of the health
system. A system of lockdown levels was implemented with varying
degrees of restrictions, which were adjusted based on the severity of
the pandemic. Each lockdown level had specific regulations
governing travel, business operations, and social activities.

H. Concluding Remarks
4.48. By their very nature, pandemics pose a collective threat, as the actions
of individuals impact others. "The Asian Development Bank (2020)
observed that in the developing nations of Asia and the Pacific, the
poor and the vulnerable in cities are the most adversely affected by
the pandemic. Although various diseases and epidemics have
influenced the development of cities over the centuries, this pandemic
has had an unprecedented impact on cities across the globe. The
pandemic has exposed the vulnerability of Govemments, health care
systems and prevailing political ideologies. COVID-19 pandemic is
the most severe disruption experienced worldwide since structural
adjustment and liberalization of economies in the l990s."rrr
4.49. Drawing upon the best practices in emergency management research,
several initial lessons can be gleaned from each country's response to
the crisis, which may be applicable for other settings. For example, in
Australia, CDPLAN has been developed under the auspices of the
National Health Emergency Response Arrangements (NatHealth
Arrangements 2009) and where no disease-specific plan exists,
CDPLAN' '2 is considered the primary response plan. Similarly', South
Africa does not have a general legislation to provide emergency
provisions in response to COVID-19 crisis and the basic framework
rrr Souvanic Roy and Tathagata Charterji, "The Pandemic and Reimagining the Urban Through the Lens
of Progressive State Responses" 49 Social Scientist 45-56 (2021), availqble .rl,
https;//wwwj stor.org/ stablel2'702'7156 (last visited on January 16,2024\.
rr: Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, Department of Health, Australian Covemment,
"Emergency Response Plan for Communicable Disease lncidents of National Significance", September
2016, avoilable at'. https://www.health.gov.aulsites/default/files/documents/2022l07/emergency-response-
plan-for-communicable-diseases-o f-national-sign ificance.cd -plan.pdf (last vis ited on January 16. 2024).
57 q./

provided by the Disaster Management Act, 2002rr3 was utilized to
deal with COVID- 1 9. In general, the legislative and executive
mechanisms appeared to operate effectively as Malaysia managed the
crisis without the need to declare a state of emergency or tum to
security legislation such as the National Security Council Act, 2016.
4.50. Considering the distinct circumstances of each nation, the specific
public health challenges they encounter, and the evolving
comprehension of infectious diseases within their borders, it can be
asserted that there is no one-size-fits-all approach or single legislation
that can be universally adopted to address such contingencies.
Consequently, consultations were held by the Law Commission to
understand the best practices and recommendations are provided in
Chapter 6.
rrr Act no. 57 of 2002, South Afric4 qvailable at:
https://www.gov.za./sites/default/fi les/gcis_document/2014091a5'7 -O20-pdf (last visited on January 19,
2024',).
58 G,/

5. CONSULTATIONS HELD BY THE COMMISSSION
5.1. The Commission sought input from the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare ('MoH&FW') and Padma Shri Professor A. P. Dash, Ph.D.
and D.Sc., serving Member of the CSIR Society, to explore
enhancements in the current health legislations aimed at addressing
future health emergencies. This initiative was prompted by the
identification of shortcomings in India's domestic health legislation,
particularly the deficiencies exposed in the Epidemic Diseases Act,
1897 during the COVID-19 pandemic. Throughout this collaborative
consultation, numerous issues conceming the current legislation were
brought to attention and have been described herein below.
A, Consultulion with the Ministry of Health and Family Ll/elfore
(MoH&Ft/)
5.2. Conceming the requirement for a stronger response to future
epidemics, it was deliberated whether a new Epidemic Diseases Act
or an amendment to existing Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 would
suffice. It was also contemplated whether there was a need to
consolidate the provisions of the Epidemic Diseases Act with the
Disaster Management Act, 2005. The Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (MoH&FW) acknowledged the necessity for an amendment
and conveyed to the Commission that a proposal to enhance the public
health response to epidemics is already under consideration. Further,
the need for introducing penal provisions to prevent obstacles that
could impede the services of healthcare professionals during
epidemics was emphasized. However, it's noteworthy that MoH&FW
59

did not advocate for merging the Epidemic Diseases Act with the
Disaster Management Act.
5.3. Regarding the possibility of enacting a new Epidemic Diseases Act
and its characteristics, the Ministry expressed its aim to put forth a
comprehensive legislation designed to assist both the Central and
State Govemments to effectively respond to an epidemic. The primary
objective is to effectively control and alleviate the impact of such
epidemics. The MoH&FW further apprised the Commission that the
Ministry was already in the process of preparing a 'Draft Epidemic
Diseases Bitl, 2023' and asked the Commission to provide its
suggestions on the same.
5.4. The prospect of biological warfare may appear distant to many.
Nevertheless, the potential of bioterrorism remains a cause of
increasing concern. In this vein, upon being asked by the Commission
on the possibility of including bioterrorism under the Epidemic
Diseases Act, MoH&FW conveyed that this responsibility lies with
the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) as per the Cabinet Secretariat
Crisis Management Plan. However, if such an event were to transpire
as an epidemic, it is imperative for both the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare and State Health Departments to engage in control
and containment activities to alleviate the impact of such occurrences.
This obligation is further elaborated in the National Disaster
Management Authority's National Disaster Management Plan, 2019
at the National, State, and District levels.
60
q"/

5.5. Regarding the definition of the term 'epidemic' and whether it should
encompass endemic infectious diseases as well, MoH&FW conveyed
to the Commission that the definition of 'Epidemic Disease' has
already been incorporated into the Draft Epidemic Diseases Bill,
2023. The Ministry was of the opinion that 'endemic infectious
diseases' does not require inclusion in the Epidemic Diseases Act, as
the term refers to the persistent and sustained presence ofa disease in
the community along anticipated patterns.
5.6. On the question of whether the authority to prevent, control, and
manage epidemic diseases, should be decentralized among the
Central, State, and local authorities, considering the fact that public
health and sanitation are specified in the State List, while infectious
or contagious diseases like epidemics are listed in the Concurrent List
of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, the Ministry indicated
that the authority to prevent, control, and manage epidemic diseases
is already decentralized, extending down to the district level as
outlined in the National Disaster Management Authority's National
Disaster Management Plan (NDMA's NDMP).
5.7 . In light of the above, it was also discussed whether there be a
distinction between National and State Epidemics and if so, should
different authorities be responsible for managing National and State
epidemics. While MoH&FW emphasised that delineating an epidemic
in a specific region of concem is necessary, considering the magnitude
of the disease, it did not agree with the proposal to establish distinct
National and State regulatory authorities equipped with robust and
6l
q---

clearly defined mechanisms to
epidemics.
effectively address respective
5.8. With respect to ensuring the effectiveness of the new Act, the question
arose as to whether it should delineate the roles and responsibilities of
different authorities, citizens' duties, surveillance mechanisms, and
other relief measures or should the Act solely outline the
organizational structure for managing epidemics and empower
various authorities and Govemments to formulate rules, regulations,
and take actions as required. The Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare holds the perspective that the existing legislation i.e., the
Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (as amended in 2020) has been
appropriately enacted, incorporating provisions for formulating
regulations and prescribing measures as needed. It is pertinent to
highlight that both public health and law and order are State subjects,
with powers related to the enforcement of measures and regulations
falling under the jurisdiction of the State Govemment. However, in
light ofthe fact that epidemics are a subject included in the Concurrent
List of the Seventh schedule, the law dealing with the same is enacted
and amended by the Central Govemment.
5.9. Regarding the incorporation of a well-defined mechanism in the
Epidemic Diseases Act, I 897, for the proper disposal of medical waste
and human corpses to prevent the potential spread of infection among
the living population, the Ministry informed the Commission that the
Central Pollution Control Board's compliance with the Biomedical
Waste Management Rules, 2016, and the National Disaster
Management Authority's guidelines on managing the deceased in the
62 fi'-/

aftermath of disasters already addresses this concern. Furthermore,
according to the guidelines of the National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA), there are no public health threats associated with
deceased bodies. The guidelines specifu that the management of the
deceased is not primarily the responsibiliry of the health sector.
5.10. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also brought to the
Commission's attention that the monitoring of pricing and distribution
of essential medical care facilities and drugs (including vaccines)
during epidemics is already being unde(aken by various agencies
such as the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA).
5.11. Another aspect that was considered was whether a robust Disease
Surveillance & Tracking Mechanisnr requires statutory support
through the new Act and its potential impact on the right to privacy;
need for a proportional standard for restricting individual rights,
including the right to privacy and right to livelihood; and whether
these individual rights should be explicitly dealt with under the
Epidemic Diseases Act. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
was of the opinion that an epidemic constitutes an emergency
situation. In this context, except for the right to life, other fundamental
rights may be considered temporarily suspended during the epidemic.
Such stringent measures can be relaxed once the relevant regulatory
bodies determine that the epidemic situation is under control.
63
\Y/

B. Consultation with Professor A.P. Dash
5.12. Professor Aditya Prasad Dash was conferred with the Padma
Shri award in2022 for his distinguished service in the field of science
and engineering as a "Distinguished Biologist specializing in vector-
bome tropical diseases like dengue, malaria, kala-azar and
chikungunya." Professor A. P. Dash has been the Advisor to the
World Health Organisation (WHO) and is presently a member of the
CSIR Society. In light of his expertise on the subject matter, the
Commission thought it fit to have a consultation with Professor A.P.
Dash.
5.13. According to Professor Dash, the foremost task of any Act dealing
with epidemics is to clearly distinguish between the stages of
'outbreak', 'epidemic', and 'pandemic'. Clear definitions of these
terms as per the country's requirements are essential, as each of these
phases demands varying levels of attention from different authorities.
This is only possible if we are able to demarcate such different stages
succinctly.
o4
5.14. A disease should be promptly declared as an epidemic/pandemic so
as to cause early alert and to pace up the preparedness plan of the
health care system. Professor Dash stressed on the importance of
notifuing the stage of disease to the public and other relevant
authorities at the primitive stage only. There should not be any delay
in declaring a disease as Pandemic so as to alert countries and give
them sufficient time to prepare. He elaborated on this aspect through
the glaring example of COVID-I9, whereby the disease was not
w/

declared as a pandemic during early stages of its detection. Due to
non-declaration, the countries across the globe were not able to
prepare in advance and were able to respond only after severe damage
was done in the country.
5.15. Professor A.P. Dash stressed on proper decentralization of power,
whereby Union Govemment acts as a 'Guiding Force', having the
power to issue guidelines as per the nature and gravity of the epidemic
disease and the State Govemment acts as an 'lmplementing Force',
having the power to take preventive and controlling measures and to
implement such actions efficaciously on ground. Thus, he conveyed
the need ofhaving a'Standard Operating Procedure', distinguishing
the powers between different levels of the government as per the stage
of the infectious disease. Moreover, he also emphasized on the need
for people's participation in management of an epidemic along with
the govemment's efforts.
5.16. On the aspect of Bioterrorism, Professor Dash holds the perspective
that in any comprehensive legislation dealing with epidemic diseases,
there should be a dedicated chapter incorporating bioterrorism, given
the potential harms that may be caused due to bio-warfare. In his
opinion, the ill effects of bio-terrorism affect the general health of
people at large and thus, to protect the health of the people,
consequences from such an act must be protected under the Act.
5.17. Professor Dash also focused on efficient disease surveillance
programmes giving early waming signals. According to him, during
such public health emergencies caused by highly contagious diseases,
65 V

detection and contact tracing is the key to contain the spread and hence
appropriate technical support should be given to monitor and
strengthen disease surveillance systems. The Govemment's efforts
should be more focused on research and development to create a
responsive and prepared study to tackle epidemics/pandemics. He also
stressed on the need for enhanced promotion of Public-Private
Partnerships (PPPs), in the wake of limited public resources and
advanced private medical facilities. During a crisis situation,
coordinated efforts are required to effectively manage and control
epidemics.
66
0h/

CONCLUSION & RECOMMENDATIONS: SUGGESTIVE
FRAMEWORK FOR EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT
6.1. The existing legal framework enacted for the protection against
epidemics and infectious diseases throughout the country are
dispersive. Considering the areas for improvement and lacunas of the
current Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, as discussed in the foregoing
chapters and in the light of the need to better manage any future
epidemics, it is important to revise and review the existing Act to
cover the current as well as future requirements for dealing with the
deadly epidemic diseases that adversely impact the health of the
people at large. There is an ardent need for comprehensive legislation
to deal with epidemics that provide for a coordinated response in the
unforeseen event of an epidemic. Considering the modern scientific
advancements, the new or the amended Act should not only give the
Government mere stipulated powers rather it should shape appropriate
response mechanisms in preventing and controlling epidemic
diseases. In the considered opinion of the Law Commission of India,
following areas must be considered while amending the existing
Epidemic Diseases Act, 1 897 or enacting a new comprehensive
legislation for the same:
A. New De/initions
6.2. In order to make a holistic legal framework relating to epidemic
diseases, certain terminologies have to be defined in a comprehensive
manner to develop an understanding about the situation and
management procedure. The amended Act or the new Epidemic
6.
67 q"/

Diseases Act, as the case may be, must include a clear definition of an
'Epidemic'. For taking the appropriate measures to contain and
control the epidemic diseases; and to demarcate the power between
Centre and State, the stages of the disease must be defined such as an
'Outbreak' which further leads to an 'Epidemic' and a 'Pandemic'.
Suggestive definitions, which may be incorporated are provided
below:
Outbreak: Sudden occurrence of an infectious or contagious
disease limited to a localized area, having the potential to result
in an epidemic.
Epidemic: An infectious or contagious disease, or anything
resembling a disease cause of which is unlonwn; resulting in
widespread transmission to other people rapidly and such
transmission being in excess of normal expectancy.
Pandemic: Any occurrence or lransmission throughout a
widespread geographical region of an infectious or contagious
disease that has the potential to adversely affect the health of
the human population and may pose a serious danger
internationally.
6.3. Similarly, the difference between 'quarantine' and 'isolation' should
be clarified by appropriately defining these terms. The Epidemic
Diseases Bill, 2023 as provided to the Commission by MoH&FW
succinctly defines both the terms. The same can be adopted in the
amended or new law, as the case may be. The Commission does not
find any need to define such terms again.
68
&,

6.4. Moreover, the Epidemic Diseases Act must include the definition of
'clinical establishment' as mentioned in Section 2(c) of the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010, rvhich
prescribes "the minimum standards that should be abided by the
hospitals before declaring it fit to treat the persons suffering from
epidemic diseases and take into consideration various aspects such as
infrastructure, services, staff, equipment, lighting arrangements and
basic facilities available to patients."rra Defining clinical
establishments is essential to properly identify places with appropriate
medical infrastructure that may be used for isolation, quarantine or for
other preliminary treatments.
6.5. During COVID- I 9, to contain the spread of infection, various
regulations pertaining to social distancing were enforced throughout
the country. Hence, it becomes imperative to define such a term in the
parent Act itself. The Commission is of the opinion that a more
appropriate word, which must be used is 'Physical Distancing' and it
may be defined as follows:
Physical Distancing: An exercise of maintaining sfficient
physical distance between individuals to limit the spread of
infection.
B. Decentralization and Demarcation of Power
6.6. The Epidemic Diseases Act should appropriately decentralize and
demarcate the power between Central, State and local authorities to
rra The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act,20l0 (Act No. 23 of20l0), s.2(c)
69
h"'

regulate an unfolding epidemic crisis. A flexible enforcement
mechanism is required for prevention, control and management of
epidemic diseases as per the stage of the spread of infectious or
contagious disease.
6.7. Since, 'public health and sanitation' is a State subject under the
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and the respective State
Govemment is the nodal authority to manage public health, thus State
Govemments should be given the primary task of implementation of
prevention and management provisions to contain the epidemic.
Moreover, the subject of 'prevention of infectious or contagious
disease' is mentioned in the Concurrent List, hence, both the Centre
and the State have the power to frame appropriate laws in this respect
and enact such laws accordingly. To avoid conflict between the Centre
and State, and to properly decentralize the implementation power, a
dedicated Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) is required to respond
against the situation of an epidemic.
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
a Outbreak in the State:
6.8. When the State Govemment is of the opinion that an 'outbreak' of any
infectious or contagious disease has affected any part ofthe State, then
the State Govemment shall have the power to take sufficient measures
in consonance with the Epidemic Plan or the Regulations made by the
State (as discussed in part C of this Chapter) to effectively prevent,
control and manage the epidemic disease. The State Govemment may
empower certain agencies and competent persons to implement the
70 W

provisions of the Epidemic Plan and any Regulations framed in
consonance with the plan during the epidemic situation.
6.9. Decentralizing the power to districVlocal authority is important to
contain the infectious disease at a micro level. If proper preventive
and containment measures are taken by such local authorities at the
initial level ofthe outbreak, then there are high chances ofcontaining
the epidemic at the primitive stage itself.
6. r0. Thus, if the State Govemment is satisfied that any district or any
particular local area of the respective State is visited or threatened by
the outbreak ofany new contagious or infectious disease, then it shall
empower the district or local authority, as the case may be, to take
certain measures and implement regulations in accordance with the
provisions of the Epidemic Plan for containing the disease. The nodal
authority conceming the public health of the State Government should
keep a strict vigil on the functioning of the district authorities and
should ensure that such authorities function and take measures in
compliance with the Epidemic Plan and Regulations made by the
State.
6.11. If during the management of the epidemic by the district/local
authority, any contingency arises for which there is no existing
guideline in the Epidemic Plan, then the State Government shall have
the power to make regulations in public interest in accordance with
the guidelines of the Epidemic Plan and the local authorities are to
comply with such regulations. 
-L
q"
71

6.12.
6.13.
b. Inter-State Spread of Eoidemi c Diseases/Pandemic:
When the Central Govemment is of the opinion that a significant part
of the country is threatened with the outbreak and spread of any
infectious or contagious disease, causing a sudden state of danger to
the health of public in various States; or the country is threatened or
likely to be threatened with any pandemic; then the Central
Govemment should have the power to frame regulations for managing
the epidemic on the basis of the guidelines and directives as provided
in the Epidemic Plan and direct the State Govemments and/or the
district authorities to implement such regulations and contain the
spread of the disease. The State Govemment or the district authority
should act in accordance with the Regulations prescribed by the Union
Govemment from time to time.
c. Extreme Threat from Infectious Disease:
In the event where the Union Govemment is of the opinion that the
outbreak ofany infectious or contagious disease has transformed or is
likely to convert into an epidemic or any pandemic, posing extreme
threat by affecting different parts of the country and the State
Governments are not able to contain the spread of the infection, then
it would be expedient for the Union Govemment to have the power to
take measures in accordance with the provisions of the Epidemic Plan
in larger public interest. Thus, when the Union Govemment finds the
epidemic to be spreading across various States and posing significant
threat to public health; discrepancies and conflicts in the guidelines as
well as measures taken by different State Govemments; and the need
for taking uniform measures throughout the country; then the Union
72 V

Govemment should itself take certain measures or should empower
some other central agency to effectively take measures for preventing
and managing the disease.
6.14. Hence, by decentralizing and demarcating the powers between Union,
State and Local Govemments, we can provide a broad framework for
functioning of controlling authorities and their nodal agencies. A flow
chart illustrating the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) is enclosed
as 'ANNEXURE-I' along with this Report.
6.15. Such a broad framework of SOP will ensure proper and coordinated
response to any epidemic with pre-defined powers and roles in case
of a public health emergency. However, every power of the concemed
authority cannot be specifically prescribed in the Act and some
discretionary rule making power should be given to the Govemments
for ensuring proper redressal of any exigency.
C. Duty lo Frame an Epidemic Plan
6.16. Epidemic situations demand quick and concerted actions by various
Govemment authorities, institutions and other stakeholders. In the
absence of a prior planned mechanism, the authorities indulge in un-
coordinated actions leading to duplicated efforts and creating
confusion among the masses. Thus, there is a need for a proper plan
that facilitates cooperation and effective actions. However, such a
plan must be flexible enough to allow actions that may be warranted
on the basis of the gravity of the situation and nature of the exigency.
73
Ay

6.17. In light of the foregoing, the Law Commission is of the considered
opinion that the Central Govemment should prepare an Epidemic Plan
for dealing with all the outbreaks/epidemics/pandemics across the
country. Such a plan should be made in consultation with all the
concemed Union Ministries such as MoH&FW, AYLISH etc., the
State Health Ministries or Health Departments, important public as
well as private health institutions, technical & expert bodies and other
stakeholders conceming the medical field.
6. r8. The State Govemments should collaborate with the Central
Govemment in preparing the Epidemic Plan. Later, the State
Govemments should be empowered to make respective State
regulations in consonance with the proposed Epidemic Plan,
considering the State-specific health infrastructure and other medical
requirements. While making such regulations, the State Govemments
should consult with the district/local authorities, important medical
institutions and other health organizations of the State. During an
outbreak in the State, the State Govemment should be empowered to
act as per the regulations made by the State following the directives
of the Epidemic Plan.
6.19. The Epidemic Plan should be given a statutory force by the Epidemic
Diseases Act. A new provision should be inserted either in the existing
Act or in the newly proposed Epidemic Diseases Act, whereby a duty
shall be imposed on the govemments to prepare an Epidemic Plan. By
giving the Plan a statutory force, we can ensure a framework of basic
regulations and guidelines prepared beforehand which shall be
executed during the epidemic crisis. Moreover, the statute should also
'14
F*'

6.20. For the Epidemic Plan to be comprehensive, it should provide for the
measures required to prevent, detect, control and manage the
epidemic. Certain necessary and inalienable aspects, which the Union
and State Governments should take into consideration while preparing
the Epidemic Plan have been discussed below. These aspects can also
be given a statutory force by specifically providing for their
mandatory inclusion in the Epidemic Plan under the Act itself.
(The list of the following aspects is only suggestive and not exhaustive)
i. Provisions for Quarantine and Isolation
6.21. The Union and State Govemments should endeavour to make specific
guidelines and general provisions with respect to quarantine ofpeople,
animals and objects, who are suspected to be exposed to the disease
and have the potential to affect people who are not ill. Such measures
are necessary to prevent further spread of infection. In quarantine
provisions, only suspected persons should be restricted and separated
from the general public.
6.22. Specific measure of isolation is also necessary to separate any person
who is actually infected and is suffering from any dangerous disease.
The concemed govemment may also lay down provisions for isolating
specific objects and goods, which are contaminated or have been in
the possession of an infected person so as to prevent the spread of
75
provide for a provision conceming the revision of the Plan from time
to time. A time-period should be fixed for reviewing and revising the
Plan according to the need and situation.
V

contagious disease. Separating the ill and infected person is the
foremost step for breaking the chain of infection spread and to contain
the epidemic disease.
6.23. The proposed Quarantine and Isolation guidelines must be made in
consonance with Indian Port Health Rules (1955),rr5 dealing with
isolation of infected ships, and Aircraft (Public Health) Rules
(1954),116 which provides for isolation of infected persons in an
aircraft. The above-mentioned rules are not comprehensive and deal
with a very narrow aspect of isolation and quarantine of infected and
suspected people.
6.24. For proper implementation of quarantine and isolation measures, the
government may develop a mechanism to establish demarcated
quarantine and isolation centres near to major airports, ports, railway
stations and other transport hubs, for early detection and separation of
infected and suspected people, through which the disease can be
contained from spreading further into the cities and districts.
6.25. Such isolation and quarantine measures make it necessary for the
people to follow stringent protocols and isolate oneself as per the
regulations, if the person concemed is showing symptoms of the
disease. Such measures also curtail the right to assemble and prevent
various social gatherings as well. Nonetheless, these measures should
be strictly considered as reasonable restrictions on the fundamental
76
rrt lndian Pon Health Rules. 1955.
I'u Aircraft (Public Health) Rules, 1954.
er/

rights of citizens in the larger interest of the countryrrT as well as the
health and well-being of the individuals themselves. Hence, it is
necessary for the govemment to make elaborative guidelines in the
Epidemic Plan pertaining to quarantine and isolation, taking into
consideration all the necessary measures and precautions contained in
such existing rules.
6.26. Quarantine and isolation, while they may qualiff as "reasonable
restrictions", should be implemented fairly. The govemment should
ensure that such quarantine and isolation is not arbitrary and should
try to empower competent people or agencies for isolating the infected
persons. The govemment can also make a provision empowering one
of its nodal authorities to keep a check on arbitrary isolation ofpeople
and objects. Such an authority will overlook the functioning of the
empowered people or agencies in restricting people in various
isolation and quarantine centres. This measure will safeguard rights
of the people from arbitrary executive action and will also help
govemment agencies to identify problems and challenges in isolating
and quarantining people.
ii. Provisions for Lockdown & Restriction on Movement
6.27. Restrictions on movement and imposing lockdowns is essential to
stop physical interaction ofpeople by breaking the chain ofcontagious
disease from spreading further. Appropriate measures for imposing
lockdown and for carrying out physical distancing are required. The
77
rr? Tho Constitution oftndia, art. 19.
fu.,/

Central or State Government, as the case may be, has been vested with
large powers to prohibit any activity or to seal an area which has the
potential of causing harm to public health.
6.28. During COVID-I9, the provisions of nationwide lockdown were
imposed by invoking the Disaster Management Act, 2005 as the
current Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 does not confer such power on
the Central Govemment. Imposing strategic lockdown and restricting
the movement of the people was a crucial step to contain the spread
of Coronavirus. The importance of lockdown can be understood from
the fact that during COVID-l9, most of the countries worldwide
amended their existing Acts and made separate rules to impose
lockdown in their respective countries.
6.29. The Epidemic Plan should contain a broad framework for imposing
lockdown and for imposing restrictions on the movement of people
and vehicles.
6.30. The Plan should demarcate as well as identify essential and non-
essential services and during any epidemic, the concerned authority
may impose restriction on such non-essential services by taking
guidance from the proposed framework and as per the gravity of the
situation at hand.
iii. Provisions for Disease Surveillance
6.3 l. To effectively manage any epidemic disease, detection is a
prerequisite. The public health authorities must follow a robust
78 w

surveillance system, which is responsive and can be effectively
implemented across the country. The current Integrated Diseases
Surveillance Programme (IDSP) is one of the primary and an efficient
programme for surveillance mechanisms in the country. The mission
of IDSP is to strengthen disease surveillance in the country by
establishing a decentralized State based surveillance system for
epidemic prone diseases that facilitates early detection of waming
signals and initiation of timely and effective public health actions at
the Districts, State and National level. The IDSP endeavours to
strengthen the laboratory-based IT enabled disease surveillance
system for epidemic prone diseases to monitor disease trends and to
detect and respond to outbreaks in the early rising phase through
trained Rapid Response Team (RRTs).rr8 Furthermore, IDSP
envisages both active and passive surveillance to enable early
detection of the disease.
6.32. The importance of surveillance has also been highlighted by MTI
Aayog in its Report of "Vision 2035: Public Health Surveillance in
India".r re The Report suggests mainstreaming of surveillance by
making individual electronic health records the basis of
surveillance.r20 The goal is to make India's public health surveillance
more predictive, responsive, integrated, and tiered system of disease
and health surveillance.r2r As per the Report, surveillance should be
India.pdf(last visited on January 28'h,2024)
tzo ld.
t2\ ld.
79
rl3 lntegrated Disease Surveillance Programme, qvailahle at: https;//idsp.mohfw.gov.in (last visited on
l"nvry 2d,2024).
rle NITI Aayog Report, Vision 2035; Public Health Surveillance in lndia. A White Paper (2020\, available
qt: https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023 -03lVision-203 5-Public-Health-Surveillance-in-
q/

primarily based on de-identified (anonymized) individual-level
patient information that emanates from health care facilities,
laboratories, and other sources.l22 The Report also emphasizes the
need to pay due attention to privacy and confidentiality of the
individual and treating these as integral to any process forming part of
the public health surveillance system.r23 The ultimate aim is a public
health surveillance govemed by an adequately resourced effective
administrative and technical structure which will ensure that it serves
the public good. One of the major goals is to provide regional and
global leadership to India in managing events that constitute a public
health emergency of international concem.r2a While dealing with
disease surveillance these aspects highlighted by the NITI Aayog
Report must be considered.
iv. Provisions for Disinfection and Decontamination
6.33. Apart from quarantine and isolation measures, the Epidemic Plan
must contain guidelines for proper disinfection and decontamination,
treatment of animals, goods, enclosures and any other place or
substance to maintain hygiene and prevent any spread from such
objects and places. The plan should elaborate safe methods and
biologically safe chemicals that may be used for sanitization of
humans and animals. Proper sanitation of humans, their belongings
and places of living and working is the key to prevent infection from
spreading. Thus, it becomes imperative for the Government to
t.. Id.
,11 ld.
t24 ld.
80
&./

Control of Healthcare & Medical Supplies
6.34. During any epidemic, basic healthcare and medical supplies such as
protective gears, medical equipment, testing kits, machineries, serums
etc. are essential for any testing, medical procedure as well as
treatment. These supplies are necessarily required at every diagnostic
laboratory and hospital. During COVID-I9, the Supreme Court
directed the Govemment to ensure availability of Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) kits to all the healthcare professionals treating the
disease.rzs Hence, it is important for the Govemment to provide
healthcare workers and medical institutions with sufficient amounts
of healthcare supplies. To combat shortage of such essential supplies
during the peak crisis, it is necessary for the Govemment to stipulate
directives and guidelines for controlling, restricting and regulating the
availability of such essential healthcare supplies. The Govemment
may also devise regulations for proper distribution, transportation and
sale of the same.
6.35. Likewise, it is also important for the govemment to provide for
regulations which may declare certain sanitizers and other
disinfectants as essential commodities in such emergencies so as to
control the price and ensure easy availability to the public. A similar
practice has been followed by the Central Govemment during the
tx5 Jerryl Banait v. Union oflndiq,(2020) 20 SCC 686.
W
categorize and prescribe sanitizers and other disinfectants which are
biologically and chemically safe to use.
8l

COVID-19 pandemic, wherein the Essential Commodities Act, 1955
was invoked to declare masks and sanitisers as essential commodities.
By declaring such goods as essential commodities, the price,
manufacturing and distribution of these goods were controlled
directly by the Central Govemment thereby ensuring the availability
of such necessary medical goods to the masses.l26
vl. Provisions for vaccination, research & regulation of medicine
and drugs
6.36. Vaccines and medicinal drugs are necessary for treating infectious
diseases and saving people from its clutches. Epidemics are
sometimes caused by unknown virus vectors or disease carriers. In
such cases, it is highly probable that any vaccine or drug existing at
the time of initial outbreak, may not effectively fight against such
virus or bacteria. In such a situation, copious research has to be
undertaken by both public as well as private medical research
institutes. During the research, these institutes need resources, raw
materials and protection over their research on vaccines and other
drugs that may be useful in the treatment ofsuch a disease. Hence, the
Central Govemment in its Epidemic Plan should identiff the nodal
institutes and authorities which shall hold the primary responsibility
of research and development of vaccines and other necessary dnrgs.
6.37. The govemment should also develop a mechanism to coordinate
between public and private medical research institutes, vaccine
82 V
r26 Gazette Order, March 13,2020, available a/: https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdfl2l8645.pdf (last visited
on January 30,2024).

6.38.
6.39.
production companies and raw material suppliers so as to effectively
manage the chain ofvaccine research and its production. Such a broad
framework will not only help the govemment, vaccine manufacturing
companies and vaccine suppliers during the epidemic to have a
concerted approach but will also be prolific for utilizing a pool of
resources from both public and private sector.
When the vaccine is launched for the public use in the market it
becomes probable that due to large demand and shortage of supply,
hoarding ofvaccines may occur, which denies vaccine accessibility to
the citizens. By enacting provisions in the Epidemic Plan, the Central
Govemment should regulate the purchase, supply, transportation,
storage, distribution, and sale of such necessary vaccines and life-
saving drugs. The Central Govemment should hold the control and
monitoring power with respect to vaccines and should facilitate
movement of vaccines and its raw materials through different States
as per the requirement during an epidemic situation.
For accessibility of vaccines and necessary medicinal drugs to all, it
is essential for the Govemment to enact a broad mechanism for
supplying vaccines and such medicinal drugs at reasonable prices. The
Govemment should endeavour to frame guidelines for effective price
management in consultation with the National Pharmaceutical Pricing
Authority (NPPA). Although, exact pricing policy cannot be made
before the occurrence of any epidemic, however, the Govemment
should identifu various aspects in its Epidemic Plan, to be taken in
consideration while pricing such life-saving medicines. The
Govemment shall as far as possible try to provide such vaccines at a
83 Av/

highly subsidized rate or free of cost to vulnerable and poor sections
ofthe society.
vlt. Provisions for proper Dissemination of Information
6.40. For an effective management of an epidemic, a collaborative action of
the govemment as well as citizens is required. It is the duty of the
govemment to inform people about the epidemic situation, gravity of
the infection, and preventive and protective measures. The citizens
must know the symptoms of the disease, the methods by which it
spreads and the measures to be taken to contain such an infectious
disease. Thus, govemments should provide sufhcient guidelines in the
Epidemic Plan regarding dissemination of irnportant, correct and
appropriate information to make the citizens aware of the situation
and also to guide them, so that they can properly protect themselves.
Further, some guidelines must be prepared by the govemment agency
to control spreading of misinformation, since such information
disseminated through various mediums, misguide people and create
unnecessary panic amongst the masses. The govemment should try to
disseminate true and official information through various authentic
and official channels and available means so that all the necessary
information reaches out to all the people living in any part of the
country.
6.41. However, while circulating information such as number of reported
cases, number ofrecoveries, testing results, reported deaths and other
public health related information, the nodal agency should proceed
with great caution as they might be disclosing protected personal
84 fik/

health information. Every person has the fundamental right to
privacy.r2T Thus, every person has the right to protect their personal
health information from being circulated in the public domain. During
an epidemic, there might be some disclosure of personal and other
health data in order to effectively contain the spread of diseases and
for better testing and treatment. However, the testing laboratories,
hospitals, health institutions, government agencies and media houses
must be cautious that such disclosures are not excessive; and that right
to privacy to each and every citizen for protecting their personal data
is ensured. Proper regulations for the disclosure of such protected
information will help the citizens in accessing the medical facilities
along with ensuring the right to privacy.
vlll. Provisions for conducting Medical Testing and Examination
6.42. During any contagious epidemic disease, in addition to post disease
surveillance and contact tracing, another big task is to conduct
medical examination and testing to detect individuals suffering from
the said disease. Thus, physical examination and medical tests are
necessary during any epidemic for proper diagnosis and treatment of
infected people. The large population of our country and limited
resources and facilities for testing and medical examination can prove
to be a challenge in this front. Thus, it is necessary for the Govemment
to formulate provisions in the Epidemic Plan regulating the testing
and medical facilities in both public and private laboratories. The
Supreme Court has observed that private hospitals and laboratories
t21 Justice K.S. Puutanany (Reld.) v. IJnion ollndia,(2017) l0 SCC I
85
q\./

also have a significant role to play in containing the epidemic and they
should extend their services at a reasonable price in the hour of
national crisis.l2s Thus, proper regulations for coordinated and
cooperative efforts of both public and private labs and hospitals are
required to fulfil the testing demand during the crisis.
Another important aspect with respect to testing and medical
examination is the pricing of the test. During COVID-19, an issue
relating to the price of screening test was raised and Supreme Court
concluded that in this hour of national crisis, screening and
confirmation tests, relating to COVID- 19 must be conducted in
laboratories approved by National Accreditation Board for Testing
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) and other agencies approved by
ICMR at reasonable price. The Supreme Court also issued some
interim directions approving the important test to be free of cost in
some approved government and private laboratories, keeping in mind
the urgency for testing and paying capacity of the large part of the
Indian population.r2e Thus, it is imperative for the govemment to
formulate general guidelines to effectively manage testing prices
through govemment and private laboratories during any epidemic
situation, as the testing is vital to control and manage the epidemic.
t2e Shashank Deo Sudhi v. Union oflndia, (2020) 5 SCC 132.
t2e ld.
86
6.43.
ix. Provision for safe disposal of infectious waste & infected human
remains
W

6.44. Infectious Bio-medical waste, ifnot disposed properly, can also act as
a catalyst in spreading infection amongst the people. Hospitals,
Testing Laboratories, Quarantine & Isolation centres, even houses
(where people remain under home isolation) generate bio-medical
waste that has the potential to further spread the infection. Any person
coming in contact with such infectious waste is at the risk of being
infected.
6.45. Hence, proper treatment and disposal of such infectious waste is of
utmost importance. The government should make certain guidelines
separately for medical institutions, isolation centres and for
households for the collection, storage, handling, transportation,
treatment and disposal of such infectious waste. While preparing and
incorporating such guidelines in the Epidemic Plans, the govemment
should take into consideration Bio-medical Waste Management Rules
2016,r30 prepared by the Central Pollution Control Board in
furtherance of its objectives to manage bio-medical and healthcare
waste.
6.46. Another aspect that needs to be considered is the disposal of human
remains. Proper disposal ofhuman remains includes various processes
such as embalming, transportation, burial, cremation and final
disposal ofhuman remains. Any person dying ofa contagious disease
might pose a risk to other people and hence proper disposal ofinfected
remains is important. The Govemment should frame specific
guidelines, to be incorporated in the Epidemic Plan for safe disposal
rr0 Bio-Medical waste Management Rules,20l6
87
v

x
of infected human remains. These guidelines should be an extension
to the Guidelines on management of the dead in aftermath of the
disasters,r3r prepared by the National Disaster Management
Authority. The proposed guidelines should contain provisions for
identification as well as for labelling of the deceased. The human
remains of any infected person dying from a contagious disease
should be explicitly labelled mentioning the cause of death and name
ofthe disease. Moreover, the proposed guidelines should also regulate
the visiting of family members during the last rites of an infected
person, so as to further contain the spread of infection.
Multi-Sectoral Emergency Relief Measures
6.47. During COVID-19, the Disaster Management Act, 2005 was invoked
to effectively manage the pandemic and a lot of reliance was placed
on Section 10(2) and Section 12 of the Disaster Management Act for
providing minimum relief to the affected people.r32 Under the said
provisions, the Ministry of Home Affairs directed the State
Govemments and Union Territories to provide food, temporary
shelter and other necessities to migrant and daily wage labourers.
Moreover, employers were asked to pay wages to their employees
during distress periods and landlords were asked to forgo rents from
such workers for a stipulated period. If during any epidemic or
pandemic, lockdown measures are imposed, then a great financial
burden is imposed on such migrant and daily wage labourers and it is
rrr National Disaster Management Guidelines on 'Management ofthe Dead in the Aftermath ofDisasters'
(August 2010), available at: hnps://nidm.gov.in/PDF/pubsNDMA/ I l.pdf (last vished on January 31,
2024).
r'2 Disasler Management Act, 2005 (Act No. 53 of2005), ss. l0(2), 12.
88
qr/

difficult for them to sustain their living. To avoid such a scenario and
be prepared beforehand, the Govemment should have in place
necessary guidelines for giving temporary and minimum relief to
people during any epidemic. Such guidelines should be incorporated
in the Epidemic Plan and should guide the appropriate authority
during the epidemic in providing minimum standards of relief to the
people.
xl. Power oflnspection, Search and Seizure
'rr Covid-19 (Temporary Measures) Act,2020
6.48. Apart from such relief to the poor and vulnerable section of the
society, it is also necessary to ameliorate the financial burden faced
by other sections of the society and different sectors of the economy.
Taking inspiration from COVID-l9 Temporary Measures Act
(CTMA) 2020t33 enacted in Singapore, the Government should enact
certain regulations in the Epidemic Plan to provide some emergency
relief measures to different sectors of the economy during the
economic distress caused by any epidemic. To prevent economic
devastation and business being destroyed due to prolonged lockdowns
and other regulatory measures, it is necessary to provide relief to
different sectors of the economy. The Govemment may think of
measures to provide indirect and temporary relief to financially
distressed individuals and businesses. Such temporary measures will
help economic entities to sustain during such distressed time.
89
N,/

6.49. The concemed govemment may formulate certain regulations
pertaining to inspection and detention. The detention of any form of
transport along with any other person, shipment, cargo or any other
object must be made only on reasonable apprehension ofsuch things
having the potential to cause the spread of infection. Any executive
action should only be as per these regulations and not arbitrarily.
D. Enhanced Penolty Provisions
6.50. Currently, the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897, as amended, provides
two types of penalties. First is in respect to contravention of any
provision, order or rule made under the Act, which is punishable under
Section 188 ofthe Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC). The second penalty
was added by the 2020 amendment Act for commission or abetment
ofviolence against healthcare service personnel or causing damage to
any property as defined under the Act. Thus, although the existing Act
stipulates penalty for contravention of its provisions, the penalty as
stated in Section 188 of the IPC is not stringent enough to act as an
effective deterrent.
6.51. Apart from the above-mentioned punishments, Section 269 of the IPC
(Section 271 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023) provides the
punishment for negligent act likely to spread the infection of any
disease dangerous to life. Similarly, Section 270 of the IPC (Section
272 of the BhartiyaNyaya Sanhita,2023) provides the punishment for
malignant acts which are likely to spread the infection ofany disease
dangerous to life. Section 271 ofthe IPC (Section 273 ofthe Bhartiya
Nyaya Sanhita,2023) provides for the punishment for disobedience
90 v

6.52. Hence, as per the current penal scheme, it is more viable to provide
enhanced and stringent punishments within the Epidemic Diseases
Act itself. Such a punishment will effectively deter people from acting
irresponsibly during an epidemic. During the COVID-I9 pandemic,
Section 188 of the IPC, providing punishment of imprisonment up to
six months or fine up to one thousand rupees or with both, was used
against contravention of any provision or order made under the
Epidemic Diseases Act. With the enactment of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023, Section I 88 of IPC is replaced with Section 221 of the
BNS, 2023 and the punishment has been enhanced to imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to one year or with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.r35
Although there has been a significant increase in the punishment,
however in the opinion of the Commission, such punishment should
be given a statutory force within the Epidemic Diseases Act itself and
the offence should be categorized in two heads; firstly for
contravening the provisions negligently imposing lesser punishment;
secondly, for wilful contravention, which will entail a stricter
punishment. Moreover, the Commission deems it frt that for
subsequent or repeat contraventions, the punishments should be
enhanced accordingly.
lr1 The lndian Penal Code, 1860 (Act r.\o. 45 of 1860), ss.269,270,271; The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023 (Acl No.45 of2023),ss. 271,272,273-
rr5 The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (Act No. 45 of2023), s. 221
to quarantine rule.r3a Despite these provisions, there is still a need for
stricter punishment for disobedience of guidelines and regulations
made by the government during any health emergency.
9l 6"/

6.53. For accelerating enforcement of such penal provisions, the
Commission proposes to make such offences cognizable and non-
bailable, whose investigation and trial should be completed
expeditiously.
The Commission recommends, accordingly.
----xxx----
92

2/"2'4
[Justice K.T. Sankaran]
Member
1. ?-'
[Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi]
Chairperson
IProf. (Dr.) Anand Paliwall
Member
IProf. D.P. Vermal
Member
<2__-"t-
IDr. Reeta Vashishta]
Member Secretary
IMr. M. Karunanithil
Part-tirne Member
[Dr. Rajiv Manil
Member (Ex-Officio)
[Prof. (Dr.) Raka Aryal
Part{ime Member
(n-
93

To the State
Govemment(s)
for
implementing
such regulations
Empower
District
Authority(s)
to
implement
regulations
STANDARD
OPERATING
PROCEDURE
(soP)
Outbreak in any
part of the State
lnter-State
Spread of
Epidemic;
Pandemic in
any part of the
country
Extreme Threat
throughout the
country;
State
government
unable to
Union
Govemment
may formulate
regulations and
give directions
as per the
Epidemic Plan:
State
Govemment shall
take measures as
per the Epidemic
Plan and
Regulations
thereunder and
Empower
certain
agency(s) or
any
competent
person(s) to
implement
regulations
94
To the Diskict
Authority(s) for
implementing
such regulations
Union
Govemment to
take measures as
per the Epidemic
Plan
ANNEXURE-I
S"/