rI;?q4 T,T4
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
RESIDENT INDIANS AND OVERSEAS CITIZENS OF INDIA
Report No. 287
February,2024
LAW ON MATRIMONIAL ISSUES RELATING TO NON-

The Law Commission consists of a Chairperson, three full-time Members, Member
Secrelary, two Ex-ofrcio Members and two Part-time Members.
Chairperson
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Full-time Members
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Prof. (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Prof. D.P. Verma
Member Secretarv
Dr. Reeta Vasishta
fu-officio Member
Dr. Rajiv Mani, Seffetary, Legislative Department and Secretary, Department of Legal
Affairs (Additional Charge)
Part-time Members
Sh M. Karunanithi
Prof. (Dr.) Raka Arya
Law rs
Smt. Varsha Chandr4 Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri Atul Kumar Cupta. Deput) Law Ofllcer
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Gaurav Yadav
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Ms. Priya Rathi
Ms. Ruchika Yadav
Ms. Deepika Chaudhary
Ms. Diksha Kalson
Shri Govind Cupta
Shri Kumar Abhishek
Ms. Shanivi Singh
Ms. Ritu Thomas
Ms. Shivangi Shukla
Dr. Taruna Solanki
Ms. Swikriti Mahajan
Shri Anubhav Dubey
Shri Animesh Pareek
The Law Commission is located at
2"d and 4d Floor, 'B' Wing
Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market
New Delhi-l l0 003.
The texl ofthis Report is available on the Website al
www.lawcommi ionofindia.nic.in
O Govemment of India
Law Commission of India
The 22d Lzw Commission was constituted by Gazette Notification for a period ofthree
years vide Order No. F No. 45021/ l/201 8-Admn-lll(LA) dated 2l't February, 2020 issued
by the Govemment of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, Depanment of Legal Affairs,
New Delhi. The term ofthe 22"d Law Commission was extended vide Order No. FA No.
6001 1 /22512022- Admn.lll(LA) dated 22'd February. 2023.
Leeal Consultants

{riq{a [d
D.O. No. 6(3\33512023-LC(LS) . l5'r'Febnnry,2O24
l+vxll.e- 3; w R,-^- nl
,.*k* \
I am pleased to forward you Report No. 287 of the Law Commission of India on ,,Law on
Matrimonial Issues Relating to Non-Resident Indians and Overseas Citizens of India".
Over the course of past few centuries, millions of Indians have moved and settled abroad.
Despite not permanently residing in India, a significant number ofthese people still hold Indian
citizenship. On the other hand, a large number ofthese migrants have become foreign citizens.
While vastly enriching the social and economic life ofthe countries in which they are residing,
they continue to maintain blood and marital relationships with people here in India. As a
consequence of such inter-country marriages taking place between the non-resident Indians
and the foreign citizens oflndian origin on one hand and the Indian citizens on the other, there
has been a rapid rise in the legal issues arising out ofsuch relationships.
The rising occurrence of fraudulent marriages involving Non-Resident Indians (NRIs)
marrying Indian partners is a worrisome trend. Several reports highlight an increasing pattem
where these marriages tum out to be deceptive, putting Indian spouses, especially women, in
precarious situations. Deceptive practices like false assurances, misrepresentation, and
abandonment are commonly associated with these fraudulent unions, causing distress to the
Indian partners. The inter-country nature ofthese marriages further intensifies the vulnerability,
making it challenging for affected individuals to pursue legal remedies and support. Challenges
such as financial exploitation and the complex legal aspects across multiple jurisdictions
contribute to the hardships faced by those involved in such marriages.
In order to deal with the emerging situation, the Registration of Maniage of Non-Resident
Indians Bill, 2019, was introduced by the Govemment in the Rajya Sabha on 11th February,
2019. Initially, the Sixteenth Lok Sabha referred the Bill to the Committee on External Affairs
(2018-2019). Subsequently, the same Bill was again referred to the Committee on Extemal
Affairs (2019-2020) after the Seventeenth Lok Sabha was constituted, for further examination
and report submission. In furtherance of the deliberations being held, the Law commission
received a reference on the NRI Bill, 2019 from the Ministry of Extemal Affairs, conveyed
through the Ministry of Law and Justice v e letter dated 1Oth April, 2023.
h
0_a.,<?r14t-
orqfdq rdr : orr{r i. los, agef cd, fi' fiiq, dro qrrrfi q!"r. ErFr crtre. T{ ftd-r r ooog
Offica Address : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Mark€t, New Delhi-110003
olrqr*q rrdr : drrdr ;f. B, dfs qr-{fi qni. r{ frd-rroorr
Rosidence : Bungalow No. 8, T€es January Marg, New Oalhi-110O'll
email : rituraj.awasthi@gov.in Tel. : 011-24654951 (Ol, 243/,0202, 24Y0203
Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former ChielJustice of High Court of Karnataka)
Chairperson
22'o Law Commission of lndia
qrq{ffi rg Yrq q{sfi
ftrtEc gq qrqffqr,6-+c6 va qro.dq)
CItITfi
qrrf, A 22f frE oTrq}rr
Trog
$[SFtt+r .sqFrrdrctrq

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former ChielJustice of High Coud of Kamataka)
Chairperson
22^o Law Commission of lndia
qrqtrf xg rre r+efr
ffi+ga ge <mfiv, cqtc6 sa qr+frq)
qEqH
.+r<o S 22d frfu srr+.r
.>oA
t9
(Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi)
tr.qq'q m[d
7*
3Il-91-4I+r .sTTdq-6RE
With warmest regards,
Yours sincerelv-
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (Independent Charge)
Ministry of Law & Justice
Govemment of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi -110001.
trrqf-dq qdr : ornr i. los, agei a-a, 6'ffiq. ato qrq6 qqir, Enq qTtrz, T{ ffi-rrooog
Ofics Address ; Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wng, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New Delhi-1l0003
sTrqr$-q qf,I : tiT6il ri. a. fie qt+fi qrrf. q-S m-rroorr
Residenc€ : Bungalow No. 8, Tees January Marg, New Delhi-11001l
email : rituraj.awaslhi@govin Tel. : 011-24654951 (O), 24UO2O2, 24340203
Having conducted an in-depth study ofthe law conceming the instant subject-matter, including
the NRI Bill, 2019 and the practical difficulties relating to the issue, the Commission is of the
considered opinion that the proposed central legislation should be comprehensive enough to
cater to all facets involving marriages of NRIs as well as foreign citizens of Indian origin with
that of Indian citizens. Such a legislation should be made applicable not only to the NRIs but
also to those individuals who come within the definition of 'Overseas Citizens of India' (OCIs)
as laid down under Section 7A ofthe Citizenship Act, 1955. It is further recommended that all
marriages between the NRIs/OCIs and Indian citizens should be made compulsorily registered
in India. The said comprehensive central legislation should also include provisions on divorce,
maintenance of spouse, custody and maintenance of children, serving of summons, warrants,
or judicial documents on the NRIs/OCIs, etc. Further. it is recommended that requisite
amendments need to be introduced in the Passports Act, 1967 in order to mandate the
declaration of marital status, the linking of a spouse's passport with the other and mentioning
of the Maniage Registration Number on the passports of both the spouses. Furthermore, the
Govemment, in collaboration with the National Commission for Women and the State
Commissions for Women in India and the NGOs and Indian associations abroad, should
conduct awareness programs for women and their families who are about to enter into marital
relationship with NRIs/OCIs. Accordingly, this Report is being submitted for your kind
perusal.

The Commission wishes to extend its deepest gratitude to all those who have
generously contributed to finalising this Report on "Law on Matrimonial Issues
Relating to Non-Resident Indians and Overseas Citizens of India".
We would like to thank the Ministry of External Affairs for enhancing the
Commission's understanding of the subject-matter. We specifically acknowledge
the contribution of Shri Amit Kumar Mishra, Director, and Ms. Reba Alba Rajan,
Legal Consultant of the Ministry who dedicated their valuable time to provide
comments and submissions on the relevant subject.
The Commission also recognizes the diligent efforts of Mr. Rishi Mishra,
Mr. Gaurav Yadav, Ms. Diksha Kalson, Mr. Kumar Abhishek, Ms. Shivangi
Shukla, and Ms. Swikriti Mahajan, serving as Legal Consultants. We commend
their significant inputs in conducting thorough research and drafting of this
Report. We express our sincere appreciation for their hard work and meticulous
efforts that have brought this Report to fruition.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
@"-
I

A. Problems Relating to Marriage of Non-Resident Indians
B. Examination of Issues by Other Ministries and Committees
C. Reference to the Law Commission
D. Earlier Reports of the Law Commission
E. Consultation by the Law Commission
2. LEGAL ISSUES AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
A. Compulsory Registration of Marriage
(i) Broadening of Contents
(ii) Overriding Effect.......
D. Amendment in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(i) Old Scheme of Criminal Procedure
(ii) New Regime of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
1
1
6
8
10
t4
17
t7
(i) Legislative Competence 18
(ii) Scope of Applicability of the Proposed Legislation.....
(iii) Need for a Robust Procedure 25
(iv) Substance of Marriage Certificate..... ...........................28
B. Comprehens ive Legislation 3l
E. Revocation of Passport. ........40
3Z
34
36
36
38
(i) Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
ll
44
TABLE OF CONTENTS
i. INTRODUCTION.
23
F. Abandonment of Indian Spouse ........... ........44
h,,/

(ii) Scope of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 46
G. Service of Summons or Warant 48
(ii) The Hague Convention,, 1965 50
(iii) Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty 53
H. Registration of Non-Resident Indian's Marriage and Muslim Personal
Law 54
3. CONCLUSION 58
4. RECOMMENDATIONS
lll
65

I. INTRODUCTION
A, Problems Relating to Maruiage of Non-Resident Indians
l.t A significant number of lndians have settled abroad in the last couple of
centuries. This Indian Diaspora is spread across various countries,
contributing to the cultural, economic, and social fabric of the nations in
which they are residing. According to the official data of the Ministry of
Extemal Affairs, 3,22,85,425 people are settled overseas as on 5'h October,
2023. Out of this figure, 1,36,01,780 are Non-Resident Indians (NRI) and
1,86,83,645 are Persons of Indian Origin (PIO).r Whether in North
America, Europe, the Middle East, or other parts of the world, the Indian
Diaspora continues to make valuable contributions to their host countries
while maintaining strong ties with their motherland. Indeed, the Indian
Diaspora, especially NRIs, often establish marital relationships that
transcend borders. Many individuals within this community form
connections and marriages with people from diverse cultural backgrounds.
With this increasing trend of inter-country marriages within the Indian
Diaspora, there has been a concurrent rise in legal issues associated with
these unions.
rSee, https://www.mea.gov.in/population-of-overseas-indians.htm (last visited on February 10,2024)
I
1.2. The increasing incidents of fraudulent matrimony with respect to NRIs
marrying Indian spouses has become a concerning trend. Various repofts
have indicated that there is an increasing trend of such marriages tuming
out to be fraudulent, leaving Indian spouses, particularly women,
Qy/

1.3. A study conducted by the National Institute of Public Cooperation and
Child Development on the deserlion of married women by NRIs in the
states of Punjab and Andhra Pradesh has underscored the prevalence and
concems associated with fraudulent marriages involving NRls marrying
Indian partners. According to the findings of the Report, 600% of such
marriages in Punjab were not registered primarily due to factors such as
lack of awareness about the importance of marriage registration, time
constraints faced by NRIs, and concems related to the legality of a second
marriage of the husband.r The study has also highlighted that in Andhra
Pradesh, 23o/o of such marriages were not registered. The primary reason
behind this issue, the Report highlights, is that the registration of marriage
makes subsequent marriages, solemnized or contracted without obtaining
the decree of divorce, non-est in the eyes of the law.a A peculiar
sociological aspect pointed out by the Report is that these cases are
predominantly observed within the Muslim community, which generally
lacks a comprehensive registration system.5
r National Commission for Women, Repon on Problems Relating to NRI Marriages Legal and Other Interventions
on NRI Maniages, National Commission for Women, New Delhi (201 l). The Report is prepared in collaboration
with Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs.
r National Institute ofPublic Cooperation and Child DeveJopment, "A Study on Desertion of Married Women by
2
vulnerable to challenging situations.2 These fraudulent marriages often
involve deceitful practices, such as false promises,, misrepresentation, and
abandonment, leaving the Indian partners in distress. The vulnerability in
such situations is exacerbated by the inter-country nature of these
marriages, making it challenging for them to seek legal recourse and
assistance. Issues such as abandonment, financial exploitation, and the
legal complexities of navigating multiple jurisdictions contribute to the
difficulties faced by individuals in such mariages.
Non-Resident Indians in Punjab and Andhra Pradesh", at 46 (New Delhi,2007).
l tbid.
5ldat47.
Ah/

1.4. In these unions, individuals often anticipate greater social security, along
with enhanced educational and professional opportunities. However, in
their quest for a better future, the parties to such marriages often overlook
proper precautions and thorough verification of facts. Unlike traditional
marriages that usually involve due diligence, marriages with NRIs may
occur hastily without adequate verification of important details such as
antecedents, marital status, profession, workplace, and income. Many are
arranged without proper verification of the NRI's background, and some
transpire without even registering the marriage. This oversight exposes
individuals to various risks, including abandonment, domestic violence,
extra-marital relations, delays in visa or immigration processes, and even
ex-parte decrees of divorce.u
1.5. The challenges escalate for women who find themselves alone in a foreign
country, facing linguistic barriers and lacking a support network of friends
and family. In such vulnerable situations, women may endure physical and
mental abuse, confinement, malnutrition,, and ill-treatment at the hands of
their husbands and relatives. Isolation becomes another form of violence,
as these women are restricted from contacting their parents and accessing
their mailboxes. Fear of this isolation often silences victims, preventing
them from speaking out. Upon arrival in a foreign country, some women
discover that their husbands provided false information about their
immigration status, job, property, marital status, and other crucial details.
Manipulative tactics may involve bringing the woman back to India under
false pretexts, where she is then deprived of her passport and essential
documents, rendering her helpless. A panicularly challenging scenario
arises in cases of ex-parfe divorces initiated by an NRI husband in a foreign
court without the knowledge and consent of his defenceless spouse. Such
6 Ministry ofExtemal Affairs, "Marriages to Overseas Indians: A Cuidance Booklet", at 9- l0 (2019).
3
ch/

1.6. Deserlion of married women by their NRI husbands, thus, is a major social
problem. Spouses are abandoned in foreign countries with absolutely no
support or means of sustenance and without even a visa to stay in the
country. While going to court for maintenance or divorce, they find legal
obstacles related to its court jurisdiction, service of notice or orders, or
enforcement of orders. In numerous instances, the NRI husbands
deliberately do not get the marriage registered. This deliberate omission
becomes a significant hurdle when a spouse seeks to apply for a visa to join
his/her spouse abroad, as the lack of a marriage certificate renders their
application incomplete. Complicating matters further, the spouse abroad
sometimes also denies the occurrence of the marriage altogether. This trend
has raised considerable concerns due to the increasing prevalence of such
unregistered marriages among NRIs.
divorces may be based on false information and fake documents, adding to
the complexities faced by women in these distressing situations.
I .7 . Answering a question about the number of cases reported regarding the
desertion of Indian women by their NRI spouses, Gen. (Dr.) V. K. Singh
(Retd.), the then Minister of State in the Ministry of Extemal Affairs, stated
that the Ministry received 1 022 petitions in the year 201 7 compared to 15 1 0
in 2016 & 796 in 2015. Between January, 2018 and 30th July, 2018, the
Ministry has received and redressed 765 complaints.T For the effective
redressal of their grievances, the parties have often tumed to state
authorities. Police stations across many states in India receive a surge of
complaints regarding fraudulent actions by non-resident Indian husbands.
Surprisingly, there are significant delays in police intervention. Even after
the filing of First Information Reports (FIRs), there's often an unreasonable
? Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 3623 (August 8, 2018).
4 A'/

delay in proceeding with the legal process, which adds to the challenges
faced by the victims. Unfortunately, the insensitivity to these issues leaves
victims even more vulnerable. Under certain pressures, the names of
accused NRIs are occasionally removed from the complaints. Additionally,
when accused NRI husbands or their parents, named in FIRs, visit their
hometowns, authorities often fail to take action to arrest them or impound
their passports. Delays in issuing lookout notices to immigration
authorities further enable the accused individuals to escape abroad.
1.8. Desertion of married women by NRIs and victims of domestic violence tn
other countries is, thus, a serious problem. They often endure financial and
physical exploitation by their NRI spouses, and yet ironically, in the
absence of a dedicated legal framework, victims have no legal protection.
Additionally, they encounter numerous legal hurdles conceming private
international law, including jurisdictional matters, service of notice, and
enforcement of orders and decrees. Unfortunately, there is a lack of
effective legal recourse for women in marriages involving NRIs.
1.9. The four major communities v2., Hindus, Muslims, Christians and Parsis
have their own personal laws, either codified or uncodified, goveming
marriage and other ancillary issues. In addition to these laws, there is the
Special Marriage Act, 1954. However, there is no uniform marriage law in
India equally applicable to all. Most of the states in the country have
enacted legislation for compulsory registration of marriage. However, rules
regarding marriage registration vary in some States. In the wake of
problems faced by the abandoned brides, the matter relating to the
registration of marriage of NRIs has been considered by different bodies of
the Govemment of India.
5
M/

B. Examination of Issues by Other Ministries and Commitlees
1.10. A discussion on the plight of Indian women deserted by NRI husbands was
initiated by the Committee on Empowerment of Women (2006-2007). The
Report, presented to the Lok Sabha in 2007, dealt with the scope and
limitation of legal intervention along with suggestions for involvement of
different bodies, amendments in the Passports Act, 1967, compulsory
registration of marriages, and separate cell in the mission abroad.8
L I l. Another response was presented by the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on External Affairs (2011-2012) to the Lok Sabha in 2012. The Report
made a number of recommendations including the need for communication
of information to be made by States and Union territories regarding court
orders against NRIs to emigration authorities to prevent accused NRIs from
leaving India against court orders. Another recommendation was for
appointment of nodal officers at district level for a regular monitoring of
such cases.e
1.12. The Standing Committee on External Affairs (2012-2013) presented its
Report to the Lok Sabha in 2013 on action taken by the Govemment on
earlier recommendation of the Standing Committee. A further
recommendation was made for a single window timely solution to the
problem along with suggestions for directives to embassies and foreign
missions to provide meaningful assistance. While an inter-ministerial
coordination, consisting of officials from various ministries was
8 Committee On Empowerment of Women, "Report on Plight of lndian Women Deserted by NRI Husbands"
(2006-2007) 67 -68 (Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, presented to Lok Sabha on l3th August, 2007).
e Standing Committee on External Affairs (2011-2012). "Problems Relating to Overseas Indian Marriages:
Schemes for Providing Legal/Financial Assistance/Rehabilitation to Indian Women Desened by their Overseas
Indian Spouses", Recommendation no. l2 and 14, at 32-33, paras 3.34 and 3.36; Lok Sabha Secretariat, New
Delhi (June 2012).
6
W

constituted on 2lst August, 2012, a "NRI Cell" was launched in the
National Commission for Women to render assistance to victims of
marriages with NRIs.ro
1.13. On 21't December,2017, the Indian Parliament was informed that Indian
missions abroad had received 3,328 complaints from Indian women about
matrimonial disputes with their NRI spouses during 2015-2017. In order to
review the legal and regulatory challenges faced by such women and to
prevent non-resident Indian husbands abandoning their wives, an Inter-
Ministerial Panel was set up in June 201 8, which asked the Ministry of Law
and Justice to prepare a draft legal amendment to give effect to decisions
taken by the Inter-Ministerial Panel.r I
1.14. The Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indians Bill, 2019
(hereinafter, referred to as the "NRI Bill, 2019") was introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on 1l'h February, 2019. The Bill was first referred by the
Sixteenth Lok Sabha to the Committee on External Affairs (2018-2019),
and the same Bill was re-referred to the Committee on External Affairs
(2019-2020) after constitution of the Seventeenth Lok Sabha on 4th
October, 2019 for further examination and submission of a report. After
consultation with the Ministry of Extemal Affairs, Ministry of Home
Affairs and the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs),
the Bill was approved by the Committee on 12th March, 2020, subject to
r0 Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs, "Action Taken on the Recommendations Contained in the Fifteenth
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject Problems Relating to Overseas lndian Marriages: Schemes for
Providing Legal/Financial Assistance/Rehabilitation to Indian Women Deserted by Their Overseas Indian
Spouses" (20 l2-20 l3), Recommendation No. 2 and 4, at 2 -5, paras 5, 6 and I I ; Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
(May 2013).
rr "NRI husbands must now register marriage within a week, update marital status on passport", Hindustan Times,
June 14, 2018, https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/nri-husbands-will-have-to-register-marriages-
within-a-week-update-marital-status-on-passports/story-wbxgisAdxwgCL2hvMhjJrN.htrnl (last visited on
February 04,2024).
7
@,/

appropriate inclusion of suggestions/recommendations made by the
Committee in their Bill or through appropriate methods.12
C. Reference to the Law Commission
I . 1 5. After discussion on recommendations of the Committee on Extemal
Affairs (2019-2020) pertaining to the NRI Bill, 2019, under reference by
the Ministry of External Affairs, further inputs/clarification from the
concemed stakeholders Ministries/Departments were sought. A reference
of the Ministry of Extemal Affairs on the NRI Bill, 2019 was received by
the Law Commission of India through the Ministry of Law and Justice vrde
letter dated 1Oth April, 2023.
1.16. The Law Commission has been asked to give its inputs on the following
.llquenes
" (i) Can the Government of India provide for compulsory
registration of Nkl marriages through its existing legislation? If not,
then what kind of legislation can be brought in by the Legislative
Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice?
(ii) The l7h Lok Sabha Standing Committee [Committee on External
Affairs (2019-2020)l in its Third report on "The Registration of
Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019" dated 12.03.2020
(Recommendation no.2) opined that a comprehensive legislation
may be enacted to tackle the problems relating to NRI marriage,
r2 Committee on External Affairs (20I9-2020), "The Registration of Marriage ofNon-Resident Indian Bitl, 2019",
Resolution No. 9, at 41-42,paft2.48, Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi (March 2020).
rr Ministry of Extemal Affairs (OIA-ll Division), OM No.0l-19013/93/2018-OIA-It, dated April 03,2023.
8
uh,

including the issues of divorce, maintenance, and child support in
such marriages. Have such issues been dealt wilh by the Ministry of
Law and Justice/Ministry of l{omen and Child Development in its
pre-existing legislation. If not, then what kind of legislation can be
brought in by the Ministry of Law and Justice/ Ministry of Women
and Child Development?
(iii) The Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019
seeks to amend the Passports Act, 1967. llhat are the existing
provisions of the Passports Act, 1967 that are requiring to be
amended? ll/ill there be addition of new clauie / sections for making
such corresponding amendment in the Passports Act, 1967?
(iv)The Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, to
2019 seeks to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. What
are the existing provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, I97 3 that
are requiring to be amended? Will there bie addition of new clause
/ sections for making such corresponding amendment in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, I97 3?
(v)The Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019
seelrs to amend the Passport Act, 1967 which empowers the passport
authority to impound / revoke the Passport of the NRI for
enforcement purpose. How can this amendment be brought about
and what will be the mechanism to ensure the registration of
marriage, if and when made compulsory?
(vi) LVhat are the legislative means to protect a woman who marries
an NPll and is either abandoned or is unable to access her rnarital
9 q,,

rights. Are there any corresponding provisions in existing
legislation. If not, then what kind of legislation can be brought in by
the Ministry of Law and Justice/ Ministry of Women and Child
Development?
(vii) Is there any alternate mode of service of summons/process of
criminal courts as prescribed under Chapter V of 'The Registration
of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019'. Can issues of
process be effective through LllhatsApp/E-mail of the NN spouse or
through his employer, as in the practice in India? Can such alternate
mode of service of summons/process be affected in countries where
data privacy laws are in place?
(viii) Wat is the procedure for registration of marriage under The
Registration of Marriage of Non- Resident Indian Bill 2019, where
the applicant NN is governed by the Muslim Personal laws and may
have more than one spouse? "
l 17. The above-mentioned eight queries under reference are concemed with the
problems of compulsory registration marriages of non-resident Indians;
comprehensive legislation; amendments in the Passport Act, 1967;
amendments in the Code of Criminal Procedure, I 973; procedure of
summons and divorce; and desertion of Indian spouses. The Law
Commission had considered in 1976,2008, 2009 and 2018 some of the
problems such as compulsory registration of marriage and foreign decree
of divorce.
l0
D. Esrlier Reports of the Ltw Commission
h"

1.18. The 65th Report (1976) of the Commission dealt with the question of
recognition of foreign decree of divorces and judicial separation in India.
The Report pointed out that the law to recognise foreign divorces and
related matters has not been codified. The Report highlighted that a decree
pronounced in absentem by a foreign court, to the jurisdiction ofwhich the
defendant has not in any way submitted himself, is by intemational law an
absolute nullity. The Law Commission quoted with approval the
obseruation of the Supren.re Court in Smt. Satya v. Teja Singh, that:
The Commission recommended that recognition may be granted by an
Indian law to a foreign divorce based on the domicile, habitual residence
or nationality ofone of the parties and the ancillary orders of foreign courts
should not be treated as binding by our courts.
1.19. While dealing with certain issues relating to child marriage, the 2051h
Report (2008) of the Law Commission also made a recommendation on
compulsory registration of marriage in India as under:
ra Law Commission oflndia,65th Report (1976), Recognition of Foreign Diyorces, at pa.a 1.8
1l
"...any such law shall also have to provide for the non-recognition
offoreign decrees procured by fraud bearing on jurisdictional facts,
as also for the non-recognition of decrees, the recognition ofwhich
would be contrary to our public policy. Until then, the courts shall
have to exercise a residual discretion to avoid /lagrant injustice, for
no rule of private international law could compel a wife to submit to
a decree procured by the husband by trickery. Such decrees offend
against our notions of substantial justice " . ta
u\,,

"Registration of marriage within a stipulated period, of all the
communities, viz., Hindu, Muslim, Christians, etc., should be made
mandatory by the Government".rs
1.20. The 21lth Report (2008) of the Law Commission dealt with the great
diversity in respect of laws on registration of mariage and divorce
prevalent in different religious communities in India. It recommended that
Parliament should enact a law for registration of marriage to be made
applicable to the whole of India and to all citizens irrespective of their
religion and personal law and without any exception or exemptions. A
parliamentary legislation on compulsory registration of marriages is not
only possible but also highly desirable. This will bring country-wide
uniformity in the substantive law relating to marriage registration and will
be helpful in effectively achieving the desired goal. Rules under the
proposed legislation may be made by the State Governments, and this will
take care of the local social variations. This should be given an overriding
effect on all other laws through anon obstante clause duly inserted in it.16
1.21. The 2l2th Report (2008) of the Law Commission of India suggested the
need for enacting a law to resolve conflicts between various family laws
rather than directly addressing registration of marriages. It recommended
that both the Special Marriage Act, 1954 and the Foreign Marriage Act,
1969 to make registration of marriage compulsory without compromising
on religious practices and personal laws. The Law Commission also
suggested that the word "Special" in the Special Marriage Act, 1954 be
reconsidered in the light of inter-community marriages and requiring all
fi Law Commission of India, 205th Report (2008), Proposal to Amend the Prohibition of Child Maruiage Acl,
2006 and other Allied Lqw, at 44.
f6 Law Commission of India,2llth Report (2008), Laws on Recognititn of Marriage and Divorce - A Proposal
for Consideration and Reform, at34-39.
t2 A\.,,,

marriage to be registered under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, except for
those between Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists and Jains. However, the Law
Commission was disinclined towards expanding the scope of the Special
Marriage Act, 1954, as it would require a revision of provisions related to
prohibited degrees of marriage.rT
1.23. ln its 270th Report (2018), the Law Commission took note of the absence
of comprehensive legislation dealing with compulsory registration. It
suggested certain amendments to the Registration of Births and Deaths Act,
1886 to provide for compulsory registration of marriage. Without adhering
to the substantive aspects of family law governed by various matrimonial
laws, the Law Commission of India focused only on compulsory
registration of marriage. 
I e
17 Law Commission of India, 2126 Report (2008), Lows of Civil Morriages in lndia - A Proposal to Resolye
Certsin Conllicts.
18 Law Commission oflndia,2lg'h Report (2009), Needfor Family Law Registrationfor Non-Resident Indians,
at 15.
re Law Commission oflndia,2TOth Report (2017), Compulsory Registation of llarriages.
l3
1.22. The 219th Report (2009) of the Law Commission held the view that
Clause (a) ofSection 13 ofthe Code a Civil Procedure, 1908 "... should be
interpreted to mean than only that court will be a court of competent
jurisdiction which the Act or the law under which the parties are maruied
recognises as a court of competent jurisdiction to entertain the
matrimonial dispute. Any other court should be held to be a court without
jurisdiction unless both parties voluntarily and unconditionally subject
themselves to the jurisdiction of that court. The expression " competent
court" in section 4l of the Indian Evidence Act has also to be construed
likewise. "tB
q,

E. Consultation by the Law Commission
1.24. The Law Commission of India noted that intensive discussion on the
various aspects related with the NRI Bill,2019 were undertaken from the
year 2006 to 2022 by the Committee on the Empowerment of Women,
Inter- Ministerial Panel, the Parliamentary Standing Committees on
External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Extemal Affairs,
Ministry of Women and Child Development and the Ministry of Law and
Justice. Their reports and recommendations, sent to the Law Commission
were studied in the preparation of the present Report.
20 Letter I.D. Note No. Q/DE /9013/93DOl8 dated January 24,2024,tothe Law Commission of India
t4
1.25. With those materials in hand, the Law Commission held a consultation with
Shri Amit Kumar Mishra, Director, Diaspora Intemational Engagement
Division, Ministry of Extemal Affairs, the Govemment of India on 5th
January, 2024.The Ministry of Extemal Affairs submitted its response to
certain queries raised by the Commission vrde letter dated 24th January,
2024.20 As to the specific query of the scope of the definition ofNRI under
Indian Law, the Ministry of External Affairs in its response, answered that
there is no scope for the universal definition of NRI under the Indian Law.
The Ministry of External Affairs suggested amending the definition of NRI
under the Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019, to
include any person who holds an Indian passport and resides outside of
India/ is not ordinarily resident in India, temporarily or permanently, for a
period more than hundred and eighty-two days (per Section 6(1) ofthe
Income Tax Act, 1961). The Ministry turther suggested that the NRI Bill
should apply not only to NRIs but also to PIOs. PIO may be defined in the
Act as, "A person of Indian Origin (PIO) means a foreign citizen (except a
qV-

national of Pakistan, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, China, Iran, Bhutan, Sri
Lanka and Nepal) who at any time held an Indian passport or who or either
of their parents/grandparents/great-grandparents were born and
permanently resided in India as defined in Government of India Act, 1935
and other territories that became part of India thereafter provided neither
was at any time a citizen of any of the aforesaid countries (as referred
above)." With regard to the second query as to whether it is plausible to
make registration of NRI marriage compulsory, the Ministry answered that
registration for NRI marriages should be made mandatory. Since the
subject matter of "Marriage and Divorce" is mentioned as Entry No. 5 of
the Concurrent List, both Parliament and the State Assemblies have the
concurrent jurisdiction to legislate on this subject matter. The Ministry
further suggested that there should be a specially designated portal for
registration of marriage govemed by the Ministry of Home Affairs, with
access to the Ministry of External Affairs. In all Indian passpofts there is a
column for the name of the spouse, a separate column may be specified
therein for the Marriage Registration Number.
1.26. Another query which was posed to the Ministry of External Affairs was
with respect to the jurisdiction that shall prevail over the conflicting
jurisdictions that may arise. The Ministry answered, "Orders issued by the
Courts in India cannot be enforced in foreign countries or compulsorily
mirrored by foreign courts. Likewise, orders issued by foreign courts may
not be mirrored by courts in India. However, in certain cases, upon the
discretion of Courts and in the interests ofjustice, Indian Courts may mirror
orders issued by foreign courts, especially where MLATs or any bilateral
agreements are signed with the said country. We may specifu in the Act
that the Indian Courts shall have jurisdiction in those cases where the
marriage is registered within the teritory of India or with Indian
l5
6,/

authorities." The Commission further sought a specific response from the
Ministry for strengthening the legal framework for securing the presence
of NRI in Indian Courts. As to this, the Ministry of Extemal Affairs
responded that if the accused person/party to the case fails to cooperate
with the Court proceedings, the Indian Court may attach the property of the
accused person/party to the case to ensure an appearance before the Court.
1.27. The Ministry of External Affairs in its response further stated that the
Ministry through the Indian Missions/Posts abroad also create awareness
amongst the Indian Diaspora in the respective foreign countries through its
community events and regular interaction with members of Indian
communities, associations, Non-Govemmental Organisation ("NGOs") in
the area of their jurisdiction. With regard to the specific query as to whether
the issue of NRI marriages should be seen from a purely feminist
perspective, the Ministry responded that although the majority of
complaints are initiated by women, the question should not be considered
only from a feminist perspective.
16
hh,

2. LEGAL ISSUES AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
2.1. The eight issues under reference, though related with each other, are
conveniently identified as (i) compulsory registration of marriage, (ii)
comprehensive legislation; (iii) amendment in the Passports Ac! 1967, (iv)
revocation of Passport, (v) amendment in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, (vi) abandonment of Indian spouse, (vii) service of summons and
warrant, and (viii) registration of non- resident Indian's marriage and
Muslim personal law.
A. Compulsory Registration of Marriage
2.2. The first query under reference is: Can the Government of India provide
for compulsory registration of NN mariages through its existing
legislation? Ifnot, then what kind of legislation can be brought in by the
Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice? The question
as to whether compulsory registration of non-resident Indians can be
provided by the Central Govemment through existing legislation involves
the following issues:
a) Which of the lists in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of
India deals with the power of the Union Govemment to make laws
with regard to "non-resident Indian" and "marriage";
b) If a Central legislation on the subject is enacted, what should be its
substantive and procedural framework to ensure compulsory
registration of marriage;
c) Can registration of marriage be included in the existing laws?
t7
6*'

"... Infact Dr. Ambedkar has saidthat if there is anything left, itwill
be included in this item 9l [of the Draft ConstitutionJ. I therefore
think that it is a very important entry.... This entry will strengthen
the Centre and weld our nation into one single nation behind a
strong Centre.... This entry gives power to the Centre to have
legislation on any subject which has escaped the scrutiny of the
House. "2t
2r Constituent Assembly Debates, Book 4, Vol. IX, (30 July 1949 to l8 September 1949), at 856 (Sixth Reprint,
Lok Sabha Secretariat, 2014, New Delhi).
rr Constitution of India: Article 248 states as follows;
l8
(D LegislativeCompetence
2.3. As to Issue no. (a) of the first question, "non-resident Indian" as an entry
doesn't find mention in any of the lists in the Seventh Schedule. If a
particular entry is not included in any of the three lists, Parliament has the
legislative competence to enact on such subject matter. The Constitution
framers had tried to cover all the societal aspects while making a
comprehensive Constitution which was to govem this diverse nation.
Having considered the dynamic nature of society, where new situations
may arise which had not existed at the time of framing of the Constitution,
a new Entry in the Union List was thought of to empower the Parliament
to legislate in case of contingencies. Prof. Shibban Lal Saxena had
observed in the Constituent Assembly that:
2.4 The issue regarding "non-resident Indian" is one such contingency which
requires the attention of the Govemment of India. Article 248 of the
Constitution of India read with Entry 97 (i.e., Entry 91 of the Draft
Constitution) of the List I, authorizes the Parliament to legislate on any
such subject which does not form part ofany ofthe three Lists.22
N'*'

"...Notwithstanding the fact that the residuary power has been
vested in the Central Legislature under Article 248 and its
consequence translated in Entry 97 in List I, there can be no gain
saying that the ideawas to assign such residuary power over matters
which at the time offraming rhree Lists could not be thought of or
contemplated. "
2.6. At present, there is no central legislation prescribing for compulsory
registration of marriages. In the similar vein, there exists no special law
governing NRI marriages. As previously said, the number of Indians
abroad has increased manifold. Thus, the matrimonial and other ancillary
issues are still left to be resolved by the conventional Indian legislation
which has proved to be insufficient. Against this background, it is also to
be pointed that the Supreme Court in Seema v. Ashwani Kumay'a had
directed the State Govemments that the marriages of all persons who are
citizens of India belonging to various religious denominations, should be
made compulsorily registrable in their respective States where such
marriages are solemnized.
"Residuary powers ofLegislation: (1) Subject lo article 248A, Pqrliament has exclusive power to make any law
with respect to any mqtter nol enumerated in lhe Concurrent List or Stqle List.
(2) Such power shall include the power of making any low inposing o t.L:x not mentioned in eilher of those Lists. "
Entry 97 of List I in the Seventh Schedule includes:
"Any other matter not enumeroled in List ll or List lll including any tox nol mentioned in either ofthose Lists, "
2r AIR 1972 sc ro6t : 1972 scR (2) 33.
,4 AIR 2006 SC I t 58
t9
2.5 Thus, on a combined reading of both the provisions, the Parliament may
legislate on a subject which does not form part of any of the Lists
mentioned in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. The
Supreme Court has observed in (Jnion of India v. H.S. Dhillon23 that:
h,

2.7 . In the context of NRIs, the Law Commission of India, in its 219'h Report
(2009), mooted some suggestions for resolving the existing family law
problems posed daily before NRls and faced by affected people resident in
India when they come in conflict with them. One of such suggestions gave
priority consideration to compulsory registration of marriage of NRIs.25
2.8. The Law Commission of India, in its 2l lthReport (2008), had pointed out
that various communities are govemed by their respective personal laws
while at the same time, individuals can also opt out of the community-
specific family law regime and voluntarily subject themselves to the
national laws on civil marriages. Provision for registration of marriages,
optional or mandatory, are found under most of these [aws. There is a need
to look at the entire gamut of Central and State laws on registration of
marriage to assess the feasibility of a uniform regime for marriage
registration laws in the country.26
2.9. Under the constitutional scheme, the subject of "marriage" finds mentron
in the Entry 5 of the List III of the Seventh Schedule. Thus, States as well
as the Union have concurrent legislative competence to legislate on the
matters relating to marriages. This gives rise to two further questions: first,
in case of conflict between State laws and the Central law, which law will
prevail; and second, can both the State laws and Central law exist
independently. In this connection, the doctrine of repugnancy is stipulated
under Article 254 of the Constitution of India that when Entries are made
in the Concurrent List, both the Union and the State Govemments have
commensurate powers. However, in the case of conflict between the
25 Law Commission,2l96 Report, Sapra note 18, at 23, para 5.3A
26 Law Commission,2l lth Report, Sapra note 16, at 10.
20
Uv,

Central and State laws, the Union law shall prevail. This repugnancy is
resolved by Arlicle 254 of the Constitution of India.27
2.10. The Supreme Court laid down certain guidelines in the case of M
Karunanidhi v. (Jnion of India28, to revoke the repugnancy with respect to
matters in the Concurrent List:
"l. Wherd the provisions of a Central Act and a State Act inthe
Concurrent List are fully inconsistent and are absolutely
irreconcilable, the Central Act will prevail and the State Act will
become void in view of the repugnancy.
2. Where however a law passed by the State comes into collision
with a law passed by Parliament on an Entry in the Concurrent List,
the State Act shall prevail to the extent of the repugnancy and the
provisions of the Central Act would become void provided the State
Act has been passed in accordance with clause (2) of Article 254.
3. Hrhere a law passed by the State Legislature while being
substantially within the scope of the enh'ies in the State List
entrenches upon any of the Entries in the Central List the
21Cowtitution of lndra: Article 254 states
(1) lf any provision ofa low made by thc Legislature ofa Stqte is repugnant to any provision ofa law made
by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to any provision of an existing lor with respecl
to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List, then, subject to the proisions ofclause (2), the
low made by Parliamenl, whether passed before or after the low nade by the Legislature of such State,
or, as the case mqt be, lhe e\isling lqw, sholl prevail and the law made by- the Legislature ofthe State
shall, to the extent ofthe repugnancy, be void.
(2) Wnere q lqw made by the Legislature of a State with respect to one df the mqtters enumerated in the
Concurrent Lisl conlains any proyision repugnant to the provisions ofan earlier low made by Parliamenl
or an existing law with respecl to thal mqtter, then, the lqw so mode by the Legislqture of such State
shall, if it has been reservedfor the consideration of the President and has received his ossent, prevqil
in thdt Stdte:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall preyent Parliauent from enqcting qt qny time qny law wilh
respect to,he same mqtter in.'luding a law adding to, onending, varying or repealing the knt so made
by the Legi;lature ofthe Stqte."
28 AIR 1979 SC 898 : SCR (3) 254.
21 A-r,,

constitutionality of the law may be upheld by invoking the doctrine
of pith and substance if on an analysis of the provisions of the Act it
appears that by and large the lawfalls within thefour corners of the
State List and entrenchment, if any, is purely incidental or
inconsequential.
4. Where, however, a law made by the State Legislature on a subject
covered by the Concurrent List is inconsistent with and repugnant
to a previous law made by Parliament, then such a law can be
protected by obtaining the assent of the President under Article
254(2) ofthe Constitution. The result ofobtaining the assent ofthe
President would be that so far as the State Act in concerned, it will
prevail in the State and overrule the provisions of the Central Act in
their applicability to the State only. Such a state of affairs will exist
only until Parliament may at any time make a law adding to or
amending, varying or repealing the law made by the State
Legislature under the proviso to Article 254."
2.11 Thus, even if existing law on registration of marriages in States and Union
introduces registration of marriage for non-resident Indians, both may
subsist independently if they do not entrench upon each other. In case of
direct conflict, the Union law shall prevail subj ect to exceptions given in
the Supreme Court guidelines. A central legislation on compulsory
registration of marriage of non-resident Indians is, therefore, not only
possible but also desirable. This will bring country-wide uniformity in
substantive law relating to marriage registration and will be helpful in
effectively achieving the desired goal. Rules and procedures relating to
compulsory registration of marriage may be made by the State
Govemments in consonance with the Central law on the subject.
22 w-

2.12 A new law on registration of NRIs will not be in derogation of any
provision of any existing legislations dealing with compulsory registration
of marriages because in view of provisions of Article 254 of the
Constitution, any law enacted by a State which is in force on the date of
commencement of the new law, if it is passed to become an Act and is not
in consonance and in conformity with this Act, shall be void to that extent.
(iD Scope of Applicability of the Proposed Legislation
2.13 India has a very wide, vibrant and participative Diaspora, which continues
to be connected to its roots in India. It was due to the proactive demands
from multiple sections of overseas individuals of Indian origin that the
Parliament amended the Citizenship Act, 1955 to insert Sections 7 A to 7D
under the head of Overseas Citizenship in 2004.2e The scheme laid down
therein provides for registration as Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) of all
Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) who were citizens of India on 26th
January, 1950 or thereafter or were eligible to become citizens of India on
26th January, 1950 except who is or had been a citizen of Pakistan,
Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Govemment may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specifu.30
2e Inserted by Act 6 of2004, sec. 7 (w.e.f.3-12-2004)
30 Citizenship Act, 1955, sec.7A.
3t lbid.
23
2.14 Prior to OCI coming into existence, the only similarly recognized category
of Indian Diaspora was PIO, which was defined by the Central Govemment
under notification no. 2601114198 F.I., dated 19th August, 2002. While the
concept ofOCI has a statutory recognition,rr PIOs had no such recognition.
Both the categories continued to exist simultaneously after OCI came into
h,.

picture. However, in 2015, the Govemment of India decided to merge the
two categories.
2.15 Despite the fact that PIOs and OCIs have legally recognised status, they
continue to be foreign citizens and are in no way to be confused with Indian
citizens abroad. Therefore, while NRIs are lndian citizens living abroad,
OCIs and PIOs are foreign citizens whose Indian origin is legally
recognized, and by virtue of which certain privileges are extended to them.
2. 16 This Indian Diaspora is very significant in numbers,32 and they continue to
have marital and familial relationships with Indians in India. When either
of the parties to a marriage is an Indian citizen and the marriage takes place
in lndia, then it is governed by the Special Marriage Act, 1954; while if the
same takes place in a foreign country, the same is govemed in accordance
with the provisions of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969.
2.17 lt is pertinent to note that a significant number of marital grievances arising
in the foreign countries is involving not just the NRIs, who are Indian
citizens, but also foreign citizens recognised as OCI or PIO. When the case
is involving the NRIs, there are actions that can be ensured against them
on account of their being Indian citizens. Such actions are, however, even
tougher and involve more complexities when an OCI or PIO is the accused.
The suffering spouse is in a more hapless situation then. Therefore, the new
legislation should be applicable to this category ofpersons too apart from
the NRIs. The provisions of the new legislation, thus, need to be
accordingly drafted taking into account the different dimensions involved.
r2 The number ofPIOS is 1,86,83,645. See Supra note l.
24
G/

(iii) Need for a Robust Procedure
2.18 As to the lssze no. (b) of the first query, it must be stated that registration
of marriage of non-resident Indians must be made compulsory, and a
failure to register such a marriage should be an offence punishable with
heavy fines and in default of payment of fine, with imprisonment for a
prescribed period. No judicial relief will be granted in a disputed matter if
the concemed marriage is not duly registered under the new law. The law
will be given an overriding effect on all other laws through a non-obstante
clause duly inserted in it.
2.19 At present, there is a great diversity in respect of laws for registration of
marriage. The administrative machinery for registration of marriage is not
regulated everywhere by one and the same law. This has created substantial
amount of confusion. A parliamentary legislation should deal in particular
with registration of marriage of NRIs and must not affect any change in the
substantive aspect of the various matrimonial laws. Further, a common and
proper machinery for marriage registration should be provided under a new
law, along with amendments in the matrimonial laws for giving effect to
the new law.
2.20 The relevant provisions in the Central legislations and personal laws on
compulsory registration of marriage may be found in the Hindu, Christian,
Sikh and Parsis communities as well as in the Special Marriage Act, 1954
and the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969. Section 8 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1954 lays down provision for registration of Hindu marriages. Further,
marriages are registered under Section 15 of the Special Marriage Act,
1954 by the Marriage Officer specially appointed for the purpose.
Similarly, the Anand Marriage Act, 1909 also contains provisions for
25
U\"/

marriage registration. On the one hand, Part IV of the Indian Christian
Marriage Act, 1872 (Sections 27-37) contains provisions for marriage
registration by Ministers and Clergymen; Part V of the Act (Sections 38-
59), on the other hand, provides rules for solemnization-cum-registration
of marriages directly by Marriage Registrars appointed under the Act.
Under Sections 6 to 9 of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act,, 1936, the
Marriage Registrars are appointed by the State Govemment for various
areas and they are required to transmit their records to the Registrar-
General of Births, Deaths and Marriages. Under Section 3 of the Foreign
Marriage Act, 1969, Marriage Officers are to be appointed by the Central
Govemment for this purpose in its diplomatic missions abroad. Section 4
of the Act provides conditions relating to solemnization of foreign
mariages and Section l7 of the Act provides for registration of foreign
marriages solemnized under other laws. However, it is unfortunate that
registration of marriages of NRIs is not covered in any of the above laws.
2.21 Through compulsory registration of marriages of NRIs with an Indian
spouse solemnized in India or abroad, the details of the travel documents
or passport as well as visa or permanent resident card and permanent
resident address in the foreign country of the NRIs shall be included, which
would help create a database of the NRIs marriages for better enforcement
of rights under various family laws that grant and provide to protect the
various rights of the deserted spouse within a marriage.33 In marriages with
NRIs, such registration will not only help a woman fight her case if
deserted but would also enable the Embassy to have full information about
the marriage while keeping a track of the erring NRI spouses. The
rr Committee on Extemal Affairs (2019 -2020), Supra note 12, at 18, paru'1.42
26
6*'

Govemment should make registration of marriage mandatory, making the
procedure simpler, affordable and accessible.3a
2.22 Since one of the purposes of compulsory registration of marriage of NRIs
is to locate and bring the culprit NRI spouse to face the court in India,
marriages solemnized in India should be registered as per a uniform
proforma for registration containing information of social security number,
passport particulars, ID card/Labour Card etc. to build a proper
identification and tracking system. A proforma for registration of NRI
marriages and a Central NRI Marriage Registry with the facility of
uploading online the exhaustive uniform proforma incorporating all details
and provision for updation needs to be provided for.
2.23 The Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs (2019-2020) in its Third
Report on the i\RI Bill, 2019 had noted that the Ministry of Women and
Child Development had developed a Martiage Registration Proforma and
a separate website portal for registration of marriages of non-resident
Indians to be linked to all the Registrars of Marriages in India. The existing
format of marriage registration should provide complete details of non-
resident Indian grooms and brides, provision of updation of information
particularly about residential address. The proforma must be made as a
schedule to a new law for the said purpose. Similarly, it may be thought of
that a website of the Ministry of Extemal Affairs may also be updated
accordingly to facilitate monitoring of compliance by all non-resident
Indians who marry after the enactment of a new law.35
ra Committee on Empowerment of Women, Sapla note 8, at 20.
15 Department ofLegal Affairs, Ministry ofLaw and Justice, Dy. No. 3582421!S and LA(ARRy2020, dated July
01,2020, para6; Lok Sabha Secretariat, Press Releose (Mtch 13, 2020), Recommendation No. 6, al 4-5, para
6.
27 eh,

2.24 The NRI Bill, 2019 proposes that marriage be registered within 30 days of
marriage in India or abroad. It is to apply to every NRI who marries a
citizen of India or another NRI. If the marriage occurs outside India, it must
be registered with a Marriage Officer, who will be appointed from among
the diplomatic officers in a foreign country. The NRI Bill,2019 does not
allow any extension of time limit to the non- resident Indians in case he is
unable to register the marriage within the 3O-days period. There may be
cases where non-resident Indians are unable to register the marriage due to
legitimate reasons within the 3O-days limit and it even does not envisage
redressal for such persons.36 The idea of a blanket 30-days limit after
marriage for its registration is not sufficient. The time limit, thus, should
be reasonable.
(i") Substance of Marriage Certificate
2.25 ln India, a marriage certificate is evidence that two individuals married to
one another are entitled to various rights relating to marriage. The validity
of a marriage is difficult to be proved in the absence of registration. All
Indian States have made it compulsory to register marriages that take place
in India. But there is no Central law for registration of marriage of NRIs
solemnized outside India.
2.26 Certifrcate of the marriage of NRIs issued by the Registrar must include
the security number ofthe foreign home of the non-resident Indian spouses
along with the passport number and briefrelevant details. The photocopy
of the valid passport of the NRI spouses should be pasted in the marriage
register maintained with the Registrar before marriage certificate is
36 Kamataka Marriage (Registration and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976, sec. 6; Gujarat Registration of
Mariage Act, 2006, sec. 6.
28

actually issued to the parties. The pasting of mandatory certificate of
marriage on the spouse's passport will certainly provide a documentary
evidence and proof of his or her marriage on being abandoned. It should
also be ensured that no marriage of NRIs is registered without the presence
of both the bride and the bridegroom.3T
(v) Possibility under the NRI Bill,2019
2.27 As to the lssze no. (c) of the first query, the Inter-Ministerial Panel had
decided in its meeting in July, 2018 to make it mandatory for the NRIs to
register their marriages with Registrars. For this purpose, it was suggested
to incorporate the necessary provision by amending the Registration of
Birth and Deaths Act, 1969.38 The Standing Committee on External Affairs
(2012-201,3) was pleased to note that in view of direction of the Supreme
Court and on the recommendation of the Committee on Empowerment of
Women and the Law Commission of India "The Registration of Births and
Deaths (Amendment) Bill,2012" was introduced in the Rajya Sabha.3e But
the said Bill could not be passed. Even the Registration of Births and
Deaths (Amendment) Act, 2023, did not incorporate any provision for
registration of marriage.
2.28 There are two other central legislations, namely the Special Marriage Act,
1954 and the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, which comprise provisions
r7 Committee on Extemal Affairs (2019-2020), Supra note 12, at l5-16, para. 1.32 Standing Committee on
External Affairs (20 | l-2012), Supra note 9, at 73-7 4, pa'a 5.13.
l8 Slpra note I l.
re Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs (2012-2013), Sripra note 10, Recommendatior, No.26, at22, para. 64.
It may be noted that the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act was enacted by the Central Legislature
in 1886. The title ofthis Act was somewhat misleading as it did not require voluntary or compulsory registration
ofmarriage under its proyisions. There was, however, no provision for the appointment of Marriage Registrars;
Law Commission, 2l Ith Report, Srpra note 16, at 25.
29 fu',

relating to compulsory registration of marriage. Chapter II of the Special
Marriage Act, 1954 on "Solemnization of Special Marriages" (Sections 4
to 14) and Chapter III on the "Registration of Marriages Celebrated in
Other Forms" (Sections 15 to 18) are related with compulsory registration.
The 212th Report (2008) of the Law Commission had recommended for all
marriages to be registered under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, except for
those between Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists and Jains. However, it may be
difficult to expand the scope of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, to include
the marriage of non-resident Indians because of the provision in the Act
relating to the degrees ofprohibited relationship.
2.29 The other central legislation, i.e., the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, which is
modelled on the Special Marriage Act, 1954, carries most of the provisions
of the Special Mariage Act, 1954 on solemnization of marriages and
registration of already celebrated marriages; however, both legislations are
not applicable in the case of marriage ofnon-resident Indians. Ifthe Special
Marriage Act, 1954, provides, on the one hand, "a special form of marriage
in certain cases, for the registration ofsuch and certain other marriages...",
the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, on the other hand gives "provision relating
to marriage of citizens of India outside India". It is to be noted that marriage
of a non-resident Indian with an Indian spouse solemnized in India is not
covered under these central legislations, despite the provision on
compulsory registration existing thereunder.
2.30 In pursuance of directives of the Supreme Court in Smt. Seema v. Ashwini
Kumar,a0 most states in India have made registration of marriage
mandatory. So far as the existing personal laws are concemed, registration
ao Supra note 24.
30
eu,

B. Co mp re h e ns ive Le gis I atio n
2.32 The question relating to the need for comprehensive legislation on
marriages of non-resident Indians involves the following issues:
(a) whether the NRI Bill, 2019 be enlarged to cover the problem of divorce,
maintenance, and child support;
(b)whether the NRI Bill, 2019, instead of incorporating detailed
provisions on the above-mentioned subjects, should merely refer to
provisions of various personal laws;
31
of marriage is not compulsory in all the religious communities in India. It
seems better, therefore, that the provision regarding compulsory
registration of marriage in the proposed NRI Bill, 2019 be expanded with
the inclusion of detailed procedure relating to compulsory registration of
marriage on the model of the concemed provisions of the Special Marriage
AcL 1954.
2.3 1 The second query under reference is as follows: "The lTth Lok Sabha
Standing Committee [Committee on External Affairs (2019-2020)] in its
third Report on "The Registration of Marriage ofNon-Resident Indian Bill,
2019" dated 12.0i.2020 (Recommendation no.2) has opined that a
comprehensive legislation may be enacted to tackle the problems relating
to NN marriagp, including the issues of divorce, maintenance, and child
support in such marriages. Have such issues been dealt with by the
Ministry of Law and Justice/Ministry of Women and Child Development in
its pre-existing legislation. If not, then what kind of legislation can be
brought in by the Ministry of Law and Justice/Ministry of Women and Child
Development? "
ah,

(c) whether a comprehensive legislation on marriages of non-resident
Indians can have an overriding effect on personal laws?
(D Broadening of Contents
2.33 As to the lssze no. (a) of the second query, it is to be noted that the NRI
Bill, 2019, did not come to the expectations of the Expert Committee, the
Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs (2011-
2012),the l55th Report of Rajya Sabha and directions of the Supreme Court
regarding registration of marriage in states for the reason that the Bill had
envisioned the registration of marriage of non-resident Indians,
amendments in the Passports Act, 1967, and amendments in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 with the limited purpose of creating pressure on
the accused non-resident spouse to appear before a court in India. The NRI
Bill, 2019 was, thus, aimed to overcome legal and procedural
shortcomings, bilateral hurdles apart from the regulatory mechanism in
order to restore the proliferation of the menace.ar
al Dy. No. 358242lJS&LA2020, Supra note 35, para 2; Press Release, at2, para 3
32
2.34 The Standing Committee on External Affairs (2012-2013) was of the view
that marriages of non-resident Indians were governed not only by the
Indian legal system, but also by the private intemational law. It was
proposed that after getting the whereabouts of the accused non-resident
Indian, the legal provisions in Chapter 4 of the Consular Manual (1983) on
marriage, divorce, maintenance, child custody and provisions in the
Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 can address the issues of marriage, divorce,
maintenance, and child custody. If it was not possible to apply the Consular
Manual (1983) and the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 on those issues, the
Committee had strongly recommended for a special matrimonial law for
Av

the NRIs to comprehensively address all issues relating to such fraudulent
marriages including divorce, maintenance, child custody. This was
suggested by the Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs as remedial
arrnour to the distressed and abandoned women in reclaiming their rights
to property, equality in marriage, the protection of family freedom or
degrading treatment and above all their dignity.l2
a2 Standing Commitlee on Extemal Affairs (2012-2013), Supra note 10, Recommendation No. 25, at 21, para.6l I
Dy. No. 358242/JS & LN2020, para2.
-t -,
2.35 The NRI Bill, 2019 primarily focuses on the issue of compulsory
registration of marriage of NRIs, but it does not deal with matters
pertaining to divorce, maintenance, and child support. In the absence of
registration of marriage of NRIs, these issues become complicated.
Generally, it is too difficult to prove that an NRI has married an Indian
spouse in India and this fact turns a marriage into a fraudulent marriage,
aiding the NRI to divorce the Indian spouse, in denying maintenance and
also taking custody of the child. In such cases, the NRIs avoid registration
on one pretext or the other, so that they can take undue advantage ofnon-
registration of marriage. An attempt to enact a comprehensive legislation
on problems relating to non-resident Indians, covering issues of marriage,
divorce, maintenance and child support, may serve the purpose. Those
issues rnay be tackled to a great extent only when there is a robust
procedure of compulsory registration coupled with a strong system to bring
the NRI to appear before the couft of law in India. For the purpose of
comprehensive legislation on registration marriages of NRIs, a broadening
of contents of the NRI Bill,2019 can be thought of by including provisions
on divorce, maintenance, and child support.
V

2.36 As regards the Issue no. (b) of the second query, it may be stated that there
is no need of reference to the personal laws in comprehensive legislation
on registration of marriage of non-resident lndians. Since a Central
legislation on the subject is likely to be a secular law, there is no
requirement ofreference to the personal laws-based provisions on divorce,
maintenance, and child support. The purpose of comprehensive legislation
can be served by the NRI Bill, 2019 with a robust procedure of compulsory
registration of marriage and along with inclusion of secular provisions on
divorce, maintenance, and child support without any reference to the
existing personal laws.
(iD Overriding Effect
2.37 As to the lssze no. (c) of the second query, a comprehensive central
legislation on non-resident Indian's marriage will have an overriding effect
on the existing personal laws. In this connection, the legal maxim
" generalia specialibus non derogant " is to be considered relevant.
Accordingly, if two laws govem the same factual situation, a law goveming
a specific subject matter (ex specialis) overrides a law goveming only
general matters (lex generalis). Hence, the comprehensive legislation in the
form of the NRI Bill, 2019 will not be in derogation of provisions of
marriage, divorces, maintenance, and child supporl as existing in the
personal laws.
C. Amendmenl in the Passports Act, 1967
34
2.38 The third query under reference is as follows: "The Registration of
Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019 seeles to amend the Passports
V

Act, 1967. What are the existing provisions of the Passports Act, 1967 that
are required to be amended? Will there be addition of new clause/sections
for making such corresponding amendments in the Passports Act, 1967? "
2.39 The question relating to amendment in the Passports Act, 1967 involves
the following issues:
a) Can the Passports Acf, 1967 be amended by a provision under the NRI
Bill, 2019 for the purpose of enforcing compulsory registration of
marriage of non-resident Indians; and
b) Which provisions of the Passports Act, 1967 require amendment for
such an enforcement purpose.
2.40 As to the lssze no. (a) of the third query, it is to be stated that an
amendment in any legislation may be brought either by an amending Act,
or even by a provision under another general Act. Hence, the Passports Act,
1967 can be amended by the NRI Bill, 2019. Altematively, the requisite
amendments can be introduced in the Passports Act, 1967 as well to bring
about the desired objective.
2.41 As to the lssze no. (b) of the third query, it is to be noted that the NRI Bill,
2019 has the major objective to locate the ening NRI spouse and to bring
him back to the country to facejustice. Ifit is brought to the knowledge of
the passport authority that the non-resident Indian has not registered his
marriage within the stipulated time, it will help the passport authority in
preventing the erring spouse from leaving the country or suspending the
passport if he has already travelled abroad as the first step toward having
him repatriated. In order to provide ultimate relief and justice to the
deserted spouse, it is also important that the NRI spouse should face legal
35
U/

D. Amendment in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
2.42 The fourth query under reference is as follows: "The Registration of
Marriages of Non-Resident Indians Bill,20l9 seel<s to amend the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. What are the existing provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 that are required to be amendedT Will there be
addition ofnew clause/sections for making such corresponding amendment
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973?"
(i) Old Scheme of Criminal Procedure
2.43 The criminal procedure, as incorporated under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, was examined by the Committee on Empowerment of
Women, Inter-Ministerial Panel, the Parliamentary Standing Committees
on External Affairs, Ministry of Extemal Affairs, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Ministry of Women and Child Development and the Ministry of
Law and Justice, from 2006 to 2022. Their main concern was as to how far
and to what extent the existing Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 could be
amended to ensure that NRI spouse living outside the territory of India may
be compelled to appear before the court of law in India.
ar standing committee on Extemal Affairs (2019-2020), supra note 12, Recommendatio n No. 2, at 22-23.
1.50.
36
paIa
consequences.43 The NRI Bill, 2019 may be broadened to include
provisions relating to revocation or impounding of passport as a result of
the failure of the non-resident Indians to update/upload the marital status.
Thus, there will be no need of suggesting amendments in the Passports Ac!
1967 itself.
W

2.44 The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 has now been replaced by the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. While there is no need to talk
about amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,it is, however,
more pertinent to focus on two issues:
a) what substantive ideas were suggested by different bodies to be
included in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 with regard to the
accused NRls abroad; and,
b) whether provisions in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
are sufficient to address the procedural matters with regard to the NRIs.
2.45 As to the lssze no. (a) of the fourth query, it may be stated that serving
judicial summons or warrant on NRIs abroad is a challenge for Indian
Missions as in most cases, either because the foreign address given is
incorrect, and whereabouts of the addressee is not known or the accused
NRI has deliberately moved residence to another place. Further, even after
court summons or a show cause notice is issued, the non-resident Indian
spouse does not appear in the court in India and refuses to respond. The
existing practice has been that once a woman lodges a complaint, the police
write to the Indian Missions abroad, which sends the summons.
2.46 The Inter-Ministerial Panel decided to allow the Ministry of Extemal
Affairs to put up summons issued to NRIs who have not responded to
earlier summons on its website. In this connection, it was suggested that
criminal procedural law must empower courts for issuing of summons, or
warrant through specially designed website of the Ministry of External
Affairs, which r.vould be considered as conclusive evidence and deemed to
have been served upon the person, thus forcing the non-resident Indian
spouse to attend the court process.
37 M'/

2.47 The Committee had observed that if the accused person fails to appear
before the court after serving of summons, then the Court may issue a
warrant of arrest for offender on the website of the Ministry of External
Affairs and thereafter, the process of impounding of passport can also be
initiated. If the person does not appear even after the issue of warrant of
arrest, then a declaration will be uploaded on the designated website that
the warrant has been issued and served.aa
2.48 Another suggestion was made for attachment of properties belonging to
NRI, if he does not appear before the court and is declared a proclaimed
offender by the court. This would put pressure on the family members and
the individual non-resident Indian to come back to India to face the legal
consequences of his overt and covert acts.as However, the Committee had
also considered that the provision of attachment of property after issue of
proclamation is not only a stringent step but lies in the domain of court,
which is seized of the concemed matter. Hence, it is important to confrne
only to the point of facilitating service of summons and courl orders. The
punitive measures that follow ought to be left to be determined by the
concemed court on a case-to-case basis.a6
(ii) New Regime of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
2.49 As to the lssze no. (b) of the fourth query, it may be observed that the
Section 62 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 did not provide for
service of summons by electronic communication. Chapter VI of the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, prescribes on the other hand,
manner in which the court may compel appearance before the court.
aa Dy. No. 358242/JS &. LA(ARRy2020, szpra note 35, para 8.
a5 Standing Committee on External Affairs (2019-2020), Suprq note 12, at I 8- 19, para I .43
a6 Dy. No.358242/JS & LA(ARRy2O20, Sapla note 35, para 8.
38
e,,2

2.50 A new provision under Section 86 has been included in the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 with regard to attachment of property of
proclaimed offender. There was no corresponding provision in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. According to Section 86 of the new Sanhita, the
court may, on the written request from police officer not below the rank of
the Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police, initiate process of
requesting assistance from a court or an authority in the contracting state
for, identification, attachment and forfeiture of property belonging to a
proclaimed person in accordance with the procedure provided in Chapter
VIII.
2.51 Even though the Bharatiya Nagarika Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 has replaced
the old Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,the criminal procedures relating
to service of summons, warrant or judicial documents in the particular case
ofthe non-resident Indians living abroad out ofthe territory oflndia has
not been addressed. It includes, therefore, a need for additional provision
in the NRI Bill, 2019 with regard to ensuring appearance of the defaulting
a7 Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023: Section 2( l)(i) -"electronic communicqlion" meqns the communication of any written, verbal, pictoriol informqtion or
video content trqnsmilted or tansferred (whether from .rne person to anolher or from one device to
another or from q person to a device or from q device to a person) by means of an electronic device
including a telephone, nobile phone, or other wireless telecommunication deyice, or a computer, or
audio-video ployer or camera or qny other electronic device or electronic lorm as moy be specified by
notification, by the Central Governmenl".
39
Sections 63 and 64 provide procedures for serving of summons. These
provisions are majorly based upon the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure except in the electronic mode of service of summons. According
to Section 63(ii) ofthe Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, the court
is allowed to issue summons " in an encrypted or any other form of
electronic communication and shall bear the image of the seal of the court
or digital signature. "41
h*,

non-resident Indian before the court of law in India in matrimonial matters
relating to his marriage with an Indian spouse solemnized in India.
E. Revocolion of Passport
2.52 The fifth query under reference is as follows: "The Registration of
Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill, 2019 seeks to amend the Passports
Act, 1967, which empowers the passport authority to impound/ revoke the
passport of the NN for enforcement purpose. How can this amendment be
brought about and what will be the mechanism to ensure the registration
of marriage, if andwhen made compulsory? "
2.53 There is already a provision in the Passports Act, 1967 to impound or
revoke a passport under various conditions when the passport authority is
satisfied that a wrongful act has been committed by an individual or when
it is brought to the notice of the authority that summons for the appearance
or a warrant of arrest of the holder of passport has been issued by a court
under any law or any order prohibiting the departure from India has been
issued by the court. Sub-section (3) ofthe Section 10 ofthe Passports Act,
1967 mentions the following conditions, under which the passport may be
impounded or a passport be revoked:
"(a) f the passport authority is satisfied that the holder of the
passport or travel document is in wrongful possession thereof;
(b) tf the passport or travel document was obtained by the
suppression of material information or on the basis of wrong
information provided by the holder of the passport or travel
document or any other person on his behalf:
40 h-

4l
Provided that if the holder of such passport obtains another
passport, the passport authority shall also impound or cause to be
impounded or revoke such other passport.
(c) if the passport authority deems it necessary so to do in the
interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of
India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country, or in the
interests of the general public;
(d) dthe holder of the passport or travel document has, at any time
after the issue of the passport or travel document, been convicted by
a court in India for any offence involving moral turpitude and
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than two
years ;
(e) if proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been
committed by the holder of the passport or travel document are
pending before a criminal court;
6) ,f ony of the conditions of the passport or travel document has
been contravened;
k) tf the holder of the passport or trayel document has failed to
comply with a notice under sub-section (l) requiring him to deliver
up the same;
(h) tf it is brought to the notice of the passport authority that a
warrant or summons for the appearance, or a warrant for arrest, of
the holder of the passport or travel document has been issued by a
court under any law for the time being in force or if an order
prohibiting the departurefrom India ofthe holder ofthe passport or
other travel document has been made by any such court and the
passport authority is satisfied that a warrant or summons has been
so issued or an order has been so made. "
h,,

2.54 Thus, the Passports Act, 1967 does not provide revocation or impounding
ofa passport specifically for matrimonial offence. It is, therefore, proposed
that a comprehensive legislation on non-resident Indians must consist of a
provision allowing the passport authority to impound or revoke the
passport of the erring NRI on failure of registration of marriage within 30
days of marriage. With the provision of such a nature in the comprehensive
legislation, the passport authorities will be authorized suo motu or on the
basis of any complaint, to take action without determining whether
marriage has been solemnized or not as the same can be decided by the
concemed competent authority only. If the marriage is registered, a
passport authority may not take any such action without instructions of the
court.48
2.55 lf it is brought to the notice of the passport authority that a non-resident
Indian has not registered his marriage within 30 days of his marriage with
a citizen of India or a non-resident Indian, his passport will be revoked or
impounded directly. A provision relating to impounding or revocation of
passport of a non-resident Indian on his failure to compulsorily register his
marriage with an Indian spouse seems to be preventive in nature, it is
however quite stringent upon the defaulting non-resident Indian. Even
though such a provision has a deterrent effect, it lacks any preliminary
measures before directly impounding the passport. There may be various
reasons for failure to register marriage within such shorl duration, but no
regard has been paid to such possibility ofhardships. There is a necessity
of certain qualifoing conditions before directly impounding the passport of
non-resident Indian spouse. Thus, prior to impounding ofpassports, certain
a8 Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs (2019-2020), Sapra note 12, at 18, para.l.4l andl.42; Committee on
Empowerment of Women (2006-2007), Suprq note 8, at20.
/1.)
U,/

provision should be made which provides for look-out notice/ show-cause
notice/ exemplary fine, etc.
2.56 The Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs (2019-2020), therefore,
recommended that a provision should be made for show cause notice,
imposition of exemplary fire, issue of a look-out notice, etc. prior to the
impounding of passpofi of a non-resident Indian on failure to register his
marriage within the stipulated period.4e With regard to the look-out notice
against an erring non-resident Indian under the proposed NRI Bill, 2019, it
may be noted that the Ministry of Home Affairs empowered the Convener
of the Integrated Nodal Agency to make a request for opening a look-out
notice to the Deputy Director, Bureau of Immigration, in a prescribed
proforma, against an individual.so It may, however, be noted that recourse
to look-out notice is taken in cognizable offences under the criminal law.
In case where there is no cognizable offence under the criminal law, the
Originating Agency can only request that they be informed about the
arrival or departure ofthe subject.
2.57 Further, the concept of audi alteram partem is not alien to the Passports
Act, 1967 . ln Maneka Gandh i v. IJnion of India,s I the Supreme Court had
established that natural justice is inherent in "procedure established by law"
that in order to exercise power under the concemed provision of the revised
NRI Bill, 2019, a chance of being heard must be given to a person whose
passport is being impounded.
ae Dy. No. 358242/JS & LA(ARRy2020, Suprq note 35,para':'.
50 Ministry of Home Affairs (OIAJI Division), OM No. 25016/10/2017-tmm(pt.), dated January 24,2018:
Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs (2019-2020), Suprq note 12, at2\, para 1.47
5r AIR 1978 SC 597 : 1978 SCR (2) 621.
43 W.

F. Abandonment of Indian Spouse
2.58 The sixth query under reference is as follows " What are legislative means
to protect a woman who marries an NN and is either abandoned or is
unable to access her marital rights? Are there any coruesponding
provisions in existing legislation? If not, then what kind of legislation can
be brought in by the Ministry of Law and Justice / Ministry of Women and
Child Development?"
2.59 lt is a persistent problem that Indian spouses are abandoned by means of
an ex parte decree of divorce obtained by non-resident Indians on
unreasonable and fraudulent grounds. They take advantage of lenient
grounds of divorce under the foreign legal system through wrongful
representation of facts. It is important to note that Indian courts do not
recognise such an ex parte decree granted under the local laws of the
foreign country on the ground that the marriage was solemnized in India.
A need is felt about a law to prevent injustice, where an ex parte decree of
divorce is obtained in courts of foreign jurisdiction without the knowledge
oftheir Indian spouses. The status is that a man stands divorced abroad, but
the spouses are still husband and wife in India because an ex parte decree
of divorce is not recognized in India.52
(D Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
2.60 Section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 lays down exceptional
grounds on which a foreign judgment shall be conclusive as to any matter
5r Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs (2019-2020), Suprq note 12, at 20, para 1.46, Committee on
Empowerment of Woman (2006 - 2007), Supra note 8, at20.
44
fr,/

thereby directly adjudicated. If the following grounds exist, a foreign
judgment cannot be recognized in India:
"(a) where it has not been pronounced by a Court of competent
jurisdiction;
(b) where it has not been given on the merits of the case;
(c) where it appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded
on an incotect view of international law or a refusal to recognise
the law of India in cases in which such law is applicable;
(d) where the proceedings in which the judgment was obtained are
opposed to natural justice;
(e) where it has been obtained byfraud;
f1 where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law inforce
in lndia. "
2.61 This makes it clear that in the case of marriages of the non-resident Indians
solemnized in India, the foreign court cannot be considered as a court of
competent jurisdiction. Similarly, if an attempt of wrongful representation
of facts is made by a non-resident Indian for the purpose of obtaining an ex
parte decree of divorce, the foreign judgment will not be recognized in
India. As per Chapter 4 of the Consular Manual (1983), "Divorce obtained
by persons who are domiciled in India and married according to Indian
laws, from any court other than an Indian court will not be recognized in
India. A person marrying again after obtaining such a divorce during the
lifetime of his wife in India will be liable to prosecution in India. "s1
2.62 An ex-parte decree of divorce, which is valid in the country where it is
obtained, may not be recognized in the home country of the parties. This
5r Standing Committee on External Affats (2019-2020), Suprq note 12
45 6"/

leads to the controversial status of being married in one country and
divorced in another - what is referred to as "limping marriages". The
conflict of laws arises when a foreign court assumes jurisdiction under its
domestic laws, which may not be recognized under the Indian law. Courts
have to balance between private intemational law rules, respect for foreign
decrees and public policy consideration such as the prevention of "limping
marriages" on the one hand and prevention of harassment to parties on the
other.
2.63 The abandonment or desertion of Indian spouses by non-resident Indian
husbands abroad, after solemnization of marriage in India, amounts to
economic hardship to the women in foreign land as well as her social
stigmatization. Thus, abandonment of Indian spouses without her
knowledge and consent on the ground of ex parte decree of divorce
obtained abroad is a form of cruelty.
(ii) Scope of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,2023
2.64 As a legislative means to protect a woman, who marries a non-resident
Indian and is either abandoned or unable to access her marital rights,
Sections 83 and 85 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 may be relevant.
According to Section 83 of the Sanhita:
"Whoever, dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes through
the ceremony of being married, lcnowing that he is not thereby
lawfully married, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
descriptionfor a term may extend to several years, and shall also be
liable tofine."
46
q*'

Here it may be noted that there are many instances of non-resident Indians,
who are already married or living in relationship with other women abroad,
undergo marriage solemnized in India with an Indian spouse with a
dishonest and fraudulent intention by not following the mandatory
registration of the marriage. Such persons may be liable for punishment
under Section 83 ofthe Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
2.65 Section 85 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, which is an improvement
upon the old Section 498,4. ofthe Indian Penal Code, 1860, provides that:
"Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a
woma4 subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall
also be liable to fine. "
2.66 According to Section 1(5) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the
provisions of this Sanhita shall apply to any offence committed by any
citizen of India in any place without and beyond India. Here the word
"offence" includes every act committed outside India which, if committed
in India, would be punishable under this Sanhita. Further, Section l(a) of
the Sanhita states that "Any person liable, by any law for the time being in
force in India, to be tried for an offence committed beyond India shall be
dealt with according to the provisions of this Sanhitafor any act committed
beyond India in the same manner as if such act had been committed within
India." Sections 1(4) and 1(5) ofthe Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,2023 are
47
Thus, these provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 are
appropriate to be invoked against the non-resident Indians, who have
subjected the Indian spouse to cruelty by abandoning them in foreign land.
M/

also to be read with Section 208 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,
2023 (corresponding to old Section 188 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973). It is provided therein that when an offence is committed outside
India by a citizen, whether on the high seas or elsewhere, he-
"...may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been
committed at any place within India at which he may be found or
where the offence is registered in India:
Provided that notwithstanding anything in any of the preceding
sections of this Chapter, no such offence shall be inquired into or
tried in India except with the previous sanction of the Central
Government. "
2.67 After abandonment by the NRI, the victim spouse may reach the Indian
High Commission for free legal aid and advice as pro 6oro services to be
provided by various non-govemme ntal organizations abroad. In India,
authorities like the National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) and Srate
Legal Services Authority (SALSA) may be directed to help such
abandoned women.
G. Service of Summons or llorrant
2.68 The seventh query under reference is as follows: "Is there any alternate
mode ofservice of summons/process ofcriminal courts as prescribed under
Chapter V of 'The Registration of Marriage of Non-Resident Indian Bill,
2019'? Can issues of process be effective through l{hatsApp/ E-mail of
the NRI spouse or through his employer, as is the practice of India? Can
such alternate mode of service of summons/process be affected in countries
where data privacy laws are in place? "
48 v

(D ElectronicCommunication
2.69 The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 had dealt with the mode of service
of summons, but not through WhatsApp or any other electronic mode. The
Indian courts have been time and again reiterating the need for
interpretation of laws according to the changing world of technology. In
Indian Bank Association v. (Jnion of India5a,the Supreme Court alerted the
judicial officers about the need to adopt a pragmatic and realistic approach
while issuing the process and had directed to issue summons by post as
well as by email. In a suo moto case, the Supreme Court had observed by
taking cognizance for extension of limitation and held that the service of
notices and summons may be done by email, fax, commonly used instant
messaging services, such as WhatsApp, Telegram, and Signal etc.55 The
Bombay High Court had also taken a step further to set a precedent that the
service of legal notices, pleadings and summons done via WhatsApp
message wotrld prima focie show that the notice or summons has been
delivered. It has become very common to send and service legal notices
and such similar correspondence electronically. Thus, the procedure as to
upholding of summons and warrant on the designated website of the
Ministry of Extemal Affairs is possible in this age of technology. The
service of summons by putting it on website should thus hold parity with
the service of summons via publishing in newspapers.
2.70 In the case that summons or warrant cannot be served physically if the
defaulting non-resident Indian spouse is beyond the territory oflndia, the
problem can be dealt under:
(i) Section 110 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2013;
54 (20t4) 5 SCC 590.
55 ln re, cognizance for Extension of Limitation, order d,ated July 10, 2020, suo Moto writ petition (c) no. 3 of
2020.
49
W

(ii) The Hague Convention on Service Abroad of Judicial
Extrajudicial Documents in Civil and Commercial Matters,
(hereinafter, referred to as the "Hague Convention"); and,
(iii) Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (hereinafter, referred
"MLAT").
and
1965
to as
2.71 Section 110 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 provides for
reciprocal arrangements to be made by the Central Government with a
foreign country with regard to the service of summons, warrant or judicial
process. Section I l0(1Xii) of the Sanhita reads that a summons or a warrant
for arrest issued by a couft in India shall be served:
(ii) The Hague Convention, 1965
56 The Hague Convention on Private International Law, Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and
Extrajudicial Documents on Civil or Commercial Maners, November 15, 1965.
50
"(ii) in any country or place outside India in respect of which
arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the
Government of such country or place for service or execution of
summons or waruant in relation to criminal matters..., it may send
such summons or warrant in duplicate in suchform, directed to such
Court, Judge or Magistrate, and send to such authority for
transmission, as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf. "
2.72 The Hague Convention, 1965 (entered into force on l't August,2007)s6
provides a method of serving the summons and other judicial documents in
other countries, which would help in reducing delays in such cases. While
&/

the Hague Convention is general in nature and deals with civil procedures,
though not pafticularly relating to issues relating marriage,, it will facilitate
speedy delivery of judicial documents and service of summons on NRI
spouse not present before the Indian courts.57
2.73 lndiabeing a party to this Hague Convention, which was adopted "to create
appropriate means to ensure thatjudicial and extrajudicial documents to be
served abroad shall be brought to the notice ofthe addressee in different
time", had also desired to improve the organization of mutual judicial
assistance for that purpose by simplifying and expediting the procedure.
According to its Article 1, the Hague Convention applies in all cases in
civil and commercial matters. Article 19 of the Convention provides that
"To the extent that the internal law of a Contracting State permits methods
of transmission, other than those provided for in the preceding Articles, of
documents comingfrom abroad, for service within its territory, the present
Convention shall not affect such provisions. "
2.74 Section 110 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 empowers
the courts in India the to compel presence of an accused who is outside
India through reciprocal arrangements with foreign countries. Articles 3 to
6 of the Hague Convention provide for Central Authority within both the
contracting State parties to regulate the serving process.58
57 Committee on Empowerment of Women (2006-2007), Supra note 8, at 20.
58 The Hague Convention, 1965: Article l5-
" Where a writ ofsummons or an equivqlent document had lo be transmitted abroadfor the purpose of semice,
under lhe provisions ofthe present Convention, and the defendont has not appeared, judgment should not be
given until it is estqblished that -
q) lhe documenl was semed by a melhod prescribed by the internal low of the State addressed for the
service ofdocuments in domestic qctions upon persons who are within its territory, or
b) the document was octually delivered to the defendant or to his residence by another method providedfor
by this Convention
and that in either of these cqses the semice or the delivery was effected in sfficient time lo enable the
defendant to defend.
5t
A\./

2.75 The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs (2012-2013)
strongly recommended that efforts must be intensified to establish better
consideration with the Member countries of the Hague Convention to take
up the issue of the non-resident's marital disputes during bilateral meetings
and consular dialogue with foreign countries. It was noted that once India
has become a party to the Hague Convention, it will facilitate to bridge the
two legal systems to which the NRI husband and wife belonged so as to
provide for appropriate civil procedure applicable to both j urisdictions. se
2.76 The main channel of transmission under the Hague Convention is where an
authority or judicial officer competent in one Contracting Party transmits a
request for service to the Central Authority of the Contracting Party in
which service in to be affected. The request must conform to the Model
Form annexed to the Hague Convention. The Central Authority of the
Requested Contracting Party shall, under its own law, serve the document
or arrange for its service by a competent authority. However, the
Requesting Contracting Party may request that a particular procedure be
used, to the extent that it is not incompatible with the law of the Requested
Contracting Party. The authority executing the request must complete the
certificate as annexed to the Hague Convention, stating that service was
affected and the reasons that prevented service.60
Each Contracting Stqte shall be free to declqre that the judge, notwilhslanding the provisions of the first
paragraph ofthis Article, uqt givejudgmenl even if no certiJicate ofservice or delivery has been received, if
all the following conditions arefulfilled-
a) the document v'as transmitted by one ofthe methods providedJbr in this Convention,
b) a period of time ofnot less thqn six monlhs, considered adequqte by the judge in the particular case, has
elapsed since the date of the transmission ofthe document,
c) no cerlificate of any kind has been received, even though erery reasonable efort has been made to
obtqin it lhrough the competent quthorities of the State addressed.
Noha,ithstqnding lhe proyisions of the preceding paragraphs the judge uay order, in case of urgency,
any provisional or prolectiye measures. "
5e Standing Committee on External Affairs (2012-2013), Supra note 10, Recommendation no.27, at22-23, para.
6'7 .
60 The Department ofLegislative Affairs, Ministry ofLaw and Justice had the opinion that the Hague Convention
would get attracted where service of summons are to be affected by a foreign court and or judicial authority
on any individual currently residing in India or in cases where Indian judicial authority orders for service of
52
v

(iii) Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty
2.77 It is generally observed that service of notices, summons or warrant against
non-resident Indians residing abroad may be part of the bilateral
agreements like the MLAT6T with such countries where the problem in
matrimonial matters is acute. India has entered into MLAT with 42
countries. In respect of other countries, the Central Govemment attempts
to send the j udicial papers by giving an assurance of reciprocity. However,
despite the best efforts, the summons and otherjudicial process get delayed
for various reasons.62
2.78 ln the case of MLAT countries, the mode of communication is laid down
in MLAT and can either directly by the Ministry of Home Affairs and the
Central Authority in other country or can be tkough the diplomatic
channel. The designated authority, after considering the request, directs its
agency to serve the document on the concemed person and it is so received
through the same chain. This is broadly the system in most countries.63
However, in some countries, private companies and non-govemmental
organizations have also been entrusted with the service ofjudicial papers.
It may be noted that it is the discretion of the requested country to serve the
summons on a foreign national, such foreign country being party to the Hague convention. Thus, the Hague
Convention provides for a procedure for transmission ofjudicial and extrajudicial documents from one
signatory country to other signatory country in accordance with steps contemplited under the Convention; Dy
, No 358242/ JS & LA (ARR)/2020, Sapro note 35, at 3, para. 3.6r Mutual Legal Assistance is a mechanism whereby countries cooperate with one another in order to provide and
obtain formal assistance to ensure that one does not escape or sabotage the due process of law ior want of
evidence in different countries. India provides mutual legal assistance in criminil matters through bilateral
,- treaties, agreements, multilateral treaties, or international conventions on the basis ofassurance ofieciprocity.62 with a view to streamline the procedure, a Comprehensive Guidelines have been prepared by the'Central
Govemment for service of summons, notice, judicial process on persons residing abroad. Ministry of Home
Affairs, F.No. 25016/l'712007- Legal cell, dated February I l, 2009; Ministry of Home Affairs, F.No.
25016/5212019-LC, dated December 04, 2019.
63 No.25ol6/1712007-Legal Cell, Ibid., para.2. \_
s3 M7'

H. Registration of Non-Resident Indian's Maniage and Muslim Personul
Low
2.79 The eighth query under reference is as follows: "What is the procedurefor
registration for marriage under the Registration of Marriage of Non-
Resident Indian Bill, 2019, where the applicant NRI is governed by the
Muslim personal laws and may have more than one spouse? "
2.80 The Nzu Bill, 2019 is a secular law, which states the process of registration
of marriage of an individual who is a non-resident Indian and does not
delve into the aspect ofreligion ofthe individual. It is quite obvious that
there is no procedure for registration of marriage ofa non-resident Indian
Muslim who has more than one spouse. A question arises as to whether the
NRI Bill, 2019 can mandate a non-resident Indian Muslim to compulsorily
register his marriage where as per his personal law, he cannot be forced to
register their marriage, especially when under Muslim personal law in
India, polygamy is allowed for Muslim men and they can marry up to four
wlves.
2.81 For the purpose of the present enquiry, it is necessary to delve into the
procedure of registration of marriage under the Muslim law. The Kazis Act,
1 880 empowers the State Government to appoint Kazis for assisting
Muslims with solemnization of marriages. Kazis are the religious officials
required at the celebration of marriages and for the performance of certain
6a [t may be noted that the responsibility ofthe Ministry ofHome Affairs, as the Central Authority oflndia, is to
serve the summons only in criminal matters.
54
documents and any time-frame for a positive response cannot be
predicted.6a
v.,

other rites and ceremonies. However, Section 4 of the Kazis Act, 1880
provides that the presence of a Kazi is not necessary at the celebration of
marriage and does not confer any judicial or administrative power on a
Kazis. The Nikah-nama issued by Kazi can serve as proof of marriage for
the purpose of registration of marriage.
2.82 The Kazis Act, 1880 does not apply to private Kazis and contains no
provision relating to preparation and preservation of records of marriages.
ln some states, the Act was amended to make it applicable to private Kazis
and to require all the private and state-appointed Kazis to maintain proper
records of marriages which they may be invited to solemnize. The Muslim
Marriage and Divorce Registration Acts prevalent in Bihar, Jharkhand,
Meghalaya, Odisha and West Bengal provide for voluntary registration of
marriage among the local Muslims.65
2.83 The Mohammedan Marriage Registrars appointed under these Acts have to
act according to procedure laid down there and to register marriage among
the local Muslims. The position of the Mohammedan Marriage Registrar is
akin to the Kazis under the Kazis Act, 1880. All the local laws also clarifu
that presence of a state-appointed Mohammedan Marriage Registrar will
not be obligatory for any marriage, and also that neither non-registration
would affect the validity of any marriage nor will mere registration validate
a marriage which is thereon invalid under the Muslim law. All the
Mohammedan Marriage Registrars have to function under the general
superintendence of District Regisrrars lunctioning under the Registration
Act, 1908 and are required to transmit to them their registration records
65 Law Commission oflndia,2l lth Report (2008). Supro note 16, at 18
55 eh",

every month. The Inspector-General of Registration has to exercise control
on all Mohammedan Marriage Registrars.66
2.84 Muslim marriage can be registered under the Marriage Registration Act of
the state where it is solemnized and parties reside or under the Special
Marriage Act, 1954 anywhere in India where the parties to marriage reside
for not less than 30 days before the marriage. If a person of any religion
marries under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 or the Foreign Marriage Act,
1969 the registration of marriage is mandatory. The Special Marriage Act,
I 954 mentions that "a marriage between any two persons may be
solemnized", whereas according to the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, the
registration of marriage is done only when marriage has been duly
solemnized in a foreign country in accordance with the law of that country
between parties of whom at least one is citizen of India.67
2.85 A Muslim couple can get their marriage registered under the Special
Marriage Act, 1954.68 Section 15(b) of this Act accords legal recognition
of monogamy to be a condition for registration of marriage for a Muslim
couple. The legal recognition of monogamy as a preferred form of
6 tbid.
67 The Foreign Maniage Act, 1969 (33 of 1969), sec. 17.
68 The Special Marriage Act, 1954: Section l5:-
"Any maruiage celebroted, whether before or after the commencement of lhis Act, olher than a marriqge
solemnised under the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (ll of 1872), or under lhis Act, may be registered under
this Chapter by a Marriage Officer in the territories towhich this Act extends if thefollowing conditions are
fulfilled, namely: -
(a) a ceremony of marriage has been performed between the parties ond they hove been living together
as husband ond wife ever since:
(b) neither porty has dt the time ofregistrqtion more than one spouse living:
(c) neilher psrly is an idiotic or a lunatic at the time ofregistrqtion;
(d) the parties hove completed the age of twent!-one yeors at the time ofregistration;
(e) the parties are nol wilhin lhe degree ofprohibited relationship:
Provided thqt in the case of a marriage celebroted before the commencement of lhis Act, this condition
shall be subject to any loe, cuslom or usage hcwing the force of law goyerning eoch of them which
permits ofa morriage between the two; and
(fl the parties hove been residing within the district oflhe Mqrriqge Offrcer for o period of not less lhan
thirt, days immediately preceding the date on which the application is mode to him for registration of
lhe marriage. "
56
Ar/

relationship is grounded in principles of equality and non-discrimination.
Endorsing monogamous unions while prohibiting polygamous relationship
is not inherently discriminatory, but a legislative decision aimed at
promoting gender equality and safeguarding the rights of all individuals
involved. If the contents of section 15 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954
are adopted in the NRI Bill, 2019, implementation of the compulsory
registration of marriage irrespective of the religion of the non-resident
Indians can be possible. This should be noted that any distinction on the
ground of religion would lead to a differential treatment of a particular
community of society, which would unreasonably make the law
cumbersome.
57
M*

3. CONCLUSION
3.r The number of Indians on foreign shores have increased multifold but the
multiple issues coming back to India are still left to be resolved by the
Indian legislations like the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. However, the dynamic, progressive and open-
minded Indian judicial system often rescues family law disputes and
situations by interpreting the existing laws with a practical application to
the new generation problems of the global Indian community residing
abroad.
3.2. There is a need to fix problems faced by the Indian wives deserted by their
NRI husbands. The Indian Penal Code, I 860 lacked appropriate provisions
to deal with such cases. Accordingly, complaints were often filed against
NRI husbands under Section 4984. of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
However, complaints under Section 498A did not work because requests
for sending the NRIs for trial in India were rejected by foreign countries.
3.3. At present, there is no central law to deal with the NRIs. The registration
of marriage is dependent on various State laws and personal laws of various
communities. The NRI Bill, 2019 envisaged compulsory registration of
marriage by NNs, amendments in the Passports Act, 1967 and the Code
of Criminal Procedure, I 973 with a hope to provide safeguards to the legal
right of the Indian citizens in foreign countries who are abandoned by the
NRI spouses by making the registration of the NRI marriages compulsory
and revoking or impounding the passport and legalizing service of e-
summons and attachment of property of the delinquent individuals.
58
M'/

J.+ The NRI Bill, 2019 defines an NRI as an Indian who resides outside the
Republic of India. However, it does not speciff the number of days that an
individual must stay outside India to be designated as NRI. As a result, it
is not clear as to whom the NRI Bill, 2019 would apply. A too general and
ambiguous definition of the NRI would easily help the accused to evade
the law and make it difficult to bring him before the courts. As per the
Income Tax Act, 1961, an NRI is an Indian citizen who resides in a foreign
country for more than 182 days. Accepting this definition might lead to the
exclusion of a large number of marital grievances of NRIs where the NRI
spouse has been residing abroad for a period of less than 182 days.6e With
a view to ensure the inclusion of the maximum number of people residing
overseas under the purview of the law, the Standing Committee on Extemal
Affairs (2012-13), had desired that NRIs be defined as "a citizen of India,
who resides outside lndia for any purpose whatsoever, save tourism."7o
3.5. The purpose of making the registration of marriage mandatory within 30
days of marriage, in India or abroad, is to ensure that the details of travel
documents and the permanent residential address in a foreign country of
the NRIs. It will help in acquiring the requisite information to trace the NRI
to enable legal action to be taken for enforcement of the rights of the
abandoned spouse under the various family laws.
3.6. None ofthe Special Marriage Act, 1954 or the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969
provide for the information of NRI spouses and delivery of summons. The
6e Under the Income Tax Act, I 961 (sec. 6), and the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (sec. 2(v)), NRI is
defined as a person who has been outside lndia for more than 183 days in a year. According to sec. 2(30) ofthe
lncome Tax Act, I 961 , non-resident is a person who is not a 'resident', and for the purposes of sections 92 B, 93
and I68 ofthe Act, it includes a person who is not ordinarily resident within the meaning ofsec.6(6) ofthe Act.
An individual is said to be resident in India in any previous year, ifhe is according to sec. 6(6) ofthe Act, in lndia
in that year for a period amounting to 182 days or more.
70 Standing Committee on External Affairs (2012- l3); Supra note lO, Recommendation No. 5, at 3 -4, para 5;
Dy No. 358242/JS & CA (ARRy2020, .Sapl,a note 35, para 6.
59
t/

Registration Proforma for the NRI marriage should be exhaustive, to
incorporate details of travel documents, permanent residence, address in
foreign country with proof. There should also be a provision for updating
of the address online at any point of time. This can be done after creation
of a separate Central NRI Marriage Registry, enabling upload of the
uniform proforma for registration of NRI marriage with the facility of
updating of address.
3.7. Marriages with NRIs, irrespective of religion, should be compulsorily
registered. The Special Marriage Act, 1954 provides procedure for the
registration of marriage by Marriage Officer. The parties to the intended
marriage have to give notice to the Marriage Officer in whose jurisdiction
at least one of the parties has resided for not less than 30 days prior to the
date ofnotice. The notice will be displayed on the notice board ofthe sub-
registrar office. After the expiry of one month, if no objections are
received, the marriage will be solemnized. The registration is to take place
after solemnization of the marriage. If a marriage has already been
celebrated, it can also be registered after giving a public notice of30 days.
3.8. A marriage certificate is a legal proof of marriage of two individuals with
one another. Various matrimonial rights are claimed on the basis of this
legal proof. If unregistered, it may be difficult to prove the validity of a
marriage. Most of the Indian States have enacted legislations making it
mandatory to register marriages that occur within States. There is a need to
make the procedure of registration certificate more effective in the case of
NRI marriages. The photocopy of the passport of the NRI husband may be
pasted in the marriage register maintained with the authority before the
marriage certificate is actually issued to the parties. A mandatory pasting
60 q",.

of marriage ceftificate on the spouse's passpofi will certainly provide a
documentary evidence and a proof of her mar:riage on being abandoned.Tl
3.9. Areas of family law in r.vhich the problem of jurisdiction are occurring
frequently relate to dissolution of marriage of NRIs. All helpless, deserted
Indian spouses on Indian shores are confronted with the matrimonial
litigation of a foreign court, for there is no means available to them, leaving
them in despair, frustration and disgust. An Indian spouse may file a case
for matrimonial or divorce relief either:
(a) at the place where the spouse habitually resides in the overseas
country; or
(b) in India, before a courl where the NRI couple last resided preceding
filing of the case or betbre a court within whose jurisdiction, the wife
is cunently living.
3.10 In the former instance, the spouse could seek the remedy in the foreign
country where it would be easy to implement the same. Whereas if the
remedy or relief is obtained from a court in India, there are difficulties in
enforcement ofthe decree in the overseas coufis and the spouse would have
to travel abroad for enforcement of the decree. In the latter case, if the
spouse files a suit for divorce or seeks any other relief in India, there is a
possibility that the other spouse may not turn up to contest the case, leading
thereby to an ex-parte decree in favour of the petitioner spouse. The
enforcement ofsuch a decree is not difficult in India as the decree becomes
final, provided there has been a proper and acceptable mode of service of
summons.
7r Standing Committee on Extemal Affairs ,2012-13), Suprd note 10, Recommendation N o.26,paru22: Sta\ding
Committee on External Affairs (201 I -2012), Supra note 9, at 73-74, pa:./. 5.13.
61

3.1 l. Private intemational law confronts two issues of jurisdiction in such
scenarios. First, to determine whether the court before which a matter is
filed possesses jurisdiction to try the case. Second, in deciding whether to
recognize a foreign judgment, a coun will be called to address whether the
foreign court that rendered the judgment was a court of competent
jurisdiction. A foreign court is considered to possess intemational
jurisdiction under the Indian private intemational law if the judgment
debtor:
i. was a national of a foreign country (i.e., the state of origin) at the time
of the commencement of the proceedings;
ii. was resident in the foreign country at the time of the commencement
ofthe proceedings;
iii. had accepted thejurisdiction ofthe foreign court;
iv. had voluntarily appeared before the court.
3.12. The lex domicilii and lex loci celebrationis are the Latin terms in the
conflict of laws. Conflict of law is the branch of public law regulating all
lawsuits involving a foreign law element where the difference in result will
occur depending on which laws are applied. When a case comes before a
court and all the main features of the case are local, the court will apply the
lexfori, i.e., the prevailing municipal law to decide the case.72
72 Both ofthese terms are the choice of law applied to cases on status and capacity ofthe parties to the case in a
common law system. In a civil law system, a test is used of lex patriae. The 'residence' ofa person as opposed to
the 'domicile' at the time ofcommencement ofthe proceedings, is relevant in esteblishing the competency ofthe
foreign Coun for the enforcement of its judgment. 'Residence' refers to physical fact, connoting a person's bodily
presence as an inhabitant, provided that it is not transitory, fleeting or casual. The domicile, refers to a person's
intention to reside permanently in a country, 'not for a mere special or temporary purpose'. In other words, the
domicile is ofthe whole country. Therefore, no one can be without a domicile, and no one can haye two domiciles.
Although the intention ofa person is not relevant in establishing one's residence in a foreign country, it must be
voluntary and lawful. Further, it is habitual as opposed to the ordinary residence in the state of origin that is
relevant.
rJ1_
v

3.13. Further, the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 does not govem the validity of a
marriage between two foreigners. It is expected that Indian courts would
apply the lex loci celebrationis to determine formal validity and the lex
domicilli to determine the material validity of marriage subject to
overriding rule of public policy.
3.14. If an Indian settles abroad, and marries in India, the marriage would be
govemed by the Indian law under which they have married. A court would
apply rules of private international law in a case involving a foreign
judgment, where such parties are foreigner, or one of the parties is a
foreigner, or a foreign law is involved for the determination of the issues
before it.
3. I 5. In Neerj a Saraph v. Jayant Saraph73, the Supreme Court of India held that
the rule of domicile replacing the rule of nationality in most countries for
assumption of jurisdiction and granting relief in matrimonial matters has
resulted in a conflict of laws. It has thus suggested for the provision like no
marriage between the non-resident Indian and an Indian woman which has
taken place in India to be annulled by a foreign court. The decree granted
by the Indian court may be made executable in foreign courts both on the
principle of comity and by entering into reciprocal agreements.
3. I 6. Provision to support women in distress, including concessions, visa
extension, etc. should be made in MLAT or bilateral treaties with various
countries including video conferencing and facilitation of attachment of
movable or immovable property of the delinquent husband. The efforts
must be intensified to establish better coordination with the member
7r (1994) 6 scc 461.
63
dt-

3.17 .
countries ofthe Hague Convention and to take up the issues ofnon-resident
Indians during bilateral meetings and consular dialogues with foreign
countries continually. MLAT is aimed at creating intemational cooperation
between countries and helping minimize crime at the intemational level.
Countries that have signed the MLAT with each other are obliged to
provide the assistance sought, whereas non MLAT countries do not carry
any obligation. The Govemment will have to make a request on the basis
of an assurance of reciprocity to the concemed foreign govemment.
The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 discusses reciprocal arrangements
between India and foreign jurisdictions. It states that courts would follow
arrangements as provided by the Central Government with respect to the
service of summons, warrants or judicial processes. The Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, also states that a letter of request can be made to a
competent authority for investigation in a country or place outside India. It
further lays down the procedure for addressing a Letter of Request or
Letters Rogatory by an Indian criminal court in a manner prescribed by the
Central Govemment. The MLAT would be one of such reciprocal
arrangements, and therefore, its procedures must be followed if India and
a foreign country have signed it. The Ministry of Extemal Affairs should
issue a well-framed practice directions or protocol in conjunction with the
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs and the Ministry of Women and Child
Development, directing the Indian High Commission abroad to provide
meaningful consular assistance to such unfortunate abandoned non-
resident Indian brides.
64
Mw.

4. RECOMMENDATIONS
4.1. In light of the aforesaid discussion, the Law Commission recommends that
the definition of NRI under the proposed central legislation dealing with
all aspects relating to NRI marriages should be made comprehensive and
all encompassing. It has to be considered that the object ofsuch a definition
is to protect the deserted spouse in the eyes of law against the erring spouse.
Therefore, technical specifications arising out of a constricted definition
cannot be allowed to defeat the purpose of what the proposed legislation
intends to achieve. The definition in order to include maximum number of
people may be, as recommended by the Standing Committee on External
Affairs (2012-2013), "a citizen of India, who resides outside Indiafor any
purpose whatsoever, save tourism. "Ta Further, it is imperative that such a
comprehensive legislation be applied to all the OCIs as well as the PIOs.
The same may be provided for by stating in the legislation that it applies to
all the NRIs as well as the OCIs (or PIOs) as defined under Section 7A of
the Citizenship Act, 1955. In this regard, it is worthwhile to highlight that
since such a legislation shall apply not only to the NRIs but to the OCIs (or
PIOs) as well, hence the name of the proposed Act too should be
accordingly formulated.
4.2. It is recommended that the registration of marriages by NRIs/OCIs with
Indian citizens shall be required to be compulsorily registered. As
discussed in the preceding Chapters, registration serves as a valid piece of
evidence, while at the same time it helps maintain a record in the form of
registry of marriages. If the marriages are compulsorily registered, then all
the records pertaining to the spouses would be available with the concemed
?a Standing Committee on External Affairs (2012-2013), Supro note 12, Recommendation No. 5, at 3-4, para 5;
Dy. No. 358242/JS & LA (ARRy2020, Sapra note 35, para 6.
65
dv,

66
Govemment department, preferably, the Ministry of Home Affairs. The
information regarding the same shall be accessible by the Ministry of
External Affairs and available on an online porlal.
4.3. However, there may also be situations where a citizen may become
NRI/OCI after his/her marriage. The only difficulty with making
registrations compulsory only for NRIs/OCIs is that the earlier marriages
of such persons may not be registered because currently there is no
comprehensive or uniform law goveming registration of marriages in
India. Therefore, instead of making registration of marriages compulsory
in specific cases, it should be done generally for all cases. Altematively, it
may be provided in the legislation that if any married Indian citizen
subsequently becomes an NRI/OCI, it shall be mandatory for him/her to
get his marriage registered ifhe/she has not already done so.
4.4. Further, it is recommended that the proposed comprehensive legislation
goveming different aspects of NRI/OCI marriages shall deal with all the
aspects including custody, rehabilitation, child care etc. of the deserted
spouse and shall also incorporate provisions on the jurisdiction of courts,
service of summons etc. It is pertinent to note in this regard that Section
63(ii) of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 allows the courts
to issue summons in the electronic mode. Further, a new provision under
Section 86 has been included in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,
2023 withregard to attachment of property of a proclaimed offender. While
the Bharatiya Nagarika Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 is yet to be implemented
to replace the old Code of Criminal procedure, 1973, the criminal
procedures with respect to service of summons, warrants or judicial
documents in the specific case of the NNs/OCIs living abroad has not been
addressed. It is, therefore, recommended that additional provisions in the
d-,

4.5.
new legislation dealing with NRIs and OCIs (PIOs) be incorporated with
regard to ensuring appearance of the defaulting NRI/OCI before a court in
India in matrimonial matters relating to his marriage with an Indian spouse
solemnized in India. Such a courl appearance can also be facilitated by the
Indian Missions abroad through video conferencing so as to ensure digital
attendance of the accused if the same is not possible physically due to any
reason.
Therefore, it is recommended that the NRI Bill, 2019 be expanded to
include provisions relating to the procedure for registration of marriage of
NRIs/OCIs as under:
"1, Procedurefor registralion of moniage.- (l) When a maruiage
is intended to be solemnized under this Act, the pcrties to the
marriage shall give notice to the Marriage Officer of the district in
which at least one of the parties to the marriage has resided for a
period not less than 30 days preceding the date onwhich such notice
$ gwen.
(2) The Marriage Officer shall keep all such notices with the office
records and shall enter a true copy of every such iotice in the
Marriage Notice Book, which shall be open for inspection by any
person without any fee.
(3) Such notice shall be published by ffixing a copy thereof within
30 days to some conspicuous place in his ffice for initiating
objections to such marriage.
57
(4) If any of the parties to an intended marriage is not permanently
residingwithin the local limits of the district of the Marriage Oficer
6,,-'

to whom the notice is given, such Marriage Officer shall cause a
copy of such notice to be transmitted to the Marriage Officer of the
concerned district where such a party is permanently residing for
affixing such copy to some conspicuous place in his ffice.
(5) If an objection is made to an intended marriage, the Marriage
Officer shall not solemnize the marriage until he is satisfied that the
objection is not valid or the objection is withdrawn by the person
making it.
(6) Before the matiage is solemnized the parties and two witnesses
shall, in the presence of the Marriage Officer, sign a declaration in
suchform as may be prescribed and the declaration shall be counter-
signed by the Marriage Officer.
(7) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties
may choose to adopt.
(8) Il/hen the marriage has been solemnized under this Act, the
Marriage Officer shall issue a marriage certificate to the parties and
keep a copy of the same with him.
(9) The certificate of marriage issued by the Marriage Oficer shall
include the security number of the foreign home of the NN/OCI
spouse, along with the valid number of the passport, the permanent
residential address and brief relevant details.
68
M",

(10) The certificate of marriage shall be deemed to be conclusive
evidence of the fact that a marriage under this Act has been
solemnized.
4.6. It is recommended that the NRI Bill,2019 be revised with additional
provisions relating to divorce as under:
" 1. Divorce.- (l) Subject to the provisions ofthis Act and the rules
made thereunder, a petition for divorce malt gs presented to the
District Court, Family Court or any such Court so designated by the
State Government, by either of the NN/OCI spouses on the ground
that the respondent:
or
d) has since the solemnization of the marriage treated the petitioner
with cruelty; or
69
(l l) Any person aggrieved by any order of a Maruiage Officer
refus ing to register a marriage under this Chapter malt within 30
days from the date of the order, appeal against the order to the
District Court, Family Court or any such Court so designated by the
State Government, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the
marriage has been solemnized and the decision of such a Court on
such appeal shall befinal."
a) has after the solemnization of the maruiage, had voluntary sexual
intercourse with any person other than his or her spouse,. or
b) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than
huo years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition; or
c) is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for.seven years or more;

e) has been incurably of unsound mind and has been suffering
continuously or intermittently from mental illness of such a kind and
to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected
to live with the respondent; or
fl has been suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form;
or
g) has not been heard of as living alive for a period of seven years or
more by those persons who would naturally have heard of the
respondent if he had been alive.
Explanation.- In this sub-section, the expression 'desertion' means
desertion of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage without
reasonable cause and without the consent of such petitioner or
against the wish of such petitioner and includes the wilful neglect of
the petitioner by the other party to the marriage, and its grammatical
variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly.
(2) lltithout prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (l), a wfe of
an NN/OCI may also present a petition for divorce to the District
Court, Family Court or any such Court so designated by the State
Government on the ground:
i. that the NN/OCI husband has, since the solemnization of the
marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.
ii. that a decree or order has been passed against the husband awarding
maintenance to the wife notwithstanding that she was living apart
and that since the passing of such decree or order, cohabitation
between the parties has not resumed for one year or upwards.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunderi either party to a marriage may present a petition for
70
W.

divorce to the District Court, Family Court or any such Court so
designated by the State Government on the ground:
i. that there has been no resumption of cohabitation as between the
parties to the matiage for a period of one year or upwards after the
passing of a decree for judicial separation in a proceeding to which
they were parties; or
ii. that there has been no restitution of conjugal rights as between the
parties to the marriage for a period ofone year or upwards after the
passing of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights in a proceeding
to which they were parties.
2. Divorce by mulual consent.- (l) Subject to the provisions of this
Act and to the rules made thereunder, a petition for divorce may be
presented to the District Court, Family Court or any such Court so
designated by the State Government by both the parties together on
the ground that they have been living separately for a period of one
year or more, that they have not been able to live together, and that
they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.
(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six
months after the date of the presentation of the petition referred to in
sub-section (l) and not later than eighteen months after the said
date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the court shall,
on being satisfied, after hearing the parties and after making such
inquiry as it thinlcs fit, that a maruiage has been solemnized under
this Act, and that the averments in the petition are true, pass a decree
of divorce declaring the marriage to be dissolvedwith effectfrom the
date ofthe decree.
71
@^/

3. Reslriclion on petitions for divorce during Jirct one year afler
marriage.- (l) No petition for divorce shall be presented to the
District Court, Family Court or any such Court so designated by the
State Government unless on the date of the presentation of the
petition, one year has passed since the date of the marriage:
Provided that the court may allow a petition to be presented before
one year has elapsed since the date of the marriage on the ground
that the case is one of exceptional hardship to the petitioner or of
exceptional depravity on the part of the respondent, but if it appears
to the court at the hearing of the petition that the petitioner obtained
leave to present the petition by any misrepresentation or
concealment of the nature of the case, the court may, if it pronounces
a decree, do so subject to the condition that the decree shall not have
effect until after the expiry ofone yearfrom the date ofthe marriage
or may dismiss the petition.
(2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to
present a petition for divorce before the expiration of one year from
the date of the marriage, the District Court, Family Court or any
such Court so designated by the State Government shall have regard
to the interests of any children of the marriage, and to the question
whether there is a reasonable probability of a reconciliation between
the parties before the expiration of the said one year.
4. Decree in proceedings.- (1) In any proceeding under this Act,
whether defended or not, if the court is satisfied that:
a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists; and
72
fth,

b) when divorce is sought on the ground of mutual consent, such
consent has not been obtained by force, fraud or undue influence;
and
c) there is no other legal ground why relief should not be
granted,'
then the court shall decree such relief accordingly.
(2) Before proceeding to grant any reliefunder this Act, it shall be
the duty of the court in first instance, in every case where it is
possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstances of
the case, to make every endeavour to bring about a reconciliation
between the parties.
(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about such
reconciliation, the court may, if the parties so desire or if the court
thinlrs it just and proper so to do, adjourn the proceedings for a
reasonable period not exceedingfifteen days, and refer the matter to
any person named by the parties in this behalf or to any person
norninated by the court if the parties fail to name any person, with
directions to report to the court as to whether reconciliation can be
and has been, effected and the court shall in disposing of the
proceedings have due regard to the report.
(4) In every case where a marriage is cjissolved by the decree of
divorce, the court passing the decree shall give a copy thereof .free
of cost to each of the parties.
5. Relieffor respondent in divorce ond olher proceedings.- In any
proceedingfor divorce, the respondent may not only oppose the relief
sought, on the gr ound of petitioner's adultery,, cruelty or desertion,
73 W./

but also make a counterclaim for any relief under this Act on the
ground, and if the petitioner's adultery, cruelty or desertion is
proved, the court may give to the respondent any reliefunder this Act
to which she would have been entitled if she had presented a petition
seeking such relief on that ground. "
4.7. It is recommended that the following proposed provisions relating to
a\imony pendente-lite, permanent alimony and maintenance will help the
NRI Bill, 2019 in broadening its scope as a comprehensive legislation on
NRI marriage:
" 1, Maintenance pendente lite and expenses of proceedings.-
Where it appears to the District Court, Family Court or any such
Court so designated by the State Goyernment that the spouse of
the NN/OCI spouse has no independent income sfficient for her
or his support and the necessary expenses of the proceedings, it
may, on the application of such spouse, order the respondent to
pay to the petitioner the expenses of the proceedings, and weekly
or monthly during the proceedings such sum as, having regard to
the petitioner's own income and the income of the respondent, it
may seem to the court to be reasonable;
Provided that the applicationfor the payment ofthe expenses of
the proceedings and such weekly or monthly sum during the
proceedings, as far as possible, be disposed ofwithin sixty days
from the date of service of notice on the NN/OCI spouse.
2. Permanent alimony snd maintensnce.- (l) Any court
exercising jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing
any decree or at any time subsequent thereto, on application made
74 q,-,/

Q) A the District Court, Family Court or any such Court so
designated by the State Government is satisfied that there is a
change in the circumstances of either party at any time after it has
made an order under sub-section (l), it may, at the instance of
either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order in such
manner as it may seem to the court to be just.
(3) If the District Court, Family Court or any such Court so
designated by the State Government is satisfied that the spouse in
whose favour an order has been made under this Act has
remarried or is living in adultery, it may, at the instance of the
husband vary, modify or rescind any such order and in such
manner as the Court may deem just. "
4.8 It is recommended that the NRI Bill, 2019 also requires enumeration of
provisions relating to child support, including thereby the custody,
maintenance and education of the minor children as under:
" 1. Custotly and maintenance of children.- In any suit under
this Act, the Court may from time to time pass such interim orders
75
to itfor the purpose, order that the NN/OCI spouse shall secure
to lhe spousefor her or his maintenance and support, if necessary,
by a charge on the NN/OCI spouse's property such gross sum or
such monthly or periodical payment of money for a term not
exceeding her or his life, as, having regard to her or his own
property, if any, her or his NN/OCI spouse's property and ability,
the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case, it
may be deemed by the court to be just.
6-'

4.9
and make such provisions in the final decree as it may deem just
and proper with respect to the custody, maintenance and
education of the children under the age of eighteen years, the
marriage of whose parents is the subject of such suit, and may,
after the final decree upon application, by petition for this
purpose, make, revoke, suspend or vary from time to time all such
orders and proyisions with respect to the custody, maintenance
and education ofsuch children as might have been made by such
final decree or by interim orders in case the suit for obtaining such
decree were still pending:
Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and
education of the minor children during the proceedings shall be
disposed ofwithin sixty days from the date of service of notice on
the respondent. "
In order to provide punishment for non-registration of marriage,
misrepresentation offacts before the foreign court in order to seek ex-parte
decree of divorce, desertion of Indian spouse and cruelty and harassment
of the Indian spouse, it is recommended that the NRI Bill, 2019 needs
incorporation of the following provisions:
1. Suspension of possports or travel documenls in certain
cases.- (l) IYithout prejudice to the generality of the provisions
contained in this Act, if any fficer designated by the Central
Government is satisfied that the passport or trayel documents of
the NN/OCI spouse are required to be impounded or revoked,
and if it is necessary to do so, he may-
a) by order, suspend with immediate effect any passport or travel
document;
76
M'/

b) pass such other appropriate order, which may have the effect
of rendering any passport or travel document invalid for a
period not exceeding four weeks:
Provided that the designated fficer may, if he considers
appropriate, extend by order and for reasons to be recorded in
writing, the said period of four weeks till proceedings relating to
variation, impounding or revocation of passport or travel
document concluded:
Provided further that every holder of the passport or travel
document, in respect of whom an order under sub-clause (a) and
(b) of this sub-section has been passed, shall be given an
opportunity of being heard within a period of not later than eight
weeks reckoned from the date of passing of such order and
thereupon the Central Government may, if it deems necessary, by
order inwriting, modify or revoke the order passed under this sub-
section
(2) The designated fficer shall immediately communicate the
order passed under this sub-section (l) to the concerned authority
such as an airport or other point of embarkation or immigration,
and to the passport authority.
(3) Every such authority referred to in the Passports Act, 1967
shall, immediately on receipt of the order passed under this sub-
section (l), give effect to such order."
4. 10 With regard to an efTective service of summons or warrant and the
attachment of the property of the absconding NRVOCI, it is recommended
77 A*/

that a provision specific to the NRIs may be included in the NRI Bill, 2019
as under:
" 1. Service of summons and worrunl.- (l) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (or
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023) or any other law
for the time being in force, where an NRI/OCI is summoned by a
court under this Act and the court is satisfied that the summons
issued could not be served, the court may issue summons along
with the substance of the information by uploading it on the
specifically designatedwebsite of the Ministry of External Affairs
of the Government of India and such uploading of the summons
shall be conclusive evidence that the summons has been sertted
against such NN/OCI.
(2) Where the NN/OCI summoned under sub-section (l) fails to
appear before the court at the specified place and time required
by the summons, either personally or through his or her duly
authorized agent, the court may, after making such enquiry as it
thinks fit, issue a warrant for arrest of such person and upload the
warrant along with the substance of the information against the
person to be arrested along with the details of summons issued
under sub-section (l) on the specially designated website of the
Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India:
Provided that the court may, on the application of the NN/OCI
summoned by it and on being convinced of the justification
provided in the application for the applicant's inability to appear
before it physically, allow him or her to appear before it through
any digital mode, as it may deem fit.
78
fr-

(3) Where an NN/OCI fails to appear before the court on the time
and place mentioned in the warrant uploaded on the website
under sub-section (2), the court may, after making such enquiry
as it thinks fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender and upload
a declaration to that effect on the specially designated website of
the Ministry of External A.ffairs of the Government of India.
(4) After uploading a proclamation under sub-section (3), tf the
accused fails to appear before the court issuing such
proclamation, a stotement in writing by the court issuing the
proclamation to the effect that the proclamation was duly
uploaded on the specially designated website of the Ministry of
External Affairs of the Government of India, shall be conclusive
evidence that the warrant has been issued against accused person
and shall be deemed to have been dulv served.
(5) The court issuing a proclamation under sub-section (3) may,
for the reasons to be recorded in writing, at any time after the
issue of the proclamation, order the attachment of any property,
movable or immovable, or both belonging to the proclaimed
offender and the provisions under sections 83 to 86 ofthe Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (or sections 85 to 89 of the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023) shall apply in such cases.
(6) Where the property attached under sub-section (5) consists of
share or interest of the proclaimed offender in the property jointly
belonging to him and other co-otuners or co-sharers, such
attachment shall have effect only with regard to such share or
interest ofthe proclaimed offender. "
79 6-'

4.1 1. It is further recommended that necessary amendments in the Passports Act,
1967 be introduced to mandate the declaration of marital status and the
linking of a spouse's passport with the other. There shall be a separate
column provided therein for mentioning their Marriage Registration
Number. A separate division within the Ministry of Home Affairs or the
Ministry of Extemal Affairs may also be created which will serve as a
registry for NRI marriages. All the information available with the registry
should also be made available on an online portal.
4.12. The information available on the said online portal shall be open for
inspection and the authorities shall allow inspection of relevant
information on the said portal upon verifuing a duly presented application
by an individual which can be filled and submitted online or offline. The
reason for not making the portal publicly accessible are manifold,
including concems relating to privacy and the possibility of misuse.
4. 13. In cases involving NRI/OCI marriages, it is essential to reiterate that
domestic courts shall have the jurisdiction to address and resolve issues
emanating from such unions. Disputes arising within such marriages often
necessitate the intervention of the local legal system to ensure fair and just
resolution ofdisputes. Granting jurisdiction to domestic courts ensures that
matters pertaining to NRI/OCI marriages can be effectively adjudicated
within the framework of the country's legal procedures, considering the
applicable laws and safeguarding the rights and interests of the involved
parties. By doing so, the courts can take into consideration principles of
comity and reciprocal agreements, as exemplified by Section 44A of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. This provision underscores the court,s
capacity to treat foreign decrees with the same enforceability as if they
were domestically issued. A .,
80 VY''"

4.14. No law can ever succeed in fulfilling its aim and objectives unless the
people are widely aware of it and abide by it. In order to prevent cases of
fraudulent marriages wherein a party to the marriage is an NRI/OCI, the
Government should create awareness by engaging with the Indian
Diaspora abroad through its community events and regular interaction with
the Indian communities and organisations. Such awareness programs can
also be organised in conjunction with Indian associations and NGOs
working in foreign countries. It is apposite to mention here that the
National Commission for Women and the State Commissions for Women
have been designated by the Govemment for conducting awareness
programs for women and their families who are about to get into marital
relationship with NRIs or OCIs.
The Commission recommends, accordingly.
----xxx----
8l

[Justice K.T. Sankaran]
Member
9^vL
[Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi]
Chairperson
IProf. (Dr.) Anand Paliwal]
Member
[Prof. D.P. Verma]
Member
UY
[Dr. Reeta Vasishtal
Member Secretary
[Mr. M. Karunanithi]
Part-time Member
(*''-'
[Dr. Rajiv Mani]
Member (Ex-O;t'ficio)
IProf. (Dr.) Raka Arya]
Part-time Member
\&
82