JI']{'EIa
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
TRADE SECRETS AND ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE
Report No.289
March,2024

The 22"d Law Commission was constituted by Gazettc Notification for a period ofthree
years vide Order No. F No. 45021/ l/2018-Admn-l II(LA ) dated 2 l.' February, 2020 issued
by the Government ol lndia, Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs,
New Delhi. The term ofthe 22"d Law Commission was extended vide Order No. FA No.
60011/225/2022-Admn.ll I( l.A) dated 22,d February. 2023.
The Law Commission consists of a Chairperson. three full-time Members, Member
Secrelary, two Ex-ofrtcio Members and two Pan-time Members.
Chairoerson
Hon'ble Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
Full-time Membcrs
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Sankaran
Prof. (Dr.) Anand Paliwal
Proi D.P. Verma
Membcr Sccretarv
Dr. Reeta Vasishta
E-r-officiu Membe r
Dr. Rajiv Mani, Secretary. Legislative Depanment and Secretary. Department of Legaj
Affairs (Additional Charge)
Part-time Members
Shri M. Karunan ithi
Prol (Dr,) Raka Arya
Law Orlicers
Smt. Varsha Chandm, Joint Secretary & Law Officer
Shri Atul Kumar Gupta. Deputy Law Officer
Shri Rishi Mishra
Shri Gaurav Yadav
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi
Ms. Priya Rathi
Ms. Ruchika Yadav
Ms. Deepika Chaudhary
Ms- Diksha Kalson
Shri Govind Cupta
Shri Kumar Abhishek
Ms. Shanivi Singh
Ms. Ritu Thomas
Dr. Taruna Solanki
Ms. Swikriti Mahajan
Shri Anubhav Dubey
Shri Animesh Pareek
The Law Commission is located at
2nd and 4'h Floor. 'B' Wing
Lok Nayak Bhawan. Khan Market
New Delhi-l l0 003.
The text ofthis Repon is available on the Website at
wlyy.lawcommissionofi ndia.nic.in
O Government of India
Law Commission of India
Lcgal Consultants
q.t^,,,

u.qqq ard
qrq$ arE lTq cffiefi
ffitga gq qrqfi*, o-ltco sa erq-oq)
qqfr
qrgfr S 22d frfu srrdrr
Date: 0-5th March. 202.1
Trog
oil-$-dl+r ",
3{{arrdrffiq
Htul)- 9; *ry*,- R* n4*at.
Neuc'/kg.l-)
I am pleased to forward you Report No. 289 of the Law Commission ol India on "Trade
Secrets and Economic Espionage". The reference to the Law Commission arose post
deliberations within the govemment. wherein it was felt that there was a need for a legislation
on the protection of Trade Secrets and also on Economic Espionage. Subsequently, the
Department of Legal Alfairs and the Legislative Department examined the issue of enacting
Economic Espionage Act and Trade Secrets Protection Act and prepared a concept paper along
with a draft cabinet note and a draft Bill. However. owing to the complexities inherent in the
subject-matter and in order to ensure thorough evaluation, the Department ofLegal Affairs and
the Legislative Department forwarded the relerence to the Law Commission of India vide letter
dated lOth October, 2017, requesting it to examine the possibility of enacting Trade Secrets
Protection Act and Economic Espionage Act. The I)epartment of Legal Affairs and the
Legislative Department also shared their concept paper along with draft cabinet note and draft
Bill for the Commission's consideration.
The Commission held extensive deliberations on the subject-matter with domain experts across
the spectrum, ranging from judiciary and academia to the Govemment and industry. Thereafter.
the Commission undertook a comprehensive study of the law relating to trade secrets and
economic espionage. examining at tength. both the concepts. While doing so. the Commission
has paid significant attention to the text ofthe TRIPS Agreement and India's obligations arising
from the same. Further. the Commission has explored the genesis and development of the law
relating to trade secrets and economic espionage in other jurisdictions. and also the present
treatment olthe same. The Commission has also addressed the exceptions that exist with regard
to trade secrets and economic espionage
orqttrq qdr : 6ryt d. nos. a-gef ilf,, -S'fifr. aY+ crqr IFFL Ert=t crtre, T{ Ri-d-t tooos
Ofrce Add6ss : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wng, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Markel, Now Delhl-110003
3Tmrdfq qdr , d'rar -i. a, fis qffifr qrrf. T{ m-110011
Re6idence : Bungelow No. 8, TeBs January Marg, Naw Delhi-l10011
smell : rituraj.swasthl@goYin Tsl. : 011'24654951 (Ol, 24y;0202, 2434,0203
Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
{Former Chief Justice of High Courl of Karnataka)
Chairperson
22'o Law Commission of lndia
D.O. No. 6(3) 3l 7/201 7-LC(LS)
W.

Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi
(Former ChiefJustice of High Coud of lGrnataka)
Chairperson
22"0 Law Commission of lndia
qrq1fd xg qrs errS
fffitEn 1u ouftn,6qtcr B-E qmdrq)
SIEIH
qr<f, + 22d frE sTrqt'r
/
{aqqq d{d
Trsa
3Il-Sl-41+r.
3T{dT6rsq
Consequently, the Commission is of the considered view that a sui generis legislation should
be introduced to protect trade secrets with exceptions pertaining to whistleblower protection,
compulsory licensing and government use. and public interest. Further. the Commission is of
the opinion that in defining trade secrets. the law should avoid bestowing any proprietary
conceptions to the same. A proposed draft of such a legislation. titted "The Protection of
Trade Secrets Bilt,2024" is being appended to this Report as Annexure-I.
With regard to the issue ofeconomic espionage, it is pertinent to note that it typicalty involves
a foreign State as a party, whereas commercial espionage is between two commercial entities.
Therefore, the Commission is ofthe considered opinion that the issue of economic espionage
should be dealt with separately through a different legislation.
Accordingly, this report is being submitted for your kind perusal'
With warmest regards.
Yours sincerely,
E' t .T
(Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi)
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
Hon'ble Minister of State (lndependent Charge)
Ministry ol Law & Justice
Govemment of India
Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi -l 10001 .
orqtmq q-dr : oq{ i. los, qgrl a-4, 6' frt r. a}6 TEr6 qs.I, tlFT crtr-c, T{ frd-ttoooa
Office Addrass : Room No. 405, 4th Floor, 'B' Wing, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New Oelhi-110003
3rnrftq qdl : .irrdr ;i. a, fis ia-+efi qrri, Tg ftd-110011
Rssldonca : Bllngalow No. 8, Teas January Marg, Now Delhi-110011
emsil : riluraj.awasthl@Oovin Tsl. : 011'24654951 (D)' 24340202, 24UO2O3

Pursuant to the reference received by the Law Commission from the Depaftment
of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice vide
letter dated I Oth October, 2017 , the Commission initiated widespread stakeholder
deliberations by inviting judges, academicians, the Govemment and industry
representatives to put forth their views and opinions on enacting a legislation on
protecting trade secrets and preventing economic espionage. The Commission
wishes to extend its gratitude to all those who have generously contributed to this
Report on "Trade Secrets and Economic Espionage".
The Commission is particularly grateful to the following
individuals/organisations who took out their valuable time to furnish their
comments and submissions on the instant subject:
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
1. Hon'ble Ms. Justice Prathiba M. Singh, Judge, High Court of Delhi
2. Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT):
i. Ms. Himani Pande, Joint Secretary DPIIT
ii. Shri Karan Thapar, Director, DPIIT
iii. Dr. G. R. Raghavendra, Senior Consultant, DPIII Former Registrar of
Copyright and Former Joint Secretary, Ministry of Law & Justice
3. Prof. (Dr.) N. S. Gopalakrishnan, Former Director and Honorary Professor,
Inter University Centre for IPR Studies, Cochin University of Science and
Technology
4. Dr. Arul George Scaria, Associate Professor of Law, National Law School of
India University, Bengaluru
5. Dr. Tania Sebastian, AsSistant Professor, VIT School of Law, Chennai
6. Dr. Naveen Gopal, Guest Faculty in IPR, School of Engineering, Cochin
University ofScience and Technology (September 2023 * January 2024)
7. The Associated Chambers of Commerce & lndustry of India
(ASSOCHAM):
i. Shri Santosh Parashar, Director & Nodal Officer, Corporate Affairs,
Legal & Regulatory Affairs, ASSOCHAM
ii. Shri Venkat Rao, Intygrat Law OfTices and Member, National Council
for Legal & Regulatory Affairs, ASSOCHAM
iii. Shri Dev Robinson, National Practice Head - IPR, Shardul Amarchand
Mangaldas & Co.
iv. Ms. Gautami Seth, Member, National Council for Legal & Regulatory
Affairs, ASSOCHAM
v. Shri Rajinder Kumar, Managing Partner, Kumar Law Associates & Co-
Chair of National Council for Legal & Regulatory Affairs,
ASSOCHAM
4,"r,

8. Confederation of Indian Industries (CII):
i. Ms. Sanjit Kaur Batra, Chaiq Sub-Committee on IPR under CII
National Committee on Legal Services and Group Vice President-
Legal and Legal Head-lndia, Cummins India Limited
ii. Ms. Debolina Partap, Member, CII National Committee on Regulatory
Affairs & Senior Vice President, Legal and Group General Counsel,
Wockhardt
iii. Shri Akhilesh Kumar Rai, Senior Partner (lntellectual Property), AZB
& Partners
iv. Shri Vikkas Mohan, Principal Advisor, CII
v. Ms. Chitra Mittal, Senior Director, CII
vi. Shri Varun Sharma, Associate Partner, LexOrbis
9. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI):
i. Ms. Pragati Srivastava, Director, FICCI
ii. Ms. Prema Dani, Deputy Director, FICCI
iii. Shri Sanjay Notani, Senior Partner, Economic Laws Practice
iv. Shri Parthsarathi Jha, PartneE Economic Laws Practice
10. United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO):
i. Shri John Cabeca, U.S. Intellectual Property Counsellor for South Asia,
U.S. Embassy, New Delhi
ii. Shri Mark Abumeri, Attomey Advisor, USPTO, Washington D.C.
iii. Shri Dinesh Sharma, Senior Intellectual Property Policy Advisor for
India, U.S. Embassy, New Delhi.
iv. Ms. Shilpi Jha, Senior Intellectual Property Specialist, U.S. Embassy,
New Delhi
The Commission also acknowledges the assiduous effons of Shri Rishi Mishra,
Shri Shubhang Chaturvedi, Ms. Priya Rathi, Ms. Ruchika Yadav, Shri Govind
Gupta, Dr. Taruna Solanki and Shri Anubhav Dubey, who worked as Legal
Consultants on this subject. We applaud their invaluable contribution towards the
comprehensive research and drafting of this Report. We place on record our
heanfelt admiration for the diligent and painstaking efforts they have expended
towards the completion of this Report.
ll
e./,,

TABLE OF CONTF],NTS
I. INTRODI]CTION
2. TRADE sECRETS ttts)-ttts DIFFERENT THEoRIES oF
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ruGHTS..... ................................9
A. Natural Rights Theory ................'...........12
B. The Concept of Privacy...... '............'.....'. 15
C. Other Concepts and Theories .........'.'......18
3. INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATION: ARTICLE 39 OF THE TzuPS
AGREEMENT )1'
A. Article 39.1
B. Article 39.2.... """""""""'28
C. Article 39.3 """""""""""34
4. APPROACHES TOWARDS PROTECTION OF TRADE SECRETS IN
orHER COUNTRIES. ................40
A. Australia """""""""""""40
B. Canada 43
D. Germany 49
E. Indonesia........ 54
F. Israel 56
J. New Zealand
lll G./
68
1
C. China. .46

K
L.
o
P.
N. Sweden 78
Taiwan 80
a United Kingdom 85
R. United States of America 88
i. State Laws 89
ii. Defend Trade Secrets Acts 90
iii. Section 337 of the'l'ariff Act of 1930 9l
tv. Economic Espionage Act 92
Considerations for Congress 93
B. Judicial Interpretation and Precedents 100
S
T
5. TRADE SECRE'|S: PREVAILING I-EGAL POSITION IN INDIA........98
ll
Defining Trade Secrets and Confidential lnformation
Trade Secrets. Confidential Information & Contracts
100
l0l
iii. Trade Secrets and Equitable Relief ............. ..............106
tv. Trade Secrets and Criminal Liability |4
Trade Secrets and Freedom ofSpeech & Expression l15
vi. l'rade Secrets and RTI Act. 2005
IV
fi7
h.',

C. Previous Attempts at Policy and Legislation
The National Innovation Bill, 2008
ii. US Interventions
iii. National Intellectual Property Rights Policy, 2016
Parliamentary Standing Committee Reportlv.
120
l2l
l2i
125
D. Indian Position on Data Exclusivity 126
6. ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE. ..........-..-.-.....r29
7 . CONSULTATIONS HELD BY THE COMMISSION............................ 140
A. Judicial Perspective.... """""""""""""'140
B. Academic Perspective """""""""""""'143
C. Industry Perspective """'156
D. Govemment Perspective """"""""""" 168
E. Other Stakeholders............... """"""""'171
8. CONCLUDING ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS."............. 1 76
A. Whether there is need for a specific legislation on the protection of trade
176,secrets
B. Whether there should be a single law on trade secrets and economic
espionage or should they be dealt separately?..'......""""" """""""""""""'177
C. What should be the scope and shape of the proposed la 178
i. Treating trade secrets as "property" or under principles of unfair
178competition....
ii. Defining trade secrets..' """"""""""'180
iii. Defining misappropriation of trade secrets l8l
iv. Trade secrets, restrictive covenants and doctrine of inevitable
disclosure l8l
I
124
h'/

D. What exceptions should be carved out in the Act?
Whistle blower protectionI
r82
182
184
187
r89
190
190
l9l
l9l
191
192
194
198
lt. Compulsory Licensing & Govemment Use
iii. Freedom ofSpeech & Expression
iv. Public interest
E. Remedies
F. Procedural Issues
i. Limitation Period
ii. Application of Commercial Courts Act, 201 5
iii. Trade Secret Board/Registry
iv. ConfidentialityMeasures
G. Data Exclusivity
ANNEXURE-I
vl
h-

I. INTRODUCTION
Trade Secrets have been in existence since perhaps trade and commerce
itself. By no means can safeguarding trade secrets be termed as a modem
phenomenon. From ancient Rome, where there were legal consequences
for inducing another's slave to divulge secrets relating to his master's
commercial affairs, to Medieval European guilds, trade secrecy has been a
common feature throughout.r Even in India, restricted sharing of
knowledge, such as relating to highly advanced weapons of mass
destruction, has been an age-old practice. There have been Gurus and
Rishis who have exercised utmost caution in passing on exalted forms of
knowledge to only the most deserving of their disciples. Many
communities in India have traditional knowledge/practices whose public
dissemination has been restricted and it has remained only within the
community/family, passed on from one generation to another. The
objective of such a practice was to prevent misuse and preserve the
knowledge within the community. Even today, the composition of various
Ayurveda and Unani medicines is often protected as a secret by many
industries.
1.2. While the existence of trade secrets is certain, the development of legal
protection, especially as an action of breach of confidence, is obscure.2
Modem trade secret law evolved in the early nineteenth century England.3
The law has Anglo-American background and has evolved out ofa series
I Karl F. Jorda, "Trade Secrets and Trade-secret Licensing" in Anatole Krattiger, Richard T. Mahoney et.al. (eds.),
Intellectuel Property ilqn.tgement in Hcalth and ,lgriculturql lnnovalion: I Handbook of Bast Practices 1045
(MIHR and PIPRA, 2007).
: Tanya Aplin, Lionel Bently, et a/. . Gu ry on llteoch of Confidencc pa'a 2.01 (Oxford University Press, 2nd edn ,
2012).
I Karl F. Jorda, "Trade Secrets and Trade-secret Licensing" in Anatole Krattiger, Richard T. Mahoney et.al. (eds.),
lnlellectudl Property Management in Fleallh and Agricullural lnnovation: ,,1 Harulbook of Besl Practice; 1045
(MIHR and PIPRA, 2007).
l.l

of doctrines such as breach of confidence, breach of confidential
relationship, common law misappropriation, unfair competition, unjust
enrichment, and torts related to trespass or unauthorized access to a
plaintifls property.a Be it in the context of unpublished works or
employment relationships, courts have consistently demonstrated a
willingness to pragmatically safeguard confidentiality using available
means.5 While the English courts provided relief mostly in equity or breach
of confidence, in the US, trade secrets came to be protected under tort of
misappropriation based on the confidential relationship between the
parties.('
1.3. The law on trade secrets was and, in rnany jurisdictions, still remains
fragmented. However, the first concrete attempt in the modem times to
introduce a legal remedy can be traced to the 1939 Restatement (First) of
Torts adopted in the US which introduced liability for disclosure or use of
another,s trade secret.T The next major development was the Uniform
Trade Secrets Act, 1979 (UTSA) based on which several US States passed
their state laws. The UTSA also substantially influenced Articte 39 of the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TzuPSf which is the first and major source of obligation to protect trade
secrets under international law.e Over the years, other jurisdictions such as
Germany,EU,UKetc.havealsointroducedlawstoharmonisethelawon
thissubject.India,however,continuestoprotecttradesecretsunder
common law, equitY and contract.
a M. A. Lemley,..The Surprising Virtues of Treating Trade Secrets as lP RightJ' 6l Stanford Ldw Review 316
(2008).
li"nyu epri", Lionel Bently, er.a/. ,Gurry on Breach ofconlidence para2.02 (Oxford University Press,2'd edn.,
20t2\.
6 E.l. du Pont de Nemours Powder Co. v. Masland,244tJ S' 100' 102 (1917)'
,e.vr"p",yn'ti,.'ThePublicHistoryofTradeSecrets.,55UC.Davis,q$,Revievl380(2022).
. Ultfnb-ti:fSO . Resource Book on TRIPS ond Devebpner, 521 (Cambridge University Press' 2005)'
e td,522.
1
6/

1.4. The term "trade secrets" does not have a concise or even settled meaning.l0
It comprises a broad range of information that can be technical or even
commercial in nature.rr 'Trade secrets' encompass confidential business
information that derives its value from being kept secret. However, unlike
other forms of intellectual property (lP) which are limited in duration, trade
secrets can be protected indefinitely. Businesses, irrespective of their size,
value trade secrets as much as patents, copyrights and other forms of IP as
using trade secrets protection, whether as a complement or as an altemative
to traditional IP protection, they derive profits as well as further research,
development and innovation.12 Further, the subject-matter of trade secrets
lies in the twilight zone before copyrightr3 and patents.ra Thus, the range
of information that can be protected as trade secrets is much broader.l5
1.5. Nonetheless, there is a thin demarcating line between the subject matter of
different IP rights and sometimes there may be an overlap. For instance,
copyright is concemed with expression and not ideas; patent is concemed
with the novel inventions and not mere discoveries of scientific principles
and abstract theories; trademark, and even passing off, seek to protect
identity and/or goodwill ofa business and usually do not cover marketing
concepts.l6 Thus, one can clearly see there is an exclusion of ideas in the
'o Tanya Aplin, Lionel Bently, el.a/.. Gu ry on Breach ofConfidence para6.O5 (Oxford University Press, 2nd edn.,
20t2\.
rr European Observatory on Infringements oflntellectual Property Rights, "Protecting Innovation through Trade
Secrets and Patents: Determinants for European Union Firms" l3 (July, 2Ol'11, avqilable all
hnps://euipo.europa.eu/tunnel-
web/secure/webdav/guest/document-library/observatory/documents/reports/Trade%20SecretsTo20Report_en.pd
f(fast visited on Februaty 24,20241.
lx ld.
tr l,iqrendrd Mohan Singh & Anr. y. Ketan ll,lehta & Ors., (2015) 64 PTC 260.
N European Observatory on Infringements of Intellectual Propeny Rights, "Protccting Innovation through Trade
Secrets and Patents: Determinants for European Union Firms" l4 (July, 2017\, Nailable at:
https://euipo.europa.et/tunnel-
web/secure/webdav/guest/document_library/observatory/documents/reports/TradeTo20SecretsTo20Repon en.pd
f(last visited on Fefitary 24,2024\.
15 Id.
lu Michael Spetce, lntelleclual Prcpefl! chap.6 (oxford University Press, 2007).
J

general sense from the ambit of traditional forms of IPR. Nonetheless,
information or ideas have been protected as an intangible asset and it is this
aspect that falls within the domain of trade secrets or confidential
information. r7 The blurring that can happen between trade secrets and other
forms of IP lends to difficulty in defining and protecting trade secrets as
the very premise of traditional intellectual property rights, that is public
disclosure, is absent in the case oftrade secrets. Thus, trade secrets have to
be protected with great caution so as not to undermine other forms of IP
and the larger public interest which essentially lies at the root of any IP
protection.
1.6. Trade secrets are a relatively new entrant in the realm of IPR. This does
not mean trade secrets did not exist prior to traditional forms of IPRs such
as patent and copyright, but that trade secrets have been brought under the
larger ambit of IPRs recently by their inclusion as protected subject matter
under the TRIPS Agreement, which came into force in 1995'
1.7. The problem with protecting trade secrets does not arise out of their late
inclusion within the domain of lPRs but by their very nature itself. There
is great difficulty in categorising trade secrets as "property" in the true
sense. The incidents associated with traditional property are absent when
it comes to trade secrets. For instance, it lacks permanence and stability in
the sense that the protection evaporates as soon as the information enters
public domain by disclosure, whether voluntary, accidental or by an act of
misappropriation; or when discovered by a third party by reverse
engineering or independently.r8 Further, trade secrets also exhibit lack of
t1 Zce Teleflms Ltd. v. Surulial comnunicotio s Ptt. Lld., (2OO3l 3 Mah LJ 695 : (2001) 5 Bom CR 404 : (2003)
105(3) Bom LR 678 : (2003) 27 PTC 457.
ls Tanya Aplin, "Confidential Information as Property?" 24 King s Lav Journal l9l (2011)'
1
A*

excludability.re The aspects of exchange and alienation are far more
problematic, contorted and strained when it comes to trade secrets.2o It is
exactly this reason why some jurisdictions like the US treat it as property
and others such as an overwhelming number of States in the European
Union do not and provide protection under unfair competition law coupled
with criminal sanctions.2l
1.8. While the law on trade secrets is not as well established and standardised
as other forms of IPRs, nonetheless, in today's era of knowledge economy
and fourth industrial revolution, trade secrets have become all the more
crucial for businesses to maintain their competitive edge. Even though
tradesecretsprotectiondevelopedatthetimeofindustrialrevolution,it
hasgainedgrowingimportanceintherecentdecadesastechnologyand
innovationhavebecomemorefastpacedandthemajordeterminantsof
economic prowess. The common and traditional perception has been that
trade secrets protection serves as a supplementary tool of protection in
addition to main-stream intellectual property rights such as patents'
industrialdesignsandcopyright.However,empiricalstudiesintheUnited
States'UnitedKingdom,EuropeanUnionandCanadaindicatetheprimacy
oftrade secrets as a protective mechanism adopted by innovators.22 Thus,
tradesecretsareakeyformofprotectionutilisedincommercetomaintain
comPetitive advantage.
1.9. Trade secrets offer a range of benefits such as an informal and relatively
cheap form of protection. the threshotd for protection IS high, the
te ld,193.
10 Id,l95.
2l Tanya Aplin' ..Right to Property and Trade Secrets,, in Christophe Geiger (ed.) ' Research Harulbook on Human
nighti ani tntellectuat Property 422 (Edward Elgar Publishin-g' 2015)'
,, Tanya Aplin, Lion elee*ly, "t.at.,bllrrii si"in tfc:"rfii"nce para I .09 (oxford University Press' 2'd edn"
20t2l.
5
h,,

requirements for action are not that onerous, and there is a longer period of
protection extending up to perpetuity.I However, these do not detract from
the fact that trade secrets have certain limitations as well. Trade secrets
provide for far weaker protection than under patents or copyright. In
addition to independent innovation and reverse engineering being
permissible, in an action of breach of confidence the claimant must prove
derivation which can be quite difficult.2a There is also the risk that opting
for trade secrets carries in that secrecy and consequently the protection.
I .10. Intellectual property rights are territorial in nature and the same applies to
trade secrets. Thus, trade secrets laws and regulations vary from one
jurisdiction to another. 'Ihe need for harmonisation and effective cross-
border protection emphasised by developed countries in particular, led to
the introduction of Article 39 in the TRIPS Agreement. However, the
TRIPS Agreement only lays down minimum criteria and there is great
flexibility leading to variation across different jurisdictions. This flexibility
includes addressing protection oftrade secrets by whatever means that may
suit the member State, that is, either under existing laws or under a specific
legislation.
1.11. India, being a signatory to the TRIPS Agreement, is obligated to protect
undisclosed information. While the TRIPS Agreement does not necessitate
the enactment ofa separate statute to protect undisclosed information, there
have been demands for such a framework. 'fhere is no specific legislation
pertaining to protection of trade secrets in India. It is protected within the
general law pertaining to contract, under common larv principles ofbreach
rr Lionel Bently, "Patents and Trade Secrets" in Neil Wilkof. Sharnnad Basheer (eds.\. overlapping lntellectual
6
Properq, pig111s 61-63 (oxford University Press, 20l2)
)o Ll.63-c,5.
6,"

of confidence and equity25 as well as under provisions of criminal law. All
developments in the subject matter have been driven by case-laws which
is also the reason for variation and inconsistency in law.26
1.12. Trade secrets is the only "intellectual property" that remains unaddressed
by a specific statute. Trade secrets first came to national limelight in 1977
when the Government asked Coca-Cola to hand over the formula for its
cola drink that led to the company exiting India to re-enter only a decade
later.27 However, the focus on this subject matter has increased in the past
decade on account of growing dernands from the industry and even our
trading partners. The National Intellectual Property Rights Policy,2016
and the Parliamentary Standing Committee Report have brought back
focus on the need for introducing a legislation on trade secrets in India.
Apart from the industry, the concern for a comprehensive legislation
dealing with trade secrets has also been echoed by the judiciary.
1.13. With the globalisation of businesses and rapid advancements in technology
that often get transferred across borders, the demand for a special law to
adequately address trade secrets protection and enforcement has become
stronger. Various arguments have been advanced in support of protecting
trade secrets such as they incentivise innovation and uphold commercial
morality.2s Thus, enacting a law on trade secrets, may prove to be a crucial
step towards creating a conducive environment for innovation, fostering a
knowledge-based economy, and protecting the intellectual property of
2t John Richard Bt'ddy v. Chenical Process Equipment, AIR 1987 Del 372.
16 Md Zafar Mahfooz Nomani and Faizanur Rahman, "lntellection ofTrade Secret and lnnovation Laws in lndia"
l6 Journal of Intellectuql Prcpertt* Righrs 349 (201 I ).
17 Prashant Reddy T., "The'Other lP Right': ls It Time to Codify the lndian Law on Protection ofConfidential
lnformation?" 5 Jorrnal of liationol Lav Univetsiiy Delhi I (2008\.
r3 Jon Chaffy, "The Law ofTrade Secrets: Toward a More Efficient Approach" 57 Vanderbih Ldw Reviett l2'll
(2004).
7
Gh,

1.14.
businesses across sectors. This will enable India to establish a forward-
looking legal framework that aligns with global standards while addressing
the specific needs ofher diverse and ernerging business landscape.
A. Reference to lhe Law Commissiott
In tight of the deliberations within the Govemment, it was felt that there
was a need for a legislation on the protection of Trade Secrets and also on
Economic Espionage. Accordingly, the Department of Legal Affairs and
Legislative Department examined the issue of enacting an Economic
Espionage Act and a Trade Secrets Protection Act and prepared a concept
paper along with a drafl cabinet note and a draft Bill. However, owing to
the complexities inherent in the subject matter and in order to ensure
thorough evaluation, the Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative
Department fonvarded a reference to the Law Commission vide letter dated
l0'h October, 201 7, requesting it to examine the possibility of enacting
Trade Secrets Protection Act and Economic Espionage Act. The
Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department also shared their
concept paper along with the draft cabinet note and draft Bill for the
Commission's consideration.
8
h,.,

2. TRADE SECRETS vts)-vts DTFFERENT THEORIES oF
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
2.1. Intellectual Property Rights are the rights given to a person for inventions,
literary and artistic works, designs, symbols, images used in commerce'
They usually give the creator an exclusive right over the use of his creation
for a certain period of time. IP is protected by law through patents,
copyrights, trademarks, designs, etc., which enable creators to benefit
financially from their creations. There is a basic understanding that
protection of intellectual property incentivises innovation, creative
endeavour and adds to the existing stock of knowledge in public domain.
However, among the recognised forms of intellectual property' trade
secrets are an outlier as they rely on secrecy rather than disclosure.
2.2. The protection of trade secrets draws its essence from common law'
contractlaw,criminallawandtofidoctrineswhichlimittheuseand
dissemination of valuable proprietary information, thereby incentivising
the creator for his/her creations of products, processes and technologies.2e
This law is useful in cases where an information is not patentable, or too
expensivetopatent,ormorevaluable,ifkeptsecretthanprotectedthrough
the patent sYstem.io
re David D. Friedman, William M. Landes, et'al" "Some Economics of Trade Secret Law" 5 Journal qf
Economic Perspect ives 61 -72 (199 l\.
ro David D. Friedman, ..Trade Secrets" in Peter NewmaD (ed.), Ilc r\ c}'' Palgrave Dictionary of F-conontics
9
ancl the Lat 604-607 (Macmillan, London. 1998)
2.3.Thesubject-matteroftradesecretsinctudetechnicalandcommercial
informationthatabusinessusesintemally,whichismaintainedas
G/

confidential.rr It has been defined bythe Uniform Trade Secrets Act, which
was the model law based on which several State laws were enacted in the
US, to include:
"A formula, pattern, compilation, program device, method,
technique or process that (i) derives independent economic value,
actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and not
readily ascertainable by proper means, by other persons who can
obtain economic ttalue from its disclosure or use, and (ii) is the
subject of efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances to
maintain its secrecy. "32
2.4. Trade secrets protection does not grant any legal monopoly to the creator
of work or invention, rather it protects creators from the unauthorised
disclosure or improper use or acquisition of confidential information.3l
Further, unlike copyright, patent or trademark, wherein the proprietary
rights are limited to a fixed period of time only, trade secrets can be
protected in perpetuity, as long as their secrecy is maintained.3a
2.5. As far as the desirability of trade secrets within the broad regime of lP
protection is concemed, trade secrets protection prevents the spread and
use of ideas and causes loss of economic rents.35 Paradoxically, the
argument that it incentivises innovation and knowledge sharing is also
advanced at the same time.36 Nonetheless, trade secrets are a vital
rr Jeffrey D. Dunn and Paul F. Seiler, "Trade Secrets and Non-Traditional Categories of lntellectual Propeny as
Collateral" Lil'CtTRlL Second Colloqium on Secured L)'ansuclions. Securitt lnletests in Intellectuul Property
Rrgils 2 (Vienna. Austria, 2007).
r1 National Conference of Commissioners on Unifornr State Laws, Uniform Trade Secrets Act with 1985
Amendments, sec. l(4), available at: https://www.uniformlaws.org/committees/community-
home?communitykey=3a2538fb-e030-4 e2d-a9 e2-9037 3 dco 51 92.
rr Carlos A. Primo Braga and Carsten Fink Claudia Paz Sepulveda, "lntellectual Property Rights and Economic
Development" ll/orld Bank Disctrssion Paper No. J12 6 (Washinglon DC: The World Bank, 2000).
rr William L. Norton. Vl !\orton Bankruptc), La* and Practice chap. 177 l4 (Clark Boardman Callaghan. New
York, 3rd edn.,2024).
r5 Steven N.S. Cheung. "Properly Rights in Trade Secrets" 20 F'cononic lnquiry 40-53 ( 1982).
16 Jon Chally, "The Law ofTrade Secrets: Toward a More Efficient Approach" 57 l'anderbilt Lctw Rcliev l2'71
(200.r).
l0 Qh/

component of any economic structure founded on the principle of
contractual freedom and private ownership.3T
2.6. Various theories and concepts supporl the protection of IP, each with its
own philosophical and legal underpinnings. These theories provide the
rationale for a legal framework and mechanism to reward the innovation
and creativity while balancing the interests of creators, consumers and
society in a comprehensive way.
2.7. While trade secrets can play a valuable role in protecting proprietary
information and fostering competition, it is essential to recognize the
unique challenges and considerations involved in their very treatment as
intellectual property itself. Striking a balance between protecting
confidential business information and promoting innovation and
competition is crucial for maintaining a fair and dynamic marketplace.
While various theories justif, the existence and enforcement of IPRs,
including patents, copyrights, and trademarks, the treatment of trade
secrets as'property' is not indisputable.
2.8. Some of the theories and concepts supporting the protection of intellectual
propefty in general are the Natural Rights theory, the concept of Privacy,
the Utilitarian theory, and the Personhood theory. While each theory offers
distinct perspectives on the nature and purpose of intellectual property,
they also converge in recognising the importance of rewarding innovation
and promoting social welfare. In the context oftrade secrets, these theories
underscore the economic, moral and personal dimensions of protecting
valuable information, thereby facilitating innovation, fostering
r7 Peter S. Menell, "lntellectual Propeny: General Theories". in Boudewijn Bouckaert and Cerrit De Geest (eds.).
Encyclopedia of Lau, and Economics l5l (Edward Elgar. 2000)
ll V

fair competition and preserving the integrity of intellectual capital.
Therefore, it is imperative to analyse the concept of trade secrets in light
of some ofthe theories of IPR and other evolving concepts in order to seek
a justification to provide for their protection. The applicability of various
theories justifying protection of IPRs in general to the protection of trade
secrets has been analysed below.
A. Nulursl Rights Theory
2.9. This theory, based on the ideas of theorists such as John Locke and Thomas
Jefferson, argues that creators inherently or naturally possess the right to
control and profit from their creations as the same is part of their autonomy
and labour. This theory suggests that some rights are not granted by the
state, but are intrinsic to human beings by vinue of their existence. IPRs
are seen as a means ofsafeguarding these inherent rights, allowing creators
to exercise control over the use, reproduction, and dissemination of their
works. These rights are often seen as fundamental and inalienable,
implying that they cannot be taken away or transferred.38 When it comes
to trade secrets, the connection to natural rights theory may not be
immediately apparent. However, there are some salient aspects regarding
the protection of trade secrets which fall within the framework of the
natural rights theory.
2.10. This theory proposes that a person who labours upon resources which are
held in common or not owned by anybody, has a natural right to his
creation, and consequently, the state is obliged to protect that natural right'
Just as a person has a right to possess and enjoy the fruits of his physical
38 Thomas Jefferson. John Adams. et.al.. The Declarqtion ol- lndependence (US 1776). @qilahle qt
https://uscode.house.gov/download/annualhistoricalarchives/pdf/OrganicLaws2006/decind.pdf.
t2
Al/

labour, he also has a right to protect and control the product of his mindful
and creative efforts. This theory gets applied to the field of IP, where the
resources (such as facts, ideas and concepts) seem to be unowned or'held
in common' and labour has a significant contribution to the value of the
final creation.3e As John Locke argued:
"...the 'labour'of his body and the 'work'of his hands, we may say,
are properly his. Ll/hatsoever, then, he removes out of the state that
Nature^ hatit provided and left it itt, he hath mixed his labor with it
and joined ti it something that is his own and thereby makes it his
property. tt being by him removed from the common state Nature
'placed'it in, it iath by this labour something annexed to it that
'excludes the common right of other men' For this'labour'
being the unquestionable property of the labourer, no man but he
,on"how a rilht to what that is once joined to, at l.east where there
is enough ani as good left in common for others 
"'40
2.1 l. One ofthe central tenets of natural rights theory is the right to properfy' It
can be argued that trade secrets are some form of property' belonging to
the individuals or organizations that develop or possess them' Therefore'
protecting trade secrets can be seen as upholding an individual's propefty
rights. However, unlike physical property such as land or goods' trade
secrets often involve intangible information or knowledge or asset' This
intangibilitymakesitchallengingtoestablishclearboundariesand
ownership rights, as trade secrets can be easily shared' leamed' or
independentlydiscoveredbyothers.Further,theenforcementofproperty
rights requires clear delineation of ownership and the ability to exclude
others from using or accessing the property' In trade secrets' enforcing the
ownership rights can be difficult, as it may be challenging to prove
], *t* ta*a..tt"--*t ""tlectual 
Property" in Stephen Munzer (ed'), rvev Essqys in lhe Legal and
Political Theory of Propetty 185 (Cambridge University Press'-2001)'.
;J;;; P. i""[", 'r, o ireitises o'n Civil GZue"'^ent lGeo'ge Roulledge and sons' London' 1884)'
13 \
qr/

misappropriation or unauthorized use, especially in those cases where the
information is not easily identifiable or distinguishable.ar
2.12. Natural rights theory emphasizes individual autonomy and the freedom to
pursue one!'s interests. Protecting trade secrets can be viewed as enabling
individuals and businesses to maintain autonomy over their intellectual
creations and innovations, allowing them to benefit from their efforts and
investments in creating commercial information and assets. Therefore, to
some level, trade secrets indeed align with this component of the Natural
Rights Theory.
2.13. Natural rights theory also emphasizes the importance of voluntary
agreements and contracts between individuals' In the context of trade
secrets. businesses often rely on contracts (such as non-disclosure
. Upholding theseagreements) to protect their confidential information
contracts can be seen as respecting individual rights to enter into
agreements and enforce the terms they have agreed upon'42 Further'
enforcing such agreements also fits well with the legat principle embodied
in the maxim pacta sunt servanda, meaning agreements must be kept'
However, these 'agreements create tegal obligations between parties
regardingtheuseandprotectionofcontidentialinformationbutdonot
necessarily establish individual property rights in the same way that
ownership of tangible property is established'
2.14. Natural rights theory typically values economic freedom and the ability of
individuals to engage in commerce and trade. Protecting trade secrets can
ar Adam Moore, "lntellectual Property", Stanfotd Encyclopedia ol Philosophs" Aug' l8' 2022' available at:
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/iniellecrual-propeny/ (last visited on-Feb 27 '2024\'
oi irot".t G. Bone. ..A New Look at Trade d""r"t iu*, Doctrine in Search cf Justificatioo" 86 California Law
Review 250 (March 1998).
t4
e,/

be seen as supporting this freedom by enabling businesses to compete in
the marketplace on the basis of their innovations and unique knowledge,
without having fear of unfair competition or exploitation. But if trade
secrets are treated as an IP in strict sense. then it will be hard to balance the
public interest as granting individual property rights to trade secrets could
potentially hinder competition and innovation by allowing companies to
monopolize certain knowledge or technologies in perpetuity.lr
2.15. It can be inferred that the connection between natural rights theory and
trade secrets may not be direct, expticit or even strong' It is pertinent to
state that trade secrets can neither be considered and nor work under the
strict diaspora ofphysical property. However, it can also not be denied that
it resembles certain jurisprudential essence of natural theory as well'
B. The Concept of PrivacY
2.16. Privacy, as a concept, encompasses various dimensions, including
informational privacy, bodily privacy, and privacy of personal
communications. within the realm of trade secrets, informational privacy
takes centre stage. It refers to the ability of individuals or organizations to
control access to and use of information about themselves or their
activities. Businesses need assurance that their confidential information
will be safeguarded to maintain competitiveness and innovation. However,
thisrationalemaynotdirectlyapplytopatentsortrademarks,where
disclosure or visibility is inherent to the protection granted by those
intellectual proPerty rights.44
{r Tait Craves and Alexander Macgillivray, "Combination Trade Secrets and the Logic of lntellectual Property'
20 Sqntd Clara High Technologt I'ow Joto nal 291 (20041.
s Shanranu MukhJrj ee, purcnllihdustion and lnternqtionul Tt ade Regulotion l7 (Brill Nijhofi Boston, 2023)'
l5
&/

2. I 7. Both IP and privacy laws focus on controlling information. This means that
ideas from one area can help us understand the other better. Both types of
laws deal with the challenge of keeping information exclusive when it's
naturally not. But they do this for different reasons. Privacy law is about
respecting people's dignity and freedom. It gives individuals some control
over their private information and lives. IP law, on the other hand, is more
about promoting innovation and making knowledge accessible. It allows
creators to have some control over their work to prevent others from using
it freely.a5
2.19. It can be said that both trade secrets and the privacy argument have
differentfocuses-protectingbusinessinterestsversussafeguarding
individual rights. However, they share common principles related to
information control, confidentiality, trust, legal frameworks' economic
interests, and security measures as have been discussed below'
2.20. The essence oftrade secrets is essentially based in the argument ofprivacy'
Both trade secrets and privacy argument involve the control of information.
a'lreneCalboliandMariaLilliMontagnani,Il.lndbookonlntellecnolPropertyResearch:Lenses.L.tethods.lnd
Perspectives l3l (Oxford University Press, UK' 2021)'
;" f"Ly [-g.;f"i"rmation privacy in Cyberspace Transactions" 50 Stdnfot'.l La\v Revieu' | 193 (1998)'
l6
2.18. Trade secrets serve as a mechanism for protecting sensitive commercial
information assets critical to a business's competitive advantage. They
enable companies to maintain control over valuable data, such as formulas,
processes,customerlists,andmarketstrategies,therebysafeguardingtheir
economic interests. In this sense. trade secrets align with the broader goal
of protecting informational privacy by allowing businesses to control the
dissemination of sensitive commercial inlormation'46
d/

In the case of trade secrets, companies protect valuable information such
as formulas,, processes, or customer lists from being disclosed to
competitors. Similarly, the privacy argument emphasizes individual's
rights to control their personal information and restrict its access by
unauthorized parties. As far as confidentiality is concemed, trade secrets
rely on maintaining the confidentiality of certain information to retain its
competitive advantage. Similarly, the privacy argument often focuses on
the confidentiality of personal data, aiming to prevent unauthorized access
or disclosure that could lead to harm or exploitation. Further, both concepts
involve the idea of trust and consent. In trade secrets, employees or
business partners may be required to sign non-disclosure agreements
(NDA) to ensure they don't disclose sensitive information.aT Similarly, the
privacy argument emphasizes obtaining consent from individuals before
collecting, using, or sharing their personal data, promoting trust between
data subjects and data controllers. Both trade secrets and privacy theory
balance economic interests with individual interests. Trade secrets protect
the economic interests of businesses by safeguarding valuable information,
while privacy theory seeks to protect individual's autonomy' dignity' and
personal freedoms in the digital age' Both trade secrets and privacy require
implementing security measures to prevent unauthorized access or
disclosure. Companies with valuable trade secrets often invest in robust
security systems and protocols to safeguard their confidential information'
Similarly, organizations handling personal data are expected to implement
appropriate security measures to protect individuals' privacy rights'
2.2l.Whiletradesecretsprovideaneffectivemeansofprotectingsensitive
commercial information, they also present challenges in balancing privacy
" 52 Stanford Law Review ll49 (2OO0l
t7
r7 Pamel Samuelson. "Privacy as Intellectual Propeny
4/

concems with the promotion of innovation and knowledge sharing{8. Trade
secret protection operates through secrecy, which contrasts with the
disclosure requirements inherent in other forms oflP, such as patents. This
tension between secrecy and disclosure raises questions about the optimal
balance between protecting privacy and fostering innovation in society'
2.22. ln the digital age, where information can be easily disseminated and
accessed through digital platforms, protecting trade secrets and
maintaining privacy poses new challenges. Issues such as data breaches,
corporate espionage, and insider threats underscore the need for robust
cybersecurity measures and tegal safeguards to protect trade secrets and
preserve informational PrivacY'
C. Other ConcePls und Theories
2.23. The theory of utilitarianism recognises the importance of balancing the
incentives for innovation with the need for information dissemination and
competition. While trade secrets protection allows businesses to maintain
secrecyovervaluableinformation,itprohibitsthesocietyfrombenefiting
from the same. This acts as deterrence for the application of this theory'
therefore, barring trade secrets from being considered an intellectual
property under this theory.
2.24. Unlike patents and copyrights, which involve a trade-off between granting
exclusivity in exchange for public disclosure, trade secrets provide no or
timited public benefit through disclosure. This lack of disclosure can
hinder innovation and the spread of knowledge, as valuable information
as Lynn sharp Paine, '.Trade Secrets and the Justification of Intellectual Property: A Comment on Hettinger" 20
Philosophy & Public Alfait's 247 (1991).
M-/
18

remains hidden from the public domain. While patents and copyrights have
limited terms of protection, trade secrets can potentially be protected
indefinitely as long as the information remains secret. This perpetual
protection can stifle competition and innovation by preventing others from
building upon or improving existing knowledge.
2.25. The reliance on secrecy can incentivize unethical behaviour, such as
industriat espionage or employee theft, as businesses seek to gain access to
valuable trade secrets held by competitors. This can lead to legal disputes
and undermine trust within the business community. Unlike other forms of
IP, which are often registered and publicly documented, trade secrets can
be difficult to identify and enforce. This can create challenges in legal
proceedings, as businesses may struggle to prove ownership or
misappropriation of confi dential information.
2.26. However, there may be some limitations and exceptions to ensure sharing
of benefits of innovation. For instance, trade secrets laws may include
provisions for fair competition and employee mobility, allowing
individuals to use their skills and knowledge gained from previous
employment while still protecting legitimate trade secrets. Further, the
exception of independent discovery and reverse engineering by a third
party also balance the competing interests of the individual and the public
at large.
2.27. The Personhood theory addresses questions such as individuat autonomy,
rights, and responsibilities within legal and moral frameworks. It deals
with the rights and moral status of persons, typically human beings' but
sometimes also extending to entities like corporations or animals.
However, the notion of personhood in this context generally does not
l9
&/

extend to abstract entities4e like trade secrets. which lack the
consciousness, autonomy, and moral agency typically associated with
persons.5o
2.28. The concept of trade secrets is majorty based on the notion of economic
value derived from secrecy rather than public disclosure, as opposed to
patents, trademarks, or copyrights. The reason trade secrets cannot be
associated with personhood theory is primarily because trade secrets are
tied to the entity that owns them, rypically a business or organization, rather
than an individual person. Personhood theory, on the other hand' often
concems itsetf with the legal rights and interests of individuals rather than
entltles.
2.2g.EconomistsapproachthetopicoflPRprotection,muchlikeotherissues'
by attempting to align it with a standard framervork for making public
policy decisions'sr In simplified terms' the overarching policy goal is to
optimizethesurplusofsocialbenefitsderivedfromnewinformation
assets,surpassingthesocialcostsassociatedwiththeirproduction'and
essentially, maximizing social benefits' Additionally' there is an aim to
steertheallocationofbothpublicandprivateresourcestowardsequalizing
the social net rate of return on investments in knowledge and other types
of productive assets.
2.30. The primary rationale often cited to justil) govemment interventions in
enforcing patents, copyrights, and trade secrecy is the presence of "market
{e Francisco J. Morales,..The property Matrix: An Analytical Tool to Answer the Question, "ls This Property?'
16l l)niversity ofPennsylvania l,an' Rer''ex' ll25-1164 (2013)'
r0 Robert G. Bone, ..A New Look at Trade Secret Law: Doctrine in Search of Justificalion" 86 California Ldtt'
Rcview 289 (March 19981.
riliilO V. A"r* and Leo J. Raskind, ,,An Introduction to the Law and Economics of lntellectual Property" 5
The Journal of Ecottomic Perspectives 3 (l99ll'
20
MV

failure". According to this argument, without govemmental safeguards for
private property rights, competitive markets would fail to provide
individuals and organizations with adequate incentives to stimulate the
optimal levet of investment in public goods, particularly in the realm of
new scientific and technological knowledge' However, it's not necessarily
implied that the most effective solution to address market failure is to
establish valuable private rights in intellectual property.
2.31. The decision on what remains confidential and what is revealed to the
public is influenced less by the inherent characteristics ofthe information
and more by the anticipated costs and benefits associated with each choice
for the involved Parties.52
2.32. Property encompasses society's granting of exclusive rights to private
creatorsofnewknowledge,establishingtheframeworkforlPmarketsand
allowingcreatorstochargefeesforother'suseoftheirwork'Thespecific
legal mechanisms of patents, copyrights, and, to a somewhat lesser extent'
trade secrets, fall under the umbrella of property rights's3
2.33.Advancementsintechnologyandrecentlegatbaftleshavealignedthetrade
secretsmorecloselywithpatentsandcopyrightsintermsofitsstructure
(as a law safeguarding valuable rights in information) and its apparent
societal purpose' However, considering trade secrets as merely another
categoryoflPposessomechallenges'Confidentialinformation'while
capable of generating income and possessing value' shares certain
**t" r"tt-" * t- ^--,d, 
"The New Economics of SciencC.23 Reseorch Policy 487 (1994\' 
r
jr paul A. David. ..tntellectual e.oi"rry tirtitrtions and the Panda's Thumb: Patents, Copyrights' and Trade
Secrets in Economic Theory and Hir#y;, ;; Nlit"t "t 
g. wallerslein,-Mary Ellen Mogee, et.al- (ed.s.),^Globol
Dinensions of Intellectual iroperry Rigi* in Science and Technologt 29 (National Academy Press' 1993 )'
2t G/

attributes with both tangible and intangible assets, which economists
typically associate with other forms of property.5a
2.34. How can society acknowledge and uphold an individual's assertion of
ownership in something that is highly specific yet must remain partially
undisclosed and hidden from public view? Another issue arises in the realm
of property law, both in real and personal property, as well as in the domain
of IP law conceming patents and copyrights. Labelling something as
.,propefty''typicallyimpliesthatthepossessorho[dsexclusiverightstouse
or enjoy the item, or to transfer those rights to others for their exclusive use
or enjoyment.55 However, this specific definition does not quite apply to
trade secrets. Even when the possessor has taken precautions to maintain
secrecy, the law offers no recourse if the information is inadvertently
disclosed or uncovered through deliberate, socially acceptable actions by
others.
2.35. ln conclusion, the exploration of trade secrets and their relationship with
varioustheoriesprovidesvaluableinsightsintothemultifacetednatureof
IPRs.NaturalrightstheorySupportstheargumentthattradeSecretsare
inherently linked to human ingenuity and the right to control one's
creations,aligningwiththenotionthatindividualshaveaninherentright
to the fruits of their labour. However, no single theory seems to completely
supporttheprotectionoftradesecretsandtheoverallexaminationofthese
theories reveals the complex interplay between trade secrets and broader
societal values, including innovation, economic prosperity' privacy' and
individual autonomY.
51 Steven N.S. Cheung, "Property Rights in Trade Secrets" 2O l'cononic Inqui\.40 ( ls8l)'
55 David D. Friedman, William M. f-unj"t. "t."f.. 
"Some Econonrics of Trade Secrets Law" 5 Thc Journal qf
Econontic Perspcctives 6l ( l99l)
'))
s,

J
3. INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATION: ARTICLE 39 OF THE TRIPS
AGREEMENT
The term "trade secrets" per se has not been mentioned in the TRIPS
Agreement.56 Under Articte 39 paragraph 1,57 however' the member states
are inter alia obligated to protect "undisclosed information". "Undisclosed
Information" is a neutral term and is broad enough to include within its
ambit a trade secret, general confidential business information, commercial
and technical information.58 Paragraph I lays down the general principle
applicable to protection of undisclosed information and paragraph 2
elaborates upon the qualifications that the information has to meet and
what acts are to be protected against. Similarly, paragraph I also mandates
protection of ..data submitted to governments or govemmental agencies"
in accordance with paragraph 3. Thus, paragraph I lays the broad principle
basedonwhichundisclosedinformationanddatasubmittedto
goverr[nents or governmental agencies has to be protected in accordance
with paragraph 2 and 3 respectively.
3.2. Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement reads:
"Article3g.t.lnthecourseofensuringeffectiveprotectionagainst
unfair competition as Provided in Article l1bis of the Paris
Convention (te67), Members shall Drotect undisclosed informat ion
in accordance with ParagraPh 2 and data submitted to sovernments
or Povernmental asencies in accordance with ParagraPh 3
2. Natural and legal Persons shall have the possibilitv of oreventins
information latlfullv w ithin their control .fi'om being disclosed to
56 Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of lntellectual Property Rights' April l5' 1994' Marrakesh-Agreement
eri"BiiJi"g,f," Wortd Trade organization, Annex lc. taoc u.r'J.r.s. 299.33 I.L.M. I197 (1994) [hereinafter,
"TRlPS"l.
57 TRIPS, art. i9.
t. M"it * p"t". una Manin Michaelis, "section 7: Protection of Undisclosed Information" in Peter-Tobias Stoll,
Jan Busche c/.a/. (eds.), tt'lO liaie-Relate4 Aspects of lntellecrual Property Rights 637 (Maninus Nijhoff
Publishers.2009)
:) e',

OC' uired b or used hv others rithout their conscnt in a manner
contrarv lo honest commercial practicesto so long as such
information:
(a) is secret in the sense that it is not. as a body or in the precise
configuration and assembly of its components, generally knotvn
omong or readilv accessible to persons within the circles that
normallv deal with the kind of information tn question:
test or other data the orisination of which involves a considerable
e-lfort,
additio
where
(b) has commercial value because it is secret; and
(c) has been subiect to reasonable steps under the circumstances, by
the person lawfully in control of the information, to keep it secret'
3. Members, when requiring, as a condition of approving the
marketing of pharmaceutical or of agricultural chemical products
which uiliie-neu' chemical entities, the submission of undisclosed
ensure that the dota are orotected a ainst unfair commercial use.
(footnote original) 1 0 For the pttrpose of this provision, 0 tnunller
contrary to honest commercial practices .shall mean at leasl
oractices such as breach of conlract, breach of confidence and
1ducement to breach, and includes the acquisition of undisclosed
information by third parties who knew, or were grossly negligent in
Tiiting to know, ihat such practices were involved in the
acquisition' 
(emphasis added)
3.3. Certain peculiarities and nuances of how this provision has been crafted
mustbeappreciatedinordertounderstanditstrueimport'Thesehavebeen
analysed in detail in the paragraphs that follow'
A. Article 39.1
3.4. Firstly, it is important to pay regard to the structure of the TRIPS
Agreement itself. The Agreement is divided into seven different parts, each
dealingwithaparticularaspect.Partllsetsforththestandardsconceming
1^_:.t

the availability, scope and use of IPRs. Thus, all types of lP, whether we
consider the term in its strict sense or loosely,5e regards which obligations
have been set forth in the agreement have been specified under this part'
Specific provisions pertaining to the other seven subject matters of the
chapter namely, Patents, Trademarks, Copyright, Geographical
Indications, Layout-Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits,
Control of Anti-competitive Practices in contractual Licences can be
found. albeit in a different wording, in previous intemational instruments
such as the Paris Convention,60 the Berne Convention,6r the Rome
Convention,62 Lisbon Agreement63 etc. However, the same does not hold
true for undisclosed information. confidential Information or Trade Secret
or Undisclosed Information, by whatever name it may be called' though of
great value to all trades and businesses' found no mention in earlier
intemational instruments' It was an entirely new addition that came out of
the negotiation on the TNPS Agreement'('a The same goes for undisclosed
test or other data that the beneficiary is obligated to share in order to get
regulatory aPProvals.
3.5. Secondly, while in respect ofother IP such as Copyright or Patent' wherein
by explicit references to and incorporation of previous agreements such as
theBemeConventionandtheParisConventionrespectiveIy,considerable
te lr is worth noting that while undisclosed information has been included within.the framework :f lllilLt
et,*r"ti, .".y ,embers, including lndia, were opposed to its inclusion as they did not and some even contlnue
;;1';';;;;;;t;;',;isctosed informa-tion u. ..prop"ny,, and provide for enforcement of rights regards the same
premised on equity, contidence, "orion LJ"tl' S'c', f*ya Aplin' "Right to Property and -Trade.Secrets" in
[i;isr"ph; c"L"i t"o.), n"rror"n iiniooo* on Human Righrs-and Intellecrudl Prope ), 421 (Edward Elgar
Publishing, 201 5 ).
@ paris Convention for the protection oflndustrial Property, March 20. 1883, 828 U.N T.S. 307 [hereinafter "Paris
Convention"l.
6r Berne Convention for the l'rotection of Literary and Anistic Works' September 9' 1886' last revised at
Stockholm, July 14, 1967,828 U:N.T.S.22'
6: Intemational Convention for the Protection of Performers' Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting
Organizations, Oct. 26, 1961, 496 U N T S 43
i iJion egr;"**t for the protection of Appellations of Origin and their lnternational Registration, October i l'
r958, 923 U.N.T.S. 205.
i'ur.jCieo-lcrSo . Resource Book on l'RtPS dnd Detelopnert 522 (Cambridge University Press, 2005)'
25
S/

obligations have been imposed on the member States as to the level of
protection that has to be provided, no such elaborate scheme has been
presented in case of undisclosed information. A minimal obligation of
simply protecting undisclosed information and undisclosed test and other
data that meets specified criteria in paragraph 2 and 3 respectively has been
imposed by Article 39.1 . This is reflective of the contentious nature of
negotiations pertaining to inclusion of "undisclosed information" wherein
there was a very vehement opposition by the developing nations,65 in
particular India.66 The provision does not indicate in what manner the State
has to protect undisclosed information and undisclosed test and other data.
It is simply teft up to states to decide their particular modalities in
alignment with their domestic laws. Thus, there is absolutely no obligation
whatsoevertoenactaspecificlegislationpertainingtoprotectionof
undisclosed information or test data such as that present in the case of
Geographical Indications6T or Layout-Design (Topographies) of Integrated
circuits6s which lead to the enactment of the Geographical Indications of
Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 19996e and the Semiconductor
Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Act, 200070 respectively, in India' Thus'
member states are free to adopt a specialised law or even no law at all and
provide only equitable remedies' Thus, the curent position in India
wherein remedies against misappropriation of trade secrets can be claimed
under common law, equityTr or applicable provision of the Indian Penal
6s Graham Durfield and Uma Suthersanen, Gloh"l lntellechrul Propcrty Law I30 (Edward Elgar' 2008) -
* uilCieo-lirso, Resource Book on iRlps and Devalopm"rr a23 (cambridge university Press.2005)'
67 TRIPS, an.22.2.
6s Article 4 ofTreaty on Intellectual Property in Respect oflntegrated circuits, 1989, incorPorated by Anicle 35
ofTRIPS.
iJ itt" C"ogrupt i"ut Indications of Goods ( Registrat ion and Proteclion) Act' 1999' Act No 48 of I 999'
" if," i"r'i".'"aro"r Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Act' 2000' Act No- 37 of2000'
,, )ii, ii"hora a*,ly a o^ ". cni.i"i i'rocess Eluipnenr p Lttl & Anr. AIR 1987 Del 3721 F-airfest itledirt
tii '. ii-i i,rrp PLr- & ors tzoiiij rcc 75 : (2b15) 2 cHN 704; Dt sudiptq Baneriee v L S Davar &
Company 2022 SCC Online Cal 4479
16 u./

Code, 186072 ('IPC") or the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 202373 or even
Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 187274 meets the minimum criteria
prescribed under the TRIPS Agreement. For protection of undisclosed test
and other data, the specific Acts imposing obligation to submit such data
and rules made thereunder would govern protection of the same. For
instance, the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 194075 read with the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules, 1945.76
3.6. Thirdly, the Article itself expounds the rationale behind protecting
undisclosed information i.e., ensuring effective protection against unfair
competition as provided under Article l06is of the Paris Convention.T?
While Article 1.2 of the TRIPS Agreement terms undisclosed information
as an IP, the wording of Article 39.1 itself indicates that property-like
exclusive rights have not been imagined to be devolved upon the holders
of undisclosed information.i8 Unlike other intellectual properties covered
under Chapter III, the protection of undisclosed information and test data
is premised on the rationale of preventing unfair competition. The aspect
of preventing unfair competition derives its origin from the Article 10Dls
of the Paris Convention which was introduced in the year 1900 when the
convection was revised.Te Unlike traditional forms of IP wherein private
7r Act No. 45 of 1860.
?r Act No. 45 of2023.
74 The lndian Contract Act, 1872, Act No. 9 of 1872.
?5 Act No.23 of 1940.
?6 Notificaiton: No. F. 28- l0/45-H ( I ) (December 21, 1975).
77 Christian Riffel, Proteclion Aguinst l]nfqir Competition in the WTO TRIPS Agreement: The Scope and
Prospects of Article l0bis oIlhe Paris Convention fot' the Protcction of Industrial Prope y20 (Brill Nijhoff,
Leiden, 2016); UNCTAD-ICTSD, Resource Book on TRIPS arul Development 521,527 (Cambridge University
Press,2005).
?3 Markus Peter and Martin Michaelis, "Section 7: Protection of Undisclosed lnformation" in Peter-Tobias Stoll.
Jan Busche e/.al (eds.), ll/T O Trade-Related Aspects of lntellcctual Properly Rights 636 (Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers,2009).
'e Martin Senftleben, "Article l0bis ofthe Paris Convention as the Common Denominator for Protection Against
Unfair Competition in National and Regional Contexts" l9 Journal oJ lntellectual Property Law & Prqctice,8l
(2024), noilable ar: https://doi.org/ l0.l093ljiplp/jpadl22 (last visited on January 28,2024); Markus Peter and
Martin Michaelis, "Section 7: Protection of Undisclosed lnformation" in Peter-Tobias Stoll, Jan Busche el.al
(eds.\, WO -Trade-Reloted Aspecls of lntellectual Propuly Rights 633 (Martinus N ij hoff Publishers, 2009).
27
AI'

rights in the form exclusive economic privileges are bestowed upon on the
owner of the IP, no such rights are available in case of undisclosed
information. Being premised on doctrine of unfair competition, it is only
specific behaviour qualifling as anti-competitive that is to be prevented in
order to uphold honesty in competition.Eo What is fair or honest may vary
in time or space, depending upon a range of factors.sl Paragraph 2 of
Article l0bis of the Paris Convention itself describes unfair competition as
"any act of competition contraty to honest practices in industial or
commercial matters constitutes an act of unfair competition". Further, the
list of acts that constitute unfair competition have been propounded in
paragraph 3 of Article l06ls. This list is not exhaustive as is evident from
the words "in particular" employed in paragraph 3 of Article 100,i.82
3.7 . The scope and ambit of protection of undisclosed information has been
delineated in Anicle 39.2 itself which deals with undisclosed information
in particular. This paragraph clarifies that both natural and legal persons
can be legitimate holders of undisclosed information. Further, the
obligation cast on member States is to ensure that such holders of
undisclosed information have some determinate means to prevent
unauthorised disclosure, acquisition or use of such information within their
legitimate control by any third-party contrary to honest commercial
practices. The member States are free to adopt any determinate means
within their national legal system be it a sui generis law or under principles
of common law, the TRIPS Agreement is flexible in this regard. There is
28
B. Article -19.2
80 Christian Riflel, Protection }lgainst Lintab Competition in the lr'7o TRIPS lgreenent: 'l'hc Scope and
Prospecls of Atticle llhis ol the Paris Conwntion for lhe Protection of lnduslri.rl Property 24 (Brill Nijhoff,
Leiden, 2016).
3t |d,23.
81 |d,24.
G/

no monopoly or absolute right created by this provision and that suitable
remedies will have to be provided in the national laws of member states to
address cases where such dishonest practices have occurred.ss
3.8. Further, availability of any such remedy would be contingent on the
existence of a dishonest commercial practice in the process of disclosure
to, acquisition by or use by others.8a Absence of consent of the legitimate
holder of the information does not ipso facto entitle the holder to avail
protection unless there is some dishonest commercial practice involved.
Thus, there may be practices that lead to disclosure to, acquisition by or
use by third parties that may not give rise to any remedy. Hence, there is
no absolute protection.ss This ties in with the fact that no monopoly rights
are created in respect of such undisclosed information. It is precisely why
practices such as reverse engineering or independent creation/discovery do
not amount to dishonest commercial practice and misappropriation.s6 In
fact, reverse engineering is an important means of promoting competition
and encouraging innovation.sT Thus, no ownership rights or property-based
conception of protectionss has been envisaged to be created by the
operation of this provision.
3r UNCTAD-ICTSD, Rescturce Book on TRIPS and Developmerl 521 (Cambridge University Press, 2005).
3a Christian Riffel, Protection A+ainst Llnfair Competilion in lhe WTO TRIPS AEreement: I'he Scope and
Prospects of Atticle llbis ofthe Paris Convention.[or lhe P]otection of lndustrial Property 20 (Brill Nijhoff,
Leiden, 20l6).
35 UNCTAD-lCTSD, Resource Book on TRIPS dnd De\)elopt lehl 527, 528 (Cambridge University Press, 2005).
36 Christopher R. Leslie, Antitrust Law and lntellectu.tl Prcperty Rights: Ca:ses orul l,laleri.tls l8 (Oxfotd
University Press, 201 I ); Christian Riffel, Prctecliok Againsl Unfair Competilion in lhe llTO TRIPS Agreemenl:
The Scope and Prospects of Article llbis oJ the Paris Convention f the Prctection of lndustrial Property 25
(Brifl Nijhoff, Leiden, 2016); Katarzyna Czapracka, lnlellectual Property and lhe Liftlits of Antitt'usl: A
(:omparative Study of US and EU Approac,es 43 (Edward Elgar, 2009).
37 Tanya Apfin, "Reverse Engineering and Commercial Secrets" 66 Current Legql Problems 341 (2013\.
88 Markus Peter and Martin Michaelis. "Section 7: Protection of Undisclosed lnformation" in Peter-Tobias Stoll,
Jan Busche el.al. (eds.\, WTO Trdde-Relaled A$pecls of lntelleclual Properq) Righls 636 (Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers, 2009).
29
h,,

3.9. It must also be noted that the word "owner" has not been employed in this
Article in contradistinction with its use in respect of other categories of
intellectual properties such as in Article l6 for trademark, Anicle 26 for
industrial design and Article 28 for patent. Herein the terminology used is
"information lawfully within their control". Hence a mandatory
qualification as to the beneficiary is also provicied within the Article
itself.Ee Control can lie with any person, natural or legal, who has the ability
to determine the use and further disclosure of the information. Thus, even
Iicensees have control and it is not necessary that only the person creating
the information may have control. It is however required that this control
must be "legitimate". What follows is that a person having access to
information by illegitimate means cannot seek protection as he is not in
"lawful" control. What would constitute lawful mebns and what would be
illegitimate is again dependent on the national legal system of the member
states.
3.10. The next aspect that needs to be paid regard to is footnote l0 of Article
39.2 which conveys what the words "in'a manner contrary to honest
commercial practices" purport. The same has been defined inclusively as
is indicated by the words "shall mean at least practices such as...". The
kind of activities that would be contrary to honest ccmmercial practices
include breach ofcontract, breach ofconfidence and inducement to breach,
acquisition of such information by third parties who knew or were grossly
negligent in failing to know that such practices were employed in the
acquisition of such information. Since the concept of what is honest is
relative to time and the society being considered, defining it conclusively
is a challenge.e0 In that regard foot note 10 indicates practices of what
8e |d,639.
'qo UNCTAD-lCTSD, Resource []ook on TRIPS and Developmenl 528 (Cambridge University Press,2005).
30
ft-,,

nature will amount to not being honest thus providing both the necessary
flexibility and reducing the scope of divergence in interpretationer by
providing a binding interpretive note.e2
3. I 1 . While the term "undisclosed information" has been used in the Article, the
same has not been defined. The Article, however, lays down certain
qualifications that must be met in order for the information to be protected.
Thus, the information can be a trade secret, a know-how or by whatever
name it may be called, so long as it meets three requirements set out in
Article 39.2 (a) to (c), viz. secrecy, commercial value and reasonable steps
to maintain secrecy, such information will be protected within the ambit of
this provision. Further, it is to be noted that sub-clause (a) establishes an
objectiveer and relativeea standard ofsecrecy. Accordingly, the information
must not be generally knor,,n among or readily accessible to persons within
the circles that normally deal with the kind of infonnation in question. So,
secrecy would be adjudged based on a sector-specific analysises and
whether most of the competitorse6 knew of the same. If another competitor
has knowledge of the information but is maintaining confidentiality over
it, it will still not be considered generally known or readily accessible. The
term "readily accessible" is usually understood to mean that disclosure of
the information would require time, effort and is subject to difficulties.
Fufther, it is absolutely immaterial whether the information is generally
e2 Markus Peter and Martin Michaelis, "section 7: Protection ofUndisclosed lnformation" in Peter-Tobias Stoll,
Jan Busche et.al. (eds.), ,yTO Trade-Related ,4spects of Intellectual Prope y Ri9hts 636 (Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers, 2009).
'r UNCTAD-ICTSD, Resottrce Book on TRIPS and Developmenl 529 (Cambridge University Press, 2005).
er Markus Peter and Martin Michaelis, "section 7: Protection of Undisclosed Information" in Peter-Tobias Stoll,
Jan Busche et.al. (eds.\, WTO-.T t qde-Related Aspecls of lntellectual Prcperty Rights 639 (Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers, 2009).
q5 
ld.
% UNCTAD-ICTSD , Resource Book on TRIPS and Developtkent 529 (Cambridge University Press, 2005).
3l
&,

known as a consequence ofdetiberate disclosure or by accident.eT Once the
information is out in the open, secrecy is lost irrespective of the
consequences surrounding such disclosure. Further, information is not just
protected as a body but even as a precise configuration or assembly of
components wherein the individual parts may be known but the beneficial
combination is not known or readily accessible to others in the industry.e8
Further sub-paragraph (b) requires the existence of a causal relationship
between secrecy and commercial value of the information meaning thereby
that the information must have actual commercial value for the holder by
virtue of secrecy being maintained over it.ee Commercial value would
generally imply that the information being kept secret gives a competitive
advantage to the holder over other competitors not having access to the
secret and such competitive edge would be lost if the information ceases to
be a secret.r00 Lastly, sub-paragraph (c) requires that the person in lawful
control of the information must have taken reasonable steps to keep the
information a secret. While the provision does not imply any specific fype
of measures that ought to be taken by the person in control of the
information,r0r it does require some actual measures to be put in place and
not passive reliance on random non-disclosurelo2. Such steps or measures
"7 Christian R,iffel, Protection .lgqinst t.tdai, Conpctition in the ll'l'O I RIPS ,lgrccnent: -l'he Scope and
Prospects of ,4rticle llbis ol the Paris ('onvenlion .fot lhe P, otection of lndustrial Property 24 (Brill Nijhoff,
Leiden,20l6).
"3 UNCTAD-ICTSD, Resource Book on TRIPS and Development 529 (Cambridge University Press, 2005);
Markus Peter a'ld Martin Michaelis. "Section 7: Protection of Undisclosed lnformalion" in Peter-Tobias Stoll,
Jan Busche el.ql. (eds.), WTO Trade-Related ..lspecls o.f lntellech@l Propert! Rights 641 (Maninus Nijhoff
Publishers, 2009).
ee Markus Peter and Martin Michaelis. "section 7: Protection ofUndisclosed lnformation" in Peter-Tobias Sroll,
Jan Busche et.qt. (eds.\, W'TO Trada-Ralaletl ,lspects of lntelle.tual ProPerty RiShts 637 (Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers,2009).
lm Antony Taubman, Hannu Wager, al.al. (eds.\. A ltqndbook on lhe ly'lo TRll'S lgreement 137-138
(Cambridge.University Press, 2'd edn.. 2020); UNCTAD-lCTSD, Resource Book on-l RlPS and Development 529
(Cambridge University Press, 2005); Markus Peter and Martin Michaelis, "Section 7: Protection of Undisclosed
lnformation" in Peter-Tobias Stoll, Jan Buschc el. al (eds.), lfTO Trade-Relqled Aspecls oflnlellectual Properly
Rights 611 (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 2009).
tot Resource Book on TRIPS and Developrzenl 530 (Cambridge University Press, 2005).
ro: Markus Peter and Manin Michaelis. "Section 7: Protection ofUndisclosed lnformation" in Peter-Tobias Stoll,
Jan Busche et.al. (eds.l, ll'TO |i'ade-Related ..lspects of lntelle.'tual Prcpcrty Riqhts 641 (Maninus Nijhoff
Publishers,2009).
32 q,

may range from non-disclosure agreements with employees and licensees
to restricting access of information to select employees, encryption of data,
other contractual restrictions etc. What is required is that the steps must be
reasonable in the given circumstances. Hence, the beneficiary is not
required to go above and beyond to protect secrecy by employing costly or
extensive counter-measures. What is expected is "reasonable" counter-
measures, which is largely dependent on the nature and value of the
informationro3 as well as what is generally done by competitors that are
similarly placed.rol
3.13. The last aspect that needs consideration is that while a definite term of
protection is specified in relation to other categories of intellectual
property, for instance Article 33 specifies a term of 20 years for patents,
there is no such period mentioned in Article 39. Protection of undisclosed
information is perpetual provided the information remains confidential and
other requisite qualifications continue to be met.r07 The moment secrecy is
r0r Antony Taubman, Hannu Wager, er. a/. (eds.), A Handbook on the ltTO TRIPS Ag,'eement 138 (Cambridge
University Press, 2"d edn., 2020).
r@ Markus Peter and Martin Michaelis, "section 7: Protection ofUndisclosed Information" in Peter-Tobias Stoll,
Jan Busche el.a/. (eds.\,llTO Trade-Rel.lted Aspects ol !nlellectuql Property Rights 641-642 (Maninus Nijhoff
Publishers, 2009).
to5 \d,637.
t$ ld,637 .
!07 Antony Taubman, Hannu Wager, er. a,/. (eds.), A llarulbook on the lffo TRll'S lg|eeme 138 (Cambridge
University Press, 2nd edn.,2020).
JJ
3.12. ln addition to the requirements specified in Anicle 39.2, there is another
un-stated requirement that flows from of the very context of the TRIPS
Agreement itself, that is, such undisclosed information should be trade
related.r05 Thus, information that is entirely private in nature or is unrelated
to one's competitive position in not covered within the ambit of this
Article.r06

C. Article 39.3
3.14. Data exclusivity has its roots in the principles of unfair competition.r08
Essentially, Article lODis aims to promote integrity in industrial and
commercial practices and to deter deceptive actions like fraudulent
manufacturing and other practices that deceive the public regarding the
characteristics and standards of goods.
3.15. The third paragraph of Article 39 is aimed at protecting data submitted to
governments or govemmental agencies which is defined in Article 39.3 to
mean undisclosed test or other data required by the laws of the member
states to be submitted for getting marketing approvals for pharmaceutical
or agricultural chemical products which utilize new chemical entities. This
obligation created under this paragraph is often termed as "data
exclusivity". Data exclusivity essentially relates to the requirement to treat
information submitted to regulators, govemments, or govemmental
agencies as protected and thus restricted from third-party access. Typically,
such data is provided to regulators to obtain marketing approvals for
various applications. For instance, clinical trial data submitted to
'03 NS Gopalakrishnan & Benoy Kadavan. Study on Test data Proteclion in lndia (Centre for Intellectual Propeny
Rights Studies, Cochin University ofScience & Technology,2004)
34
lost, the protection ceases and the information may be used by others. The
same applies where the information ceases to have commercial value. In
similar vein, if a third party independently develops or creates the
information by fair means and chooses to disclose the same to the public,
then also the protection would cease and if the third parry chooses to keep
it a secret, then no claim of misappropriation would lie against such bara
fide third party.
q/

a
goverrlment agencies seryes as support for the approval ofa compound as
a drug. This submitted data is often crucial in demonstrating the safety of
the concemed drug.
3.16. The following can be observed in respect of Article 39.3:
There must be a condition mandating submission of such data for
marketing and regulatory approvals. Any data not required for approval or
submitted in excess of the legal requirements would not be protected within
the ambit of Article 39.3.r0e
The protection should be made available for pharmaceutical or agricultural
chemical products. If there are other sectors wherein such test data is
mandated, there is no requirement to protect the same at least under this
Article as the Article itself is putting data submitted for marketing of
pharmaceutical or ofagricultural chemical products at a higher pedestal.rr0
Further, what are pharmaceutical or agricultural chemical products have
not been defined. Pharmaceutical would imply medicines available at the
pharmacies - be it for human consumption or otherwise. Agricultural
chemical products (agrochemicals) can be defined as biologically active
compounds such as herbicides, fungicides, pesticides or fertilizers and does
not include animals and plants as such, regardless of whether developed by
means of genetic engineering or conventional breeding as they are not
b
r@ Lucas R. Arrivillagg, "An lnternational Standard ofProtection for Test Data Submitled to Authorities to Obtain
Marketing Authorization for Drugs" 6 The Journal o/ lltorld lntellecnal Property 144 (2005).
rro Srividhya Ragavan, "The Significance ofthe Data Exclusivity Debate and its Impact on Generic Drugs" l(l)
Journal of lntellectuol ProPerty Studies 133 (201'7\' avqilable qt'
https://scholarship.law.tamu.edrrcgi/viewcontent.cgi?article: I 8 l6&context=facscholar ( last vistited on February
25,2024\. \
35 &,/-nv

c
d
"chemical products.rrr There is some discretion with the members states as
to the interpretation of these terms.
Such pharmaceutical or agricultural chemical products should utilize new
chemical entities. The wording of the A(icle is clear that the entity in itself
should be new and not simply a new usage. Beyond this, the Articte is silent
on the standard of novelty required under this provision.r r2
The provision covers not only "test data", which encompasses clinical and
pre-clinical trial data, but also "other data" which may comprise
manufacturing, conservation and packaging methods and conditions etc.rrl
However, such test data or other data has to be "undisclosed".
The next requirement under the provision is that the origination ofthe data
must involve a considerable effort. What amounts to considerable effort,
however, is not defined either by illustration or explanation.
For test data or other data meeting the criteria specified in the provision,
two kinds ofprotection have been envisaged. First, such data shall protect
against unfair commercial use. Second, data has to be protected from
disclosure. However, such disclosure is not prohibited if it is necessary to
protect the public or when steps are taken to ensure that such data is
protected against unfair commercial use. Unlike footnote l0 in Article
39.2, there is no explanation or illustration provided under this paragraph
to explain what amounts to "unfair commercial use".
Another prerequisite flows from paragraph I of Article 39 that the
provision is only applicable to data submitted to the govemment or
rrr Severin Strauch and Martin Michaelis, "Section 7: Prolection of Llndisclosed lnformation" in Peter-Tobias
Stoll,JanBuschee/.41.(eds.l,'TO Ttade- Ralatcd l spects ol lntcllcctutil Propcrty llights 650 (Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers, 2009).
l12 Eric M. Solovy, "Protection ol-Tesl Dqt.t Under,lrticle 39.3 eflhc l'RlPS,!*recnent.. ,ldvancements and
Challenges /[ter 25+ Years of lntcrpretation and ,!pplicatior" 43 Northwestern Journal of lnternational Law &
Business 66 (2022), available at: https://scholarlycommons.law.nonhwestern.edu/nj ilb/vol43/iss I /2 (last visited
on February 26,2024).
rrr Severin Strauch and Manin Michaelis, "Section 7: Protection of Undisclosed Information" in Peter-Tobias
Stoll, Jan Buscheer.al. (eds.),lfTO Tra<le-llclatcd Aspects dlnlallLct dl l'rcpc ! Righls 650 (Mafiinus Nijhoff
Publishers, 2009).
f.
36
s,

govemmental agencies. Information made available to third parties
voluntarily by the legitimate holder is outside the scope of this Article.rra
3.17. Data exclusivity is often criticised as generic drug companies are required
to replicate a clinical trial that has already been conducted elsewhere,
which leads to redundant burdens in terms of both time and cost. The
expense of conducting such trials is added to the cost of the drug and
ultimately passed on to the consumers. Additionally, the delay caused on
account of duplicating the clinical trial postpones the availability and
accessibility of the drug in the market. By safeguarding the data and
restricting its disclosure, clinical trial data becomes exclusive information
which is limited in access to certain individuals or entities' However,
members also possess the flexibility to delineate what constitutes "unfair
commercial use.
3. I 8. In many developing countries, it is common practice to permit goverrlment
authorities to utilize clinical trial data for evaluating the effectiveness and
safety of a pharmaceutical product. This allowance is considered to be in
the public interest, as it facilitates the approval process and enables the
immediate marketing of the drug once the data exclusivity period
concludes.l l5
3.19. For pharmaceutical companies, safeguarding this information presents an
economic opportunity by establishing a new market for data conceming
rra Severin Strauch and Martin Michaelis, "Section 7: Protection of Undisclosed Information" in Peter-Tobias
Stoll, Jan Busche er.a l. (eds.). ll7 O-'fratle-Relatctl .4 spects of lntellcctudl Property Riarrs 650 (Maninus Nijhoff
Publishers,2009).
rr5 Srividhya Ragavan, .'The Significance of the Data Exclusivity Debate and its lmpact on Generic Drugs" I ( | )
Journal oi lntcllectual Property Studies ll4 (201?)' availahle at:
hnps://scholarship.law.tamu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?anicle= I 8 | 6&context=facscholar ( last vistited on February
25,2024\.
37

the safety of the drug. It also aids in preserving the existing market for the
compound and, in certain instances, extends market exclusivity for the
compound beyond the expiration of the patent. However, the crux of the
mafter lies in ensuring access to medication and food, which are vital for
poorer nations. Therefore, it is crucial for developing countries to adopt a
coherent approach to address these issues effectively.rr6
3.20. Given that access to medication has emerged as a significant concern
within the framework of the WTO, particularly under the TRIPS
Agreement, permitting government authorities to access clinical trial data
for public health purposes would likely fall within the public interest
exception outlined in Article 39.3. Definitions of "public interest"
established in the Doha Declaration on the TNPS Agreement and Public
Health are also relevant in this context. This application of public interest
definitions enhances the flexibility of WTO Members in determining the
components of the data exclusivity regime.llT
3.21 . The debate surrounding access to medication has gamered significant
global support for several reasons:
The patent systems of countries like the United States, which have been
emulated worldwide, are now facing widespread criticism for prioritizing
private property rights over public heatth concems, particularly conceming
pharmaceutical patents.
The rising costs of medications have become a pressing issue even in
developed nations, exacerbating concems about affordabiliry and access to
essential treatments.
a.
b
\6 Id. lf4.
rr7 World Trade Organization, Doha Declaration on TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, para' 6'
38 q"

Influential intemational reports, such as the LIN High-Level Panel Report
on Access to Medicines,r rE have emphasized the critical need for
improving access to medication in poorer nations, highlighting the
importance of addressing this issue on a global scale.
3.22. Moreover, the prevailing view of patents as impediments to access,
coupled with the backlash against predatory pricing practices by
pharmaceutical companies (e.g., Bayer's Nexavar in India), has prompted
innovator pharmaceutical firms to seek altemative methods to maintain
market exclusivity. The rising unpopularity of escalating drug prices has
led to data exclusivity emerging as a potent indirect tool for preserving
market exclusivity.
3.23. Data exclusivity, thus, represents a compromise between innovator drug
companies and generic drug companies, particularly in the context of
legislations tike the Hatch-Waxman Act in the United States. However, it's
important to note that such compromises may not be imperative for every
market, particularty in developing countries such as India. The dynamics
ofeach market, including its economic and healthcare considerations, can
influence the need for and the nature of such compromises.lle Data
exclusivity essentially bestows market exclusivity upon the entity that
submits the information, thereby aiding in maintaining a high price for the
product.r20
r18 United Nations Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines, United Nations,
avai lab I e .1t : http://www.unsgaccessmeds.org/.
I Ie Srividhya Ragavan, "The S ign ilicance of the Data Exclusiv ity Debate and its Impact on Generic Drugs" I ( I )
Jorrnal ol lnlelleclual Prope, ty .!rdie.! I 16 (2017)' available al:
https://scholarship.law.tamu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article= I 8 | 6&context=facscholar (last vistited on February
25,2024).
12o Id,136.
39 &/
C.

4. APPROACHES TOWARDS PROTECTION OF TRADE SECRETS
IN OTHER COUNTRIES
4.1. Protecting intellectual properry is important for individuals and businesses
to safeguard valuable assets and foster a culture of innovation. Trade
secrets are one of the important intellectual property rights safeguarding
confidential undisclosed information pertaining to any business or
cbmmercial activity. Realizing the importance of trade secrets, many
countries have enacted and amended laws to strengthen the protection of
trade secrets and sensitive corporate information. The right of protecting
trade secrets is available in many countries but the nature ofthe right varies
significantly. Some countries have enacted standalone specific laws on
trade secrets, some provide protection under laws pertaining to unfair
competition, while others continue to protect it under principles of common
law or equity or a mix of different laws. The approaches towards
safeguarding trade secrets adequately as adopted across various
jurisdictions has been elaborately discussed below.
A. Australia
4.2. Trade secrets in Australia are treated as 'confidential information', giving
businesses a competitive edge. Since, there is no strict definition of'trade
secrets, in Australia and it is merely a form of confidential information,
trade secret is understood as per the meaning accorded by Article 39 ofthe
TRIPS Agreementr2r, to which Australia has acceded. To protect trade
secrets in Australia, there is no specific legislation and trade secrets are not
registered with the Intellectual Property office. Rather, trade secrets are
Pr TRIPS, art. 39
40 6/

protected under the common law of Australia with secrecy and
confi dentiality agreements. 
| 22
4.3. Since Australia does not have a statutory framework for protecting trade
secrets, confidentiality of trade secrets is ensured through 'confidentiality
agreements' outlined in contracts between parties, which are binding and
can be enforced under the common law of the country. A confidentiality
agreement is a legally enforceable contract. If under such an agreement,
any information is disclosed with any person, then such person is obligated
to maintain the secrecy and confidentiality of such information and refrain
from misusing it.r23 Usually, such protection is given by Non-Disclosure
Agreements, whereby employees are prohibited from disclosing the
sensitive information to any other employee of the company or any third
party. Moreover, in simple contracts, a'restraint of trade' clause is inserted
to protect company's trade secret. Such a clause may prevent an employee
from starting a new competing business in the same industry or to join a
competing company and it may also prevent employees from appropriating
company's clients, when they leave the company. Thus, in any commercial
retationship, confidential information can be protected through explicit
contract terms.
4.4. In cases where there is no contract befween the parties for protecting such
information, the parties may rely on the equitable principle of the breach
of confidence. A breach of confidence claim is to be established for
protection of the confidential information. Such may be claimed if the
l:: Types of lP, lP Australia, Australian Government. ar,ailable at: https! lwww. ipaustralia.gov.aulunderstand ing-
ipltypes-of-ip (last visited on February 18. 2024).
I:r Confidentiality Agreements, Business Queensland, Queensland Govemment. available dl,
hBps://www.business.qld.gov.aulrunning-business/risk/ip/ip-kit/browse-ip-topics/confidentiality-agreements
(last visited on February I8, 2024).
1l Qr/

information can be identified with exclusivity and specificity; the
information is confidential and not known to people at large; the defendant
had an obligation of confidence to keep the information secret; and the
defendant misused the information or used without the plaintifls consent.
Several provisions of different Australian statutes protect disclosure of
information by imposing an obligation of confidence. One such statute is
the Australian Corporations Act 2001, which is the federal legislation
outlining laws and regulations for operation of businesses. One of the
provisions of the act provides that a person acting as a director or other
officer or employee of a corporation must not improperly use the
information, which they have obtained while being in that position to: (a)
gain an advantage for themselves or someone else; or (b) cause detriment
to the corporation.r2a
4.5. As trade secrets is protected through agreements under common law, thus
there is specific statutory duration ofthe right. For breach ofconfidentialiry
agreement, only a limitation period is applied depending on the region of
Australia and nature of the agreement. The remedies for breach of
confidentiality includes equitable remedies of civil law such as injunction,
compensation for damages, delivery-up of documents etc. and other usual
remedies, available in the case of a breach of contract. While determining
such remedies, the principle of unjust enrichment of the defendant and the
extent of damage caused to the plaintiff are to be taken care of. Hence,
trade secrets in Australia are protected through common law by the
principle of confi dentiality.
r:a The Corporation Act ofAustralia 2001, (Act No.50 of200l), Chapter 2D. Part 2D l' Division I' 182-183,
available al;hnps;l^vww.legislation.gov.au/C2004A00818/2019-07-01/texr
42
S,/

B, Canada
4.6. Canada, unlike the US, which has both federal and provincial law
protecting trade secrets, does not have a separate trade secrets law. Trade
secret law is instead based on the common law action for breach of
confidence.r2s The term "trade secrets" has generally not been clearly
distinguished from the broader category of confidential commercial
information.r26 A trade secret can be any technical, financial or commercial
information. Trade secrets are not treated as property, rather it is an
obligation to maintain confidentiality that arises out of fiduciary duty'
4.7. Trade secrets are protected in Canada by contract or by tort where a duty
of confidence or fiduciary duty is owed by a recipient to a discloser of
confidential business information.r2T Further, misappropriating
confidential information can lead to criminal sanctions for fraud.
Additionally, improperly disclosing trade secrets is economic espionage
under the federal Security of Information Act if done in connection with a
foreign economic entity and if resulting in damage to canada's economy,
security or intemational relations. r2E
4.8. If someone acquires trade secret through fraudulent means such as
misrepresentation, non-disclosure of information or breach of confidence
then it is punishable under Torts of Deceit, which provides remedies such
rr5 *Trade Secret Protection and Remedies in Canada", Dentons (Feb 25, 2022\ qvqilable al
hnps:/iwr"*.dentons.com/en/insights/articlesl2022/february125/trade-secret-protection-and-remedies-in-canada
(last visited Feb. 14,2024't.
126 lbid.
111 Doing Business in Cqnada, Osler, Hoskin, & Harcoun LLP' 129 (September 2023\' available.at
https://wiw.osler.com/osler/media/Osler/Content/DBICiPDFs/Osler-Doing-Business-in-Canada pdl?ext: pdf
(last visited Feb. 14,2024)
113 lbid.
43 U,/

as injunction damages and accounts of prrofit.r2e Whereas if anyone gets
unauthorized access to a trade secret contained in computer system or when
someone fraudulently takes someone else's property be it intangible, then
it is punishable under Criminal Code of Canada.r30
4.9. lnLac Minerals Ltdv. International Corona Resources Ltd,t3t the Supreme
Court of Canada affirmed the following test for the breach of confidence:
i. the existence ofconfidential information,
ii. its communication in confidence, and
iii. its misuse by the paffy to whom it was communicated.
4.10. The test laid down in Lac Minerals was followed in Cadbury Schweppes
Inc. v. FBI Foods Ltd,tt) with the court finding in particular that the
information conveyed was confidential, was communicated in confidence,
and was misused by the party to whom it was communicated.
4.11. However, while breach of confidence can protect true trade secrets, the
absence of a requirement showing independent economic value or
reasonable efforts to maintain secrecy means that breach ofconfidence can
also protect information that is not truly a trade secret'r33 Breach of
confidence has been used to protect personal information, like in the cases
of Condon v. Canadat34 and John Doe v. Canada.l35
rre Business Law and Ethics, qvailable al,
https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/buslawandethicscanada./chapter/other-torts/-
rr0 Criminal Code ofCanada (R.S.C., 1985, c: C-46), ss.322,342.1,380.
'r' I9891 2 SCR 574.
rr? [999] I SCR 142.
r, J Buchanan and S Cloutier, "Canada's Secret Trade Secret Protection Laws", Mccarthy and Tetrault (July 5,
20'lE), available a/; https://www,mccarthy.calen/insights/blogs/techlex/canadas-secret-ftade-secret-protection'
laws (last visited Feb. 15, 2024).
'r4 2015 FCA 159.
rr5 20 t6 FCA t 9l.
44 qx/

4.12. Another important consideration applicable to intellectual property cases
in general has been the emphasis that the overall purpose in assessing
damages or profits is to find "a broadly equitable result".136 ln GasTOPS
Ltd. v. Forsyth,l3T the Ontario Superior Court noted that damages are rarely
sufficient to compensate misappropriations of confidential information
given that the harm suffered is often hard to quantify' The Court opted to
award damages based on accounting of Mxl's competing profits. After
wading through the substantial evidentiary record covering a ten-year
period, the Court awarded over CAD I I million.rrE
4.13. Recently, the Ontario Legislature passed the Working for Workers Act,
2021, making Ontario the first province in Canada to prohibit employers
from engaging in non-compete agreements with employees.r3e Non-
compete provisions in employment contracts were among the most widely
used tools for protecting against unauthorized use or disclosure of trade
secrets in Canada.lao However, there are two exceptions:
i. the sale ofa business where, as part of the sale, the parties enter
into an agreement that prohibits the seller from competing with
the purchaser's business and the seller becomes an employee of
the purchaser immediately following the sale; and
ii. non-compete agreements entered into with executives, defined
as "any person who holds the office of chief executive officer,
president, chief administrative officer, chief operating officer,
116 Michael crichton and will Boyer, "canada" in chanthcrs Glohal Practice Guides: Tr.rdc secrets 2022,7
(Chambers, 2022\, availoble at: https://gowlingwlg.com/getattach ment/lnsights-Resources lauidesl2l22/t.ade-
iecrer-guide-2022-canada/bedeac5cbb47-004_CANADA-3.pdf.xml/?lang:en-GB (last visited Feb. I 5, 2024).
'r? 20l2 oNcA t34.
rrs Michael Crichton and Will Boyer, "Canada" in Chamber.s Glohal Pr(tctice Guides: TrQde Secrels 2022' 1
(Chambers, 2022\, available ar: ilttps://gowlingwlg.com/getattachmenrlnsights-Resources /Gt ides/2Dz2ltnd*
iecret-guide-2022:canada./bedeac5cbL4z-oOl CeNaOe-l.pdf.xml/?lang=en-GB (last visited Feb. I 5, 2024).
tte Ibid.
140 lbid
45 G/

chief financial officer, chief information officer, chief legal
officer, chief human resources officer or chief corporate
development officer, or holds any other chief executive
position."
4.t4. A key takeaway from this is that trade secret enforcement will take on
heightened importance, making contractual confidentiality provisions
more important, as will any other measures that companies may be able to
take, to limit trade secret misappropriation (e.g., limiting access to trade
secrets to select employees; and, ensuring appropriate security measures,
including digital and physical measures).
4.15. Furthermore, recent amendments to Canada's Criminal Code resulted in
the addition of section 391. Section 391 formally defines the term "trade
secret" and creates two new offences for fraudulently taking a trade secret.
In particular, subsection 391(1) makes it an offence to knowingly obtain,
communicate or make available a trade secret by deceit, false-hood or other
fraudulent means. The Crown must prove both the act and the mental
element beyond a reasonable doubt to be liable under this provision.
Subsection 391(2) makes it an offence to knowingly obtain, communicate
or make available trade secret obtained through the commission of an
offence under subsection 39 1 (1 ).ral
4.16. In the 1990s, China introduced its inaugural trade secret protection
legislation through the enactment of the Anti-Unfair Competition Law
(AUCL) of 1993. A subsequent amendment in 2019 broadened the
141 lbid.
46
C. Chirtu
q,/

definition of a trade secret outlined in the 1993 AUCL. This expansion
incorporated "commercial information" alongside "technical or
operational" information within the scope of trade secrets definition.
4.t7. The amendment implemented in 2019 now mandates that a trade secret
only needs to possess commercial value, which previously constituted just
one aspect of the broader category termed "economic benefit." This
adjustment lowers the burden of proof required to establish this criterion,
benefiting the rights holder, particularly conceming commercial rather
than technical secrets. However, in a ruling dated December 16,2019ra2,
the Supreme Court narrowed the scope of commercial secrets by excluding
protection for mere customer lists, even if covered by executed
confidentiality agreements. Specifically, the precedent set forth determined
that details such as customer names, product names, product specifications,
sales order quantities, unit prices, contact persons, phone numbers,
addresses, etc., could largely be compiled from publicly available sources'
4.1 8. In stipulating the criteria for "commercial information" to qualify as a trade
secret under the 2019 AUCL, the Court delineated the notion of "special
information" with specific examples. For instance, a customer list must
encompass not only past order details but also delve into the customer's
precise purchasing habits, intentions, and other nuanced information to be
deemed a trade secret. The conjunction of the updated law and the
subsequent clarification by the Supreme People's Court regarding this
pivotal aspect appears to have established clarity and coherence.r{3
ta1 Mai Da Keer Oianjin) Tech. (o.. Ltd. v. lluayang -tiuing Technoloqg' (Tidnjin) Group Co., l.td.. (2019\ Zui
FaMin Zai.268.
rar paolo Beconcini, ..The State ofTrade Secret Protection in China in Light ofthe U.S.-China Trade Wars: Trade
Secret Protection in China Before and After the U.S.- China Trade Agreement ofJanuary 15. 2020", UIC Review
of Intellectual Prcperty l,6t 128 (2021).
47 G"/

4.19. The relevant articles of the AUCL are notewofthy and necessary to be
discussed. Article 9 deals with infringement of trade secrets and casts a
duty on entity not to infringe another trade secret. Any entity may report a
suspected act of infringement of trade secret as per Article 16 and the
regulatory department may conduct an investigation as per the provisions
of Article 13. A duty is also cast on the Regulatory Authority to keep
confidential any trade secret that it may come across during investigations
of suspected unfair competition by any entity as per Article I 5 and Article
30 penalises the misuse of trade secret by any official or employee of the
Regulatory Authority.
4.20. Article l7 further imposes a civil liability on any entity causing damage to
another in violation of the said law which includes infringement of trade
secrets and it further empowers the party that has been prejudiced to
institute an action before the competent people's court. Article l7 further
provides that the amount of damages, which includes the reasonable costs
for stopping the infringement, shall be determined based on its actual loss
caused by the infringement and if it is difficult to calculate the actual loss,
based on the benefits obtained by the infringer.
4.21. Further, in accordance with Article 2l if the business entity has maliciously
infringed upon the trade secret with flagrant circumstances, the amount of
damages shall be no less than one time but no more than five times of the
amount determined by the aforementioned method. In addition to the civil
liability that may ensue, the law also imposes fine of RMB 100,000-RMB
10,00,000, or in case of serious circumstances, a fine of RMB 500,000 to
50,00,000 yuan.
48 h-

4.23. The Chinese government has shown a commitment to continuously
improve its intellectual property laws, including trade secret protection'
Revisions to the AUCL and other relevant legislations demonstrate a
willingness to address gaps and strengthen enforcement mechanisms to
better protect trade secrets.
D, Germany
4.24. Pursuant to the EU Directive on the protection of undisclosed know-how
and business information against their unlawful acquisition, use and
disclosure (Trade Secrets Directive), Germany enacted the 'Gesetz zum
Schutz von Geschiiftsgeheimnisser/GeschGehG' (Trade Secrets
Protection Act) of t 8'r' April, 2019.t44
4.25. Prior to this, trade secrets in Germany were protected through a
fragmentary framework, especially through Sections l7-19 of the Unfair
Competition Act, which have now been repealed.ras Apart from this, prior
r14 (Trade Secret Laws and Regulations in Germany", CMS, availablc 4r: https://cms.la enlinrexpei-
guides/cms-expert-guide-to-trade-secrets/germany (last visited on Feb. 15,2024)'
i.t.Th" N"* Trade Secret Protection Act and its Implications for Practice", Deloitte, available at.
https://www2.deloine.com/dl/en/pages/legal/articles/geschaeftsgeheimnisschutzgesetz.html (last visited on Feb.
t 5,2024\.
49
4.22. Article 32 elaborates that the holder oftrade secret has to establish a prima
facie case by proving that measures were taken to maintain confidentiality
and reasonably indicating that there has been an infringement. The burden
of proof then falls upon the alleged infringer that the information concemed
is not a "trade secret". The Article also indicates the evidence that the
lawful holder can submit to establish a prima facie case of infringement
and that the infringer will have to prove non-infringement when such
evidence has been adduced.
qY.,

to the enactment, trade secrets were protected through Sections 280(l),
241(2) of the German Civil Code for contractual claims for damages as
well as Sections 823 and 826 of the German Civit Code for tortious claims.
On the criminal side, trade secrets were protected through Sections 201 to
206 of the German Criminal Code which criminalize the violation of
personal life and secrets pertaining to it.r16 Section 203 of the German
Criminal Code criminalizes the disclosure of protected secrets by people
subject to certain kinds of professional secrecy.raT
4.26. The Trade Secrets Protection Act addresses unauthorized acquisition, use,
and disclosure of trade secrets. The rights and obligations arising from a
relationship of employment and the rights of workers' representatives
remain unaffected by this Act. Further, right to freedom of expression and
information protected under the EU Fundamental Rights Charter also
remains unaffected.
4.27. Section 2( I ) defines a trade secret. It broadly encompasses the three criteria
as provided under Article 39.2 of the I'RIPS Agreement, however an
additional condition of "a legitimate interest in maintaining
confi dentiality" has also been incorporated. 
I a8
4.28. Under the scheme of the Act, it has been specified as to what are permitted
actions, prohibitions and exceptions. Section 3 clearly demarcates what
amounts to permitted acts. It is permissible to acquire a trade secret by:
independent discovery or creation; or by observing, examining, reverse
engineering, or testing a product or object that is either publicly available,
146 (Trade Secret Laws ar,d Regulations in Cermany", C.MS, qvailubla a/: https://cms.la en/int/expert-
guides/cms-e\pert-guide-to-trade-secrets/germany (last visited on l'eb. 15, 2024).
to, lbid.
ra3 The Trade Secrets Protection Act (Gesetz zum Schutz von Ceschiiftsgeheirnnissen/GeschGehG)' N 2( I ).
50 qr/

or in the lawful possession of the observer, examiner, reverse engineer. or
tester who is not subject to any duty to restrict the acquisition of the trade
secret; or exercising information and hearing rights of employees or
participation and co-determination rights of employee representation.
Further, it is permissible to acquire, use or disclose a trade secret if
pennitted by taw, pursuant to a law, or by contract.rae
4.29. Section 4 deals with the prohibitions and specifies that a trade secret cannot
be acquired by: unauthorized access to/ appropriatiorV copying of
documents, ob.jects, materials, substances, or electronic files that are under
the tawful control of the holder and that contain the trade secret or from
which the trade secret can be derived; or any other behavior that, under the
circumstances, does not comply with the principle of good faith, taking into
account customary market practices. Further, a person cannot use or
disclose a trade secret if they have acquired it in a prohibited manner or in
violation of an obligation to restrict the use of the trade secret, or an
obligation not to disclose the trade secret. Furthermore, a third parfy is also
estopped from acquiring, using or disclosing a trade secret if at the time of
acquiring, use, disclosure it is known or should have been known that he
person from whom it is being acquired has used/disclosed the same in a
prohibited manner.r5o
4.30. Limited exceptions have also been car'red out under Section 5 that are not
subject to prohibitions under Section 4. The exceptions include
acquisition, use, or disclosure of a trade secret done to protect a legitimate
interest, especially: to exercise the right to freedom of expression and
,0, /d, S 3; The wording ofthe Act allows a licensee to be the holder ofthe trade secret as well. The agreement
must contain an obligation of the other contracting party to keep secret the knowledge and information that has
become known as a result ofthis cooperation.
,to /d, s 4.
51
W

information, including respect for freedom and plurality of the media; or to
expose an unlawful act or professional or other misconduct when the
acquisition, use, or disclosure is suitable to protect the general public
interest; or as part of disclosure by employees to the employee
representation when necessary for the employee representation to fulfil its
tasks.l5l
4.3 I . Chapter 2 articulates the claims that may be raised in case of infringement.
Section 6 provides that the holder may ask for removal of the impairment
and, in case ofa risk of repetition, also a cease-and-desist order.l52 Section
7 provides other remedies that may be claimed by the holder: destruction
or surrender of infringing documents and recall/permanent
removal/destruction/withdrawal of infringing products. rs3 Section 8 funher
provides what information may be sought by the holder from the infringer
and the infringer's liability to compensate in case of intentional or grossly
negligent failure to provide the same.r5a
4.32. Section 9 talks about instances where claims are barred on account oftheir
fulfilment being disproportionate and thus seek to balance the interests of
justice in exceptional cases such as where legitimate interests of a third
parly exist or in public interest. Section l0 talks about the liability of an
infringer acting intentionally or negligently to compensate and how
r5r /d, $ 5: As shown by the formulation "in particular" in Sec. 5. this list is not exhaustive. Other legitimate
inlerests may include fundamental rights positions that conflict with the protection ofbusiness secrets.
rtr /d, s 6.
r5r /4 S 7.
r51 /d. S 8; Acc. to Sec. 8, the holder ofa trade secret nray request frorn the infringer information on the following:
i) the name and address ofthe producers, suppliers and other previous owners ofthe infringing products, as well
as ofthe commercial custom€rs and sales outlets for which thcy were intendedi
ii) the quantity of infringing products manufactured, ordered, delivered or received and the purchase pricesl
iii) the documents, items, materials, substances or electronic files in the possession or property ofthe infringer,
which contain or embody the trade secret; and
iv) the person from whom they have obtained the trade secret and to whom they have disclosed it.
52
h,,

damages are to be computed.r55 Section I I says that an infringer not acting
intentionally or negligently can compensate the holder in money. Section
12 brings in the concept of vicarious liability in case the infringer is an
employee or agent of a business. In this context, it should be noted that the
aforementioned claims may also be asserted against the new employer of a
former employee if the ernployee concemed has violated trade secrets by
taking them with him or disclosing them and is therefore a rights infringer.
Section l3 provides for a claim for surrender ofunjust enrichment which
can be brought in after expiry of the limitation period within 6 years of
occurrence. Section l4 prohibits abusive assertion and entitles the
opposing party to claim reimbursement of legal expenses without affecting
other claims to compensation that may exist. Section 15 is the jurisdiction
clause. Section 16 addresses confidentiality and provides that the court
upon request by either parry may classifu information as either wholly or
partially confidential. Section 17 provides sanctions for violation of
confidentiality, if so classified by the court - the same is punishable with
fine of up to 100,000 euros or detention for up to six months. Section I 8
clarifies that the confidentiality obligation continues to persist even after
the conclusion of the judicial proceedings also clarifies that the same does
not apply if the coun denies the existence of the contested trade secret or
the information otherwise becomes known to persons dealing with such
information.
r55 /d, S loi According to Section l0 (2), the injured party can choose betueen three variants ofhow to quantify
the compensable damage:
i) demand compensation for the actual danrage incurred.
ii) demand the retum ofthe profit made by the infringer,
iii) calculate the damage on the basis ofan appropriate remuneration, which the infringer would have had to pay
if he had obtained consent to obtain. use or disclose the trade secret.
According to Section I0(3), the o\a,ner of the trade secret may also claim monetary compensation from the
infringer for non-material damages, to the extent that this is equitable.
53
4.33.
S'/

4.34. The catalogue of claims extended by the Act brings about a clear
improvement in the position of the holder of an infringed trade secret
compared to the previous legal situation. It is worth mentioning in this
context that the winning party in a court dispute can now be granted the
power to make the judgment or information about the judgment publicly
known at the expense of the losing party, if the winning party has a
legitimate interest in doing so. r56
E. ln onesia
4.35. Indonesia, sits at the crossroads of south-east Asia, attracting significant
foreign investment across diverse sectors. As innovation flourishes,
protecting trade secrets become crucial for securing a competitive edge.
Indonesia's digital economy is skyrocketing, with staffups and established
players developing innovations in fintech, e-commerce, and artificial
intelligence (AI). Trade secrets in various algorithms, software, and
business models hold immense value. This country is rich in natural
resources like palm oil, minerals and timber. Protecting proprietary
extraction processes and refining techniques through trade secrets
safeguards economic advantage. From batik designs to traditional
medicines, Indonesia has a wealth of intellectual property. Hence, trade
secrets are vital for protecting unique formulas and craftsmanship.
4.36. Indonesia's intellectual property is governed by Copyright Lawr57, Patent
Lawr58, Trademarks and Geographical Indications Lawlse, Trade Secrets
156 /d, $ 21.
15? Law Number 28 of20l4 on Copy ghts-
r58 Law Number l3 of20l6 on Patents.
Ito Law Number 20 of 2016 on Trademarks and Geographical Indications
54 G/

Lawr60, Industrial Designs Lawr6r, Layout Designs of Integrated Circuits
Lawr62 and Plant Variety Protection Lawr6r. Thus, the legal framework in
Indonesia provides a specific law to protect trade secrets.
4.37 . As per the Indonesian Law, 'trade secret' means any information not
known or readily accessible to the public and such information having a
commercial value. The owner of trade secrets owns exclusive rights to use
it and exclude any other party from its use or access.164
4.39. An information qualifies to remain a trade secret till the time it has
economic value and it is confidential, and the owner takes reasonable care
and puts efforts to protect such information. The owner of trade secret can
also grant permission to third party by granting license to use the trade
secret and restricting the third party to disclose it without permission.r66
4.40. Article 1 1 of the Trade Secrets Law provides that in case of infringement
of trade secret, owner can seek civil remedies such as damages and
4.38. Unlike patents or copyrights, trade secrets do not require registration to be
protected. Protection is automatically granted as long as the information
meets the criteria defined above. Trade secrets are protected by a separate
dedicated law regarding Trade Secret (UU 30/2000).165 This law provides
a framework for protecting confidential information that has economic
value and is subject to reasonable efforts to keep it secret.
160 Law Number 30 of2000 on Trade Secrets.
16r Law Number Jl of2000 on lndustrial Designs.
r6: Law Number 32 of2000 on Layout Designs oflntegrated Circuits.
r6r Larv Number 29 of2000 on Plant Variety Protection.
r& Law Number 30 of2000 on Trade Secrets, arts. l,2,3.
r65 Law Nurnber 30 of2000 on Tradc Secrets.
r'6 Law Number 30 of2000 on Trade Secrels, ans. 5,6,7.8.9.
55 b/

termination of all acts. However, Articte 17 of the Trade Secrets Law
provides penalty for the infringement of trade secrets and stipulates a
punishment of imprisonment of at most two years and a fine of upto three
hundred million rupiahs.
F. Israel
4.42. The Commercial Wrongs Act seryes as a cornerstone of trade secrets
protection in Israel, providing a comprehensive framework for
safeguarding confidential business information. The said Act was passed
by the Israeli Knesset in 1999 which refers to trade secrets as a property.
This vras done after the groundbreaking ruling in A.Sh.l.R. caser6T which
explored a new approach in all unfair competition by adding protection to
any intellectual property right which was not eligible for other legal
protection. Thereafter,, the Commercial Wrongs Act, 1999 came into force
which defines trade secret in a manner which is closer to civil law as the
161 A.Sh.l.R. lmportdtion Itlanufaclure and Distrihutioh el al. v. l"orum Accessories and ('onsumer Producls el
al., Ml-A 5768t94.
4.41. As per Article 15, a trade secret shall not be infringed, if the disclosure is
based on the interest of public defense, health, securiry or safety and the
reverse engineering ofa product that is produced from the use of the trade
secret of another person is solely conducted for the interest of making
further development of relevant products. Thus, as Indonesia embraces
innovation across diverse sectors, a well-prepared legal framework and
effective enforcement mechanism for protection oftrade secrets will prove
to be a key to nurture a flourishing environment for businesses to thrive.
56
6.,

definition draws its inspiration from the definition given in the TRIPS
Agreement.r68 The said definition is as follows:
" "trade secret ", "secret" - business information, of any kind, which
is not in the public domain and cannot be easily revealed by others
using legal means, whose secrecv provides its owner a business
advantage over its competitors, and provided that its owner takes
reasonable measures to keep its secrecy. "t6')
4.43. The requirement to refrain from disclosing trade secrets was a common
topic of discussion, primarily due to Israeli law's lack of prohibition on
reverse engineering. Nonetheless, if it can be proved that disclosing such
trade secrets necessitates substantial effort, this information will still be
protected under trade secret provisions. l?0
4.44. The misappropriation of a trade secret which constitute its infringement is
given in the same Act as follows:
"Prohibition against misappropriation of a trade secret
6. (a) A person shall not misoppropriale another's trade secret.
(Two) Any of thefollowing acts constitules a misappropriation of a
trade secret:
(1) The taking by illegal means of ct trade secret without its owner's
consent;for this purpose it shall make no dffirence whether the
secret \t)as taken from its owner or from another person in
possession of the trade secret;
(2) Use ofa trade secret without its owner's consent, the use being
contrary to a contractual or fiduciary obligation imposed upon
the user in favor of the owner of the secret;
(3) The receiving of a trade secret or use of it without its owner's
consent, the receiver or t$er knowing, or it being obvious at the
time of receipt or use, that the secret was transferued to such
person in a manner prohibited by paragraphs (l) or (2) or that
the secret was transferred to any other person in such prohibited
manner prior to reaching the present receiver or user.
5'7
163 Vladimir Gutkovsky, "Comparison ofthe Trade Secret Laws ofthe lsrael and the United States" (2008)
available at.. hnps://ip-ta.com/wp-content/uploads/2022ll l/tsisr.pdf.
Ine The Commercial Wrongs Act, 1999 (Act 5759/1999), s.5-
t10 See, Soptir (lommunicotions Ltd. v. llla'a lot Ili-tech Company Ltd., Motion 6461/04.
&/

(Three) The revealing ofa trade secret by reverse engineering shall
not of ilself be considered an illegal means under paragraph (b)( I );
for the purposes of this subsection, "reverse engineering" -
disassembly or analysis of a product or process with lhe aim of
deciphering a trade secret by working backwards."tTl
4.46. Therefore, ifa misappropriation oftrade secrets is discovered, the plaintiff
has two avenues to pursue for claiming damages. Under the Commercial
Wrongs Act, there exists the option of seeking statutory damages fixed at
100,000 NIS. This choice withdraws the plaintifl-s obligation to prove the
precise extent ofthe harm inflicted upon their business. However, should
the ptaintiff opt not to pursue statutory damages, they still retain the right
to seek the retum of profits gained by the defendant or to pursue the actual
quantifi able damages incurred. 172
G. Itnly
4.47. ln Italy, the Trade Secret I-aw has been implemented by a Legislative
Decree no. 6312018. Trade secrets in this jurisdiction are protected under
both civil and criminal law. The Italian Code of Industrial Property (ICIP)
protects the trade secret under Articles 98, 99, 120, 124, 128, 129, I 3 L The
Italian Criminal Code, also protects the trade secret under Article 362.
Trade secrets are protected as specific industrial property rights in ICIP. In
accordance with Article 2 ICIP, trade secrets are protected as "untitled" IP
r7r The Commercial Wrongs Act, 1999 (Act 5759/1999), s.6.
17'] Mgr. Malej Machu. "Trade Secret law in the U.S.A. and Israel in comparative perspective" (2014\. available
a/: hftps://ssrn.com/abstracF2536864 or http://dx.doi.org/ I 0.2 I 39/ssrn.25 3686,1.
58
4.45. lt can be said that the lsraeli law with respect to trade secrets has an
approach of common law when it comes to misappropriation and an
approach of civil law as far as the definition oftrade secret is concemed.
G./

Rights if they meet the requirement as set out in articles 98 and 99 of the
ICIP.
4.48. Article 98 of ICIP defines trade secrets as:
" Trade secrets include commercial information and technical
industrial experience, also the commercial ones, subject to the
legitimate control of the o,oner, whether such information:
a) is confidential, in the sense that as a whole or in its precise
configuration and combination of its elements it is not generally
known or easily accessible for experts and operators in the field;
b) has an economic value inasmttch as it is confidential;
c) is subject, lo lhe persons to v,hose legitimate control it is subject,
to measures to be considered reasonably adequate to keep it
confidential.
Protection shall also be granted to data relating to tests or other
confidential data, whose processing entails a considerable effort
and whose presentation is conditional upon the marketing
authorization of chemical, pharmaceutical or agricultural products
implying the use of new chemical substances. "
4.50. With respect to an unlawful act, Article 99 states that:
"The acquisition, use or revealing ofthe trade secrets referred to in
Article 98 shall be considered unlawful even when the subiect, at the
time of acquisition, of use or revelation, was aware of or, according
r7r Mattia Dalla Costa. Gaianluca De Cristofaro, "The Trade Secrets Directive-ltaly" LIV No. 3. /,fi.S 199 (2019)
59
4.49. Article 99 of the Intellectual Property Code (ICIP) deems the acquisition
oftrade secrets lawful solely through "independent discovery or creation",
meaning that obtaining information without any involvement of third-party
knowledge or information is permissible. It can be interpreted that lawful
actions may also encompass: (i) reverse engineering, (ii) exercising trade
union rights, and (iii) any other legitimate practices'r73
V

lo the circumstances, should have been aware of thefacl that trade
secrets had been oblained directly or indirectly by a third party who
used them or re'vealed them unlawfully pursuant to paragraph 1."
4.5,I . As far as the protection of trade secrets is concemed, the judges have ample
power to protect the same. The proceedings are held under Article 124lClP
under which there are huge powers of preliminary injunction against the
manufacture, sale and use of the trade secret. In addition, the definitive
withdrawal from the market as well as destruction can be ordered too.
Further, assignment of the ownership of the trade secret to the rightful
owner without prejudice of the right to compensation or damages can also
be done.rTa
4.52. Furthermore, the judge will assess whether to authorize the publication of
their ruling and the appropriateness of the requested measures, taking into
account: (i) the significance ofthe trade secrets, (ii) the actions undertaken
by the infringer in acquiring, using, or disclosing the trade secrets, and (iii)
the likelihood of the infringer continuing to unlawfully use or disclose the
trade secrets. Thejudge also weighs whether an individual can be identified
as the actual infringer and, if so, whether the public interest in publishing
such information is balanced against the potential harm to the infringer's
privacy and reputation.
4.53. The ICIP also prescribes a limitation period under Article 99, wherein it
has been stated that the rights and the actions connected to the misconducts
in such article expires in five years.
60
''o Hogan Lovells, "Reporl on Trade Secrets for the European Commission" (2011\, a,ailable otl
https://publications.europa.eu/resourcc/cellariO68c999d -06d2-4c8e-a68 I -a4ee2eb0e I I 6.0001 .02/DOC l.
(Visited on: Feb 22,20241.
h/

H. Japtn
4.54. ln Japan, trade secrets are mainly protected by the Unfair Competition
Prevention Act, 1993r75 which was last amended in 2018, to strengthen the
protection of trade secrets.
4.55. This Act defines 'trade secrets' as, "technical or business information
useful for business activities, such as manufacturing or markeling methods,
that are kept secret and that are not publicly known.ut76
4.56. The Unfair Competition Prevention Act includes the act of acquiring trade
secrets by theft, fraud, duress or other wrongful means (acquisition oftrade
secrets) or the act ofusing or disclosing trade secrets acquired through an
act of wrongful acquisition of trade secrets, within the purview of 'unfair
competition'. r77
4.57. The Japanese law provides both civil and criminal remedies for
infringement of a trade secret. Civil remedy exists typically in the form of
a court injunction, claim for damages, and restoration of business
reputation under the Unfair Competition Prevention Act.
4.58. The injunction may be aimed at suspending the ongoing encroachment
against the persons encroaching upon its business interest or at preventing
the threatened encroachment from being acted upon against the person
likely to encroach upon its business interest. 178
r75 The Unfair Competition Prevention Act, 1993 (Act 47 of 1993).
t16 Id., art.2(6).
t11 ld., vrt. 2(l).
118 ld., afi.3,
6t Gr/

4.59. Further, the proceedings to seek damages can be pursued without the need
to prove the exact amount of loss or damage resulting from the
infringement, as damages are presumed to have occurred in certain
casesr7". This reduces the burden on claimants to prove lost profits, which
can often be challenging.
4.60. In addition to these, if a company's business is harmed due to infringement
oftrade secret, the company is entitled to seek order for necessary measures
to be taken by the person responsible for infringement to restore the
reputation of the company, in lieu of or in addition to compensation for
damages.lso
4.61. With regard to criminal remedies, the Unfair Competition Prevention Act
specified nine types of acts which constitute Crimes of Infringement of
Trade Secretsl8l, i.e.,
i. Unlau,ful Acquisition: Acquisition of trade secrets by fraud,
deceiving, assaulting, or intimidating a person' or through the
usurpation of management, stealing assets, breaking into afacility,
making unauthorized access, or in any other way prejudicing the
management that the trade secrel owner mainlain;
ii. IJnauthorised (Jse or Disclosure after lJnlawful Acquisition: Use
or Disclosure of trade secrets acquired through an act offraud, or
through the usurpation of management, for the purpose ofwrongful
gain or causing damage to the trade secret owner;
iii. Misappropriation: A person to whom the trade secret ou)ner has
disclosed trade secrets, and who, for the purpose of wrongful gain
or causing damage to the trade secrel owner, obtains trade secrets
by any of the fotlowing means, in breach of the legal duties
regarding the management of the tade secrels:
iv. misappropriating a recording medium containing trade secrets, elc.
or an object that represents trade sectets;
62 h-
17" /.1, an.5.
r3" //., art. 15.
r3r /cl. art. 21.

v. reproducing a description or a record from a recording medium
containing trade secrets, elc., or an object that represents trade
secrets;
vi. not deleting a description or a record that should be deleted from a
recording medium containing trade secrets, etc., and disguising this
act as if the description or record in the recording medium
containing the trade secrets, etc. had been deleted;
vii. Unauthorised Use or Disclosure after Misappropriation: Use or
Disclosure of trade secrets for uniust purposes in violation of the
duty to manage or keep cuslody ofsuch tade secrets, by a person
who acquired such trade secrets bv way of misappropriation;
viii. Unauthorised Use or Disclosure by Employees: Use or Disclosure
of trade secrets by a current executive or employee, to whom the
owner has disclosed such trade secrets, if it was done for unfair
purposes and breached the duties of the said executive or employee
regarding the management or safeguarding of those trade secrets;
ix. {Jnauthorised llse or Disclosure by Former Employees: Use or
Disclosure of trade secrets by a former employee for unfair
purposes after the termination of their employment if, during their
employment and for unjust purposes, they either offer to disclose
the trade secrets to others or receive requests from others lo
disclose or provide access to the trade secrets. This action violates
the duties of the employee regarding the management or
safeguarding of those trade secrets;
x. (Jnauthorised LIse or Disclosure by Secondary Recipients: Use or
Disclosure of trade secrets for unfair purposes by a person, who
has acquired such trade secrets by way of unauthorized disclosure
under any ofitem (b), (d), (e) or (fl above.
xi. (Jnauthorised Use or Disclosute by Tertiary Recipients: Use or
Disclosure of trade secrets for unfair purposes by a person,
knowing that there has been an inlert'ening disclosure constituting
unauthorized disclosure under any of item (b), (d)' (e) or (fl above'
xii. Transfer of goods infringing on Trade Secrets: Assignment,
Delivery or Display of goods for wrongful gain or causing damage
to trade, or transfer or delivery, export, import or providing
through telecommunication line or network distribution by any
person who has obtained such goods under knowledge thal they
were produced by way of using trade secrets' which use constitutes
an offence under above'mentioned offences.
63 h/

4.62. These offences are punishable by imprisonment for not more than five
years, and/or a fine of not more than 5 million yen,rE2 or imprisonment for
not more than ten years and/or a fine of not more than 30 million yenrEi, as
the case may be. Further, if the offences are committed in connection with
the perpetrator's business entity, it may be subject to a fine of not more
than 500 million yen.r8a
I. Netherlands
4.63. The intellectual property rights in Netherlands are govemed by various
federal statutory laws covering all the major domains of intellectual
property. Trade secrets are protected by the Dutch Trade Secrets Act, 2018
(In Dutch: Wet bescherming bedri-jfsgeheimen).t85 Prior to the 2018 Act,
trade secrets were majorly covered by the provisions ofthe Tort law under
the Dutch Civil Code, provisions of employment laws and by some of the
provisions of the criminal law. 186
4.64. However, the scope of trade secret protectlon \t'as broadened ln
Netherlands by the Dutch Trade Secrets Act' 2018, which laid down rules
for implementing the 'Trade Secrets Directive (EU)2016/943 of the
European Parliament and of the council of 8 June 201 6 on the Protection
of Undisclosed Know-how and Business lnformation (Trade Secrets)
t3' Id.. a.t.2l(21.
133 Id.. art.2ll3).
tu ld., an.22(l\.
r8t Dutch Trade Secrets Act,20l8 (ln Dutch: ll'et bascherming bedri-ifsgeheimen' PbELt 2016' Ll57).
ls6 Wouter pors- ,,The Trade Secrets Directive Netherlands" 54. No. 3, Les Notvelles - Journal ofthe l-iunsing
Lteculives Socie1' (2019). available al:
t ttpi,lla"tiu"rypat.srn.com/detiveiy.ph p?tD=47806912411008 80251010220210060 1509203004200601 208903
toiott:ogsoibtosoz:tolotsos+0s20430380220170i100t0t800310201100907500006911001001702800709
2095097086 I 20 | l9 lO2l 0001000800 | 00400'{ l06 t o5 I 2002507509307208407400 I 00 1086092030065 | 2606906
4073 I 261 1300 I 00208 I &EXT=pdf&INDEX=TRUE.
64
&/

4.65. Considering the EU Directive, Netherlands adopted a uniform definition ot
'trade secret' in its Trade Secret Act. 'Trade secret' is defined as 'any
rs7 Directive (EU) 2016/943 0fthe European Parliament and ofthe Council of 8 June 2016 0n the protection of
undisclosed kno\a-how and business information (trade secrels) against their unlawful acquisition, use and
disclosure, ava i I ahl e a/: https://www.wipo.int/wipolex,/enAex'423032'
r33 World lntellectu;l eroperty Organization (wlPo), wlPo Lex' available all
https://www.wipo.int/wipolex./en/legislatior/detai ls/ I 643 5#.
65
Against their Unlawful Acquisition, Use and Disclosure'.r87 On June 8,
2016, subsequent to a proposal from the European Commission, the
European Parliament and the Council passed a directive aimed at
standardizing national legislation within European Union (EU) member
states concerning the unlawful acquisition, disclosure, and exploitation of
trade secrets. This directive seeks to hannonize the definition of trade
secrets in accordance with established international norms. Additionally, it
specifies the forms of misappropriation relevant to trade secrets and asserts
that trade secrets do not confer exclusive intellectual property rights,
thereby affirming the preservation of activities such as reverse engineering
and parallel innovation. Although the directive does not prescribe criminal
penalties, it consolidates civil remedies available to victims of trade secret
misappropriation. These remedies include injunctions to cease unlawful
use and disclosure of trade secrets, removal from the market of goods
manufactured using illegally acquired trade secrets, and entitlement to
compensation for damages arising from unauthorized use or disclosure of
trade secrets.rss EU member states are obtigated to enact legislation and
administrative measures to confirm with the directive. Accordingly, the
Netherlands transposed the EU Trade Secrets Directive into its national law
in october, 2018 and enacted the Dutch Trade Secrets Act. The legislative
proposal ofthe Act ofNetherlands reflects the norms and directions set out
by the directive.
&.r-

information that is secret in the sense that it is not generally known among
or readily accessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with
the kind of information in question; that has commercial value because it
is secret; and which has been subject to reasonable steps under the
circumstances, by the person lawfully in control of the information, to keep
it secret.'l8e It is important to note that only technical information does not
qualifu as a trade secret, other commercial information in the form of
business plans and strategies may also qualify as a trade secret. The
duration for the protection of such an information is perpetual' provided
the information remains a secret.
4.66. Article 2 of the Act provides instances and conditions of infringement of
trade seirets through unlawful and unauthorized acquisition, use or
disclosure of a trade secret. If the acquisition of any information is without
the consent of the owner and is accessed, appropriated or replicated
unauthorized and against the honest commercial practices, then such
acquisition is deemed to be unlawful. Similarly, if the use or disclosure of
the trade secret is without the consent of the owner and violates a
confidentialiry agreement or any other obligation prohibiting the disclosure
of the trade secret or breaches a contractual or other obligation to restrict
the use of the trade secret, then such use or disclosure is also considered as
unlawful.leq
4.67. The Trade Secrets Act also includes provisions for enforcing trade secrets,
encompassing preliminary reliefs seeking injunction to halt further use or
disclosure of a trade secret and prohibition on producing, marketing,
I3o Dutch Trade Secrets Act,2018, art. I
r{ Dutch Trade Secrets Act,2018, an 2
66 eh/

importing, exporting and using infringing goods.rer Apart from the remedy
of injunction, the Act stipulates provision for providing interim or final
monetary relief as well. Under Article 8 of the Act, the holder of the trade
secret or the injured party can claim damages and compensation from an
infringer, involved in unlawful acquisition, use or disclosure of a trade
secret.
4.68. The Dutch Trade Secrets Act also has provisions for the protection oftrade
secrets in court proceedings, whereby the court may, upon request preserve
the confidentiality of a trade secret or alleged trade secret used or
mentioned during the proceedings. To preserve confidentiality, the courts
can restrict access to the documents to a limited number of persons
submitted by any of the parties that contain the trade secret or the alleged
trade secret. Simitarly, the court can restrict access to hearings, where the
trade secret or alleged trade secret may be made public. Under the Act, the
courts can also prepare a non-confidential version of judicial decisions,
where any information relating to trade secret is omitted.re2
4.69. Regarding the employer-employee liability for trade secret protection,
there are general statutory obligations in Netherlands under the Dutch Civit
code. Article 7:678 of the civil code provides an immediate termination
of any employee, who discloses any confidential information pertaining to
the employer's company that was required to be kept secret'rer Moreover,
the Dutch civil code also acts as a basis for action against the breach of
non-disclosure agreements.
rer f)utch Trade Secrets Act. 2018. ans. 5, 6.
re2 Dutch Trade Secrets Act,2018, art. l0l9ib
rer Dutch Civil Code. aIl.7:678-
6l G/

4.70. Hence, post enactment of the Dutch Trade Secrets Act, Netherlands has
ensured sufficient protection of trade secrets in their country. The Act not
only introduces a new legal definition of the term 'trade secret' but also
establishes rules and requirements to determine whether the acquisition,
use and/or disclosure of trade secrets is unlawful. With the enactment of
the Act, enforcement measures have been strengthened and the holder of
trade secret has got the right to apply to the Court for an injunction against
unlawful use or disclosure of a trade secret. The Act also imposes various
remedies against infringing goods or materials embedding trade secrets and
enables the court to grant compensation and award other costs'
J. New Zealand
4.71. In New Zealand, there is no specific legislation to protect the trade secrets.
Intellectual property rights are govemed primarily by statues such as Trade
MarksAct2002,DesignsActlg53,CopyrightActlgg4,PatentsAct20l3
along with common law principles related to intellectual property'
Interpretation of commerciaI contracts and their enforceability is govemed
by common law in New zealand but framework for commercial contract
is the combination of various statues, common law and commercial law.rea
4.72. lnNew Zealantl, trade secret is the information which adds commercial
value to a business and which is not known within the industry generally.
Any unauthorized disclosure of such information brings a cause of action
and there arises the right to claim for the breach ofsuch confidence'
re'Contract and Commercial Law Act ofNew Zealand, 2017 (Act No 5 of2017)
68
Qt./

4.73. For the protection of trade secrets, common law provides for the
contractual arrangements or employment agreement.le5 To prevent further
misuse oftrade secrets, remedies such as injunctions can be granted. Other
remedies for infringement such as damages, accounts for profits can also
be availed. Criminal liability can also be imposed under the criminal law
of New Zealand for taking away trade secrets and doing criminal breach of
trust.re6 Section 230 of the Crimes Act, 196l (as amended by Crimes
Amendment Act, 2003) provides specific punishment for taking, obtaining
or copying trade secrets:re7
"Taking, obtaining, or copying trade secrets
( t ) Everyone is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
5 years who, with intent to obtain any pecuniary advantage
or to cause loss to any other person,-
(a) dishonestly and without clctim of right, takes, obtains' or copies
any document or any model or olher depiction of any thing or
process containing or embodying any trade secret, knowing that it
contains or embodies a trade secret; or
(b) dishonestly and without claim of right, takes or obtains any
copy of any document or any model or other depiction of any thing
or process containing or embodying any trade secret, knowing
that it contains or embodies a trade secret.
(2) For the purposes of this section, trade secret means any
information that-
(a) is, or has the potential to be, used industrially or commercially;
and
(b) is not generally cvailable in industrial or commercial use; and
(c) has economic value or potentiol economic value to the
possessor of the information; and
ret Rob Bany "Trade Secrets under New Zealand Law" (20l,7\ avoilable
4r..https://ssrn.com/abstracF29o2349orhttp:i/dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssm.2902349(LastVisitedon: Feb 24,2024).
r% Crimes Act, l96l (Act No.43 of l96l ) as amended by Crimes Amendment Act' 2003, s 229'
te1 Id., s.23o.
69

(d) is the subject of all reasonable efforts to preserye its secrecy. "
4.74. Although New Zealand does not have a dedicated legislation for the
protection of trade secrets, however its laws provide for effective
remedies that can be availed by the trade secret owner in case of
infringement.
K. Singapore
4.75. Singapore does not enumerate protection for trade secrets through a
specific legislation. It govems other forms of intellectual properry through
local legislations such as lntellectual Property Office of Singapore Act,
2001, Patents Act, 1994, Copyright Act,202l, Trade Marks Act, 1998,
Registered Designs Act, 2000 etc.
4.76. Trade secrets are protected through a combination ofcontractual obligation
govemed by the Contracts Act of Singaporeres and law of confidence
which protects the parties against unlawful disclosure of information,
acquisition etc. It is for the courts to look into the various heterogeneous
factors to decide if any information which is confidential comes within the
purview of trade secret. Such confidential information can be revealed by
breaching the promise ofconfidence, thus causing financial loss and harm
to the interest of any company or business. Since there are no statutory
provisions for the protection oftrade secrets in Singapore, therefore, there
is no registration procedure mentioned for the protection oftrade secrets.
4.77. According to the law of Singapore, many businesses use contracts, non-
disclosure agreements or confidentiality agreements to protect the
re3 Contracts (Right to Third Parties) Act ofSingapore, 2001 (Act 29 of200l )
70 ev,