LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

TWENTY NINETH REPORT

ON
PROPOSAL TO INCLUDE CERTAIN SOCIAL
AND ECONOMIC OFFENCES IN
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE

1966


Para. ‘SUBJBCT-MATTER Pace
No. . 7
3-3. Genesis of the Report y . . . . . t
4. ReferencetoLaw Commission . . . wk 2
5  Materialsudied 2 2. 7. 9. . «4; 3
Wanre-CoiLar Catmes ,
6  Whitecollarcrimes © 2. ww -+- - 3
7 Relevance of white-collarcrimes,. 9. .  . *"५ 5.
8-9 Problemof white-collarcrime =. 9. 2. 5
10 Focussing of attention on white-collar crimes in the West 6
1 Reasons why such crimes escape punishment’. 6
12 Description of white-collar crime Se 7
13 White-collar crimes in 18th century. . . . &
14-16 White-collar crimes in England . . . . ay
17 Restrictive trade practices . - . न . oe
18-19 Conspiracy . जज wom . . 9
20. “Sutherland’sstudy 2. Mk, wt
ar Main species of white-collarcrime =. 5, S40"
22 Adulteration ५०१, ७०... 7 ५, 9. . . गया
23 ‘Racketeering (organised crimes)inthe U.S.A. a
24 White-collar crimes by professional People क्र . . 2
25 Price control laws in U.S.A soar . . . bt
26 White-collar crimes in afftugnt sogiety,. 2 wl 13d
Eqonomic Crimes in Soviet RUSSIA : -
27-28 Economic crimes in Soviet Russia . 2 . Y
29 Important species of ecomamic crimes ५ : . .
३०. Death penalty in Russia for certain economic crimes.
31 Reasons for imposing death penalty 2° |.
Minimum penalties 5 boobe +'  5+ 7 jeg ook

32



@)

Para. ‘SUBjSCT-MATTER Pace
No.
33 Some salient points as to the provisions in England, U.S.A. and So-
vietRussia . ५ ran ५ 7
34 Position in Commonwealth countries. . . . . 18
‘Main Points To BE CONSIDERED—GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
38 Main points to be considered =. . . . . . . 18
36 Addition of new provisions . . . . . . 1g
37 General observations as to proposal for transfer. . न नि 19
38  Correctapprouch ww ew + + ee + + 15
39 Permanent offences and temporary malpractices  . . 23
40. Example of Guest Control Order cited डा
41-43 Character of special statutes . . . . . . नि 21
a Multiplication of offences . . . . 22
44 Criminal Law and Morality .  .  . 23
45 Line of division thin . . . . . 25
46 Function of criminal Jaw and moral law comPared 25
a7 Analysis of anti-social etc., offences. . 25
ANALYSIS OF SPECIAL BRACTMENTS.
48 Analysis of specialemactment =. 0. 6 se et 26
49 Special penal provisions. . . ete . . . 26
2 Mens rea modified + न बन न . . . . 27
, Analysis of kinds of mens rea . . . . . . . 27
$2-53 Strict liability . . . . . . . . . 28
“54 Knowledge of illegality whether relevant 9. 0. 1 ww 29
55-56. English cases on mens rea under particular statutes . . . 29
शा Offences under the Customs Act . . . . . . 30
58-59 Offences under the Foreign Exchange Act. . wo. . 31
o Classification of offences in question, with referetice to mens rea ना 3r
C7 Companies . . . . . . . + . . 3t
* 62-65 Liability of officass of companics . . . . . ° 32
66 Vicariouslisbility 2. 2 + + ewe 34
67-71 Modification by statute न न . . . . . . 34
72 Vicarious liability-an aspect of strict Hability न न kg 37
43 Object of the analysis regarding mens rea . . . . . 37
* 74-75 Special rules of evidence . . . . . . 38
40 Importance of delegated legislation in relation to statutory offetoes 39



(v)

PARA ‘SUBjBCT-MATTER Pace
No.
7 Penalties by rules . . . . . . . . . 4a
7 Special powers . . . . . . . . . 43
79 Special provisions as to sanction . . : : . . . 43
80. Provisionsfor publicity =. + + + © + + * 43.
हा Special character of the enactments. . न न . . 44.
82 Possibility of new offences in future. . . . .
83-84 Likelihood of new devices coming into existence. न . न “4
85-89 Genesis of special enactments rs 4s
go Alterations in the Indian Penal Code by special enactments. . 47
ox “Special” enactments and problems deat with bythem . 5 + a
CATEGORY 1.—Orrences PREVENTING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
92 Offences preventing economic development (Category De. . 47
93 Other economic crimes mentioned by Santhanam Committee . . 45
94-95 Whether adoption of economic crimes from Bastern Europe feasible 49
96-97 Points suggestedincomments .  - + + + te 49
CATEGORY 2.—Evaston aND Avorpancs oF Tax
98 Evasion, etc. oftax(Category2), 6 5 + tt 56
99-100 “Evasion” बात “avoidance” ee et st
101-106 Attitude towards ax ayoidance in England 2 6 7 ss sz
107-109 Interpretation of taxing Acts .
110 Avoidance not always fraudulent 5३ + +- न ल्‍*छ 36
IIE Views of Courts in India as to avoidamce =. . . . न 56
११४ Methods of checking evasion . . . . . . . 57
m3 Existing provisions analysed . . . bid
114 Transfer of existing provisions not feasible. 5 see st
115-117 Placing provisions as to evasion in the Penal Code ss st
18 Question of enacement of geneal provision 1s to tax evasion conse =
119 Addition of new provision . . . . . . . a
120 Points suggested in comments. . . . . . . @
ia Avoidance howtobetackled 2 6 se Ht हि

UR ऋ नस क_....मपाफककक-


PARA.
No.

22
123
324
125

126

127
128-129
330-131
132
133°
134

135

136
137

138
139

149
14t
142-143
144
145
146

147
148
149-150
जड़ा

(vi)

SuBJECT-MATTER

PAGB

CATEGORY 3.—Misuse or Pustic Posirion By एक SERVANTS
Misuse of their position by public servant (Category 3)
Existing provisions analysed
Misuse without benefit .

Points raised in comments

CATEGORY 4.—Derivary or Goons NoT IN ACCORDANCE
WITH CONTRACT

Delivery, etc., of goods not in accordance with contract (Category 4)
Bxisting provisions analysed =. wks
‘Cheating” and delivery of goods, ete.
Meaning of “deception” . .
Point of implied representation academic
Attempt to cheat . . . . . .
Complicity of officers and offenders - - + . न .
Position in English Law =. . oo . . . .
Kinds of malpractices

Proposed section.

Points suggested in comments

Proposed section not to be enacted without considering likely reper=

cussions . . . . 2 . . . . .
CATEGORY §.—HOARDING AND. PROPITEERING

Hoarding and profiteering (Category 5)"

Existing provisions analysed =,

History of legislation relating to contro! of cesential commodities
Points suggested in comments
‘West Bengal Act .
Addition of new provisions

CATEGORY 6.—ADULTERATION
Adulteration

Existing provisions. .
‘Transfer not feasible .
Addition of new provisions

61

62:

63

65
65
65
65

67
67

67

67
67
68

69.

Jo:
4०
Jo
nm


wii)

Para SUBJECT-MATTER Page
No.
152 Adulteration and public opinion, . . . . . . . ris
153-155 Failure of prosecutions.  , . . . . . * . 72

CATEGORY 7.—THEFT AND MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND FUNDS
156 Theft and misappropriation of public property and funds (Category 7) 7
157 Transfer not feasible .

. . न . . . . . 73
158 Addition of new provisions . . . . . . . 73
159-160 Provision proposed for theft of public property . . . 73
161 Points suggested in comments . . . . + . 7
CATEGORY 8,~-TRAFFICEING IN LICENCES
162-163 Trafficking in licences, permits, etc, . . . . . 73
364 Meaning of “trafficking” and points suggested in comments . . 74
165-168 Trafficking to be dealt with by special enactments . . . 1s
CoNcLUsION
169-171 Problem of crimea complex ole 8. ww 76
192 Appendices. . Or cy 76
APPENDICES
AprEnpis 1.—Existing statutory provisions regarding calculated
to prevent or obstruct the development of the
country and endanger its economic health . bd
APPENDIX 2.—Bxisting si provisions regarding evasion or avoidance
of Tax or duty and the ‘consequcns penalty hersot 6
APPENDIX 3.—Existing stantory of posi+
tion by public servasits (oper than 0 that of Theft, Bribery,
lisapproprigtion and Trust), occurring in
various statutes . . 100
APPENDIX 4.—Existing statutory provisions regarding offences in the
bueaches of resulting in delivery of
goods got a¢cordihg to ‘specifications . . . 107
APPENDIX §.—Exi: Stanton sions 38 to Hoarding atid Black-
5: isting ry provi as ing, हे 108

APPENDIX 6.—Provisions relating to adulteration of food and drugs
the penalties provided therefc . 114

APPENDIX 7.—Existi statutory provisions as to Theft and Misappro-
Priation of public gropegty and

et



(iii)

PPENDIX 8.-—Existing statutory provisions relating to trafficking in
licences, permits, etc. . . . .

APPENDIX 9.-—Provisions of the Defence of India Rules, 1962—relevant
‘or analogous 10 the offences ३8 question . . .

APPENDIX 10,-—List of Central Acts pertaining anti-social offences,
ther than the offences listed by che Santhanam
mittee

_APPENDIX 11.—Provisions of the Income-Tsx Act, 1961 (43 of 1961)
referred to in the Report of the Committee on Prevention

Corruption, page 271 (middle), ss offering scope
evasion

APPENDIX 12,——Summary of certain points a8 to tax evasion etc., dis-
ssed in the Report of Income-tax Investigation Com-
mission, 1949 presided over by Shri Vardachariar .

APPENDIX 13.—Points as to Evasion Avoidance discussed in the
eport of the Taxation uiry Commission (1953-55)

APPENDIX 14.—Summary of the points made in “ Indian Tax Reform”
y Mr. Kaldor, Department of Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Finance, Government of India (1956) .

APPENDIX 1§.—Tax Evasion—prosecution in India for—Extracts ‘from.
Report of the Direct Taxes etc. Coramittee) .

Appsnpix 16.—Extracts from the Criminal Code of Hungarian People’s
Republic, 1962.0. पु +

APPENDIX 17.—Extracts of Code of Not

Oi Norwegian Penal Code” (1961) lished in the
ors’ Series of Foreign peg dg . .

-APPENDIX 1%.—Extracts of certain sections of the Argentina Penal Code,
taken from the translatio! ion published in American
Serjes of Foreign Penal (968) - . . .

APPENDIX 19.—-English iaw relating to spreading false rumours to affect

APPENDIK 20.—Position in English Law regacding certain offences (Bri-
bery and sorption, Conspiracy, Cheating, Embezzle-

APPENDIX 21.—Heonomic crimes iti certain Eastvern-European coun-

APPENDIX 22.—Tax Evasi ign provision in U.S.A. (Géetion 7201, Internat
APPENDIX 23.-—The Penal Code and the Preverition of Corruption, etc.

APPENDIX 24.--Sub-Stendard goods and clmeting = :
APPENDIX 25.—Some हक provis isions of Hindu Law regarding high prices

Apranum 26.—Adulterstion Laws of some qoustyics eee
APPENDIX 27.—Hasic principles for pure food lews  .

APPENDIX 28,—Provisions in Te ling anti-
eared ‘asmania (Australia) regarding

APpENDix 29.—Catladian Laws as to, anti-social etc: offences 9. ५
APPENDIX 30.—English law relating 00 conspiracy =< . .
APPENDIX 31.—-Proposed amendments to the Indian Penal Code .
APPENDIX 32.—Proposed amendments to the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898. न : .

Paon
136

137

138

gs

142

145
145

147

161

162

163
169
175

182
187

188
1B9
194

196
201

शा

212


INTRODUCTORY

1. The circumstances in which the preparation cf this Genesis of
Report was undertaken may be briefly stated. The Gov- ‘he Repost
ernment of India appointed in 1962 a Committee to review
the problem of corruption and to make suggestions! on
various matters connected therewith. One of the terms
of reference of the Commitiee was, “To suggest changes
in the law which would ensure speedy trial of cases of
bribery, corruption and criminal misconduct and make the
law otherwise more effective®.”.

Dealing with this, the Committee’ made the following
observations:—

“7.2. The substantive law relating to bribery, cor-
ruption and eriminal misconduct is contained in the
Indian Penal Code and the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1947, the procedural law in the Criminal oce-
dure Code, Criminai Law Amendment Act, 1958 and
some special rules of evidence relating to such cases
in the Prevention of Cor ruption Act. The working of
the relevant provisions of ५ enactments in prosecu-
tions in courts and alsp at the stage of investigation
have disclosed that certain changes in the law are re
quired in order to ensure speedy trials and more
effective results. We have examined the existing
provisions in the light ht of experience gained in
numerous cases, and in the context of social
changes and economic objectives which have created
new problems.

“7.3. Amendments to the Indian Penal Code

The Indian Penal Code was enacted in 1860,
and though it has been amended here and there,
its main structure has contimved intact during the
last 100 years arid-mére. It.is an admirable com-
pilation of substantive ariminal law, and moet of
its provisions are as spitabhe today as were
when they were formulated. But the socket and
economic strueture of Indié-hes changed to such a
large extent, especially durimg the last 17 years of
freedom, that in mawy tespects the Code does not
truly reflect the deeds of the present . It is
dominated by the'notion that almost dey il major

+See the Report of the Committee on the Prevention of Ceesuption,
65510 Pes }) Page x, para. 1-1. (The Committee is hereafter referred to as the
Coat eae Committee).

“See the Report of the Santhanam Committec, page 2, pare 1३ and
Page 53, Pare WI. fe

"Report of the Senthanain Chmthtttce, pie’, parse, 7°3 ead Jip



2

crimes consist ef offences against person, pro-
perty or State. However, the Penal Code does not
deal in any satisfactory manner with acts which
may be described as social offences having regard
to the special circumstances under which they are
committed, and which have now become a domi-
nant feature of certain powerful sections of
modern society.”.

2. The Report? of the Santhanam Committee broadly
categorised the offences as follows:—

“(1) Offences calculated to prevent or obstruct
the economic development of the country and en
dariger its economic health;

(2) Evasion and avoidance of taxes lawfully im-
posed;

(3) Misuse of their position by public servants in
making of contracts and disposal of public property,
issue of licences and permits and similar other
matters;

(4 Delivery by individuals and industrial and
commercial undertaking of goods not in accordance
with agreed specifications in fulfilment of contracts
entered into with public authorities;

(5) Profiteering, black-marketing and hoarding,
(6) Adulteration of foodstuffs and drugs;

(7) Theft and misappropriation of public property
and funds; and

(8) Trafficking in licences, permits, etc.”

3. The Committee then went an to observe*:——

“Some of these offences have been made punish-
able by special enactments. We are of the opinion
that it is desirable to add-@ mew chapter to the Indian

_ Penal Code bringing tdgether ‘all the offences in such
special enactments and’ supplementing them with new”
provisions so that all'secial offences will find a promi-
nent place in: the general .eriminal law of the country.
It is a matter for the ‘Government to consider whether
this work should: be undettaken by a special legal
committee or referred to the Law Commission.”.

Reference to 4, The Government® decided, that the matter should be

Lm. दी considered by the Law Commission, आते referred the

Report of ‘the 1277 i pe: 7४३०५ paces 53, 54, -DareE TS."
"Report of the Saahatam, ( RE PRE So. POR. 724...
“Miniatty Of Home} ee 2

f



3

above proposal of the Santhanam Committee to this Com-
mission’, as the revision of the Indian Penal Code was
under the Commission’s consideration. That is the genesis
of this Report. In view of the importance of the matter,
we decided to deal with it separately from the general
vevision of the Indian Penal

5. In order to facilitate our consideration of the sub- Materiat

ject, we have studied the various special enactments rela- 5

ting to the offences in question”, the penal laws of several

other countries®, and the literature available on the sub-

ject, including the Reports of several Committees*. A

study of the judicial decisions relating to these offences

was also made, in order to find out whether the existing
provisions relating to these offences are not adequate’.

The proposals of the Santhanam Committee were cir-
culated by us for comments to State Governments and
High Courts, and several other persons and bodies. We
have considered each one of these comments in detail. The
important points made in some of the comments will be
dealt with in the Report under the relevant categories®,

Wnite-CoLttaR CRIMES
White-Collar

6. From the discussion in another part of the Santha- crimes,
nam Committee’s Report’, it would appear, that the Com-
mittee attached great importance to the emergence of
offences and mal-practices known as “white-collar” crime.

We quote the relevant portion:—

‘2.13. The advance of technological and scientific
development is contributing to the emergence of
“mass society”, with a large rank and file and a small
controlling elite, encouraging the growth of :monopo-
lies, the rise of a managerial class. and intricate institu-
tional mechanisms. Strict adherence to a high stand-
ard of ethical behaviour is necessary for the even and
honest functioning of the new social, political and
economic processes. The inability of all sections of
society to appreciate in full this need results in the
emergence and growth of white-collar and economic

» erimes, renders enforcement of the laws, themselves
not sufficiently deterrent, more difficult. This type of

1Para. 3, supra.
3806 Appendices 1 to 8.
*Parti England, ralis, Canada, Zealand, Uni
of America, Seviet 8, Hungary, Norway, ‘branes tnd ‘angentioa
‘See Appendices 12, 13, 14 and 15.
*A part of the material studied by us will be found in some of the Ap-
pendices to this Report.
Pad Paragraphs 38, 76, 96, 97, 120, 125, 136, 138, 144, 164, and 168,

ange
"Report of thd Santhanam Commitee; pape, tf gares 2:13 and 2-14.


4

crime is more dangerous, not only because the finans
cial stakes are higher but also because they cause irres
parable damage to public morals, Tax-evasion and
avoidance, share-pushing, mal-practices in the sharé
market and administration of companies, monopolis
tic control, usury, under-invoicing or over-invoicing,
hoarding, profiteering, sub-standard performance of
contracts of construction and supply, evasion of
economic laws, bribery and corruption; election
offences and mal-practices are some examples of
white-collar crime’.

“2.14, Corruption can exist only if there is 5076
one willing to corrupt and capable of corrupting. We
regret to say that both this willingness and capacit
to corrupt is found in a large measure in the industrigh
and commercial classes. The ranks of these classes
have been swelled by the speculators and adventure
ers of the war period. To these, corruption is not only
an easy method to secure large unearned profits, but
also the necessary means to enable them to be in @
position to pursue their vocations or retain their posi
tion among their own competitors. It is these persons
who indulge in evasion and avoidance of taxes, accu-
mulate large amounts of unaccounted money by vari-
ous methods such as obtaining licenses in the names of
bogus firms and individuals, trafficking in licenses,
suppressing profits by manipulation of accounts to
avoid taxes and other legitimate claims on profits,
accepting money for transactions put through without.
accounting for it in bills and accounts (on-money) and
under-valuation of -transactions in immovable pro-
perty. It is they who have control over large funds.
and are in a position to spend considerable sums of.
money in entertainment. ‘It is they who maintain an
army of liaison and contact men, some of whom live,
spend and entertain ostentatiously. We are unable to
believe that sp rauch money is being spent only for
the purpose of getting things done quickly. It is said
that, as a large majority of the high officials are incor-
tuptible and are likely to react strongly against ony
direct attempt to subvert their integrity, the lNaison™
and contact men make:a careful study of the charac-
ter, tastes and weaknesses of officials with whom they"~
may have to deal and that these weaknesses are, then,
exploited. Contractors and suppliers who have _per-
fected the art of getting business by under-cutting, off ‘
making good the loss by passing off sub-stand: .
works and goods génerally spare no pain or expel de
ture in creating a favourable atmosphere. Possession. .
of large amounts of unaccounted money by various
persons including those belonging to the industrité
and commercial classes is a major impediment in it
purification of public life. If anti-corruption activi
are to be successful, 1६ must be recognised that it is as


5

important to fight these unscrupulous agencies of cor-
ruption as to eliminate corruption in the public ser-
vices. In fact they go together.”.

7. The above extract! from the Santhanam Com- Relevance of
mittee’s Report seems to indicate, that many of the offen- white-collar
ces which that Committee had in mind were crimes usual- ‘™*
ly known as white-collar crimes, We, therefore, proceed
to discuss the problem of white-collar crime in detail.

8. In recent times the problem of white-collar crime Prblem of
has received considerable attention. “White-collar white-co as:
crime” has been defined approximately as a crime com- ”
mitted by a person of respectability and high social status
in the course of his occupation?, The emphasis is on the
connection with occupation. The commission of a crime of
this category is facilitated by the office, calling, profession
or vocation of the individual concerned. White-collar
crimes, thus, exclude crimes like murder, adultery and
intoxication, even if committed by people of the upper
class, since these have nothing to do with their occupation.

9. The object of those who had drawn attention to the
prevalence of white-collar crime was to educate the publie
about the harm caused to the society by such crime, and to.
point out that these crimes should bear the same moral
stigma as acts regarded as crimes according to the ortho-
dox notions. It was pointed out®; that one of the reasons
for the differential implementation of the law in the area
of white-collar crimes was the “relatively unorganized
resentment of the public” towards such crime, The reasons
for the absence of such resentment were stated to be as
follows‘: —

(a) The violations of law in such cases are com-
plex, and can be appreciated only by experts;

(b) The public agencies of communication (like
the press) do not express the ० ngenised moral senti-
ments of 'the community, partly use the crimes
are complicated and cannot be easily presented as.
news, but probably in a greater degree because these
agencies of communication are themselves controlled
by businessmen involved in the violations of many of
these laws.

(c) The laws for the regulgtion of business belong
to a relatively new and specialised part of the statutes,

*Para. 6, supra,

*Sutherland, White-Collar Crime, (1949), pe 9. See also Sutherland.
and Cressey, Principles of Criminology (1960), page 40.

*Sutherland, White-Collar Crime, (949): page 49-
4See Sutherland, White-Collar Crime ‘(lo4gy pages 50-57.


Gocusting of __,19- Attention was focussed on the problem of white-

attention on COllar crime in England and the U.S.A. after the First

white-collar World War, when it was realised that losses resulting from

crimes in the business frauds far exceeded those from the offences

‘west. against property that were punishable under the orthodox
notions of crime. It was the financier, not the gangster,
who was the greater public enemy’. As defined by Suther-
land, white-collar crime is a “violation of the criminal law
by a person of the upper socio-economic class in the course
of his occupational activities”.

Later, he seems to have added a refinement to the defi-
nition, by defining a white-collar criminal as “a person of
the upper socio-economic class who violates the criminal
law in the course of his occupational or professional
activities?.”

He pointed®-‘ out, that white-collar crime was more
dangerous to society than crimes committed by the members
of the lower class, first, because the financial losses were
higher, and secondly, because of the damage inflicted on
the public morals.

The necessity of revising the social attitude towards such
anti-social behaviour and perceiving its dangers was
pointed out by various other writers aiso’-*.

Reasons why 11. Sutherland also elaborated the reasons why such
such crimes crimes went unpunished. “The difference in the imp lemen-
evo Pun- tation of the criminal law is due principally to the difference
" in the social position of the two types of offenders”.
Because of their social status, implementation of the crimi-
nal law in relation to white-collar criminals becomes diffi-
cult. They are more powerful than the traditional criminals
“Consumers, investors and stockholders are unorganise
lack technical knowledge and cannot protect themselves".

Thurman Arnold, Folklore of Capitalism, page 276.

* jictic of Sock edited by Fairchitd iG Pre:
Se Distr Sea sfc Rah, ae

London)
(259 under White-collar

sts
win H, Suthers

*See Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences
(September, 1941), Vol. 217, page 112.

‘See’ also Sutherland, “White-collar Criminality”, (1940), American.

Ss. Review, pages 1, 4.

*See Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences,
(September, 1941), Vol. 217, “Crime im the United States ?,

“See also paras. 12, 19, 24, infra.

*See Sutherland, “ White-callar Criminality”, American Sociological
Review, (1940), page 1, & page 8.

‘Embezzlement is an exception to this.


%

White-collar crime, it is stated, goes undetected because
it “transcends the visibility of ordinary cheating practices
of small merchants”. It can, however, be gathered from
reports of investigating committees or from conversation
with intimate friends*. . ;

12. That white-collar crime is essentially connected with Description
social status has been brought out in the following descrip- (व crime.
tion given by a writer on Criminology*: —

“White-collar crime is most distinctively defined in
terms of attitudes toward those who commit it. White
collar crime is definitely made punishable by law. It is
convictable behaviour. However, it is generally re-
garded by courts and by sections of the general public
as much less reprehensible than crimes usually punished
by our courts, which may be designated “blue-collar
crime”. Blue-collar crime is the crime of the
under-privilege ed;  white-pollar crime is upper
or middle-class crime. Just wheat proportion
or section of the population must condone this
type of behaviour to eonstitute it as white-collar is net,
and perhaps cannot be, clear. Many courts and other
authorities clearly distinguish between a man who
jNegally misrepresents the qualities of his products and
a burglar or robber. Yet the very existence of the law
penalizing the former type of act indicates an adverse
attitude toward it, though ordinarily not of the same
degree. The fact that white-collar crime is punished in
less degrading ways than “ordmary crime” does not
imply that the former is petty. Actually society loses
huge sums through white-collar crime. Some of the
rackets we described in an earlier chapter are white-
collar crimes; some ace not. As Sutherland defines the
term, most racketeering by officers of a labour union
would not be white-collar crime; nor, apparently would
the vice racket be so defined. Thus ne Her in terms of
class status, business .actiyity, attitudes, nor degree of
seriousness can white-collar crime be wholly separated
from other crime. Nevertheless, it is the somewhat dis-
tinctive attitudes and policies toward the offender in
such Cases which have been given significance in discus-
sions of white-collar crirpe.' १६ ap) pears that eyen out-
side of business circles, white-collar crime is less re-
prehensible than ordinary’ crime, beeause low-class
people often aspire to be white-collar criminals. Or if
not, they at least secent the game individyalism and the
same value of materialism which the middle and upper
classes accept. White-tollar crime is attractive because
it brings material rewards with little or no loss of
status...

*Reckless, The Crime Problem, (1955), page 206.

4Cf. Sutherland, ** Crime in Business” Ameri
et sn

*Teft snd England, Climixplog at aao-2br. “a
47 Law—2. .

j i


White-collar
crimes in
18th century.

Whice-collar
crimes in
England.

3s

13. Problems similar to white-collar crimes had arisen as
far back as the 18th century. The “South Sea Bubble” led
to the Bubble Act of 1720', which may be cited as example
of an effort by the Legislature to deal with “-aud on a big
scale perpetrated by unscruplous persors?-*. Bu* the varie-
ties of such crimes and their diverse manifest ‘ions were
seen more acutely after the First World War.

14. Certain species of white-collar crime have received
special attention-in England. One example is, “share-push-
ing” (victimisation of the public by fraudulent dealings in
stocks and shares)‘. Legislation penalising this mal-practice
was enacted in 1939°-%?-8,

There are similar provisions in the Company Law in
India®.

15. Another example of legislation relating मै to white-
collar crime in England was the Prices of Goods Act, 1939,
under section 1 of which it was unlawful to sell any goods
the price of which was regulated, at a price exceeding the
authorised price’,

16. Taxation frauds have been regarded as an impor-
tant kind of white-collar crimes, and Legislatures in all
countries have been constrained to go on adding more and
more stringent provisions in the law relating to taxation,
as so to bring within their net transactions which, under
the pre-existing law,: were not taxable. The problem as-
sumed importance in England in the forties. For the
present purpose, it is not necessary to discuss in detail the |
difference between “tax-evasion” and “tax-avoidance”".
The former is a breach of the law, while the latter raises
only ethical questions.

'The Bubble Act, 1720 (6 Geo. 3, ०. 18).

3566 Gower, Modern Company Law (1957), (1963 Impression), page
27 W 30.

3866 also Gower in (1952) 68 L.Q.R. 214.

‘See rt of the Departmental Committee on Share-pushi:
pointed by tke President of he Beetle 50% srg Pushing, ap

‘Prevention of Fraud  Gvestinenes) x 2 and 3 Geo. 6 ०. 16)
later replaced by the Act of 1958 (6 ०, १2 0 9 3 e 70

*See Gower, Moder Law, 63 11 i
285-286, हि The ACE OF Taher AM (1957 (1563. Impression) pages

7K of i on the Act, see Note ii
Modera Law Review 781-704 bY BWM. Downey.) Nw im 0960 24

*See also analysis in R. ४. Russell, (1953) 1 W.L.R. 77, 79, 81 (C.C.A.).

*See section 68 of the Companies Act, 1956, (1 of 1956), punishing
false, deceptive or misleading statements, etc., made by any person knowingly
or recklessly to induce any other person to buy, etc., shares.

“The Act was replaced by the Goods and Services (Price Control) Acts
1941 (4 & 5 Geo. 6, ५. 31) which, im its turn, was repealed by the S.L.P.
Acts, 1950 and 1953. , if : H fe 4 .

“See para. 99 et seg, ihfra: 1.


¥

17. Other types of activities on which attention has been Restriptive
focussed in England in recent times are restrictive trade practiges.
practices!, though the legislation on this subject? is not
so widely framed as “anti-trust legislation” in the United
States of America.

18. Apart from these statutory provisions* there is the Conspiracy.
common law offence of “conspiracy”, in England, the
scope and application of which may be wide enough to
cover many fraudulent transactions not covered by speci-
fic criminal statutes*.

We may quote the observations of Fitzgerald J. in one
of the leading cases on conspiracy®:—

“A conspiracy consists in the agreement of two
or more to do an unlawful act, or to do a lawful act by
unlawful means. By the terms “illegal” and
“unlawful”, it is not intended to confine
the definition to an aet that would be
in itself be a crime or an offence. They ex-
tend to and may embrace many cases in which the
purpose of a conspiracy, if effected by one person
only, would not be a criminal act; as for instance, if
several persons combined to violate a private right,
the violation of which, if done by one, would be
wrongful but not in itself criminal. If, for instance a
tenant withholds his rent, that is a violation of the
right of his landlord to receive it, but would not be a
criminal act in the tenant, though it would be the
violation of a right. But if two or more incite him
to do that act, their agreement so to incite him is by
the law of the land an offence.”.

He further observed, 1 conepiracy has been aptly des-
cribed as divisible under three heads*:— pny

“where the end to be attained is in itself a crime;
where the object is to do injury to a third party or to
a class, though if that injury were effected by a single
1K many Sir Dar id Cairns, “ Monopoli iti
Practoes” in Ginsberg (Editod. Lew and Opinion in Eagland in eh
Kee पट 2 8 0, 2007 Rea NS Ro
Commission on the Press (1942), (Gmd. 1811). © Royal

*The Monopolies and Restrictive Practices (Inquiry and Control) Act,
1948 ; the Monopolies, etc., Commission Act, 19: 63, (now repealed) ; the
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1956 ; the Re-sale Prices Act, 1964 (c. 58) ;
and the Monopolies and Mergets Act, 1965 (c. 50).

*Paras. 14 to 17, supra.

4See Appendix 30, for a detailed discussion.

37२. v. Parnell and others, (1881) 14 Cox 0.0, 508, (Fitzgerald 33
Irish Queen’s Bench Division). See Turner and Armitage, Cases on Crimi
Law, (1964), page 173.

“Thi i seis " in हि
02 13



Sutherland’s
study,

Main species
of white-
collar crime.

we

individual it would be a civil wrong but not a crimi-
nal; and where the objeet is lawful, but the means te
be resorted to are unlawful........ The law of cons-
piracy is not an invention of modern times. Tt is part
of our common law; it has existed from time imme-
morial. It is necessary to redress certain classes of
injuries which at times would be intolerable, and which
but for it would go unpunished.”.

19. In the United States of America, the expression
“white-collar crime” was made current by Sutherland!.
Certain other authorities had also pointed out the damage
to society from the upper sécio-eeonomie groups which ex-
ploited the accepted economfie system to the detriment of
the masses?-°,

20. In his book “White-pollar crime*” Sutherland exa-
mined the criminal activities of 79 of the biggest corpo-
rations jn America, ang focugsed attention on the follow-
ing types of law-breaking by them:—

(1) Restraint af trade.
(2) Misrepresentation in advertising.

(3) Infringement of patents, trade marks and
copyrights.

(4) Unfair labour practices.
(5) Frauds in business.

Thereafter, several other suis and reports have come
out in the U.S.A. on the sybject®. P हि

21. The main crimes that have attracted attention in
the U.S.A. under the head af white-collar crimes may be
summarised as follows:—

(९) frauds in business, in relation to sale of bonds
and investments*;

(b) adulteration of food and drugs, and mislead-
ing advertisements'-*;

‘Sutherland, “White-collar  Criminlity ”, i jologi
Review (February, 1940), pager Say American Sociologicel
3806 Barnes & Teeters, New Horizons jn Criminology (1959), page 41.

*See also para. 10, supra.
New ania H. Sutherland, White-collar Crime (1949) (Dryden Press,
°B, g, Hartung, “ White-collar Crime ; and its significance ii
and practice” (1955) 17 Federal Probation 33. “es in theory
‘Cf. Barnes & Teeters, New Horizons in Criminology (1959), page 45.
sKalet & Schlink, * 10,000,000 Guinea Pigs” (New York, Vanguard,
1932).
wo Lamp, The Amedcas Cipuafde of Horrors Qilew Vouk, Farrar, . :


१६ ९

(९) mal-practices in the medical profession, such
as “illegal sale of alcohol and narcotics, abortion, illegal
services to undet'world criminals, fraudulent reports and
testimony in accident cases, extreme cases of unneces-
sary treatment, fale specialists, restriction of compe-
tition and fee-splitting!’”; .

(d) crimes by lawyers, such as guiding the crimi-
nal or quasi-criminal activities of corporations, twist-
ing of testimony to give a false picture, fake claims
(bogus liability in aecidents), ete.2-*;

(९) trusts, cartels, combines and syndicates, ete.,
formed to combat competition, ot to raise prices or other
wise to interfere with the freedom of trade to the detri-
ment of honest businessmen or. the consuming public.
This has now become a braneh of the law by itself
and is usually dealt with under the topic of “Anti-
trust legislation”;

(0 bribery and graft by public officers*,

22, Adulteration of food and drugs has received exten- Aduleration
sive consideration in the United States of _ America®, of fodd, etc,
along with the question af drug addiction and sale of narco- .
tics, such as opium, and teveral Acts have been enacted on
the subject®. The latest of the Acts, the Federal Narcotics
Control Act, 1956, besides Penalising the addicts’, also
punishes those who handle narcotics ‘for Profit and exploi-
tation. For sale of heroint® by # person over 18 to a person
ynder 18, death sentence ean be awarded under the Act of

23. Another topic which has received special attention Racketeering
in the U.S.A. is “organized crimes”, ie. crimes wherein the (organized
traditional criminals join hands with big business for secur- Bear We
ing ends harmful to the community. Literature on this

subject is abundant?. This is popularly known as “racketeer-

‘Sutherland, “ White-collar Criminality’, American Sociological
‘Review (February, 1940), Vol, 5 Page 1, at page 2.
"Barnes & Teeters, New Horizons in Criminology (1959), pages 47 and

*Kefauver, Crime in America (1952), Page 57.

«See “Crime in America” by Esttes Kefauver, Chairman of the Senate
Grime Investigating Committee (May, 1950 to May, 1951). (Gollancs)
(7952), pages 15, 25, and 54.

‘See “Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, (1954) 67 Harward Law
Review 633.

See the Harrison Anti-Narcotics Act, tors (regarding opium) ; the
Marihauna Tax Act, 1937 ; and the Federat Narcotics Control Act ‘1956.

{For a summary, see Barnes & Teeters, New Horizons in Criminology,
(1959), page 85.

‘Heroin, it is stated, is 5 times st than morphine, and may lead to
criminal behaviour. See’ Mabel EBliott, Crime in Modern Society, (Harper)
(1952), page 173.

*For an anthology, sce Teles, [orate पाकर in America, (1962), pabe

shed by the University of a “ot

re


12

ing” (organised conspiracy for exploitation)’. Such activi-
ties, it is stated, may be indulged in by businessmen, leaders
of organised labour, politicians, criminals or even lawyers,
but the purpose is exploitation of commerce and the public
through circumscribing the right to work and do business.
These do not, strictly speaking, fall within “white-collar
crime”, because the “under-world” takes an active part?.

They might, however, encourage or give rise to white-collar .

crimes (for example, corruption in the police).

White-coller 24. As regards white-collar crimes by lawyers and other

crimes by
Profession:
people,

* Price conti
Jaws in
U.S.A.

b: aj Professional people, the following observations of Senator

Kefauver® are relevant:—

“In Chicago, too, we gathered evidence of a disturb-
ing phenomenon that we found repeated in other large
cities of the country. I refer to the active participa-
tion—amounting almost to subsidization—in gang affairs
by a certain element of lawyers, accountants, and
tax consultants. As Judge Samuel Leibowitz, of Brook-
lyn, an outstanding jurist, remarked in his testimony
at our final hearings many months later, “There are cri-
minal lawyers and lawyer criminals”. Judge Leibo-
witz said it was one thing for a criminal lawyer to
defend his client honestly and squarely and to see that
he got his day in court according to our laws and our
Constitution, but it was “another thing to be in the
hire of some gang to advise the gang how to operate,
and to be at the beck and call of the gangster or act as
his right-hand man”, Nation-wide disclosures on this
particular problem were so disturbing that the Senate
Committee felt it would be desirable for local bar as-
sociations everywhere to take a new look at how the
canon of ethics supposedly governing conduct of mem-
bers of the bar was being heeded. On the federal
level, we felt it would be wise to tighten up the regu-
lations regarding standards for admission of attorneys
permitted to practice before federal courts and other
United States judicial bodies.”

rol «25. The question of violation of regulations Telating to
prices, rents, and rationing has received detailed consi-
deration in the U.S.A.4,

Regulations relating to price control were issued in the
U.S.A. extensively during and after the Second World
War.

‘Hostetter and Beesley, “ 20ch Gencary Crime ”, in (1933) 14 Politicat
Quarterly Review, No. 3, reproduced in Tyler, “Organised Crime in
America”, (1962), page 49.

2Gf. Mabel Elliott, Crime in Modern Society, (Harper) (1952), page

47.
*Kefauver, Crime in America (1959 page $7.
4868 (Clinard, _Criminatpgi ical | Violations of Wartime Regy--
lations 2 1249 “Americhn 5180 Ree, 258, 260, fooe-note 10, mud:
page 264.

H


8

The office of Price Administration was the main agency
charged with the implementation of these regulations.
Apart from criminal prosecutions, action in other forms
could be invoked against violators of such regulations in
various forms, such as, warning letters, monetary settle-
ments, damage suits, suits for injunction and license sus-
pension proceedings. Damage suits are of three types,
first, suit by the Administrator for violation in the course
of trade or business; secondly, suit by the Administrator
for violation at the retail level; and thirdly, suit by the
consumer himself. In the first two cases, money paid as
the result of the monetary settlement or suit is not deducti-
ble as a business expense for income-tax purpose. The
maximum amount of damages is laid down by law.

An interesting feature disclosed as a result of the study
of such crimes was, that the whole-sale dealers considered
imprisonment to be a far more effective penalty than
fines’,

26. We have dealt with white-collar crimes at length?
with reference to the importance which they have assumed
in some of the Western countries. We are not unmindful
of one important fact, namely, that they are a peculiar
feature of an acquisitive and affluent society. Our society
is by no means affluent, but it is gradually becoming acqi-
sitive, particularly in the urban areas. While white-collar
crime may not exist in this country on the scale on which
it seems to exist in England and in America, it is not
totally absent. Corruption of administrative Officers, eva-
sion of tax (particularly income-tax) by persons who fall
in the higher income group, smuggling of foods which are
scarce in this country (such as gold, watches and transis-
tor-radio sets) and deliberate breach of foreign exchange
regulations, may be cited as instances of white-collar crime
in cur country.

Further, the problem assumes worse Proportions when
town populations pass the million mark. The power to
influence and the power to corrupt, and all the other evils
associated with those powers, may not, at present, exist
on the same large scale in India as in other more pros-
perous countries. But, with rapid urbanisation, these evils
are bound to grow in intensity. That there is a marked
association vetween crime and urbanisation is recognised
in respect of crime generally’, and in respect of the crimes
with which we are concerned, it must particularly be so.
28668 Clinard, “ Criminiological ies of Violati i
Regulations coaennineniel Theorie of Violtions of Ware
roand page 264.

*Paras. 7 to 25, supra. पु
*Sutherland and Cressey, Pind i

५ (1960), page. 156.

White-¢ ollar
ctimes in
affluent
society.


1¢
Economic Crimes In Soviet Russia

Economic 27. Mali ractices in connection with business, profes-
Grimes in sion and office, thus, seem to have received special treat-
Russia. ment in England! and in the United States of America’

On the other hand, in Soviet Russia, the subject of econo-

mic crimes has received special consideration*.

28. Many acts which would not be criminal in other
countries are regarded as crimes in Soviet Russia. The sub-
ject of “economic crimes” has received a most detailed at~
tention in Soviet Russia and in other countries of Eastern
Europe. Criminal law is viewed as political weapon and as
an instrument of policy‘.

Apart from “counter-revolutionary crimes’, (which बार"
of a political nature), acts and types of behaviour like in-
efficient management, poor work, neglect of duties by an
employee, non-performance of contracts and inefficient use
of one’s property, are penalised. Provisions as to economic
crimes have existed for the tast 40 years, and recent legis-
lation increasing the penalty for such offences in certain
cases and even impoging tlie death penalty*, would appear
mersly to carry on the policy reflected in the earlier pro-

visioris. हे

\
Important 29. The number of “economit erimes” as known to Soviet.
species of penal law is large, and some. of them, such “counter:

camer’ ‘revolutionary crimes” and “rites against the public
administration” seert to partake of a political charactet,

> As these are not relevant for our present purpose, we
shall confine ourselves only to the species which are purely
of on economic character, of which the following may be
noted: - -

@ Manufac- The prohibition agains! manufacture of clothes, under-
Need pro- wear, knit goods, hats, leather footwear goods, and urticles
ducts. Pr made of non-ferrous metals, ete., being an essential feature
* of the economic policy, provisions were enacted to penalise
the manufacture, ete., or sale of such prohibited products®.

1 Paras. 14 to 18, supra.
3 Paras, 19 0 25, supra,
* Paras 28 to 33, snfra.
rn COL and Grzybowskt, Goverament, Law and Courts in the Soviet -
cfered to ७ G Gy लिए eee th oe: Sovier Union
cas, Sée G & G, Government, etc., in the Soviet Union, pages 947 and
* See note “Economic Crimes im the Soviet Union”, Journal of the
International Commission of Jurists, (December, 1964), Vol. 5, No. to
Page 3 at pages 6 and 10. :
३ 862 G&G, Government, ds ip the Soviet Union, pages 947—g4g8.
५ G & 6, Government, etc,i in thik Soviet Union, page 951. ः



u

“Speculation”—purchase and sale of goods and other 69, Specule-
objects with the intention of making a profit—is punished".

Dissipation by a leaseholder or trustee of legal entity (ii) Cont-
(corporation) of governmental or public property given to फल th
him under a contract is punishable. So is failure to per- pene
form an obligation arising from a contract made with
governmental or public office or enterprise, if, during a
civil trial, the malicious character of the failure to perform
is established*.

Violation of laws on nationalisation of land, committed in (iv) Private
the form of overt or concealed purchase, sale, gift,.etc., of relating to
plots or land not allowed by law, and other transactions in 1814.

violation of such laws, are punishable*.

“Pseudo-co-operative” activities, ie, founding or direct- © Private
ing the activities of pseudo-co-operatives (organisations business
which are disguised under the form of a co-operative in under, पट
order to secure privileges granted to ratives, but which (o-opera-
are in fact private enterprises), is pt blet. tive,

Release of products of poor quality, or of products in- (vi) Products
efficiently completed or released in violation of the estab- of rad
lished standards, is regarded as an anti-State crime equiva. MY
lent to sabotage. The directors, chief engineers and chiefs
of divisions of technical supervision of industrial establish-
ments are punishable for such offences’.

Mismanagement by a person placed at the head of gov- (vii) Poor
ernmental and public offices and enterprises or of those en- ansgtiticat.
trusted by them, based upon a careless or dishonest atti-

tude to the affairs entrusted, resulting in dissipation or
icreparable damage to property of the office or enterprise, is
punishable. So is dissipation of governmental or public pro-

perty, particularly the entry into unprofitable business
transactions by a person directing a governmental or public

office or enterprise committed by agreement with the party

to the contract of such office or enterprise*.

Giving faulty weights or measures to customers, using (viii) Weight
wrong scales or measurement devices or weights, is punish- and messures
able’,

“Warticle 154, R.S.F.S.R. Criminal Code, 1960.
* G & G, Government, etc., in the Soviet Union; page 955.
* G & G, Government, etc., in the Soviet Union, pages 956.
* G & G, Government, etc., in the Soviet Union, pages 957 and 958.
* G & G, Government, etc., in the’ Soviet Union, pages 957958.
* G & G, Govermment, etc., in the Soyiet Union, pages 958 and 959,
© ७ & &, Government, ete in tk छिलके Ginion, page 999. “

tote ibs
4 के €


16

fix) Selling Selling goods of inferior qui ality at the price for those of
goods of in superior quality is punish: as theft from the customer
ally ‘and fraud of the Soviet State’.

() Exeessiv® Violating established retail prices for goods of mass

Prices. consumption in shops, stores, stands, eating places, etc.,
and concea’ing ‘rom customers the prices of goods indi-
cated in the price list, are punishable as theft from the con-
sumer and fraud of the Soviet State.

(xi) Theft of ‘Theft of public property is dealt with elaborately in
pubic Pro- Soviet Criminal Law. Broadly speaking, theft of Govern-

डे ment property is punishable more severely than theft of
“public property” (property of collective farms, co-opera~
tives. ete.), and theft of public property is punishable more
severely than theft of private property". Recently, even the
death penalty has been introduced for large-scale theft of
State property or social property committed by dangerous
Tecidivists or persons serving sentences for special crimes*.
(In fact, even previously under the law of August 7, 1932,
misappropriation of goods shipped by rail or water, Gov-
ernment property or property of collective farms and co-
operatives was punishable with death. This position con-
tinued up to 1947. when the death penalty was generally
abolished on 26th May, 1947. From that date, confinement
and confiscation of property were substituted for theft of
public property‘).

peath नरक 30. Since the penalty of death can now be awarded for

cori a fF certain offences in Russia, it may be useful to summarise

mic ctimes. the important provisions on the subject. The death penalty
was abolished in Russia :n 1917, re-introduced some raonths
later in 1918, re-abolished in 1920, and again re-introduced
in 1920, i.e. in the same year. In May, 1947, it was abolished
again, but in January, 1950, it was re-introduced for certain
serious crimes (enemies of the reginte, traitors, spies and
subversive-diversionists). In 1954, it was extended again
to murder under aggravating circumstances. This position
was repeated in the General Principles of Criminal Legis-
lation, laid down jn 1958. Thereafter, in 1961-62, it was
extended to certain economic crimes*-*.

3 ७ & G, Government, etc., in the Soviet Union, page 959."
3 5 & G, Government, etc., in the Soviet Union, page 960.
Decree of sth May, 1961, No. 19/207.
4G & G, Government, qtc., in the Soviet Union, ‘page For chi
text of the law of 1947, see ibid, pages 961 and 962. 960. For the
4 Seem
6) G & G, Government, ete., in Soviet Union, page 939, text corres~
ponding to foot-motes 39 and 40, pages 940, and 941, para. 55
a
@) “Economic Crimes in the Soviet Union”, (December, 1964)
Volos नह: ‘the ‘international ‘Commission, of” Jurist
No. 1, 9. oS > 7, and. 8.
53 Generally 85 to dl PE Sins see “law in Eastern Europe,
jinal : "» feldbrugge), (1964), Pagese 79, ;
203--205, 230. | Hi d
ae

Shag ny


जज

37

31. It has been stated’, that the extension of the death Reasons fo»
penalty in 1961 and 1962 to various economic crimes re- Heth  peoale-
Nects the determination of the Soviet regime to take ex- ye
treme measures against those who most flagrantly violate
the tenets of Communist morality. Some of the salient
points that have been emphasised” are, that Soviet law—

(४) regulates ail aspects of economic and social life;
(ii) remains a law of planned economy; and

(iii) remains a law whose primary function is to
discipline, guide, train and educate Soviet citizens to
become dedicated members of a collectivized and mobi-
lized social order.

32. An interesting feature of the Soviet Criminal Ccde Minimum
which came into force on the Ist January, 1961, is the dis- Penalties.
appearance of minimum penalties in many cases*-*.

33. On the basis of the brief discussion attempted above’, Some sélient:
we venture to draw certain general conclusions as to fe prow
white-collar and economic crimes in the countries con- sions in
cerned. England, .

First, in England and in the U.S.A., an emvhasis has
been placed on “white-collar crimes” (such as, frauds by
corporations, manipulations in the stock exchange, com-
mercial bribery, bribery cf public officials, tax frauds, pro-
fessional and business rackets, ete.). But, in the Soviet
Russia and other countries of Eastern Europe, the emphasis
placed has been on “economic crimes”. In fact, having
regard to the social and economic complex of those coun-
tries, the importance of white-collar crimes (crimes by
persons of the upper strata), seems to be limited.

Secondly, the importance attached to each species of
white-collar and economic crimes has varied from time to
time. While one species of whité-collar crime, such as pro-
fiteering, assumes importance at one stage, at another stage
it might pale into insignificance, and another species of
white-col! fer crime, such as tax fraud, might come into pro-
minence.

. Thirdly, there is no common factor binding white-
collar crimes as known in the West with economic crimes as
emphasised in Eastern Europe. .

1 Harold Berman, “Soviet Law Reform”, Harvard Law Review (March
1963), 929, 948.

* Harold Berman, “ Soviet Law Reform”, Harvard Law Review (March
1963), 929, 930 and 931.

* Feidbrugge, “Soviet Criminal Law, The Last Six Years”, Journal of
Criminal Law, Criminology and Police Science (September, soy page
249, 255, righthand column.

co cea 51 3, Pte te:
ता!



:Position in
-Commen-
wealth
scountries,

“Main points
to be consid-
aed,

Addition of
concerned, no detailed suggestions were forwarded when

18

Fourthly, there is no cemmon characteristic behind the
economic crimes penalised in Eastern Europe, except that
they share the common characteristic of all crimes, namely,
acts universally disapproved of by members of. the society
concerned’.

34. We tried to ascertain, as far as possible, whether
provisions of the nature contained in the Soviet Criminal
Law? are in force in the Penal Codes of Commonwealth
countries. For this purpose, we made an attempt to study
in detail the Penal Codes of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand, and the materiai_ available as to certain other
Commonwealth countries“®, We were unable to trace such
wide and sweeping provisions in the laws of those countries,
or in the law of England*.

POINTS TO BE CONSEDERED-—~GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

35. We now proceed २० consider the main points arising
from the proposals of the Santhanam Committee. The pro-
posal of the Committee’ is ६0 add a new chapter to the
Indian Penal Code bringing together “all the offences in
such special enactments (%e. enactments relating 10 the
offences in question) and supplementing them with new
provisions”. Thus, it seems to contemplate two classes of
changes, namely— -

(9 transfer to the Indian Penal Code of the existing
provisions relating ta the offences in question, c¢on-
tained in other special enactments; and

(क्र) addition to the Indian Penal Code of new pro-
visions as to social (and economic) offences.

36. So far as the question ef adding new provisions is

the matter was referred to us {except the recommendation
made by the Santhanam Committee)*. But certain sugges-
tions were made in the commenits received by us on the pro-
posals under consideration. The important points made in
those comments will be ¢dnsidered later in this Report,
under each category, at the appropriate place’. .

‘Cf. Durkheim, Division of Labour in Society (English translation by
George Simpson, 1933), page 70, cited in Mannheim, Criminal Justice
and Social Reconstruction, (1946), page 167.

3 Para. 28 to 32, supra.

5 The Criminal law is codified im Queensland, Western Australia and
Tasmania. .

‘ idan, Malaya Singaporé— nt
and Steridan, | Malays and ‘The Development of their Laws 1५.
6 ea A. De Smith, The New Commonwealth and its Constitution,
1964).

© See also Appendives 19, 20, 26, 28 and 29.

? Para. 3, supra.

1 अप ee ae poi ge a a :

* See parsgraphs 38, 74 o8-d7) thd, 225, 136, 138, 144, 164 send £68," 1

o4

infra,


19

37. We shall, later, discuss in detail' how far changes in General ob-
the nature of transfer of existing provisions, as well as addi- errata ae
tion of new provisions, is necessary and convenient in re- fe propeal
lation to each of the various classes of offences mentioned
by the Committee. But, as to transfer of existing provisions,
there are certain points of a general character which we
would like to state at the outset. In the first place, the penal
provisions contained in various specia] enactments are, in.
many ९३५९३, linked up with the general structure of those
enactments, ang take their colour from them. Their trans-
fer to the Indian Penal Code may be inconvenient, if such
transfer has the effect of disturbing the whole scheme of
those enactments and making them unintelligible or in-
complete. Converseiy, if transferred to the Indian Penal
Code, these provisions themselves would become incom-
plete, as they would then have to be read without refer-
ence to the main provisions of the special enactments.
Secondly, their transfer will not only increase the number
of sections in the Penal Code and add’ to its bulk, but also
mar its structure.

38. The correct approach to the problem seems to us_ to Correct
have been well expressed in a comment which we received *PProada-
from one of the High Courts on the proposals under consi-
deration. We quote the relevant portion in extenso®:—

“In their Lordships’ opinion, the proposal of the
Committee to include these anti-social offences in the
Indian Penal Code does not appear to be practicable,
and, if followed, will create innumerable difficulties,
apart from marring the structure of the Penal Cade.

Their Lordships further observe, that the Indian
Penal Code deals with such acts against persons and’
their property as are universally accepted as injurious
in all civilized societies and (with) acts which offend’
against the fundamenta) principles on which (the)
existence of human beings ag a society rests. These
fundamentals are more or less of a permanent nature,
and will endure for-a long time to come. In their Lord-

‘ ships’ view, the offences dealt with in the Indian Penal

de are of a different nature, and have a different con-

tent, from social offences, and it would not be proper to
include anti-social offences in the Indian Penal Ccde.

The preamble of the Indian Penal Code also shows
that it was intended to be a general Penal Code for-
India. It was never intended, ad section 5 of the Act
shows, to affect any special er local law by the enact-
ment of the Penal Code. The Opium Act, the Gambl-
ing Act and a number of special and local laws were:

© Para. 92, et seg, infra.
3 Cf. Para. 38, infra, i ia

: waded wi पु
. Punctuation marks have beeh added at! fw places.


‘Permanent
offences
and tempo-
ary mal-
Practices,

20

-and are in force, which not only constitute but also
punish some types of acts under circumstances men-
tioned therein, and that method of dealing with offend-
ing acts of a special nature or acts which require to be
specially considered and dealt with, has been found to
be working satisfactorily. Sometimes, while dealing
with particular offences, it has heen found necessary
to provide for particular procedure or special rules of
evidence also. Provisions for special sanction before
starting investigation and prosecution, for raising pre-
sumption of guilt, fer awarding minimum sentences,
etc, have been made in some special enactments, e.g.
Prevention of Corruption Act, Prohibition laws, etc.
The Penal Code, besides giving its own general
explanations, definitions. and general exceptions,
divides into and deals with categories of acts constitut-
ing offences on their basic wature, e.g. offences against’
the State, against public tranquility, offences relating:
to public servants, affecting public health and morals,
affecting the human body, offences against property,
etc. Most of the principal offences defined and made
punishable under the Penal Code have, unfortunately,
continued to be committed and punished, but, except
in a few cases (almost.negligible), the occasion to
delete any of them as obsolete has so far-not arisen. On
the other hand, offences of new and complex types have
come to the forefront, the'pature and the number of the
offences constituting the basic structure of the Penal
Code remaining unaffectéd. These offences have now
assumed such proportions that it has become’ necessary
to deal with them on a more scientific basis and to in-
corporate them into the pénal law of the land. But, as
stated before, such offencas require special treatment
and procedure in their trial, and, in their outer forms,
are short-lived, though they reappear in different and
perhaps more complicated guises later on. These
offences being the outcome of changed and changing
social conditions, would require repeated legislative
attention, and therefare, ;it would be appropriate if
they are made the subject-matter of special legislation
while the penal law of the land, i.e. ‘he Indian Penal
Code, should be left substantially in its present form.”.

39. As has been pointed. out in one article’, some offences

go against the fundamental structure of the society. On the
other hand, there are some activities which are regarded as
offences because of a temporary dislocation of the economic
structure. “Statutory offences mainly belong to the second
category. They are intended to counter-act passing pheno-
mena. So long as human life is considered of value--and it
be eternally so—. taking away human life would be consi-
dered a crime. On the other hand, if things return to

सब CE St FRE 0 7 oa


a

normal, there will be no necessity for any Guest Control
Order or for the matter of that any Control order.”.

40. As regards the argument that courts attach more
gravity to offences mentioned in the Penal Code, it has keen
statedi—“An offence of, say, entertaining more than 100
guests in violation of the Guest Control Order cannot be
looked upon by anybody as an offence as heinous as rape,
even if it is enacted ‘in the Penat Code cs section 376-A”.

41, Such offences are better left to be dealt with by
special and self-contained enactments which supplement
the “basic criminal law”. (We would, in this connection,
like to quote the following observations of Stephen?: —

“Before undertaking either of these tasks I must
endeavour to define what 1 mean by the Criminal Law.
The most obvious meaning of the expression is that
part of the law which relates tocrimes and their
punishment—a crime being defined as an act or omis-
sion in respect of which legal punishment may be
inflicted én the person who is in default either by act-
ing or omitting to act.

This definition is too Wide for practical purposes.
If it were applied in its full latitude it would embrace
all law whatever, for one specific peculiarity by which
law is distinguished from morality is, that law is coer-
cive, and all coercion at some stage involves the possi-
bility of punishment. This might be shown in relation
to matters altogether unconnected with criminal law,
as the expression is commonly understood, such as 1९, gal
maxims and the rules of inheritance. A judge who
wilfully refused to act uupo mn recognised legal maxims
would be liable to impeachment. The Proprietory rights
which are protected by laws punishing offences against
property are determined iby the application of those
laws.. If there were no such crimes as theft, forcible
entry, malicious mischief, and the like, and if there
were no means of forcing people to respect proprietory
rights, there would be no such thing as property by

Ww.

This is no doubt a remote and abstract speculation.
The principle on which it depends may be displayed by
more obvious and important illustrations. It would be a
violation of the common use of language to describe the
Jaw relating to the celebration of marriage, or the Mer-
chant Shipping Act, or the law relating to the registra-
tion of births, as branches of the criminal law. Yet the
statute on each of these subjects contain a greater or

3 (1964-65) 69 Calcutta Weekly Notes (No. 14), page 57 (8th February
1965 Editorial note). ”

Example of
Guest Cone
trol Order
cited,

Chagecter of
special statu

snfigpie’ History of ७॥ ०:०० फेल ind, (88), Vol ag.


22

less number of sanctioning clauses which it is difficult
to understand without reference to the whole of the
acts to which they belong. Thus, for instance, it is
felony to celebrate marriage otherwise than according
to the provisions of certain Acts of Parliament passed
in 1823 and 1837, ard these provisions form @ connected.
system which cannot be understood without reference
to the common law on the subject. These illustrations
(which might be indefinitely multiplied) show that the
definition of criminal law suggested above must either
be considerably narrowed or must conflict with the
common use of language by including many parts of
the law to which the expression is not usually applied.”.

42. The observations of Stephen relating to summary
offences may also be quoted!:—

“Such offences? differ in many particulars from
those gross outrages against the public and against
individuals which we commonly associate with the
word crime. It would be an abuse of language to apply
such a name to the conduct of a person who does not
sweep the snow from his doors or in whose chimney a
fire oceurs.”.

Mulkiplicy: - 43. Recent years have witnessed a growth in the volume
Booth” of criminal law and the intensive multiplication of
° offences. Some of the offences with which we are concern-
eq seem to belong to a clags which cannot be equated with
the class of offences dealt with in the Indian Penal Code.
This is an aspect well worth elaboration. We quote the
following passage from the Encyclopaedia of Social

Sciences?: — .

“Treason, murder, certain sexual offences and some
serious offences against property are fairly constant in
the criminal laws of the world, with relatively similar
definitions.

In addition to these. mces, however, the increas-
ing complexity of socipl ae has led to the creation by -
the State of a vast number of laws which strike at
forms of conduct peculiar to some particular type of
social organisation. Roscoe Pound, in his Criminal
Justice in’ America, ina the | ip analysing the criminal
laws of Rhode. Is) paid d the Revised Public
Laws of 1882 defined i while the title of
“Crimes and Punishment? of i of the general laws of 1923
defined 212. More than half of the offences that may
be prosecuted by the State.and punished by tine and
imprisonment or both are contained in special laws
Stephen, History of the. Criminal Law of England, (1883), Vol. 17

Page 4.
*The reference is to “ summary of police offences”.

pages S61 16 366 (Chat bf ८२7०७



23

passed since 1872. dealing with such problems as the
protection of workers, the regulation of motor vehicle
traffic, the regulation of selling of securities and of
merchandise and the enforcement of liquor prohibition
laws...”

‘Only the most serious offences against the law
cause a stigma to be attached to the offender. Were it
otherwise, the psychic burden of criminality carried by
the average community today should be immense, for
the multiplication of legal prohibitions has made it
difficult for any one of its members to lead a completely
law abiding life.’.

44. Even as regards acts of an anti-social character Criminal law
belonging to a class which can be regarded as “unethical” fad Mota-
it should be borne in mind that every act which is regarded 7?
as immoral cannot be made criminal. The question of the
relation between law and morality is a vexed one, and we
need not enter into a detailed discussion thereof!. Stephen’s
observations on the subject, however, seem to put the sub-
ject in a proper perspective, and may be quoted*: —

“The first point then to be considered is the nature
of the popular and the legal conception of crime in
general, their relation to each other and the inference
which the existence of that relation suggests as to the
nature and objects of punishments.

The great difference between the legal and the
popular or moral meaning of the word ‘crime’ is, that
whereas the only perfectly definite meaning which a
lawyer can attach to the word is that of an act or omis-
sion punished by law, the popular or moral conception
adds to this the notion of moral guilt of a specially deep
and degrading kind. By a criminal, peo, fe in general
understand not only a person who is liable to be
punished, but a person who ought to be punished

ecause he has done something at once wicked and
obviously injurious in a high degree to the commonest
interests of society. Perhaps the most interesting ques-
tion connected with the whole subject is how far these
views respectively ought to regulate legislation on the
subject of crimes, ‘ought’, meaning in this instance
how far it is for the good of those whose good is con-
sidered in legislation that the view {n question should
be adopted, and ‘good’ meaning the end which the
legislator has in view in his legislation. In other words,
the question is, what ought to be the relation between
criminal law and moral good and evil as understood
by the person who imposes the law?

) For a bibliography, see Devlinj हाफ emedat of: 6
(ails) and ain). SPM ३०० Devlin; Eriforoemecg of Morals, (1965), pages _

3 Stephen, History of the Criminal Law of England, (1883), Vol. 2,
Pages 76,77, 78, 99 and 80.)  j tet

47 Law—3. i



a

betes In what relation ought criminal law to stand
to morality when the effective majority of a great
nation legislates for the whole of it, and when there are
no other differences of moral standard or sentiment
than those which inevitably result from individual . ५1
differences of opinion and unrestricted discussionon {'
religion and morals?

The answer to this question is not quite simple. In
the first place, criminal law must, from the nature of
the case, be far narrower than morality. In no_ age or
nation, at all events, in no age or nation which has any
similarity to our own, has the attempt been made to
treat every moral defect as a crime. In different ages
of the world injuries to individuals, to God, to the gods,
or to the community, have been treated as crimes, but I
think that in all cases the idea of crime has involved
the idea of some definite, gross, undeniable injury to
some one. In our own country this is now, and has been
from the earliest times, perfectly well-established. No
temper of mind, no habit of life, however, pernicious,
has ever been treated as a crime, unless it displayed
itself in some definite overt act. It never entered into
the head of any English legislator to enact, or of any
English court, to hold, that a man could be indicted
and punished for ingratitude, for hardheartedness, for
the absence of natural affection, for habitual idleness,
for avarice, sensuality, pride, or, in a word, for any —
vice whatever as such. Even for purposes of ecclesias- |:
tical censure some definite act of immorality was requir-. |:
ed. Sinful thoughts and disposition of mind might be
the subject of confession and of penance, but they were
never punished in this country by ecclesiastical crimi-
nal proceedings.

The reasons for imposing this great leading res-
triction upon the sphere of criminal law are obvious.
If it were not so restricted it would be utterly intoler-
able; all mankind would be criminals, and most of their
lives would be passed in trying and punishing each.
other for offences which could never be proved.

Criminal law, then, must be confined within narrow
limits, and can be applied only to definite overt acts or
omissions capable of being distinctly proved, which acts
or omissions inflict definite evils, either on specific per
sons or on the community at large. It is within these
limits only that there can be any relation at all between
criminal law ahd morality.

The relatign between criminal law and morality i¢ +
not in all cases the same. (a) The two may harmonize;
(b) there may be a conflict between them, or (c) they
may be independent. In all common cases they do, and, 5
in my opinion, wherever; and so far as it is possil bee i
they ought to harmdnizé with, and support, and aby!
other.”. Qo



3
45. Sometimes, notwithstanding that an act is immoral,

it may be necessary to put it outside the criminal law
because it is difficult to enforce a law punishing it. The
observations of an eminent judge' are of interest: —

“The line that divides the criminal law from the
moral is not determinable by the application of any
clear-cut principle. It is like a line that divides land
and sea, a coastline of irregularities and indentations.
“There are gaps and promontories, such as adultery and
fornication, which the law has for centuries left subs-
tantially untouched. Adultery of the sort that breaks
up marriage seems to me to be just as harmful to the
social fabric as horro-sexuality or bigamy. The only
ground for putting it outside the criminal law is that
a law which made it a crime would be too difficult to
enforce; it is too generally regarded as'a human weak-
ness not suitably punished by imprisonment. All that
the law can do with fornication is to act against its worst
manifestations; there is a general abhorrence of the
commercialization of vice, and that sentiment gives
strength to the law against brothels and immoral earn-
ings. There is no logic tv be found in this. The boundary
between the criminal law and the moral law is fixed
by balancing in the case of each particular crime the
pros and cons of legal enforcement in accordance with
the sort of considerations I have been outlining.’.

46. The same eminent Judge” has made the point about

the proper function of the criminal law, as compared with
the moral law, in these words: —

“I have spoken of the criminal law as dealing with
the minimum standards of human conduct and the
moral law with the maximum. The instrument of the
criminal law is punishment; those of the moral law
are teaching, training, and exhortation. If the whole
dead weight of sin were ever to be allowed to fall upon
the law, it could not take, the strain.”.

47. In the course of our deliberations, we tried to analyse

the common characteristics of the offences in question’.
Many of the offences seem to have the following features in
common: -—

(a) the offences are committed by the upper classes
of society;

(9) those upper classes themselves set the moral
standards of society, and hence a serious view is not
taken of these offences:

‘Devlin, Enforcement of 21 (at ang 22.
*Devlin, Enforcement ‘of हू 23.
*Para 2, supra. . : ee

Line of
division
thin,

Function of
criminal law
and moral
law com-
pared.

77277 1
etc, offences, ;


enactments.

Special penal

Provisions.

26

(c) the victims of the offences are unascertainable
persons (usually, the State or the community), as
contrasted with the majority of the offences under the
Indian Penal Code, where, in most cases, the victim is
an ascertained individual.

But all these features are not shared by each of the
offences (e.g. theft of public property and offences relating
to taxes). Moreover, some of the offences—e.g. theft of
public property-—are, even now, punishable under the Indian
Penal Code.

ANALYSIS OF SPECIAL ENACTMENTS

48. What we would like to emphasise is, that most of the
special enactments dealing with ‘these offences' possess
some special features, and we proceed to state some of
these special features.

These special features are briefly, special pena] provi-
sions, provisions modifying mens rea, provisions relating to
liability of officers of companies, vicarious liability, special
rules of evidence, penalties by rules, special powers, special
provisions as to sanction, provisions for publicity, and
similar provisions which illustrate the special character of
the enactments*.

49. We begin with cone feature found in many of the
enactments, namely, the existence of special penal provi-
sions. These seem to take various shapes—

(a) There may be “Departmental” penalties
{penalties which can be imposed by officers of the
Department), as in the Income-tax Act and similar Acts,
in the Customs Act and in the Stamp Act.

(b) Again, action by way of confiscation of goods
can be taken, an example of which is section 3(2) of
the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947, read with
the relevant provisions in the Customs Act*,

(c) Even in respect of the traditional penalties
(such as imprisonment or fine), some of the special
enactments ‘contain special provisions. By way of
example, we may refer to provisions relating to conti-
nuing offences*-*, provisions enhancing the powers of
Magistrates in respect of fines* (for offences under the
special enactments), and provisions for enhanced

{Para. 2, supra.
*See paragraphs 49 to 81, infra.
ef. F.N. Roy, v. Collector of Oustoms, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 648, 650,
para. 6. .
4See section 24 (1X#v), Industries (Development and Regulation) Act,
1951 (65 Of 1951).
‘As to continuing halt tay di jon in Mubicipal Council v.
Rawat Ram, A.LR. 196$ Raji 18. #H « 1 ४
‘See section 29A, I and Regufetion): Act,
(65 of 1951). : | bs 0a : y Aas x

i


27

unishment in fespect of subsequent offences, e.g.
ection 16, Prevention of Food Adulteration ‘Act!2,”

(d) Then, revocation or amendment of licences
may be provided for. An example is section 12(1) of
the Industries (Development and Regulation) 2०३
1951.

(e) Lastly, penalties may be provided for, not in
the enactment, but in the rules made thereunder. Thus,
rules made under the Central Excises and Salt Act,
1944, contain extensive penal provision‘-°-6. In our
opinion, if certain penal provisions of special enact-
ments ate removcd while other provisions are allowed
to continue in the special enactments, then the inte-
grated scheme of the special enactments would be des-
troyed without any compensating advantage.

50. It should also be noted, that the enactments relating Mens rea
to some of the offences under consideration modify the re-
quirements of mens rea, thus standing in contrast with the
Indian Penal Code.

51. For the present purpose, it is not necessary to ana- Analysis of
lyse in detail the various special Acts in order to show how Kinds ef
the mens rea, i.e. “some blameworthy conditions of mind?” ™*"s 74
has been modified. Bui some broad points may be
indicated.

While dealing with meng rea, it would be convenient
to group* the various crimes into four classes—

() Crimes in which the mens rea® is found in an
intention to commit an illegal act. (General intention).

(#) Crimes in which a 187 intention’ is re-
quired (e.g. in English Law, Purely is house-breaking
by night with intent to commit a felony) .7,

1Prevention of Food “Adulteration 1 ‘Act, 1954 ५ 1954 G7 Of 1 1954).
3868 State v. Badri, A.LR. 1965 Raj. 152, para.412.
*The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (65 of 1951)

40f, al i read with i i
‘ment and Repalaton AD 1951 (65 है 2:25 Bon, 40060 Tadustries (Develop-

‘Cf. A. A. Beeravoo v. Collector, stc., (3965) 2 Cr. L. J. 279 (Kerala).
“See also para 77 infra.
"Cf. Cave J. in Chisholm v. Doulton, (1889) 22 Q.B.D. 736, 741.

*The grouping is based on that given in Stephen, Commentaries on th
Laws of England (1950), Vol. 4, pages 10-12. enue

hi ‘Stephen's criticism of the expression “mens rea” will be found in
his judgment in R. v. Tolson, (1889) 23 Q.B.D. 168, 185, 187.

"Knowledge can aloo, 8० agg Gf Rw, ,
W.ER. 50% 60 (2th Magch, लकी, मी का Hudwm, 0969 2

Law os ee 8720: > Bast [2५ spas [इिक्रफरल्ट im Pepkine Cricinal

BS



Strict

28

(iii) Crimes in which negligence! will suffice (e.g.
management of vehicles in public streets);

(iv) Crimes in which the requirement of mens rea
is reduced to a minirnum (i.e. abducting a girl under 16
from her parents, though the girl is believed to be above
16) * ' *

52. But, beyond these examples’, lie the cases where the
legislature has absolutely forbidden the commission of cer-
tain acts under penalty of fine (or imprisonment in default
of payment of fine), apart. altogether from the question of
mens rea‘. That the liability so created is ofa quality
different from that attaching to ordinary offences requiting
mens tea is now well-recognised by the case-law and ex-
tensive literature that has grown around these offences. It
js not necessary to deal with these offences of “strict liabi-
lity” at length. As has been said, strict responsibility “has
been with us so long that it has become accepted as a
necessary evil”. At the same time, a brief discussion is
not out of piace.

53. In this connection, we may quote the ‘following
observations of the Privy Council in a recent case®:—

“Where the subject-matter of the statute is the re-
gulation for the public welfare of a particular activity--
statutes regulating the sale of food and drink are to be
found among the earliest examples—it can be and fre~

quently has been inferred that the legislature intended
that such activities should be carried out under the
conditions of strict liability. The presumption is that
the statute or statutory instrument can be effectively
enforced only if those in charge of the relevant acti-
vities are made responsible for seeing that they are
complied with. When such a presumption is to be
inferred, it displaces the ordinary presumption of mens
rea. Thus sellers of meat may be made responsible for
seeing that the meat is fit for human consumption and
it is no answer for them to say that they were not
aware that it was polluted. If that were a satisfactory
answer, then as Kennedy, L. J., pointed out in Hobbs

"Por the present purpose, # i urpose, ह is assumed that negligence is a pee of
rea, For 3 vconerary view, yee Glanville Williams, Criminal "The
General Part, (1961), pages 10g and 262. For 2 comprehensive discussion,
a P. J. Fitzerald, “Crime, Sin and Negligence” (1963) 79 L.Q.R. 351;

.

*R. v. Prince, (1875) L.R. 2 C.CiR, 154.

*Para. 51; supra.

4Cf. Stephen, Commentaries on the Laws of England (1950), Vol. 4»
page 13.

#7, J. Fitzgerald, in Block Re" of Colin Howard, Strict Responsi-
bility, (i964) 7 Lawyer 41. ie lies °

‘Lim Chin Aik v. The > (॥| DAK 160 All है ४
228 PC), + ००६” he HY pe) at an



29

v. Winchester Corporation’, the distribution of bad meat
(and its far-reaching consequences) would not be effec-
tively prevented. So a publican may be made respon-
sible for observing the condition of his customers*.”.

In other words, these are cases in which—‘“Intention to
commit a breach of the statute need not be shown. The
breach in fact is enough’-*.”.

54. The passages quoted above' have been discussed at Knowledge
length in a recent decision of the Supreme Court of India®-* of illegality
which also deals with the question, how far mens rea in Mitast,
the sense of actual knowledge that the act done by the
accuseq was contrary to the law, may be requisite. It was
pointed out there, that “starting with an initial presumption
in favour of the need for mens rea, we have to ascertain
whether the presumption is overborne by the language of
the enactment. read in the light of the objects and purposes
of the Act, and, particularly, whether the enforcement of
the law and the attainment of its purpose would not be
rendered futile in the event of such an ingredient being con-
sidered necessary”.

On the other hand, where it cannot be said that the
object of the Act would be defeated if mens rea is read as
an ingredient, courts would be slow to dispense with it’.

55. Examples of reduction or elimination of mens rea English case
are abundant in the case law in England re; garding the Food 0n mens rea
and Drugs Act,*-°.1-1 and the Weights and Measures Acts!? under Parti

AHobbs, v. Winchester Corporation, (1910) 2 K.B. 471.

4Cundy v. Le Cocq, (1884) L.R. 13 Q.B.D. 207.

8Cf. Lord ore ht in McLeod v. Buchanan, aS sy )) 2 All. England
Reports 179, 186 (H-L.) (Case under s. 35, Road Tt Act, 1930, requiring
insurance 'isks),

against third party risks).

“See also para 59, infra.

“Paragraph 53, supra.

*State of Maharashira v. M. H. George, AIR. 1965 S.C. 722, 736,
73% patnaraphe 2 10 227 and 51 दशक Judgment. > 73%

१61, Nathulal v. State of M. P. AIR. 1966 S.C. 43, 45, para. 43 1966
Cr. Le J. 71, 73-

‘Williams, Criminal Law, The General Part, (1961), page 218, para. 77.

‘Craies, Statute Law (1963), pages 540 and 545.

3Halsbury, Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vol. 17, pages 484, 48: पर
9००, 901, and page 506, para. 937. 464 485, Pare

गटर case-law reviewed in Hobbs, etc., v. Winchester, (1910) 2 K.B. 471,
478, 480.

"sAngle-American Oil Co. Ladi v.- Mapnidy 1KB
Channel, 1. | os 2908 1 KBs 536 san,

: iba



Offences
under the

Judicial construction in England of certain enactments
passed for protection of the revenue also furnishes similar
examples.’-*

56. In India, a striking example of modification of the
ordinary rule regarding mens rea is the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, section 19(1) of which provides, that”
{subject to certain qualifications), jt shall be no defence के :
a prosecution for an offence pertaining to the sale of any
adulterated or misbranded article of food, to allege merely
that the vendor was ignorant of the nature, substance ar .
quality of the food sold by him, or that the purchaser, hav-
ing purchased any article for analysis, was not prejudiced
by the sale*. It has been held’, that under this Act even
the sale of any arti¢le to a particular customer on the under |
standing that the customer is to use it only for animals, i
punishable. In England also, provisions of the correspond
ing statutes are given a wide interpretation®.

57. Another example of a provision dispensing with
mens rea is section 167(12A) read with section 52A of the

Customs Act. (old) Sea Customs Act‘. The net result of these two provie

sions was, that if a vessel constructed, adapted, etc., for the
purpose of concealing goods, under section 52A, ‘entered,
etc., within the limits of India, the vessel] would be liable
to confiscation. The master of the ship was also liable to
a penalty not exceeding rupees 1,000. It has been held?,
that having regard 10 the fact that this sub-section, as con+
trasted with other sub-sections, did not use the word
“knowingly”, etc., and having regard to the fact that impor |
tation of the requirement of mens rea would nullify the
object of section 52A (to put an end to illegal smuggling), :
the prohibition must be Togarded as absolute. The guilty —
mind could rarely be estal ed against the owners of ves=
sels which are travelling on the high seas, and it may be
difficult to prove the guilty knowledge even of the master
of the ship. If absence of such knowledge was allowed to
be pleaded as a defence, the owners and the master could
very well plead that the alleged alteration, etc. was made
without their knowledge, and it will be almost impossible
to establish mens rea in such cases.

16.1. Davies v. Harogy, (1874) L.R. 9 Q.B. 433. .

*For an analysis whigh has now become classic, see Wright, J."s judge
ment in Sherras v. De Rutzen, (1895) 10.8. 918, 921.

*The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954).

4See Mangaldas v. State of Maharashtra A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 128, 133,

para. 14.
*P. P.¥. Palanisami, A.I.R. 1965 Mad. 98, 99 para. 3 (Ramakrishnan ~
i).

*The English cases are cited in Kenny, Outlines of Criminal Law (1962)»
Page 42.
i 3866, now section 115 (1a) Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962)... : ot
"Indo-China Sted Novice id है Jashe Singh, ALR. 1964 $.G.i}
0 as i tn 7808, + छह ol
8 ४ 1


31

58. A recent decision of the Supreme Court‘ virtually ggences
establishes the same position in respect of offences under x the
the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 19477. Epreign Ba

59. Of course, the question whether the liability under
a statute is absolute, is ultimately one of construction of
the particular statute, and the answer will depend on_ the
language employed in the statute’, the policy behind it,
and how far enforcement of the statute would suffer by
adherence to the doctrine of mens rea®.

The examples cited above are merely intended to show
that in relation to some of the enactments relating to the
offences in question, it would be proper to say, that they
fix theiv attention on the acts themselves, irrespective of
the knowledge or intention®.

60. The above discussion’ will show, that it cannot be Classification
asserted thar all the eight classes of offences with which of offences
we are concerned in this Report® stand on the same footing साय
with reference to mens rea. In fact, the offences seem tO ace to
belong to four different categories. First, there are offences ment rea.
in respect of which mens rea is undoubtedly required (such
as theft of public property). Secondly, there are offences
which, though requiring mens rea, possess a special charac-
ter of their own (e.g. many offences falling under the cate-
gory of black-marketing). Thirdly, there are offences
which can, with a fair measure of accuracy, be described
as offences of strict liability (such as, some offences regard.
ing food and drugs)’. And, fourthly, there are acts in res-
pect of which their moral culpabiliy is a matter of contro-
versy (e.g. tax avoidance)'*.

61. We may, in this connection, also refer to certain Companies.
special provisions concerning companies. The subject of

1 State ९. M. H. George, ALR, 1965 S.C. 722, para. 40, 41 (May)
{Reviews case-law).

*The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (7 of 1947).
°Cf. Craies, Stante Law (1963), page 539.

4Cf. Mousell Brothers, Lid. v. L. & N. W. Railways. Gor) 2 KB.
836, 845 5 (1916-17) AN E.R. Rep. rror, 1106 (per Atkin) J.).

pi Get कै४४० BOI ६4068 5 ME
iw Review 446.

‘See also para 53, supra.

*Para. 50 to $9, supra.

"Para. 2, supra.

*See also para. 73, infra. ;

"Of. paras. 1011}, info 1 |: lhe. one


Liability of
officers of
companies,

32

criminal liability of corporations is interesting one’-*, and
we need not, for the presen‘ purpose, enter into a detailed
discussion’ of the subject.

The subject has been discussed in detail in
England’-*~".

In India, the point was referred to, but not decided, in
one case before the Supreme Ceurt®.

The question has recently been discussed in a Bombay
case’.

62. But the provisions that deserve especially to be men-
tioned in the present context are those which (subject to
certain qualifications), treat directers and officers of the
company as liabie for the offences committed by the
company. .

63. An examvle of such a provision is section 1700 of
the Prevention of Food Adulteration 8०0९०, quoted below:

“17(1) Where an offence under this Act has
been committed by a company, every person who at the
time the offence was committed was in charge of, and
was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment
providea in this Act if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised
aa due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.

See Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 10, page 281, para. 521 ; and Vol. 6, 8
440 to 42, para. 3 and 854, dealing wih the नली liability of the come
panics 8 nd also with the criminal tiability of officers, particularly page 441,

3866 also Gower, Modern Company Law, (1957) (1963 Impression),
pages 137 to 138.

‘In England, the leading case is R. v. J. 6. R. Haulage, (1944) K.B.
उठा ;1944)'t All Eng. Rep. 691» 693, (C.GA. ४० 0944

(070$९८एएॉंणा of company for common law conspiracy to defraud).

¢Welsh, “Criminal Liability of Corporation” (1946) 62 L.Q.R. 345.

‘Russell on Crime, (1964), Vol. 1, page 96.

‘Kenny, Outlines of Criminal Law, (1962), page 70, para. 50.

2Glanville Williams, Criminal Law, The General Part, (1961), page 853,
et seq.

‘*Motipur Zamindari Co. v. State of Bihar, (1953) S.C.R. 720 ; ALR.
1953 S.C. 320, 323, para. 9.

*State of Maharashtra v. Syndicate Transport (0.5 A.1.R. 1964 Bom.
195, 200, para. 17. (Paranjpe J.).

wThe Prevention of छा ion 84; 1954 (37 of 1954).

ney. PP. v.K. Re 2 Sheik}, ALR. 1964 Mad. 301.



33
Similar provisions are found in many English Acts*.

64. As has been observed’, “Recent years have seen a
further development whereby the rule that the acts of:
directors are treated as those of the company is, in effect,
applied in reverse, so that the acts of the company are
treated as those of all its directors. Many modern statutes -
and regulations provide that if an offence is committed by
a company, every director or officer shall be guilty of that
offence unless he proves that it was committed without his
consent and that he exercised due diligence to prevent its
commission”. Such provisions are so worded as to stop the
loophole revealed by tertain judicial decisions’.

65. The practice of inserting such provisions‘ has not
escaped Criticism. The comment of Upjohn J. in one case
may be referred to. There the statutory provision in issue
was* as follows: —

....Where an offence’ under this Act has been
committed by a body corporate (other than a local
authority), every person who at the time of commission
of the offence was a director, general manager, secre-
tary or other similar officer of the body corporate, or
Was purporting to act in any such capacity, shall be
deemed to be guilty of that offence, unless he proves
that the offence was committed without his consent or
connivance and that he exercised all such diligence to -
prevent the commission of the offence as he ought to
have exercised having regard to the nature of his func-
tions in that capacity and to all the circumstances”.

The following observations were made on_ this

provision’; +-

“First of all, I have to bear in mind that this is a
enal statute. It-indeed, I suppose, represents the
‘igh-water mark of the Parliamentary invasion of the

traditional rights of the subjects of this realm. Not
only does it impose upon offenders substantial penalties.
--no objection could be taken to that—, but what is so
serious from the point of view of the subject is, that
where a body corporate has been found to be an

\For English Acts containing similar visions, see Glanville Williams...
Criminal Law, ‘The General Part, 96s pages B66, Serie Wiliams,

*Gower, Modern Company Law, (1957), (1963 Impression), page 138.

*E.g. Dean v. Hiesler, (1942) 2 All. Eng. Rep. 340 (person not
pointed as a director not liable under Regulation 97 of the Delenes) दशा
Regulations).

“Pare. 62, supra.

wi Borrowing (Control and Guarantees) Act, 1946. Schedule Para.
3@. :

*London and Company ’ as ped peak Investment, Lidy vo.
Aporney General, (1953) 1 We law $4 1312, 318, 319, (Ch. छः
i न है ४ > हे



34

offender, then every director, general manager, secre-
tary or other similar officer of the body corporate, in-
cluding a person who was purporting to act in those
capacities, is deemed 10 be guilty unless he proves that
the offence was committed without his consent or con-
nivance, thereby reversing the usual and traditional rule
of English law that 4 man is innocent until he is proved
guilty. But net only that; for proof that he is innocent
will not avail an accused person, because he must fuc-
ther show that he exercised ali such diligence to pre-
vent the commission of the offence as he ought to have
exercised, having regerd to the nature of his functions
in that capacity, and in all the circumstances. How-
ever, that is what Parliament has thought fit to enact,
and I abide, of course, by it. Nevertheless it is what
Mr. Lindon described as a highly penal statute.”,

दक्ष 66. The question of vicarious penal responsibility also

. falls to be considered, in this context. The rule at common

law is that (subject to certain exceptions), a master is not
vicariously responsible for the crimes of his servants'-’-*.

शी 67. This common law rule‘ may undergo a modification

vy * in relation to special enactments. The liability so imposed
may be vicarious either in relation to the actus reus, or in
relation to the mens rea. The method by which such modi-
fication is achieved is two-fold. There may be statutory
provisions creating vicarious responsibility, by using words
~such as “no person shall either by himself or by any servant
or agent” do some act.

68. Besides such statutory modifications’, there may be
a modification as a result of judicial construction. * A statute
may be so construed 'as to render a person criminally liable
for the acts of his servants; and, such a construction might

1Kenny, Outlines of Criminal Law (1962), pages 38, 42, 43, 48 and
49.

*See discussion in Glanville Williams, Criminal Law—The General
Part, (1961), pags 267 to 269, para. 92.

3866 S. Prevezer’s article in 26 Modern Law Review 236, for a general
discussion.

‘Para. 66, supra.
cee ee
"Spe examples of English Acts cited in Glanville Williams, Criminal
Law, ‘The General Part, (1961) Page 269 footnotes. जि पिता

‘Compare section 9B, Opium Act (1 of 1878), as inserted
Act 5 of 1933. ° 7. by Bengal

" "Bee para. 67, खाक: | id


35

be more easily adopted in relation to special enactments,
having regard to their subject-matter!-2-2+_

This seems to be particularly so im the case of “public
welfare offences”®-6,

Vicarious liability fer statutory offences is, in many
cases, justified on the principle, that if a master chooses to-
delegate the conduct of his business to a servant, then, if
the servant in the ccurse of conducting the business, does an
act which is absolutely pruhibited, the master is liable‘.
On the other hand, where intent is a necessary element, as
in attempt, the doctrine of vicarious liability may be nega-
tived®. The link between vicarious liability and absolute
prohibition can be seen in the following observations :—

“A master who is not participant in the offence can.
only be liable criminally for the acts of his servant if
the statute which creates the offence does so in terms
which impose an absolute prohibition.”.*

The following observations of Channell J. with refer-
ence to a case under the Weights and Measures Act, 1878”,
illustrate this aspect! :—

“(The Act] is within the class of statutes under
which versons may be convicted for acts of their ser-
vants in respect of which they are not in any real sense
culpable. Mens rea is not an element in the

‘For the position in England, see—
@ Gross, and Jones, Introduction to Criminal Law, 1964, pages
96, 98 5
Gi) Kenny, Outlines of Criminal Law (1962), pages 38, 42 and
48, paras. 28, 32 amd 35.
(i) Glanville Williams, Criminal Law, the General Part (1961),
pages 270—285. .
*For the position in Australia, see—
© Proudmany. Dayman and the judgement of Dixon J. therein,
(1953) 67 Commonwealth Law Reports, 536, 540 ; °
(i) Thomas ५. R. C99) 59 Commonwealth Law Reports 279,
300, 305 (Dixon J.) ;
(ii) Note by Colin Howatd in 67 L.Q.R. 547; and
(fv) Colin Howard, Strict Responsibility (1963), Chapter 7.
© For the position in America, see Perkins Criminal Law, (1957), pages
5 to 697.
‘For Indian case Law see Ustam Chand v. Emp. A.L.R. 1945 Lah
238, 246 to 248 (F.B.). .
*See Glanville Williams, Criminal Law, The General Part’ (1961), page
282, middle.
486९ also Yeandel v. Fisher (1965) 3 W.L.R. 1002, 1007, (per Lord
Parker C.J.)
Cf. Barker v. Levinson (1951) 1 K.B. 342 ; (1950) 2 All E. R. 825,
827 (Lord Goddard C.J.).
*Gardner v. Akeroyd, (1952) 2 All Eng. Reports 306, 310, 311.
cy > Gardner ९. Akeroyd (1952) 2 All E.R. 306, 310. (per Lord Goddard.
J). : Bil १
pte Weights and Measures Apt, £
25). हैं i i
“Anglo-American Oil Co., Lid, T

1५६ #४ 4० Vict. ०4% sections —

[690 7 KB. 536, 54. ot, }



36

-offence...... The offence is within that class where
the legislature has absolutely prohibited certain acts
being done, with the consequence that if they are done-~
although by a servant of the etnployer—done in any
sense in the course of the employment, so that for some
purposes the maxim qui facit per alium, facit per se
applies—the employer may be convicted although he is
not in any way morally culpable.”. .

69. As was observed by the House of Lords in a recent
scase', the number of statutes which may give rise to the
~question of vicarious criminal liability is “regrettably
great”, and the language “very far from uniform”. But the
effect of the numerous cases on the subject appears to be,
that (subject to certain exceptions), where the scope and
purpose of the relevant Act is the maintenance of proper
and accepted standards of public order in licensed premises
or other comparable establishments, there arises under the
-legistation what Channell J called a “quasi-criminal
offence”, which renders the licensee or proprietor criminally
liable for the acts of his servants, though there may be no
mens rea on his part.

70. An elaborate analysis of the methods whereby the
statute itself may create vicarious liability is found in the
judgment of Lord Morris*:

“It is open to Parliament to provide that a parti-
cular act is wrongful and that a person who does the
act is guilty of an offence. In general our criminal law
requires that there should be mens rea in order to.
establish guilt. (i) Parliament may, however, enact
that mens rea is noi necessary. There may be strict
liability. (#) So also it might be enacted that a person
is guilty of an offence if his servant or agent does some
act and does it with mens rea. It might be enacted
that a person is guilty of an offence if some other per:
son not his servant or agent does some act and does it
with mens rea. it might be enacted that a person is
guilty of an offence if there is mens 7९6 either in him
or in the person doing the act. (iii) It might be enact-
ed that a person 55 guilty of an offence if an act is done
“by some other person even though there is no mens rea
in any one.”.

71. This aspect cf special enactments creating “quasi-
<criminal offences” has been thus put by Lord Dev! Ain —

“The first distinguishing mark of the quasi-criminal

law then, is that a breach of it does not mean that the

Ve ५ Yiannopoullos, (1964) 3 weekly Law Reports, 1218, 1228
CAL.) (per Lord Evershed). 964) 3 Sports, पर व:

2566 para. 72, infra.
Ve + Yiannopoullog, (11 Becky Law Repor mts, 1218,
कि oid” Morais ९8:% 0046 ON indicating teas

*Devtin, Enforcement of Morals, (1965), page 30.



37

etfender has done anything morally wrong. The second
distinguishing mark is that the law frequently does not
care whether it catches the actual offender or not.
Owners of goods are frequently made absolutely Hable
for what happens to the goods while they are under
their control even if they are in no way responsible for
the interference; an example is when food is contami-
nated or adulterated. Likewise, they may be made
liable for the acts of their agents even if they have ex-
pressly forbidden the act which caused the offence.
This sort cf measure can be justified by the argument
that it induces persons in charge of an organisation to
take steps ६0 5९९ that the law is enforced in respect of
things under their control. In some of our colonies
where the police force is sparse and the population
scattered, and the detection of crime exceptionally diffi-
cult, the law provides for imposing a collective fine on
a village where there has been disorderly behaviour.
That helps to ensure that the inhabitants will keep
order among themselves. In England a more refined
form of vicarious liability prevails. The majority of
quasi-criminal offences are committed in the course of
trade or commerce, and the fines that are imposed in
respect of them fall upon the shareholders of a limited
company or the proprietors of the business.”.

72. Really speaking, vicarious liability in this context is Vi

1197

an aspect of strict liability. As has been observed', “By liabitity—en

the general principles of criminal law, if any matter is made SR

a criminal offence, there is imported into it that there must
be something in the nature of meng rea. Therefore, in
ordinary cases a corporation cannot be guilty of a criminal
offence, nor can a master be liable criminally for an offence
committed by his servant. But there are exceptions to this
rule in the case of quasi criminal offences, as they may be
termed—acts forbidden by law under a penalty, possibly
even under the penalty of imprisonment, at any rate in
default of payment of a fine—because the legislature thought
it so important to prevent the act being committed that it
forbade it absolutely to be dene in any case. It seems to
me chat exactly the same principles apply to a corporation
doing such a thing. If it does an act which is absolutely
forbidden it is liable for a penalty.”.

४

73. The above analysis of mens rea’, and vicarious crimi- Object of the

nal liability®, is not intended to imply that all the enact- analysis

ments dealing with the eight categories of the offences repeeding

\Pearks, Gunston and Tee Ltd. v. Ward, (1902) 2 K.B. 1, 11 3 (1902)
A.E.R. Reprint 228, 232 (per Channell, J.).

"Para. 50 to 60, supra.
*Para, 66 to 72, suprd.

॥ |


Special I rules
evidence.

38

which are the subject-matter of this Report}, create offences
of “strict liability”. Many of them do require mens rea’.
The analysis is only intended to bring out the position, that
at least in respect of some of them, there has been a modi-
fication of mens rea.

The analysis is also intended to demonstrate, that sia-
tutes creating new crimes represent the attempts of the
Legislature to give effect to the criminal policy of the
moment. “The Legislature is therefore primarily concerned
to find the best method of dealing with the particular mis-
chief which it is, at that moment, seeking to repress, and.
its decisions, aimed at a narrow target, are not as a rule
reached by any careful regard for general principles of an
abstract kind”,

Further, it will also show, that “as things are, the sta-
tutory crimes, as a whole mass, cannot be brought under a
simple schemes of general pririciples of criminal liability”*.

Representing, as they do, efforts of the Legislature to
repress anti-social conduct of a particular variety prevalent
at the particular moment when the Legislature is confront-
ed with the problem, these enactmerits, therefore, may not
fit in with the Scheme of the Penal Code. A synthesis of
the princivles on which most of the crimes in the Penal
Code are based (on the one hand), and the principles on
which some of the crimes dealt with by these special enact-
ments are based (on the other hand), would be difficult to
achieve. In so far as mens rea is eliminated or modified,
these special offences are “quasi-criminal’” rather than
criminal.

74. Besides provisions modifying mens rea’, and similar
provisions there are special 701९४ of evidence laid down in
respect of many of the offences in question. An example
is section 14 uf the Essential Comimodities Act®, which pro-
vides that where a person is. prosecuted for contravening
any order made under section 3 (of the Act), being an order
which prohibits him from doing any act or being in posses-
sion of a thing, without 1175 8 authority or without a per-
mit, licence or other document, the burden of proving that
he had such authority, permit, licence, or other document
shall be on him’.

\Para. 2, supra.

*See para. 60, supra.

"Russel on Crime, (1964), Vol. 1, page 65.

6; ू Mousell ४. L. N. W. Rly. ८०. (1977) 2 1९.8. 836 ; (1916-77)
All E.R. Rep. 1101, 1106, (see judgment of Viscount Reading 0.1.).

‘Para. 50—60, supra.

‘Section 14, eg (

*For an exhaustive di
Williams, Criminal Law,
292 and page 867, para.

odigies Act, 1955 (10 of 1955).
of sien reversals of onus, see Glanville
it ४ब३ (2961). page 896, ef seg. para.
!



39

75. Another familiar example of a special rule of evi-
dence is section 123 of the Customs Act', which applies to
“gold, diamonds, manufactures of gold or diamonds, watches
and other notified goods*”. Under this section, where such
goods are seized under the Act {section 110 read with sec-
tion 2(34)], in the reasonable belief that they are smuggled
goods, the burden of proving that they are not smuggled
goods shall be on the person from whose possession they
were seized’.

6. It should, next, be noted, that many of the enactments Importance
relating to the offences in question cannot be worked with- of deepened
out delegated legislation on a large seale contemplated by rete we
those enactments. This aspect has heen emphasised in one statutory
of the comments received by us on the proposals under offences,
consideration’. We quote the relevant portion: —

“The Indian Penal Code is an enactment which
enumerates and defines a series of offences against the
State, society in general, the human body and property,
besides providing for punishment for each of these
offences. Even the codified social offences like those
relating to public tranquility, elections, all offences
against public justice, religion, etc., are capable of an
al fictime definition. The le does not provide any
delegation of legislative Ea hority to the executive by
way of rule-making powers to wary the definitions of
these offences. Structurally, the Code is quite different
from the various other enactments like the Essential
Commodities Act, Company Law, Industries (Develop-
ment and Regulation) Act and legislation concerning
Income Tax, Custems, Excise, Import and Export, etc.,
which can, in general, be called’ social and economic
laws. Generally speaking, these enactments, unlike the
Indian Penal Code, do not give complete definitions of
offences. These enactments, ‘bésides stating certain
social objectives, incorporate vast enabling powers to
the evecutive to make rules or issue orders or directions
to implement the objectives in a gwen situation. Con-
traventions of these rules, orders and directions would
amount to offences which are made punjshable under
the parent enactments. It 4 seen that Government
and its officers, exercising le geted authority, can
periodically change the ¢ jients of what can be social
and economic offences, 18% ling on the exigencies and
needs of the situation, by virtue of the delegated legis-
lative pawers vested in them. “With this structural

The Cameos At, 962 दर of af ).
*This corresponds to old section 1784, which wes enacted in pi nee
of the recommendations mad: Taxqtion Eagyiry Comm
of he, recommendations made by the Tssqtion Heawiry Cammission, (Report

“See Be ts he" 1७ Schult । FAST S.C. 87% 889,
‘S.No Ma the Law ‘
47 Law ™ > ? oa :


40

difference, it would be very difficult to define, codify
and incorporate what can be social and economic
offences in the Indian Penal Code. For illustration, we
may examine black-marketing, hoarding, trafficking in
licences and permits, etc. The question of black-
marketing arises oniy when the price of any commodity
is fixed statutorily. Similarly, a person can be said to
hoard any article and thus commit an offence only
when he hoards more than what he is permitted to,
under the law. Necessarily, black-marketing and hoard-
ing cannot take piace in respect of a commodity when
its supply position is comfortable, and when, as a re-
sult no restrictions are placed. Such restrictions are
usually imposed, when necessary, under specific enact-
ments, and the circumstarices of the case are bound to
vary with the commodity and the position prevailing
at the time. Trafficking in licences and permits takes
place when these are transferred without the permis-
sion of the competent authority though such transfers
are prohibited by the law, or when a premium 15 charg-

ed on such transfers in spite of a prohibition under the
aw.

Here also the circumstances of the case and the
severity of the anti-social activity vary with the differ-
ent classes of Jicences .and permits, necessitating
punishments varying in séverity.”.

. Provisions are left to statutory rules and orders, because
varied and recurring action by way of subordinate legisla-

tion is required, particularly in connection with essential
commodities. The following points seem to be worthy of
notice: —-

(a) It often becomes necessary to issue more than
one order under an Act. By way of illustration, we
may refer to the large number of orders issued in con-
nection with control of sugar’-*-*.

These were issued under the Essential Com-
modities Act. In 1963, an order on the subject‘ was
issued under the Defence of India Rules, 1962.
Reference may also be made to orders issued under
the Sugar (Regulation ‘of Production) Act’.

dated the 27th August, 1955).

‘The Sugar (Control) Order, 1955. .(S.R.O. 1862-Ess. Com., Sugar,
55). Diwan Sugar etc. Mills vy. Union of
India, (1959) 2 8.C.R. (Supp) 123 5 ALI.R. 1959 S.C. 626.

*The Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1955, (S.R-O. 1863—Ess. Com.

Sugarcane, dated the 27th August, 1955).

1963).

*The Sugarcane Pressmud Control Order, 1959 (G.S.R. 551/Ess.
Com/Press-mud, dated the 29th April, 1959). _ . a
‘The Sugar (Control) ०4५ 398) BGSR (676, dated ‘the 17th” April,

"The Sugar (Regfilatia of Prpobtfoe) Act, 796 (55 of 1962). wig



41

(b) Even more than one Act may have to be en-
‘acted to deal with one commodity, e.g. sugar ~*.

(c) Changing circumstances require frequent
amendments in statutory rules and orders. Thus, the
Inter-Zonal Wheat Movement Control Order, 1957
was, between 1957 and 1961, amended seventeen times,
before it was rescinded’.

Particulars of the amendments are given in the foot-
note’.

186९, for example—
@ the Sugar (Regulation of Production) Act, 1961 (55 of 1967):
(ii) the Sugar Export Promotion Act, 1958 (93 of 1958) ;
ate, Sugarcane Control (Additional Powers) Act, 1962 (39 of
1962) 3
Gio) the Sugarcane Act, 1934 05 of 1934), which has been repealed.
in some States by local Acts ;
(७) section 4, Sugar (Special Excise Duty) Act, 1959 (58 of 1959).

गुप्त history of some of the laws regarding sugar, see Tika Ramji v,
‘State, (1956) S.C.R. 393 3 A.LR. 1956 S.C. 676.

*The Inter-Zonal Wheat Movement Control Order, 1957) ERS
1986, dated the 13th Junc, 1957), (Gazette of India Extraordinary, Il,
3. 3, page 1985, dated the 13th June, 1957).

‘The Order was rescinded है: SRO. ८४६ the sth April, 1961.

A fresh order—the Inter-Zonal and’ Products (Movement)
Control Order, 1964—was issued later (GSR 511 dated the 23rd March,

1964).

°The notifications amending the orders were—

SRO. 2464, 27th July, 1957.

SRO. 2630, 14th August, 1957.

SRO. 4043, 14th December, 3957 (published on 21-12-1957).
SRO. 399, 25th January, 1958 (published on 1-2-58).

GSR. 346, sth May, 1958 (published on 10-5-58).

GSR. 242, 1sth April, 1953.

GSR. 609, rath July, 1958.

GSR. 635,130 July, 1958 (published on 19-7-58).

‘GSR. 171, 7th February, 1959.

GSR. 347, 18th March, 1959.

GSR. 641, 27th May, 1959.

GSR. 925, 29th July, 1959 (published on 8-83-59).

GSR, 121, 21st January, 1960 (published on 30-1-60).

GSR. 1117, 20th September, 1960 (published on 24-9-60).
GSR. 1407, 24th November, 1960. .

GSR. 3, 3rd January, 1964.

GSR. 35, 7th January, 1961.


Penaleic
Rules, eo by

Power.

42

(व) Amendments in an order' may sometimes
become necessary in view of criticism of the order
made by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation.

(e) Further, under an order issued in pursuance
of the Essential Commodities Act,? it may become
necessary to issue subsidiary orders.

Thus, under clause 14(b}(2) of the Cotton Control
Order, 1955, more than 4,000 orders were issued in
1958".

(f) Again, it may become necessary to add to the
very list of essential commodities in the Essential
Commodities Act*. हर

This has been done in res} of several com-
modities, by notified orders*-t.

The above illustratjons will show, that a degree of flexi-
bility is required in regard to control over commodities,
which cannot be had ‘under the Indian Penal Code.

it. In connection with delegated legislation", it may be
pointed out, that it may be mmcessary to frame rules im-
posing different requirements fer different situations. An
example is a rule made und ५ ६५ Prevention of Food Ace
whereby the ae किन ions ६ hich “Ghee” must conform
were laid down differently for ferent areas, having re-
gard to the fact that the “Reichert” value of pure ghee is
not constant, but is dependent on several factors, such
as—what is the breed of है ९ cattle in an area, whether the
cattle are fed on pasture or on stall, and so ०017-14.

78. Another special feature to be noted is the conferment
of special powers. An example is section 10 of the Preven-

3866, for exam pie Sixth Report of the Committee on Subordinate
Legislation (Second Sabha) (90 September, 1959), page 2, para. 7.
*The Essential Commodities Act, 7955 (10 of 1955).
‘See Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Sixth Report (Second Lok
Sabha) (oth September, 1959), pages 20-21 (Appendix 3), 4th column.
49०6 section 2 (०) (i), Essential Compmodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955).
38.0. 2232, dated the 13th Septentber, 1960. (Cinema carbons).
*$,0. 2896, dated the 8h September, 1962. (Non-ferrous metals).
me) Notification No. GSR/Ess. Comm. dated the 1sth April, 1959. (Press—
mud).
*S.R.O. 828, dated the gth April, 1956. (drugs).
48.0. 3594, dated’ the 24th “ Noverhber, 1962. (Cement).
“The list of orders is illustrative andy.
“Para. 76, supra.
जज आह pt Ree stohtal vine GT of 195).
जद, State of 0. P. v. Rertar'Sfrehy ALR. 79654 8.C. we
3856 also pare. 49 (0) sfpra. | 1 3 बा

8 ०



43

tion of Food Act!, whereundet, a food inspector has power
to take samples of any article of food from certain persons.
As has been pointed ouf?, without such a provision, the
inspectors cannot carry out the duties assigned to them,
and the section, thus, is a “pivotal” section.

79. Another type of special provision is a requirement Special pro-
relating to sanction of a particular authority before prose- vision 88 to
cution can be instituted. An example is section 107 of the “ston
Insurance Act’, under which the sanction of the Advocate-

General is required before proceedings could be instituted
against insurers or against any director, etc., under the
Act’.

There is a similar provision requiring sanction of the
specified authority for prosecutions under the Prevention
of Food Adulteration Act®, the Digs Act®, the Income-tax
Act’, the Customs Act’, and other special enactments.

80. Special enactments sometimes contain special provi- Provisions
sions intended to add to their deterrent effect. The most for publicity.
apt illustration in this context is a provision for publicity.

‘Thus, the Australian Act regardjng black-marketing’,

makes elaborate provisions for, giving publicity to convic-

tions for black-marketin, 3 Whet a person has been con-

Victed of the offence of black-marketing, then, uhder the
ct,—

{i) the court shall require the person convicted to
exhibit, outside his piace of business, a notice contain-
ing particulars relating to thé conviction and to Keep
it exhibited continuously for not less than three
months;

(#) the court méy requifd him to print on thé
invoices, a¢counts and letter-heatis to be used by such
persoh in business, during a period of not léss than
three months, a notice regarding his convictiorf, con-
taining such particulars as the court determine;:

(iti) the Attorney-General may direct that the '
particulars regarding the conviction may be broadcast;

1The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954).

*Narasimharao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, A.1.R. 1964 Andhra .
Pradesh 501, 503, para. 14.

3Section 107, Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938).

4As to this section, see Raghubar Singh v. Emp. A.LR. 1944 F.C.
25, 29. .

8Section 20, Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954. (37 of 1954).
"Section 15 (2), Drugs (Control) Act, 1950 (26 of 1950). हु
*Section 280, Income-tax Act, 1961 (4३ of 1961).

*Section 137, Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962).

"The (Australian) Black-marketing Act (49 of 1942), sections 12, 33. and

ag.


Special cha-
sracter of the
‘enactments.

Possibility of

new offences
in fatare.

Likelihood
ofnew devi-
ces coming
into exis-
tence.

“4

(४) particulars regarding the conviction are to be
published in the Gazette, and, if so directed by the.
Attorney-General, also in a newspaper.

Somewhat similar provisions are found in the Act that
was in force on the subject in West Bengal’.

Provisions for publicity aré found in some Central Acts.
छ180%-7-4.

81. The features enumerated above’ amply show, that
the enactments in question are of a special character, and
stand apart from the general criminal law of the country
embodied in the Indian Penal Code.

82. While taking a decision about transferring the
provisions of special enactments to the Indian Penal Code,
we should bear in mind a practical aspect, namely, that.
with the passage of time, new and fresh offénces under
the head “anti-social offences” will come into existence,
and those new offences may, in the light of practical needs,
necessitate their own special rules of evidence and proce-
dure, as well as special provisions as to maximum and
minimum punishment. The manifestations of human
ingenuity cannot be predicted, and special provisions may
become necessary to tackle them. On the other hand, it.
may be that several of the offences dealt with in the special
enactments now in force may, in course of time, become
obsolete or lose their importance. In view of these consi-
derations, it would-be more practicable to keep provisions.
relating. to such offences in special enactments, as they:
are at present.

In this connection, we may also point out, that besides:
the offences listed by the Santhanam Committee’, there
are several other offences which could be regarded of an
anti-social character, and that these are all dealt with in.
special laws’.

83. We would also point out, that with the passage of
time, new and fresh devices to evade the existing taxation:
or economic laws might come imto being, and the more
convenient course would, therefare, be to deal with thenr
jn the relevant special enactments rather than in the
Indian Penal Cade.

Sections 20 and 21, West Black-marketing
(repealed by West Bengal Aa 33 न Act (ga of ro48>
we” section 16 (2), Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of
3866 also section 287 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 ५१ of 1961), and
the recommendation made in the Report of the Direct Taxes, etc., Com~
mittee, (1958-59), pages 186-187, para 7-87, 7°88.
356८ also section 35, Drags and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940).
"Paras. 48 to 80, supra.
‘Paragraph 2, supra.
१६९८९ Appendix 10.



45

84. As has been ४8९९7, “The race between the
evaders of the law and the authorities who enforce the
law may, in some fields (like techniques and methods),
be one (continuous process, in which each tries to get the
better of the other. In such circumstances, the Legislature
and the Government may try to equip the enforcers of the
law at any time with powers required at that time, consi-
dering the prevailing circumstances, the nature and
extent of actvities of evaders and extent of power requi-
site for the officers enforcing the law, including rules and
notifications to deal with the evaders.”

55. We also made an attempt to study the genesis of Genesis of
some of the special enactments, and the study bears out special ents
what we are endeavouring to emphasise, namely the Snactments-
“special” character? of the relevant enactments, Thus,
the Prevention of Food Adulteration Bill was introduced,
for the following reasons’: —

“Adulteration of foodstuffs is so rampant, and the
evil has become so widespread and persistent, that
nothing short of a somewhat drastic remedy provided
for in the Bill can hope to change the situation. Only
a concerted and determined onslaught on this most

anti-social behaviour can hope to bring relief to the
nation.”

Notwithstanding the existence in the Indian Penal Code
of certain sections punishing adulteration‘, the enactment
of a separate law was proposed, because that was consider-
ed the only adequate way of dealing with the problem.

86. Similarly, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947
Was passed®, because the opportunities for bribery and
corruption had been enormously increased by war condi.
tions, and because it was anticipated that post-war recons-
truction would involve disbursements of very large sums
of Government money. The enactment of a special. provi-
sion whereunder, possession of a sudden accretion of
wealth should constitute an offence was (apart from proce-
dural changes) the main innovation introduced by the
Act. The section creating the offence was framed in the
terms in which it is now found (section 5), because it was

felt that the correct legal course was to create a new
offence of “criminal misconduct®”,

'Shreeram Durgaprasad (Private) Ltd. २. D. ८. Customs tment,
A.LR. 1965 4.9. 294, 302, para. 33 (per Anantanarayana Ayyar J.) (August).

*Para. 81, supra.

386८ Statement of Objects and Reasons, Gazette of India (1950), Part
II, section 2, page $22.

‘Sections 272—~276, Indian Penal Code.

SCf. Statement of Objects and Reasons, Gazette of India, (1946),
Part V, page 374.

“Cf. section 9 (1), Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1 and
section'2 (1), Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, पर 7245


4%

87. Again, the Railway Stores Act! was passed in 1955
to replace the Railway Stores (Unlawful Possession) Ordi-
nance’, and to extend its provisions to Part B States’. The
Ordinance itself was promulgated on the 13th May, 1944,
with a view to preventing persons from having unlawful
possession of articles of railway stores, a thing of frequent
occurrence towards the end oj the last war. The Act
creates a new offence of “unlawful possession of railway
stores®”. The offence is more drastic than theft and allied
offences, inasmuch as, under the Act,—

(6) it is enough if there is a reasonable suspicion
that the stores are stolen or unlawfully obtained, and

(ii) it is for the accused to account satisfactorily
how he came by such stores.

88. The Telegraph Wires Act‘ was enacted’, because
thefts of copper wires used in telegraph lines had been so
rampant, that tele-communications in several parts of the
country were considerably dislocated during the two years
preceding the vassing of the Act®. Many offenders had
escaped only due to the failure to prove in court that the
wires found in their possession had been stolen from the
Posts and Telegraphs Department. Since copper wires
used in telegraph lines were of distinctive gauges, it was
felt that it would not be unreasonable to presume that any
person found in possession of wires of these gauges came
into their possession unlawfully (except in the case of
persons who purchased them from the Disposal stock).
Later, by an amendment in 1952’, sale or purchase of any
quantity of telegraph wire [as defined in section 2(b)]
was prohibited except with the permission of the prescrib-

ed authority.

89. Similarly, the Imports Act® was enacted, because
it was considered* that the measures of control imposed.
under rule 84 of the Defence of India Rules and subse-
quently extended under the Emergency Provisions (Con-
tinuance) Ordinance, 1946 (20 of 1946) would have to be
continued for some time longer, in order to avoid any dis-
turbance to the economy of the country during the transi-
tion from war time to peace tine conditions. At the same

1The Railway Stores (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1955 (51 of 1955).
*The Railway Stores (Unlawful Possession) Ordinance, 1944 (19 of

1944)
38०6 the Statement of Objects and Reasor Gazette i

Part I], section 4, page 374. at, of India, (1954),
4Section 3.
"The Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1950 (74 of 1950).
"Gazette of India, (1950), Part वा, section 2, page 402.

4 oes 4A, Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1950
*The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 (18 of 1947).
*See the Statement of Obj and Reasons,

Part V, page 86. jects » Gazette of Todia, (1947),


47

time, penalties had been “considerably reduced to suit
peace conditions”.

90. In this connection, it may be noted, that some of Alterations
the sections of the Indian Penai Code dealing with offences ie the Ladion
relating to trade marks, were repealed or amended by by Special
special legislation which dealt comprehensively with the enactments.
subject. Thus, section 478, Indian Penal Code (Definition
of trade-mark) and section 480, Indian Penal Code (Using
a false trade-mark), were repealed by, and sections 482,

483, 485 and 486 were amended by, the Trade and Merchan-
dise Marks Act, 1958१.

91. The study of the genesis of many of the special enact- special en-
ments’, thus, shows, that they were either enacted to deal actments and
with problems which arose temporarily -but survived problems
longer than expected, or with problems that were confined ६, करा.
to particular trades or industries or particular kinds of
public properties, or otherwise to deal with particular
species of acts 1egarded as harmful. These laws are, thus,
properly described as “special”. Even though some of the
acts proposed to be penalised by them* were already
punishable under the Indian Penal Code, yet a special law
had to be passed.

CatecoRy 1--GFPFENCES PREVENTING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

92. We now proceed to consider, in detail, the various ogences pre-
categories of offences mentioned in the Report of the San- venting eco-
thanam Committee’. The first of these is the following: -— nomic

development
“Offences calculated to prevent or obstruct the (Category 1).
economic development of the country and endanger its
economic health.”.

This appears to be a very wide and all-embracing
category. The test being the economic development of
the country and its economic health, enactments relating
to public finance, control in trade, contro! on industry,
control of power and resources and the like, would all fall
under that category. It fact, it is wide enough to cover
many of the offences mentioned in the other categories
listed by the Committee, for example, evasion of taxes,
and profiteering. But, as the other categories have been
separately mentioned, the present one would have to be
confined to what is not covered by them.

We have listed separately some of the existing jaws
that seem to have some bearing on such offences*, that

°The Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958).
*Parus. 85--90, supra.

%E.g. theft.

sPara. 2, supra.

*See Appendix 1.


48

list being illustrative only and not intended to be exhaus-
tive. So far as transferring the penal provisions of these
Jaws to the Indian Penal Code is concerned, we think that
it would not be a feasible proposition. It would, in_ the
first place, tremendously increase the bulk of the Code.
Secondly, the penal provisions in these enactments are in-
extricably woven with the other provisions or with the
statutory rules issued thereunder. By way of example, we
may cite the Industries (Development and Regulation)
Act!, The penal section in that Ret is section 24, which
punishes a contravention etc., (i) of the provisions of
severai sections mentioned therein, or (ii) of directions or
orders issued under the sections mentioned therein, or
(itt) of any rule thé contravention whereof is made
punishable. The Act also contains provisions regarding
burden of proof (section 28), and procedure and jurisdic-
tion (sections 27, 29, ete.). All these provisions would
become incomplete if the penal sections are transferred to
the Indian Penal Code. The same can be said of many
other Acts, like the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
1947 and the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947.

Other econo- 93. We next come to the question whether addition of

mentioned by ANY New provisions is called for under this category. At

Santhanam another place in the Report?, the Santhanam Committee

Committee. gave an indication of the white-collar and economic crimes
which it had in mind. After observing that such crimes
rendered the enforcement of the laws more difficult, and
that this type of crime was more dangerous not only
because the financial stakes were higher but also because
irreparable damage to public morals was done, the Com-
mittee stated, that tax evasion and avoidance, share-
pushing, mal-practices in the share market and administra-
tion of companies, monopolistic controls, usury, under-
invoicing or over-invoicing’, hoarding, profiteering, sub-
standard performance of contracts of construction and
supply, evasion of economic laws, bribery and corruption,
election offences and mal-practices, were some examples of
white-collar crimes.

Now, of the examples so given by the Committee, most,
if not all, would be covered by the existing enactments on
the subjects in question‘, which include certain provi-
sions relating to economic offences also’. Monopolistic
controls and sub-standard performance of contracts are, of
course, important items. But the former has already been

yrhe Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of
1951).

*Reports of the Santhanam Committee, page 11, para. 2°13.

"As to under-invoicing, etc, see also Report of the Santhanam Com~
Mittee, page 253, item (xxii).

4See Appendices 110 8.

‘See Appendix 1.



49

the subject-matter of consideration by a separate Commis-
sion', whose report has been submitted recently, and it is
umnecessary to discuss it in detail. The latter will be dealt
with separately*.

94. Economie crimes have received elaborate treatment whether
in countries in Eastern Europe*-*. But certain observations adoption of
in relation to the laws in force in those countries penalis- Stance Com.
ing such crimes may not be out of place. First, they seem Eastern हु
to incarnate the economic and social philosophy of the Europe
sroup of countries concerned. Secondly, they include feasible.
some activities which are, as a rule, not punishable else-
where’, e.g. speculations’. Thirdly, many of the formula-
tions of the offences are of a sweeping character. The lan-
guage employed is general’, so that the provisions may
lead to varying interpretations at different times and
places.

95. For the reasons given below, we do not think that
provisions of the general and sweeping character found in
the laws of countries of Eastern Europe® can be incorporat-
ed into the Indian Penal Code:—

(a) The concepts of economic policy and ideology
on which they are based have first to be accepted,
before they can be incorporated into the criminal law.

(0) Even if those concepts and ideology are ac-
cepted, putting such provisions in the criminal law
might lead to “bad judicial legislation”, in view of
their generality. In a country like India, — with
numerous High Courts, such provisions are likely to
lead to conflicting interpretations and consequent un~
certainty in the law,—a risk which should be under.
taken only where compelling reasons exist.

(०) Even if such provisions are to be enacted as a
part of the Criminal law, they would appear to be of
@ special or temporary character. It is doubtful if they
can be preperly put into the Indian Penal Code, which
is the basic penal law of the country.

96. One of the comments received by us suggest, that Points sug
under the first category’, the following offences should be gested in
— गन न अनन्त miments,

'The Monopolies Commission.
*See paragraph 126, infra.

3866 para. 29-34, supra.

See also Appendices 16 and 21.
८ 258 Mannheim, Criminal Justice and Social Reconstruction (1946),

Pag .

“Para. 29, supra.

*See Appendix 16, sections 225 and 227 (Hungarian Criminal Code),
‘Para. 94, supra.

*Para. 92, supra.


‘Evasion, etc.
‘Of tax,
«(Category 2).

50

made penal by inserting a Chapter in the Indian Penal
Code: —

(३) smuggling across the Indian border;

(४) trafficking in foreign currency and bullion;

(iti) any move, open or subtle, purported to obstruct
any foreign aid,

(६0) any move to incite the peasants in any area to
abstain from cultivation;

(०) inciting strikes calculated to paralyse any
transport or communication system, such as Railways,
Port or road transport, ete.;

(vi) under-invoicing export and over-invoicing
import;

(vii) export of manufactured goods, handicrafts or
raw materials, in quantities below the specified stan-
dards.

97. We are not able to accept the suggestion. Some of
the offences, e.g. smuggling. and trafficking in foreign cur-
yency, are already covered by special enactments’. A few.
like “any move to obstruct any foreign aid” or “any move to
incite the peasant to abstain from cultivation” appear to
be too wide. Assuming that such provisions would be
constitutional—-a point on which we do not express any
opinion,—-they might cover many innocent activities. For
example, a person who expresses an honest difference ot
opinion in regard to the policy followed as to foreign aid
may find himself within the four corners of the suggested
offence of “any move to obstruct any foreign aid”. The rest,
such as inciting strikes, etc., can be more appropriately
dealt with in legislatisn relating to industrial disputes.

Carecory 2.—-Evasion aNp AvorpaNce oF Tax

98. The second category of offences mentioned by the
Santhanam Committee is—

“Evasion and avoidance of taxes lawfully imposed”.

At another place in the Report’, the Committee dis-
cussed in detail the 10970 of evasion and avoidance of
jncome-tax, and enumerated certain sections ‘of the
Income-tax. Act, 1961, which appeared to the Committee
to offer scope for avordance and evasion’. The Committee
observed, that the Department itself should examine and
take suitable steps to plug loopholes on these matters; it
suggested certain administrative measures, as well as two

‘See Appendix 1.

*Report of the Santhanam Committee, page 271 and page 272, items (ei)
and (vii).

*Those sections are listed in Appendix 10 to this Report.


or

changes of a legal nature, namely, (६) making the in-
come-tax offences of illegal evasion and avoidance cogniz-
able and non-compoundable, and (ii) a provision that the
punishment should be imprisonment for at least three
years, and the amount feund to be evaded or avoided,
should be liable to forfeiture.

It :nay also be noted, that so far as evasion of customs
duty is concerned, the Report of the Committee contains
a detailed discussion as to smuggting’.

99. It is unnecessary to elaborate here the distinction
ordinarily understood between “evasion” and “avoidance”.
The former denotes a defect in the enforcement of ‘the
laws, while the latter denotes a defect in the law itself.
The latter has to be tackled by a detailed study of the
provisions of the relevant enactments.

100. The following extract from the Report of the
Income-tax Investigation Commission*, which was }re-
sided over by Sir S$. Varadachariar, former Judge of the
Federal Court, lucidly explains the distinction between
the two:—

‘It remains to add a few observations relevant to
the problem of avoidance and evasion. According to
well-established usage, the term “avoidance” denotes
the utilisation of loopholes to effect tax saving, within
the letter though perhaps contrary to the spirit of the
law. It is rendered possible by defects in the framing
of the law or in its drafting, as a result of which cases
within the interdmeni of the law have not been brought
in by Clear or apt words, or cases which ought to be
fairly comprised within the policy of the law have
been omitted by oversight or for other reasons. Leak-
age of tax in this way has to be prevented by making
the law clearer or wider; but there will never be an
end to attempts at income-taxr avoidance. Though a
Lord Chancellor some years ago referred in terms of
disapprobation to the efforts of tax dodgers and to “the
professional gentlemen who assisted them in the
matter” (Latillg v. Inland Revenue Commissioner'—
Law Reports 1943 Appeal Cases at page 381), popular
or professional opinion does not seem to share that
view but is prepared to regard such attempts as a
“commendable exercise of ingenuity”. As courts are
slow to construe tax laws according to their “intent”
(as distinguished from the letter of the law), occasional

ast ‘Report of the Santhanam Committee, page 19, para. 3-15 and page
"Report of the Income-tax Investigation Commission, (1949), page 7+

‘Evasion’
and
“avoidance”-

para
a pag, १. Inland Re Revenie Commissioners, (1943) 1 All Eng. Reports 255,.

256 (House of Lords)


Attitude to-
wards tax
avoidance in
England.

52

modifications cf the statute will be necessary to close
loopholes that “judicial construction cannot plug”.
“Evasion” is applied to the escape from taxation,
accomplished by breaking the letter of the law,
whether intentionally or through mistake or negli
gence. Most frequently, taxes are evaded because
proper administrative machinery has not been pro-
vided or the machinery is not working properly.
Evasion has therefore to be  combated mainly by |
“improving” the administration of the law—we
advisedly say “improving” though some would prefer
to speak of it as “tightening” the administration.

“To the extent to which the weaknesses of the adminis-
tration may be traceable to defects in the law (particu-
larly in the sanctions piovided by the law), some changes
in the law may be necessary even to prevent evasion.
Under a system where the assessment of the tax depends to
a large extent upon information given by the assessee, he
has every opportumty, and, when the rate of tax is high,
every temptation, to attempt evasion. This can be met
only by improving the efficiency cf the administration”.

101. Two varying aititudes seem to have been shown
towards tax avoidance in England. The traditional at-
titude of the judiciary was, that a tax-payer is entitled to
avoid the payment of tax so long as he could do so by
legal means. There is no rule of law against the subject’s
making genuine and lawful arrangements to reduce
tax'-*,

102. This iaditional attitude is represented by the
following view expressed by Lord Quickswood’-*: —

“Taxation is prima facie a wrong, for it consists in
taking from the taxpayer what belongs to him; and
that is prima facie wrong. Taxation is justified only
by the authority of the State, which is expressed in
the law. The taxpayer is morally bound to obey the
law, bvt is not bound beyond the law; for, apart from
the law, taxation would be blackmail or racketeering,
There is not, behind taxing laws, as there is behind
laws against crime, an independent moral obligation,
When therefore the taxpayer has obeyed the law, he

has done all that morality requires.

1Gf. LRG. ४. Duke of Westminster, (1936) AC1, 19 3 0939 All
Eng. Reports Reprint 209 267 GEL” "09 > (1989)

*For a detailed discussion on “evasion”, “ shifting” and “minimising”
of tax, see Encylopaedia of Social Sciences (September 1951 Reprint), Vol.
14 page 535 under “ Taxation’? (Robert Murray Haig).

*Lord Quickwood, Letter to the Times, February 20, 1 cited in
Mannheim, Criminal Justice and Social Reconstruction 698 Page 146.

*See also Lord Tomlin in /.R.C. ४. Westminster, (1936) A.C.1, at
Page 19; (1935) All E.R. Rep., 259, 267.


53

It is said, that by avoiding a tax he throws a load on
to some other taxpayer. But this is not quite accurate; for
the deficiency might be met by reducing expenditure
is it not a good thing that there should be this last lawful
remedy against oppressive taxation by a majority, that
human ingenuity can always find a_ way by which the
minority can escape from tyrannical imposts?”.

103. Lord Tomlin’s observations may also be cited’: —

‘Apart, however, from the question of contract
with which I have dealt, it is said that in revenue cases
there is a doctrine that the court may ignore the legal
position and regard what is called “the substance of
the matter”, and that here the substance of the matter
is that the annuitant was serving the Duke for some-
thing equal to his former salary or wages and that,
therefore, while he is so serving the annuity must be
treated as salary or wages. This supposed doctrine
(upon which the commissioners apparently acted)
seems to rest for its support upon a misunderstanding
of language used in some earlier cases. The sooner
this misunderstanding is dispelled and the supposed
doctrine given its quietus the better it will be for all
concerned, for the doctrine seems to involve substi-
tuting “the uncertain and crooked cord of discertion”
for “the golden straight mete wand of the law”” (4
Inst. 41).

‘Every man is entitled, if he can, to order his affairs so
that the tar attaching under the appropriate Acts is less
that it otherwise would be. If he succeeds in ordering
them so as to secure this result, then, however गा rect-
ative the Commissioners of Inland Revenue or his fellow
taxpayers may be of his ingenuity, he cannot be compelled
to pay an increased tar. This so-called doctrine of “the
substance” seems to me to be nothing more than an
attempt to make a man pay notwithstanding that he has so
ordered his affairs that the amount of tax sought from him
is not legally claimable.’.

104. The following cbservations of Viscount Simon’,
L.C., however, illustrate a change of attitude?: —

‘My Lords, of recent years much ingenuity has
been expended in certain quarters in attempting to

'LR.C. v. Duke of Westminster, (1936) A.C. 1, 193 All B
Reports 259, 267, 268 (H.L.). 936) 23 6939 “
*Latilla v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, छू ) A.C. 377) 3815
(949) 1 All Eng. Reports, 265, 266 3 25 Tax Cases 107, 117 CAL
*Detailed study as to tax avoidance will be found in—
@ notes by A. Farnsworth in the Modern Law Review, (1942
Page 75, (1943) page 243, and (1944) page 84 ; and
Gi) article by Wheatcroft, “The attitude of the Legish
the Courts to tax avoidance,” (1955) 18 Modern fae Review



54

devise methods of disposition of income by which
those who were prepared to adopt them might enjoy
the benefits of residence in this country while receiv-
ing the equivalent of such income, without sharing in
the appropriate burden of British taxation. Judicial
dicta. may be cited which point out that, however
ciaborate and artificial such methods may be, those
who adopt them are “entitled” to do so. There is, of
course, no doubt that they are within their legal
rights, but that is no reason why their efforts, or those
of the professional gentlemen who assist them in the ~
matter, should be regarded as a commendable exercise
of ingenuity or as a discharge of the duties of good
citizenship. On the contrary, one result of such
methods, if they succeed, is, of course, to increase pro
tanto the load of tax on the shoulders of the great body
of god citizens who do not desire, or do not know how,
to adopt these manoeuvres. Another consequence is.
that the legislature has made amendments to our
income-tax code which aim at nullifying the effective-
ness of such schemes.’

105. But it would appear, that there has, again, been @
trend in the reverse direction'-*-"-*.

106. The following observations of Lord Simonds would
be of interest in this connection’: —

“The determination of these appeals involves a
consideration of certain sections of two Acts of Par-
liament which were designed to bring within the
ambit of taxation to income-tax and sur-tax income
which wouig otherwise escape that burden. For that
reason and because the ways of those who would avoid
ability to tax are often devious and obscure, the sec-
tions are framed in language of the widest and most
general scope and in the case of one of the Acts [1
refer to the Finance Act, 1936, section 18(4)] the opera-
tive sub-sections are reinforced by a provision which
appears to exhort the assessing authority, and pre-
sumably the court, to let the balance, wherever
possible, be weighted against the taxpayer. But, this
notwithstanding, I think that it remains the tax-
payer's privilege to claim exemption from tax unless
his case is fairly brought within the words of the tax-
ing section, and it is in this light that I examine the

1Vestey’s (Lord) Executors ४. I. R. ८. Gose 1 All Eng. Rep.
11135 1185) ree Lord Simonds and 34 Normand)” P. THOR,
*Potts Executors v. ILR.C., 1) 1 ALC. 3 i q
Reports 76, 81, 82, 88 iris (0 443 5 0#7 1 Al Eng,
5LLR.C. ९. Wolfson, (1949) 1 A.E.R. 865, 868.
‘Attorney General ४. A.W. Gamogo Lid., (1949) 2 A.E.R. 73%

734:

‘Vestey’s(Lord) Executors v. 1.R.C. (1949) 1 All Eng. Reports 1108,
1112) 1113 (HLL.).


55

spplieability of the Finance Act, 1936, section 18, and
the Finance Act, 1938, s. 38, to the circumstances of
the late Lord Vestey and his brother Sir Edmund

Vestey.”.

Reference may be made to the observations of Lord
Normand!:—

“Parliament in its attempts te keep pace with the
ingenvity devoted to tax avoidance may fall short of
its purpose. That is a misfortune for the taxpayers
who do not try to avoid their share of the burden, and
it is disappointing to the Inland Revenues. But the
Court will not stretch the terms of taxing Acts in
order to improve on the efforts of Parliament and_ to
stop yaps which are left open by the statutes. Tax
uvoidance is an evil, but it would be the beginning of
much greater evils if the courts were to overstretch
the language of the statute in order to subject to tax-
ation people of whom they disapproved.”

garding interpretation of taxing Acts. The icllowing
observations of Lord Cairns?-* may be referred to in this
connection: -—-

...as L understand the principle of all fiscal
legislation, it is this:

If the person sought to be taxed comes with:
in the letter of the law he must be taxed, how:
ever great the hardship may appear to the judi-
cial mind to be. On the other hand, if the Crown,
seeking to recover the tax, cannot bring the
subject within the letter of the law, the sub-
ject is free, however apparently within the spirit
of the law the case might otherwise appear to be.
In other words, if there be admissible, in any
statute, what is called an equitable construction,
certainly such a construction is not admissible in
a taxing statute, where you can simply adhere to
the words of the statute.”

168. Other decisions on the subject are collected in 8
recent case of the Andhra Pradesh High Court‘. The
following observations of the Supreme Court may also be
referred to:-

‘Vestey’s (Lord) Executors v. I.R.C., (1949), 1 All Eng. Reports 1108,
1120 (H.L.).

*Partington'v. Attorney General, (1869) Law Reports 4 H.L. 100, 122.
3566, further, Craies, Statute Law (1963), pages 113—116.

‘Ramakrishna v. State Andhra Pradesh, A.LR. ALP.
42 3 (November). ¢ 1965 Pen

47 Law—5.

107. inci . Interpreta-
107. We may also refer to the principles adopted 16: inte १7 sar


Avoidance
not always

fraudulent,

Views of

Courts in
India as to
avoidance,

56

“Sub-section (2) of section 21 {of the Bombay
Sales-tax Act 3 of 1953) is a penal provision con-
tained in a taxing statute and the Court cannot specu-
late contrary to the plain intendment of the words
used about the object of the Legislature. If the Legis-
lature has failed to clarify its meaning by the use of
appropriate language, the benefit thereof must go to
the taxpayer. It is settled law that in case of doubt,
that interpretation of a taxing statute which is bene-
ficial to the taxpayer must be adopted.”.!

109. Legislation passed in England during and after ihe
Second World War illustrates the increasing efforts made
by the legislature to check avoidance of tax’.

110. As regards tax avoidance, it has been recognised in
the U.S.A., that every transaction which results in tax
avoidance is not always entered into with the sole object
of avoidance of tax. As an example, we may cite the
American institution of “foundation”. An individual, a
family or a corporation may donate a proportion of his
or its assets to a permanent institution “established for
officially recognised charitable purposes”, the donor
usually being the controller of an industrial or business
empire’. Such donations are exempt from gift tax, and are
deductable for purposes of estate tax. So far as the donee
organisations are concerned, they would ordinarily be
exempt from income-tax, property tax and other taxes.
Further, the donor gets a deduction in taxes in respect. of
the charitable gift inter vivos (within certain limits). By
transferring the capital and annual income from his per-
sonal estate, the donor thus reduces his liability to tax.
At the same time, the donor sanctifies his name and gives
a public proof of his social responsibility through the
establishment of a charitable institution‘.

111. In many Indian  decisions-5-’ 1 it has been
pointed out, that legal avoidance cannot be regarded as
reprehensible.

‘Sate of State of Bombay v. Automobile and Agricultural Industries Corpns
(1961) 12 S.T.C. 122 (S.C.) (Kapur, Hidayarullah and Shah JJ.),
*See, for example, section 35 (1), Excess Profits Tax Act, 1941 (U.K.).
*See Friedmann, Law in a Changing Society, (1959), pages 86, 290 to

“eee also Report of the Select Committee to investigate foundations
(House of Representatives, Reports No. 2514, 82nd Congress, 2nd ‘Session
1953).

‘In re Bai Sakinaboo, A.1L.R, 1932 Bom. 116, 117 (Beaumont C.J. and
Rangnekar J.). 3 » 17 5

‘In re Central Talkies Circuit, A.1.R. 1941 Bom, 205, 206, 207 (Beaumont
lJ. and Kania 1.)- 298 207 «

"Devarajulu Co. v. I.T.C., A.LLR. 1950 Mad. 718, 722, para. 10,

*Meyyappa ९, 1.T.C., A.LR. 1951 Mad. $06; $13, 514; Para. 17.

°Ganga Sagar v. Emp., A.LLR. 1929 All. 919, 923 (Mukeriee J.).

WRajniti v. CLT, LR. 9 Pat. 194; A.LR. 1930 Pat. 33, Courtaev-
Teel C15. . 3 930० 3335 (
म866 also article in 8... 1953 Journal 26.

293.


A

57

The followiag passage in the judgment in a Bombay
ease’ puts the matter lucidly:—

“It has also been stateg that the same result may
be achieved by two entirely different transactions,
and it may be that whereas one transaction could be
subjected 0 tax, the other might not be, and it is not
open to the Court to tell the assessee that he could
rather have entered into a transaction which subjected
him tc taxation rather than a transaction which per-
mitted him to escape taxation. A citizen is perfectly
entitled to exercise his ingenuity so as to arrange his
affairs as may make it possible for him legally and
lawfully not to pay tax, and if his ingenuity succeeds,
however reluctant the Court may be to acknowledge
the cleverness of the assessee, the Court must give
effect to the letter of the taxation law rather than
strain that letter against the assessee.”.

112. It may also be noted, that besides the imposition of
penalities and institution of prosecutions, there are many
other methods of preventing illegal evasion of taxes, par-
ticularly, strengthening the administrative machinery
and streamlining ithe procedure. We need not repeat what
has been said in the valuable reports of the various Com-
mittees* that had occasion to go into the subject’.

113. The existing provisions relating to tax evasion
have been listed separately! Broadly speaking, provisions
against evasion can be classified into—

(i) provisiors which enable the taxing authority to
assess income, ete., which has escaped assessment;

(ii) provisions which empower such authority itself
to impose a penaliy; and

(iii) provisions which create offences for which
a prosecution can be instituted in the criminal courts.

An example of the first® is section 34 of the Income-Tax.
Act, 1922, (now sections 147 to 153 of the Income-tax Act,
1961)*. An example of the second is section 273 of the
Income-tax Act, 19617. Strictly speaking, we are concerned
here only with the third class. But it will be necessary to
refer to provisions of the second class, for purposes of
comparison.

1 Provident Investmer nV. LT. missioner, ALR. ५
para 3 Cee, OS nt Co, ४. 1.7. Com A.LR. 1954 Bom. 95, 975

*Appendices 12 co 15 to this Report may be seen in this connection.

*See para, 100, supra,

4See Appendix 2.

‘For history of section 34, see Radheshyam v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1960.
Bom. 353» 355, et sea.

*The Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).

Tine Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).

Method of
checking
evasion.

Existing
provisions

analysed.


Transfer of

existing pro-

visions not
feasible.

Placing pro-
visions as to
evasion in
the Pena]
Code.

58

114. We have considered the question whether the
transfer of the provisions’ relating to evasion of tax to
the Indian Penal Code would be advantageous. The laws,
of which there provisions form part, constitute self-
contained Code. In the first place, these provisions con-
tain minute and detailed references to the other sections
of the enactment of which they form part—e.g. the section
under which a return is to be filed, or a stamp is to be fixed,
or the like. They cannot be divorced from those sections.
Secondly, if they are to be transferred to the Penal Code,
then, whenever laws imposing new kinds of taxes are
passed in the future, it may become necessary to amend
Indian Penal Code also, and that might prove to be an in-
convenient process. Thirdly, there are special procedural
provisions*, which require the sanction of a particular
authority for instituling a prosecittion for an offence under
the particular enactment, or which authorise the com-
pounding of offences, and so on. If the penal provisions of
the taxing enactments are transferred to the Indian Penal
Code, then the relevant procedural provisions of the tax-
ing enactments---which will then lose their justification
for being retained in the taxing enactments will have tc
be transfered to the Code of Criminal Procedure, and that
process also would be inconvenient.

115. So far as we could ascertain, there is hardly any
country governed by the common law system where the
offence of evasion of taxes has been incorporated in the
Penal Code. The provisions are found to exist either in
the enactments relating to the particular taxes’, or in 3
general Taxation Law‘.

116. Further, the administration of these laws requires
specialised knowledge and experience, including, par-
ticularly, a knowledge of the various classes of income or
transactions that are taxable, the various deductions, ex-
emptions and concessions that are permissible, and
the departmental practice. Even if these provisions are
transferred to the Penal Code,—assuming that such
transfer is feasible—the need for this special knowledge
and experience will always remain. There will be no
practical improvement as the police will not possess this
special knowledge and experience.

117. So far as we could gather, none of the various
Committees or Commissions® that have gone into the ques-
tion of taxation structure or Taxation Laws or the adminis-
tration of Taxation Laws, has found fault with the placing
of the penal provisions in the taxation enactments.

3 Para, 113, supra,

३ E.g., section 279, Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).

* For example, section 198 of the Tasmania (Australia) Criminal Code
Act, (1924), reproduced in Appendix 28,

+ For example, section 201, Internal Revenue Code of the U.S.A., dis-
cussed in Appendix 22.

© See Appendices 12, 13, 14 and 15.



59

218. We also considered at length the question whether Question of
it would be desirable to insert a general provision in the cnactment of
Indian Penal Code, punishing the evasion of taxes. The Sineral pro:
arguments for and against the adoption of such a course tax evasion

376 summarised below:— consi cered.

Arguments for and against including in the Indian Penal Code of the offence of
1ax-evasion

For Against

(7) A provision in the Indian Penal Code (1) The abhorrence is already

will reflect the society’s abhorrence indicated by the Income-tax

of the crime in question and the Act. It is not necessary to

importance which it attaches to it. put it in the Indian Penal
Code.

(2) A comprehensive provision applicable (2) The Purpose is adequately

to all taxes would be desirable. served by existing provision
in the law relating to each
tax.

(3) Evasion of taxes is a major problem, (3) The defect is not in the law
and should be dealt with criminally. but in its enforcement. Even
the existing penal provisions

are not enforced.

(4) Acts like keeping false accounts, mak- (4)In practice, filing a talse
ing false entries, keeping unaccounted return is the usual type of
money, should be covered. evasion, This is sufficiently

provided for by existing laws.

(5) Prosecution for tax-evasion should be (5) Tax evasion is a technical
allowed at the instance of any person. subdject, requiring special
knowledge. Only the De-
partmental Officers are in a
position to understand the

technicalities.

. (6) A sweeping provision may,
in practice, turn out to
be vague, and thus cause
hardship.

.

Serre ||


For Against

(7) In particular, the word
“evade” is vague, and may
be interpreted so as to em-
brace even legitimate avoid-
ance.

<8) Any widening of the penal
provisions regarding taxation
laws should be | undertaken
with caution, as it may bring
into being a weapon which has
great potentialities for abuse.

(५) Prosecution is not the only
method of checking evasion.
The real remedy lies in various
other non-penal measures,
such as a proper tax structure,
adequate strength of officers,
increased civic conscious-
ness, creation of cordial
relations with assessees, and
prompt action under the
existing laws.

(70) None of the various Com-
mittees that have gone into
the subject of taxation in
India have recommended
such a change.

After a careful consideration of all the issues involved, we have
come to the conclusion that the inclusion of a general penal provi-
sion of the nature referred to above would not prove to be an
improvement in practice, and may even cause hardship by reason of
its vagueness. In considering the question of inserting such a penal
provision, regard must be had aot only to those who are guilty, but
also to those who are innocent.


> 61

119. As to the question of insertion of new provisions Addition of
relating to evasion of tax, we do not think it proper to dis- new pro-
cuss that question in the abstract. Any specific recom- ‘#0?
mendation must await specific proposals for amendment.

120. In one of the comments received by us, a sugges~ Points sug-
tion has been made that the suppression of imcome, or gested in
suppression of information relating to sale and purchase, ments.
should be made an offence, either by including it in a
Chapter in the Penal Code intended to deal with social
and economic offences, or by inserting a new section 477B.

The matter, however, seems to be amply covered by the
provisions in the various enactments relating to taxation’,
and a new provision does not appear to be called for.

121. Regarding “avoidance”, it is obvious that the Avoidance
changes, if any, will have to be made not in the penal law pow to be
but in the taxing enactments’. That is outside the scope “लक
of this Report.

CatTeGoRY 3.—Misuse or Pustic Postrion By Puriic
SERVANTS

122. The third category of offences mentioned by the Misuse of

Santhanam Committee is the following:— their oer
tion by

“Misuse of their position by public servants in public ser-
making of contracts and disposal of public property, (are oy ).
issue of licences and permits and similar other Bory 3
matters”.

The Committee observed’, that where there was power
and discretion, there was always the possibility of abuse,
more so when the power and discretion had been exercised
in the context of scarcity and controls and pressure to
spend public money. It also referred‘ to dishonest prac-
tices like the system of “speed money” (money paid to
speed up the process of movement of files, etc.) and to the
corruption prevalent in contracts of construction, pur-
chases, sales, ९९.९,

123. There are numerous provisions regarding misuse Existing
of position by public servants in various enactments®. Mis- fnalysed.
use of such position in the making of contracts or disposal ised.
of property is not seperately dealt with in any of these
enactments. If by such misuse the public servant con-
cerned obtains any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage,
the offence would be covered by section 5(1) (d) read with

1 See Appendix 2.
2 Cf. Para. 99-100, supra.

3 Report of the Santhanam Committee, page 9, para 2-9.
$ Report of the Santhanam Committee, page 9, para. 2°10,
* Report of the Santhsnam Committee, page 10, pare 2-11.
* See Appendix 3. ° “


62

section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, the
relevant portion of which is quoted below’: —

“5(1). A public servant is said to commit the
offence of criminal misconduct in the discharge of his
duty if he, by corrupt or illegal means or by otherwise
abusing his position as public servant, obtains for him-
self or for any other person any veluable thing or
pecuniary advantage.

5(2). Any public servant who commits criminal
misconduct in the discharge of his duty shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than one year but which may extend to
seven years and shall also be liable to fine:

Provided that the court may, for any special
reasons recorded in writing, impose a sentence of im-
prisonment of less than one year.”.

Misuse 124, What remains is the misuse of such position with-
benefit. out obtaining any such benefit. Such cases would be tare,

and if they do happen, it would be difficult to ascribe a
criminal intention to the person concerned in such cases.

Points in 125, It has been suggested in one of the comments _re-
tomments, ceived by us, that a new section—section 164A—should be

inserted in the Indian Penal Code to penalise the misuse
of position by public servants in the making of contracts,
etc. The matter, however, seems to be sufficiently cover-
ed by section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act’.

CaTeGORY 4.—DELIVERY CF GOODS NOT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
CONTRACT

ec. 126, The fourth category of the offences listed by the

livery
of ger. Santhanam Committee is the following:

ance with “Delivery by individuals and industrial and com-
(Category © mercial undertakings of goods not in accordance with
agreed specifications in fulfilment of contracts entered

into with public authorities”.

At another place in the Report‘, the Committee
observed, that frequently it was the dishonest contractors
and suppliers who, having obtained the contract by under-
cutting, wanted to deliver inferior goods or get approval
for sub-standard work, and, for this purpose, were prepar-
ed to spend a portion of their ill-earned profit. hh an
Annexure to the Report’, the Committee discussed in de-
tail how favours could be shown by passing and accepting

2 The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (2 of 1947).

2 For a detailed analysis, see Appendix 23.

® The Prevention of Corruption Act 1947 (2 of 1947).

* Report of the Santhanam Committee, page 10, para 2°11.

5 Report of the Santhanam Committee, Annexure VII, page 236, ikem

@


63

gocds which were it strictly in accordance with the
specifications laid down in the accepted tenders, or by not
applying the penalty clause in respect of rejected goods,
or by not strictly applying all the terms of the contract, or
by giving wrong certificates about completion of inspection
or actual despatch of goods.

127. We have hsted separately! some of the existing
provisions which have a bearing on the mal-practice in
question the most important of these are sections 415 and
420, Indian Penal Code, which run as follows: —

‘415. Wnvever, by deceiving any person, fraudu-
lently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to
deliver any property to any person, or to consent that
any person shall retain any property, or intentionally
induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do
anything which he would not do or omit if he were not
so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is
likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body,
mind, reputation or property, is said to “cheat”.

Explanation—A dishonest concealment of facts is
a deceptioa within the meaning of this section,’.

“420. Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly in-
duces the person deceived to deliver any property to

Exining
analysed.

Cheating.

Cheating and

dishonestly
induci

any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or delivery of

any part of a valuable security, or anything which is

signed or sealed, and which is capable of being con-

verted into a valuable security, shall be punished with

imprisonment of either description for a term which

may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
ne.”,

128. We considered carefully the question whether the

offence in question is covered by section 415—420, Indian of

Penal Code. “Cheating”, as defined in section 415,
requires—
(a) deception of 6 person, plus
(0) fraudulently or dishonestly inducing the person,
so deceived to deliver any property etc.
OR
(a) deception of a person, plus

(8) intentionally inducing the person so deceived
to do or omit any thing which he would not do or omit
if he were not deceived, and which act or omission
causes, etc., damage or harm to that person in body,
mind, reputation or property.

3866 Appendix 4.
*Para, 127, supra.

property.

“ Cheating ”
and delivery
goods, etc,


Meaning of
+ deception”,

64

The section, thus, falls into two parts!. Under the first
part, the act must be done fraudulently, etc., and must re-
sult in delivery, etc. Under the second part, there must be
intentional inducement, ete., and the act or omission in-
duced must cause damage or harm. Deception, is, how-
ever, common to both the parts.

129. Deception generally is “to lead into error by caus
ing to believe what is false or to disbelieve what is true”?,

The following observations of Buckley J. as to the
meaning of “deceive” are interesting: —

“To deceive is, I apprehend, to induce a man to be-
lieve that a thing is true which is false, and which the
person practising the deceit knows or believes to be
false. To defraud is to deprive by deceit: it is by
deceit to induce a man to act to his injury. More
tersely it may be put, that to deceive is by falsehood to
induce a state of mind; to defraud is by deceit to induce
a course of action.”

(The aspect of likelihood of injury, as an ingredient
of “intent to defraud”, is not relevant for the Present
purpose)’.

130. The first ingredient of cheating is, thus, “deception .
The point whith requires consideration is, whether there is
“deception” when a person delivers sub-standard goods,
without making any express representation that the goods
are in accordance with the contract. The argument that
may be advanced is, that the contractor does not deceive
any person, where he makes no representation that the
goods are in accordance with the contract. We are not
inclined to accept this argument. Though decided cases
dealing with this specific point are few®, it would appear,
that in such case a representation to the above effect could
be implied. It may be pointed out, that, as provided by
the Explanation to section 415, Indian Penal Code*.", a
dishonest concealment of facts is “deception”. Ilustrations
(४) and (3) to section 415 also emphasise the same aspect.

1Gf. Ramji v. Harshadrai, AIR. 1960 Bom, 268.
35७७ P,P.v, Vedantam, A.LR. 1952 Mad. 183» para. 4 (Subba Rao

*Re London and Globe Finance Corporation Ltd. (1903) 1 Ch. 728,
932-733 approved in R. ९. Wines, (1953) 2 All Eng. Reports 1497, 1498
(Court of Criminal Appeal).

4As to this, see—
GR. N. Goadergon, “ Prejudice as a test of Intent to defraud "",
(1960) Camb. Law Journal 199, 201.
(४00. B. v. Abbas, LL-R, 25 Caf. 512 (F. 8.).
(६00. EB. v. Soshi Bhushan, (3898) LL.R. 1s All. 210, 217
"See Appendix 24.
"See also para, 127, supra.
‘Surendra v. Bai Narmada, ALR. 1963 (जा, 239.


65

131. As has been observed', “The practice of deception
implies the practice of fraud and falsehood. For, there can
be no deception without fraud, and falsehood is a species of
fraud implied in deceit. Now, fraud is hydra-headed, and
its ways of attack are insidious and innumerable. It may
consist of words, acts or conduct, or all combined.”.

132. In practice, the point? may often be academic, as Point of
in respect of huge contracts where detailed bills are to be implied fom
submitted, the bills will have to describe the goods sup- tae
plied in great detail, so that the contractor cannot avoid हि
making an express representation at some stage or other’.

133. Where the defect in the goods is discovered before Attempt to
payment, it would be an attempt to cheat**-6, cheat.

134. Another point which we had to consider was, whe- Smplicity
ther cases where the oificer receiving delivery and the  oMicers
offender are acting in complicity, are covered by sections ders,
415—420, Indian Penal Code. We think that they would be
covered. In fact, this seems to have been assumed in a
recent decision of the Supreme Court’, and in cases of cer-
tain High Courts’.

135. In England, at common law, short delivery was held Position in
not to be “cheating” {in the absence of use of false mea- English law.
sures, etc. as a general course of dealing, or to many cus-
tomers, or unless there is a conspiracy to cheat)"’-". The act
was regarded only as an unfair dealing. It was stated, that
fraud, to be the object of a criminal prosecution, must be
calculated to defraud numbers.

1 Gour, Penal Law of India, (| 1962), Vol. 3, page 2225,

* Para. 130, supra,

* Cf, Billinghurst v. Emp. ALR. 1 1. 18, 47, oh
and Richardsom J), P 1924 Cal. 18, 41, 43 (Sanderson 0. J

4 Billinghurst v. Emp. A.LR. 1: .
and Pra he a mp. 924 Cal. 18, 41, 43 (Sanderson C. J.

SR, v, Light, (1915) 84 L..K.B. ; - | 8.1९, Rep.
(oc ky, 808 0959) 84 Ly 865 3 (1914-15) All, E.R. Rep. 659

5 Halsbury’s Laws of 79 Edn.), Vol. 10,
and peg ean oes s of England, Gi dy Page 828, footnote (A)

"Cf. Bamwari Lal v. The Union of India, A.LR. 1963 S.C. 1620.
* See in re J. 3. Dhas, A.LR. 1940 Mad. 155, 157.

१ The decision in Sheonarayan v. State Bihar, ALR.
228, 229, para. 11 (S. K. Das 15 can ae iret a oie Pat 25;

10 २, ४. Wheatly, (1761) 2 Burr. 112: ५ cited in Archbold, Criminat
leadings, ct. (1962 Ban), paras गले 1727 cited in

21 See also Russel on Crime (1964), Vol. 2, pages 1163 and 1164.


66

This rule of the common law was altered, to some exe
tent, by section 32, Larceny Act'.". The relevant portion
of the section runs as fellows: —

“32, Every person who by any false pretence
(1) with intent 70 defraud, obtains from any other per-
son any chattel, money, or valuable security, or causes
er procures any money to be paid, or any chattel or
valuable security to be delivered, to himself or to any
other person for the use or benefit or on account of
himself or any other persomy ........... 02.60 e eee eee

guiliy of a misdemeanour and on conviction
jable to imprisonment for any term not exceed~

ion “false pretence” ineludes a pre-
or conduct, without words spoken".

Kinds of 136. In cne of ihe comments‘ received by us, it has been
maipracticess stareq that there aie three kinds of malpractices that have

mie to notice---

{aj The contractor, in collusion with the inspectors
of Government, committed illegal acts in getting stores
of an inferior quality passed as if they were of the
specifications specified in the contract, and supplied the
same and induced the Governmeni to part with the
valuo thereof.

(0) The contractor, after getting the stores passed
by the inspectors, despatched unpassed stores in place
of passed stores, and thus defrauded the Government
by inducing it to part with the value of the passed
stores.

(९) The contractor, by furnishing false particulars
and quoting fictitious numbers of Railway Receipts,
cheated the Government and obtained 90 per cent. price
of the goods without supplying them.

See section 32, Larceny Act, 1916 (6 and 7 Geo. 5, 0. 50).
?See Russell on Crime (1964), Vol. 2, pages 1765 and 1166.
Russell on Crime (1964), Vol. 2, page 1176.
‘The comment, however, adds that practically all these are covered by the
existing penal provisions in s. 415 and 420, read with sections 109 and 120-B,
ndia Penal Code.



67

137. In view of the fact that the volume of contracts Proposed
with Government and other public authorities has increased section.
tremendously and is likely to increase further, and also
having regard to the fact that the point was raised before
us, we propose a specific provision on the subject' though
we think that the existing law covers it. Before, however,
it is enacted into law, one practical aspect which we have
indicated separately’, will have to be examined by the
Government.

138. Some of the comments received by us objected_ to Points sug-
tréating undertakings in public and private sectors differ- Sesied in
catly in this respect. It has also been stated, that some- है
goods are not delivered in accordance with agreed
ions, for reasons beyond the control of the parties
ed, and it has been suggested that it should be clear-
down that mis-delivery or wrong-delivery should be
considered an offence only if done deliberately.

So far as the first point is concerned, we think that a
fraudulent breach of contract with the Government or a
public authority can be regarded as standing on a different
footing from a fraudulent breach of a private contract. So
far as the second point is concerned, the provision proposed
by us* has been so framed as not to take in any such honest
defaulters.

139. We shouid, however, state here, that we have not Proposed
considered the question whether the proposed section* Spon गण
would deter honest contractors from entering into contracts enacted
with the Government and other public authorities. An without
apprehension to that effect has been expressed in one of the fonsidering
comments received by us on the subject. Before the propos- perctssions.
ed section is enacted, this aspect of the matter, which is a
practical one, will have to be examined by the Government.

CaTEGORY 5.—HOARDING AND PROFITEERING

140. The fifth category of the offences mentioned by the Hoarding
Santhanam Committee is—“Profiteering, black-marketing and Li
and hoarding.”. किक 9.

141. The existing laws relating to these offences are Existing
listed separately*. As will be seen, the details of the policy Provisions
laid down in these laws have to be worked out by orders 1133 :व-
and rules issued under those laws. The provisions that
emerge, as a result of those laws read with such statutory

1 Appendix 31, section 420A, Indian Penal Code (Proposed),
* Para. 139, infra,
3 Appendix ३1, section 420A, Indian Penal Code (Proposed).
4 Para. 137 supra.
5 See Appendix 5.


History of
legislation
relat ing to
control of
essential
commodities.

68

orders or rules, are bound to vary in respect of each com-
modity or group of commodities. There is a whole struc-
ture of legislation and sub-legislation which has come into
existence as a resuit of the exercise of various powers by
various authorities as to the control of essential commo-
dities. We do not think that the transfer of the offences
against such legislation to the Penal Code would be conve-
nient. It should also be noted, that there are special rules
of evidence and procedure enacted by some of these enact-
ments. For example, section 11 of the Essential Commo-
dities Act” bars the court from taking cognizance of an
offence under that Act, except on a written report of a pub-
lic servant. Again, section 14 of that Act enacts a rule as
to burden of proof. It is obvious that the Indian Penal
Code cannot, be encumbered with these provisions.

142, Another aspect to be emphasized is that these
offences are essentially of a temporary and special character.
The conditions of scarcity prevailing in respect of each
commodity are bound to differ from time to time and from
place to place, and for that reason, their transfer to the
Indian Penal Code would not lead to any practical benefit.
The history of the legislation on the subject may be noted.
During the Second World War, provisions on the subject
were contained in the Defence of India Rules. In 1946, the
Ceniral Legislature passed the Essential Supplies (Tempo-
rary Powers) Act? under Entries 27 and 29 of List IT of the
Government of India Act, 1935, “Trade and Commerce
within the Province” and “production, supply and distribu-
tion of goods” as altered by the India (Central Government
and Legislature) Act. 1946° (hereinafter referred to as the
English Act).

143. The effect of the English Act was to empower the
Central Legislature to make laws with respect to trade and
commerce in, and production, supply and distribution of,
certain specified goods‘, for a temporary period mentioned
in section 4, and the Essential Supplies Act came into force
on the 19th November, 1946. The Act was to expire on the
expiry of the period mentioned in section 4 of the English
Act. But, by the combined effect of the public notification
issued by the Governcr-General under section 4 of the
English Act, and the resolutions passed from time to time by
the Constituent Assembly acting as the Dominion Legisla-
ture, the life of the Essential Supplies Act was further ex-
tended upto the 26th January, 1955. Before the Act expir-
ed, the President promulgated the Essential Commodities

1The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955).

2The Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946 (24 of 1946).

*The India (Central Government and Legislature) Act, 1946 (9 and 10
Geo. 6 ८. 39«

486० Basu, Commentary on the Constitution of India, (1964) Vol. $,
1 ४४० 504



69

Ordinance’, which was replaced by the Essential Commo-
dities Act’, which is the Act now in force. Detailed history
of the various resolutions of the Constituent Assembly and
the notification issued by the Governor-General would be
found in the under-mentioned decisions’-*-',

The brief historical resume given above will show the
special character of the legislation on the subject.

144. One comment received by us suggests that these Points suge
offences should be included in a new Chapter in the Indian Bes in :

Penal Code. The comment also offers a definition of pro-
fiteering as “selling a thing at a rate in excess of its con-
trofled price”, and a definition of hoarding as “storage in
excess of a permissible quantity”. It also points out, that
the meaning of the term “Black-marketing” is obscure, and
emphasises that the definition of that expression should in-
clude suppression of facts relating to the acquisition or dis-
posal of things controlled by different special laws. The
definitions suggested in this comment, however, themselves
postulate the existence of special laws containing the neces-
sary substantive provisions. For this very reason, such wro-
visions cannot be inserted in the Penal Code.

145. In this connection, we may refer to the West
Bengal Black-marketing Act, 1948° (now repealed). Sec-
tion 2 of that gave a very wide definition of “black-
marketing”, but almost every clause of that definition
assumed the existence of another (special) law, i.e. a law
which fixed prices, provided for rationing, or regulated
the supply, distribution, sale, disposal, etc., of goods, or
their storage, production or manufacture, acquisition or
movement, etc. Thus, section 2(a) spoke of “selling or
purchasing for purposes of trade any goods at a greater
price than the maximum price fixed by or under any law,
notification, or order for the time being in force for the
sale of goods”. Section 2(b) began thus—“otherwise than
in accordance with any law, etc. selling or disposing of any
articles rationed, ete.”

146. As regards the addition of new Provisions con-
cerning the offences of hoarding, black-marketing and
profiteering, an amendment of the Indian Penal Code
would not be conveniept. The details of the stock which

1The Essential Commodities Ordinance, 1955 (1 of 1955).

‘The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955).

*Khoshed Ali ९, The King, A.UR. 1950 Cal. 202.

‘Ramananda v. The State, 3.1.1२, 1951 Cal. 120.

‘State v. Hira Lal, AJR. 1951 Bom. 369,

"The W -marketi
1948) taow se beth Black-marketing Act, 1948 (West Bengal Act 320f

West Bengal
Act.

Addition of
new pro-
visions,


70

can be lawfully possessed (hoarding), the conditions sub-
ject to which transactions may be entered into (black-
marketing), and the maximum prices that could be charg-
ed (profiteering), would vary in respect of each com~
modity, and, therefore, a general and sweeping provision
cannot conveniently be incorporated in the Indian Penal
Code. We may also point out, that in respect of matters
on which the existing provisions are found to be inad-
equate, it is open to Government to initiate amendments
thereto or to introduce further special legislation, when-
ever necessary).

CATEGORY 6.—ADULTERATION

Adulteration 147. The sixth category of offences mentioned by the
(Gaegory 6). Santhanara Committee is—‘Adulteration of food-stufts
and drugs”.

Existing 148. The existing provisions as to these offences are

Provisions: disted separately. Some provisions on the subject are

contained in sections 272 to 276, Indian Penal Code. But

special enactments on the subject that are now in force,

- are much more important, and prosecutions are usually
filed under the special enactments.

‘Transfer nor 149. The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act® contains

feasible. elaborate provisions of a substantive, procedural and evi-
denciary character, which cannot possibly be transferred
to the Indian Penal Code.

Section 2(1) of the Act contains an elaborate definition
of the expression “aduiterated”, and clauses (j), (k) and
(1) of that definition refer to the “prescribed” extent of
colouring matter or preservative, or the “prescribed”
standard of quality or purity, etc. The standard of quality
and purity and limits of colouring matter can thus be
ascertained only from the rules made under the Act.
Section 19 bars the raising of certain defences by the
vendor to the effect that he was ignorant of the nature,
substance or quality of the food sold by him {except in
certain cases). Section 16(2) empowers the Court to
cause the offender's name, ete., to be published where the
offender is a second or subsequent offender. Again, sec-
tion 13(5) contains a rule of evidence as to the report of
the public analyst. Section 21 confers higher powers upon
Magistrates of the First Class in relation to the sentences
that they can pass for offences under the Act. It would,
obviously, be impracticable to transfer all these sections
to the Indian Penal Code. It would not be convenient to

186७, for example, the Supply and Prices of Goods Act, 1950 (qo of 1950)
which was repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1957.

२8७७ Appendix 6.
*The Prevention tof Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954).


h

split them also, that is, to transfer the substantive provi-
sions to the Penal Code, and to leave the remaining proce-
dural provisions in the Act, as that is bound to create
confusion.

150. A study of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act! will also
show, that its penal provisions cannot be transferred to
the Indian Penal Code. There are vast rule-makin
powers under sections 12, 16(2) and 33 of the Act, an
breach of the rules may attract penalty under sections 13
and 27(a) read with sections 17(e), 17A(e) 18(०)(४४), 18(a)
(vi), 18(b), etc. Then, there are special rules of evidence in
sections 19 and 25(3). There are special provisions as to
jurisdiction and procedure in sections 15, 32 and 36. There
are provisions for enhanced punishment on second or
subsequent conviction, in sections 13(2) and 30, and also a
provision regarding offences by companies in section 34.
Finally, there is provision for publication of particulars
relating to sentences in section 35. To transfer the penal
provisions to the Indian Penal Code would, in view of
these special provisons, mean a virtual disintegration of
the Act.

151. As regards the addition of new provisions, that is Addition of
a matter concerning amendment of the relevant Acts,  D&¥ Prov:
152. The fact that we are not recommending transfer Adulteration
to the Indian Penal Code of the provisions as to adultera- 204 public
tion* does not, of course, mean that we under-rate the °
gravity of the offence of adulteration. In fact, public
opinion on the subject appears to be strong. A comment
signed oF several citizens residing in West Bengal has
suggested, that persons guilty of adulteration of medicines
should be punished with the death sentence along with
confiscation of property, that persons guilty of adultera-
tion of food should be punished with life imprisonment
along with confiscation of property, and that in all cases
of conviction, wide publicity through the Press, thé cinema
and the radio should be giver. Another comment has
suggested, that the relevant Acts may be amended so as
to provide compulsory rigorous amp risonment and also
fine, to be imposed on the convi persons. One com-
ment suggests, that sections 272 and 274 of the Indian Penal
Code should be suitably amended, and that the maximum
punishment for adulteration should be hanging, as such
adulteration may sometimes cause death, and that the
offence should be made cognizable.

If any amendments pertaining to sentence are requir-
ed, those will have to be made to the relevant enactments
relating to food and drugs.
SO  / :॒॒॒ ॒ऑ..

The Drugs and Cosmetics Acty 14d (33 of 1940).

*Para. 149-250, supra.

47 Law—6.


Failure of
prosecutions

Theft and
misappro-
priation of
Public pro-
and

153. The failure of prosecutions under the Prevention
of Food Adulteration Act is often put forth as a matter
deserving serious consideration. And no doubt it is so.
But such failures are not due to a defect in the penal
provisions or in their being dealt with in special laws.
The causes are to be found elsewhere.

154. Thus, prosecutions may fail because of defective
reports of the Public Analyst! or delay in the examination
of samples*. Sometimes, the rules as in force up-to-date
are not brought to the notice of the court’. Complications
may also arise where the procedure prescribed by the Act
for taking samples ig not followed’. The same difficulty
may arise if the provisions of the Act requiring complaint
by a particular person are not complied with®.

155. In this connection, it must also be pointed out, that
higher courts have not failed to impress upon the magis-
tracy the importance of legislation relating to adulteration
of food, and the need for ensuring that mere technicalities
do not hamper or defeat the cause of justice®.

CATEGORY 7.—-THEFT AND MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC PRO
PERTY AND Funps,

156. The seventh category of the offences mentioned by
the Santhanam Committee is—“Theft and misappropria-
tion of public property and funds”.

The existng provisions as to these offences are listed

(Category 7) Separately’. The offences are mainly dealt with—

($) in the Indian Penal Code;

(i) in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947; and

(iit) in special enactments relating to particular
subjects.

Transfer to the Indian Penal Code of the provisions
contained in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, is not
practicable, as the Act contains its own rules of evidence
and procedure’.

3Cf. the cases cited in State v. Gunjlal, A.L.R. 1964 Pun. 475, 476, 477,
paras. 2 and 6.
* Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Surja Ram, (1965) 2 Cr. L. J. 571.
Cf. Mela Singh v. State, ALR. 1964 Pun. 332, 333.
4Cf. Food Inspector v. P. Kannan, A.LR. 1964 Kerala 261.
5Cf. State v. Ishvar Saran, ALR. 1964 All. 497.

है "See Delhi Municipality v. Jai Dayal, A.LR. 1964 Pun, 520, paras. 11
and 12.

*See Appendix 7.

Se sections 3, 4, 5, $A and 6, Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (2 of
1957).


157. Transfer to the Indian Penal Code of the provisions Transfer not
of other special enactments under this category does not feasible.
appear to be feasible, as the provisions are a part of the
integrated schemes of the particular enactments.

158. The addition of new offences under this category Addition of
is a matter which need not be considered until any defi- new pro-
ciency in the existing provisions is brought to notice. visions.

159. We, however, think that the punishment for the Provision ke
theft of public property should be enhanced, so as to pro- hroposed for
vide a more stringent check on such thefts. We propose public pro-
an amendment to the Indian Penal Code on the subject}. perty.
Theft is punishable under the Indian Penal Code (section
379), and aggravated forms thereof have also been dealt
with in the same Code (sections 380, 381). It would not,
therefore, be against the scheme of that Code to place the
proposed provision in that Code’.

160. As regards misappropriation of public property,
the offence, if committed by a public servant, would, in
most cases, fal] under section 409, Indian Penal Code
(Criminal breach of trust by a public servant, or by banker,
merchant or agent). The maximum punishment for that
offence is imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either
description upto ten years, and also fine, which seems to
be sufficiently deterrent. We do not, therefore, propose
any increase in the punishment.

161. One of the comments received by us also states, Points sug-
that the offence of theft (or misappropriation) of public gested in
property is much graver than the same offence in respect
of property of an individual or company, and should be

adequately punished.

CatTecory §.—-TRAFFICKING IN LICENCES

162. We now come to the eighth category of the offences Trafficking
mentioned by the Santhanam Committee, namely, “Traffick- 8 licences,
ing in licences, permits ete.”. छः, ई:

There are no direct statutory provisions creating a
specific offence of this nature. Some of the important
enactments dealing with the control of industries, imports
and exports and foreign exchange’, seem, however, to
imply, that ordinarily a licence, permit or similar other
document issued under those enactments cannot be trans-
ferred for profit, at least where the competent authority
imposes such conditions in the licences, ete.

‘See Appen 31, section 379A, L.P.C. Proposed).
3866 also para . 160 infra.
‘For details , see Appendix 8.



4

163. The subject has been dealt with in the Report of
the Committee at various places. The Committee has dis-
cussed the procedure for the scrutiny of applications receiv-
ed under the Industries (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1951}, and illustrated the unfair practices that may
arise in the absence of field verification of progress reports,
@.g., the licensee utilising the services of sub-contractors
instead of setting up the factory himself. The Committee
has made certain recommendations* regarding import and
export control also. It has observed, that corruption in
that sphere arose from (i) issue of licences or quota certi-
ficates in fictitious names, (३8) issue of licences to actual
users on forged certificate and without proper scrutiny vf
documents, (ii) issue of licences to prospective exporters
on the basis of false or forged orders of foreign suppliers,
{iv) theft of blank licences, etc. by the staff and supply of
the same to parties for value, (v) theft of issued licences
by the staff at the time of the despatch or when returned
by parties for revalidation, etc. and sale to other parties,
(vi) applying for licences even after changes in the cons-
titution or ownership of the importer’s business, (vii)
trafficking in licences, (viti) applying for licences in the
name of fictitious firms, (ix) soliciting of licences, ete‘.
As regards import licences granted as export incentives,
the Committee was told, that they were transferable and
this caused serious damage to the domestic market and
foreign exchange resources®, (It also referred to the mal-
practice of material allowed to be imported for use in
manufacturing exporiable goods being sold for huge pro-
fits, and recommended that such offences should be
punishable with imprisonment of at least 3 years and a

ine which would be twice the market price of the import-

ed goods),
Meaning of 164. The Committee has not suggested any definition
and es of trafficking. A definition of “trafficking” svagested in
suggested in One of the comments is, “the outright sale of licenses and
comments. permits and allowing any other person besides the one
intended, to enjoy the fruits of such licences and permits.”.

Another comment states, that “trafficking” takes place
when a licence is transferred without the permission of the
competent authority, though such transfers are prohibited
by law, or when a premium is charged on such transfers
in spite of a prohibition under the law,

“"aReport of the Santhanam Commitee, pase a4p and dese of the Santhanam Committee, Pages 243 and 245,
*Report of the Santhanam Commitee, page 247.
*Report of the Santhanam Committee, Pages 247 and 249,

... ‘Report of the Santhanam Committee, pages 252 to >: |, Dp ii
(HD, Go), ©), (CH), (HD, Geo), (RD, Caxxoid and axe” PM के items

‘Report of the Santhanam Commitice, Page 254 para. 9:
“Report of the Santhanam Committee, Pagt 298, para. 10 (18)


mS

165. It seems to us, that the matter can be more con- Teaficking
veniently dealt with by a suitable provision in the law (> ty it
under which the licenses are issued. When a license is special
issued, a condition can be inserted that it shalj not be enactments.
transferable. Breach of the condition could be made

punishable under the relevant enactment.

166. So far as licenses for importing or exporting goods
are concerned, contravention of a condition in the license
authorising the import or export is an offence under
section 5 of the Imports Act'%5. And it would appear,
that under clause 5(2) of the Export (Control) Order, 1962,
it is deemed to be a condition of every licence that the
licensee shall not (except with permission of the licensing
authority, etc.) transfer the license, and that the goods
for the export of which the licence is granted shall be
the licensee’s property at the time of export. Similar
provision has been made by clause 5 of the Import (Con-
trol) Order, 1955.

This being the position, an unauthorised transfer of
the license (“trafficking”) would seem to be already cover-
ed, so far as import and export licenses are concerned‘.

167. If there are any practical difficulties in the en-
forcement of the relevant condition in the licence, those
difficulties would not be solved by making a provision in
the Indian Penal Code.

168. We may also state here that, as has been pointed
out in one of the comments received on the proposals
under consideration, the magnitude of the mal-practice of
trafficking may vary with the particular enactment (ie.
the enactment which requires t! fat the activity or opera-
tion or transaction in question should be licensed). For
that reason also, it will be more appropriate to deal with
the matter by a suitable provision in the special enact-
ment concerned, rather than by a general provision in the
Indian Penal Code. If a feneral provision (prohibiting
trafficking) applicable to all licenses and permits is insert-
ed, it might cover even a license or permit which is trans-
ferable under the enactment under which it is issued,
and thus lead te inconsistency in the law. We do not,
therefore, feel inclined to recommend a provision in the
Indian Penal Code on the subject.

क Tig roots and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 (8 of 1947) (as amended
i .

*See Best & Co. v. Additional Collector, A..R. 1965 Cal. 478.

‘It is understood that 8 Bill to provide for minimum Iti
section § is to be introduced shortly. Penalties under

मा Mohan Lal v. Jasjit Singh, 1965) 1 Cr. Law Journal 379, (Caleutta


Proolem of
crime a
complex
one,

Causes of
crime,

Appendices.

6
ConcLUSION

169. In the end, we should emphasise that the problem
of checking crime in general, and of white-collar crimes
in particular!, is a complex one. It is much wider than
the form and content of the penal law, or the placing of
its provisions. The inhibitions which prevent a person
from committing crime generally may have their origin
in various factors which contribute to the emergence of
conscience and the creation of a sense of guilt®. The
sanctions imposed by the penal law constitute only one
species of those inhibitions.

170. Crime is not a legal problem; it is a social and
economic one. The sanctions which can effectively operate
to check crime are not legal only. As has been observed’—

“Among the basic elements in any culture are
social values. These have been developed out of the
historical experience of each society. Experiences and
behaviour patterns which have brought the group
Satisfaction are positively valued. Experiences whicn
have brought dissatisfaction are negatively valued.
Sanctions are set by the society designed to “encourage
approved behaviour and discourage disapproved he-
haviour. These sanctions are embodied in the folkways,
mores, conventions, religious ideals and taboos, public
opinion, and laws of a society, and may be promoted
through education. Every society has to decide what
kinds of behaviour shall be discouraged through law,
and what kinds by appeal to other sanctions. We have
seen in our society a great reliance on law and yet a
considerable disrespect for many laws. Criminology
is, strictly speaking, concerned only with acts which
are made punishable under the criminal law.”.

171. When we consider the question of preventing the
commission of a particular class of crimes, the matter
becomes still more complex, because then one has to con-
sider not only the criminal instinct in general, but the
more detailed question as to why the desire to commit the
crimes of that particular class Grises,

172. The Appendices to this Report are intended to fur-
nish information regarding provisions of existing laws
relevant to the subject-matter of this Report, provisions of
the laws of certain other countries which may be of in-
terest, and similar other material. Some of the Appendices
also seek to analyse, in detail, the scope of certain provi-
sions of existing laws, in order to show how far they cover

*Para. 7, et. seq. supra.

°Cf. Barbara Wooten, Crime and the Criminal Law (The Hamlyn
५ 1501 series), (1963), Page 23

*Taft and England, Criminology, (1964) page 273.


7
the offences which, according to the Santhanam Commit-
tee’s Report, cught to be covered. It should be stated, that
the Appendices relating to existing laws are illustrative
only, and are not intended to be exhaustive.

A tentative draft of the amendments which we propose
in the Indian Penal Code and in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1398 is given in twe of the Appendices’.

1. J. L. KAPUR—Chairman.

2. K. G. DATAR |

3. 5. छू. HIRANANDANI
¢ Members*

4. T. K. TOPE
5. RAMA PRASAD MOOKERJEE

£, M. BAKSHI,
Joint Secretary and Draftsman,

New Deut;
The 11th February, 1966.

4Appendices 31 and 32.

*The post of Special Secretary, Legislative Department and Member
Comission has not been filled up.


APPENDIX 1

EXISTING STATUTORY PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFENCES CAL-
CULATED TO PREVENT OR OBSTRUCT THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
OF THE COUNTRY AND ENDANGER ITS ECONOMIC HEALTH,

Acts listed inside—
(1) The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962).
(2) The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962).
(3) The Coffee Act, 1942 (7 of 1942),

(4) The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947
(18 of 1947),

(5) The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955).

(6) The Indian Standards Institution (Certification
Marks) Act, 1952 (36 of 1952).

(7) The Industries (Development & Regulation) Act,
1951 (65 of 1951).

(8) The Tea Act, 1953
(9) The Coir Industry Act, 1953.
(10) The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.

(11) The Oilfields (Regulation & Development) Act,
1948 (53 of 1948).

(12) The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.

(18) The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952
(14 of 1952).

(14) The Mines & Minerals etc. Act, 1957 (67 of
1957)

(15) The Securities Contracts etc. Act, 1956 (42 of
1956).


APPENDIX 1

Name of the Act Section Gist of the Section
Number
0) @) @)
iL The Gans Act, 1962 (52 135 Without prejudice to any action that may be taken under this Act, if any per-
of 1962). son—
(As to confiscation and penal- (a) isin relation to any goods in any way knowingly concerned in any fraudulent
ties, see sections 111 and 112 evasion or attempt at evasion of any duty chargeable thereon or of any
etseq. Astofalse declaration prohibition for the time being imposed under this Act or any other law
see section 132. for the time being in force with respect to such goods, or

(6) acquires possession of or is in any way concerned in carrying, removings
depositing, harbouring, keeping, concealing, selling or purchasing or in
any other manner dealing with any goods which he knows or has reason to
believe are liable to confiscation under section 111, he shall be punishable,—

(@) in the case of an offence relating to any of the goods to which section
123 applies and the market price whereof exceeds one Jakh of rupees,
wath imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and
with fine:

Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the
contrary, to be recorded in the judgement of the court, such im-
prisonment shall not be less than six months;



@)

‘The Custom Act, 1962 (contd.)

2.

The Atomic Energy Act, 1962
(33 of 1962).

The Coffee Act, 1942
(7 of 1942).

The Imports and Exports
(Control) Act, 1947
(18 of 1947).

24

(#) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both.

{As to offences under the Act being regarded as “economic crimes”, and
the need for punishing severely such offences, see Srate v. Kumari
Dhrupatt Bhawnani, A.L.R. 1965 Bombay 6.)

The section makes contravention of orders made under sections 14, 17 and 18
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 5 years.
Section 14, inter alia, provides that the Central Government may, by order,
prohibit, except under a licence, the production, possession, use, disposal,
export or import of prescribed substances or other minerals, or of any plant
designed for development of atomic energy etc.

Section 20 provides that no coffee shall be exported from India otherwise than
by the Board or under an authorisation granted by the Board, and the pro-
visions of the Sea Customs Act have been made applicable to any violation
of this provision. The Board is constituted under section 4. Section 21
deals with import of exported coffee.

Section 5 makes the contravention or attempts at contravention of any order
made under the Act punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year.

If any person contravencs or attempts to contravene, or abets a contravention
of, any order made or deemed to have been made under this Act, or any
condition of a licence granted under any such order, he shall, without pre~
judice to any confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable under the


g. The Essential Commodities
Act, 1955 (10 of 1955)

6. The Indian Standards Insti-
tution (Certification Marks)
Act, 19$2 (36 of 1952).

Industries (Development &
Regulation) Act, I9§t
(6s of 1951)-

13

24

provisions of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, as applied by sub-section (2) of
section 3, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.

(As to the need for punishing such offences severely, see State v. Kumari Dhrupati,
A.LR. 1965 Bombay 6).

The section makes contravention of orders made under section 3 as punishable
with imprisonment which varies from one year to three years in certain
specified circumstances and also gives discretion to the court to make an
order imposing a sentence of fine alone. Section 3 gives powers to the
Central Government to control production, supply and distribution of
essential commodities.

The section provides penalty for contravention of the provisions of section §
and section 6 of the Act. Section 5 prohibits improper use of the standard
mark or any colourable imitation thereof. Section 6 prohibits the use
without previous permission of the Institution, of any name resembling the
name of the Indian Standards Institution, etc.

This section makes contravention or attempts at contravention of provisions
of sections 10, 11, 118, 13(1), 188 and 180 and 29B(2) or direction or order
made thereunder punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 6
months or with fine. Section 3 makes it obligatory for every owner of existing
industrial undertaking to have it registered in the prescribed manner. Section
To requires registration. Section 11 prohibits every person from establishing
a new industrial undertaking except under a licence issued by the Central
Government. Section 11A makes it obligatory on every owner of industrial
undertaking to obtain a licence for producing or manufacturing a new article.
Similar provisions are contained in section 13.

Section 24A punishes false statements.



_. APPENDIX 1 (concld.)

(1) (०)

(3)

Industries (Development and

( 18G
Regulation) Act, 1951 (contd.)

8. The Tea, Act, 1953. "3
9. The Coir Industry Act, 1953. 20

10. Foreign Exchange Regulation 2
. Act, 1947. 3

Section 18G gives powers to the Central Government to control supply,
distribution and prices of certain articles.

The section makes the breach of the provision of section 18(i) & (ii) punishable
as if it were an offence under the Customs Act. Section 18 provides that
no consignment of tea shall be exported except under a licence by the Central
Government or the Tea Board.

The section makes contravention of the provision of section 12 punishable with
fine which may extend to Rs. 500/-. Section 12 prohibits the export of coir

fibre, coir yarn and coir products except under a licence issued by or on
behalf of the Coir Board.

‘The section makes a person contravening the provisions of' sections 4, f 9 or
sub-section (2) of section 12 or of any rule, order, direction made therein,
liable to penalty not exceeding three times the value of the foreign exchange
in respect of which contravention has taken place, or Rs. 5,000/- whichever
is more, as also punishable upon conviction with imprisonment for 8 term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. Contravention
of provisions of section 19 is also punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. Section 4 places
restrictions on persons resident in India on dealing in foreign exchange.
Section 5, inter alia, places restrictions on persons resident in India from mak~
ing any payment to or for the credit of any person resident outside India.

Section 9 empowers the Central Government to purchase any foreign exchange

in the possession of any person resident in India at a price fixed by the Govern-
ment itself. .


11. The Oilfields (Regulation &
Development) Act, 1948.

12. The Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934.

32

Section 19 empowers the Central Government to direct owners of foreign ex-
change or foreign securities to make a return thereof to the Reserve Bank
within such a period as may be specified. The Central Government or the
Reserve Bank may also require any such person to furnish to the Government
or the Bank any information, book or other document as may be required by
the order to be so produced or furnished.

Section 9 provides, that the contravention of any rule made under the provisions
of the Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 5 empowers the Central Government to make rules for regulating the
grant of mining leases, or for prohibiting the grant of such leases, in respect
of any mineral oif or any area.

Section 6 empowers the Central Government to make rules for the conservation
and development of mineral oils, and, inter alia, for regulating drilling, re~
drilling, deepening, plugging and abandoning of oil wells, and for the limitation
or prohibition of such operations, and for taking of remedial measures to
prevent waste of or damage to oil.

The section makes contravention of provision of section 31 as punishable with
fine which may extend to the amount of the bill, hundi, pronote or
engagement in respect whereof the offence is committed. Section 31
prohibits any person in India from drawing, accepting or making or
issuing any bill of exchange in the promissory note or engagement for the
Payment of money, payable to bearer on demand.



@

APPENDIX 1 (concld)

@)

G)

13. Forward Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1953

14. Mines & Minerals (Regulation &

Development) Act, 1957.

15. Security Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1956.

20

The section, inter alia, penalises the person who is a member of any
association, other than a recognised association to which a certificate of
registration has not been granted under the Act. The penalty pro-
vided for the offence is with imprisonment which may extend to one
year, or with fine of not 1658 than Rs. 1,000/-, or with both.

This section makes contravention of provisions of sub-section (1) of
section 4 punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
Tupees, or with both.

Section 4(1) prohibits any person from undertaking any prospecting or min-
ing operation in any area, except under or in accordance with the terms
and conditions of a prospecting licence, or a mining licence [granted
under the Act.

The section makes it an offence for a person to own or keep a place

than a recognised stock exchange for use for the purposes of
entering into any contracts in contravention of the provisions of the
Act. It further provides penalties for entering into any contract
in contravention or the provisions of sections 13, 16, 17 and 19, and
*for canvassing or advertising for any business connected with con-
tracts without being a member of a recognized stock exchange,


13 Section 13 empowers the Central Government to notify that contracts
other than between members of a recognized stock exchange, shall be illegal
in any area to which the said notification may apply. Section 16 empowers
the Government to prohibit contracts to prevent undesirable speculation
in specified securities. Section 17 empowers the Government to
make it obligatory on persons in areas that may be specified to take a
licence for dealing in securities.

19 Section 19 prohibits persons from being members of any stock exchange

er than a recognised one for the purposes of assisting in, entering into, for
performing contracts in securities.



पा. 86
APPENDIX 2

EXISTING STATUTORY PROVISIONS REGARDING EVASION OR
AVOIDANCE OF TAX OR DUTY AND THE CONSEQUENT PENALTY
THEREOF.

1. The Indian Penal Code s. 177, 181, 191, 192, 198, 199
read with s. 136, Income Tax Act, 1961 ete.

2. Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) (Section 62).

3. The Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (I of 1944).
(Section 9, 17 & 24).

4. The Estate Duty Act, 1953 (34 of 1953) Sections 59
and 60.

5. The Terminal Tax on Railway Passengers Act, 1956
(69 of 1956) (No provision).

6. The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) Sec-
tions 9(3), 10, 13(5).

7. The Wealth Tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957) Sections 17,

8. The Expenditure Tax Act, 1957 (29 of 1957) Sections
16, 17, 32.

9. The Gift Tax Act, 1958 (18 of 1958) Sections 16, 17,
35.

10. The Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) Sections 276,
277, 278, 281.

11. The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) Section 135 (This
Act repeals the Sea Customs Act, 1878 and the Land
Customs Act, 1924).

12. Super Profits Tax Act, 1963 (14 of 1963) Sections 10,
11, 19 and 22.

13. The Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964 (7 of 1964)
Sections 8, 20, 21, 22.

1. THe Inpran PenaL Cope (45 or 1860)

The following sections of the Indian Penal Code are
relevant in connecticn with evasion of taxes—

Section 1i7
Section 181

Read with section
136, Income Tax-
Section 191, 192, Act, 1961, and simi-
199 lar provisions in
other enactments
Telating to tax
ation,


87
APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

2. Tir Enpian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 or 1899)

Section 62~Pensaity for executing, etc., instrument not
duly stamped.

q1) Any person—

(a) drawing, making, issuing, endorsing or trans-
ferring or signing otherwise than as a witness, or pre-
senting for acceptance or payment, or accepting, pay-
ing or receiving payment of, or in any manner nego-
tiating, any bill of exchange payable otherwise than
on demand, or promissory note without the same being
duly stamped; or

(b) executing or signing otherwise than as a wit-
ness any other instrument chargeable with duty with-
out the same being duly stamped; or

(c) voting or attempting to vote under any proxy
not duly stamped,

shall for every such offence be punishable with fine which
may extend tu five hundred rupees: Provided that, when
any penalty has been paid in respect of any instrument
under section 35, section 40 or section 61, the amount of
such penalty shall be allowed in reduction of the fine (if
any) subsequently imposed under this section in respect
of the same instrument upon the person who paid such
penalty;

(2) If a share-warrant is issued without being duly
stamped, the company issuing the same, and also every
person who, at the time when it is issued is the managing
director or secretary or other principal officer of the com-
pany, shall be punishably with fine which may extend to
five handyed rupees.

3. THE CenTRst EXCtses anp Satt Act, 1944 (I or 1944)

Section 9.—Whoever commits any of the following offen-
ces, namely: —

(b) evades the puyment of any duty payable under
this Act, shall for every such offence be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months and with fine which may extend to two
thousand rupees or with both.

Section 17.—Any owner or occupier of land or any
agent of such owner or occupier in charge of the man-
agement of that land, who wilfully connives at any offence
against the provisions of this Act or of any rules made
thereunder shalt fur every such offence be punishable with
‘imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or
with both.
47 Law—7.


88
APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

Section 24—When any excisable goods are carried by.
sea in any vessel other than a vessel of the burden of three
hundred tons and upwards, the owner and master of such.
vessel shalt each be punishable with imprisonment for 4
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

4. Tus Estate Doty Act, 1953 (34 of 1953)
Section 56 deals with grant of representation.

Section 39.—Property escaping assessment: If the Con~
troller,—

(a) has reason to believe that by reason of the
omission cr failure on the part of the person account
able to submit an account of the estate of the deceased
under section 53 or section 56 or to disclose fully and
truly ail material facts necessary for assessment, any
property chargeable to estate duty has escaped assess-
ment by reason of undervaluation of the property in-
chided in the account or of omission to include therein
any property which ought to have been included or of
assessment at too low a rate or otherwise, or

(b) has, in consequence of any information in his
possession, reason to believe notwithtanding that there
has not been such emission or failure as is referred to
jn clause (a) that any property chargeable to estate
duty has escaped assessment, whether by reason of
undervaluation of the property included in the account
or of omission to include therein any property which
ought to have been included, in the or of assessment at
too low a rate or otherwise,

he may at any ‘ime, subject to the provisions of section 72A,
require the person accountable to submit an account as
required under section 53 and may proceed to assess or re-
assess stich property as if the provisions of section 58
applied thereto. |

Section 60.—Penalty for default or concealment:

(9) If the Controller, the Appellate Controller or the
Appellate Tribunal, in the course of any proceedings under
this Act, is satisfied that any person—

(a) has without reasonable cause failed to deliver
the account of the property of the deceased under
section 53 or section 56 or to comply with any requisi-
tioh of the Controller under section 55 or section 59 or
has without reasonable cause failed to deliver or sub-
mit any of the accounts or statements required under~
any of the sections aforesaid within the time allowed
and in the manner required; or +


तप

89
APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

(9) has without reasonable cause failed to comply
with a notice under sub-section (2) of section 58; or

(c) has concealed the particulars of the property
of the deceased ur deliberately furnished inaccurate
particulars thereof; or

(d) being a company referred to in section 20A
fails without reasonable cause, to pay the amount of
estate duty due from the company under that section
within the time specified in this behalf,

he or it may, by order in writing, direct that—such person
shall pay by way of penalty—
(४) in the case referred to in clause (6) or clause
(d), in addition to the amount of the estate duty pay-
able by him; a sum not exceeding twice the amount of
such duty, and
{ii) in the case referred to in clause (b) or clause
(6) in addition to the amount of estate duty payable
by him, a sum not exceeding twice the amount of the
estate duty, if any, which would have been avoided if
the principal value shown in the account of such persor.
had been accepted as correct.

(2) No order shail be made under sub-section (1) un-
less the person concerned has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.

5. Tue TerminaL TAx on Ramway PassENGERS Act, 1956
(Act 69 or 1956)

This Act contains no provision as to evasion or avoid-
ance of Tax. :

6. The Centrat Sares Tax Act, 1956 (74 6७ 1956)
Section 9—Levy and collection of tax and penalties:

(3) The authorities for the time being empowered to
assess, collect and enforce payment of any tax under the
general sales tax law of the appropriate State shall, on
behalf of the Government of India and subject to any
rules made under this Act, assess, collect and enforce pay-
ment of any tax, including’ any penalty, payable by a
dealer under this Act in the same manner as the tax on
the sale or purchase of goods under the general sales tax
law of the State is assessed, paid and collected; anq@ for
this purpose they may exercise all or any of the powers
they have under the general sales tax law of the State; and
the provisions of such law, including provisions relating
to returns, appeals, reviews, revisions, references, penal-
ties and compounding of offences, shall apply accordingly:

Provided that if in any State or part thereof there is
no general sales tax law in force, the Central Government


90
APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

may, by rules made in this behalf, make necessary pro-
vision for all or any of the matters specified in this sub
section, and such rules may provide that a breach of any
rule shall be punishatle with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees; and where the offence is a continuing
offence, wita a daily fine which may extend to fifty rupees
for every day during which the offence continues.
Section 10.—Penalties:

If any person—

(a) fails to get himself registered as required by
section 7; or

{b) being a registered dealer, falsely represents.
when purchasing any class of goods that goods of such
class are covered by his certificate of registration; or

(0) not being a registered dealer, falsely repre-
sents when purchasing goods in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce that he is a registered dealer;
or

(d) after purchasing any goods for any of the
purposes specified in clayse (b) of sub-section (3) of
section 8 fails without reasonable excuse, to make
use of the goods for any such purpose;

(e) has in his possession any form prescribed for
the purpose of sub-section tay of section 8 which has
not been obtained by him or by his principal or by
his agent in accordance with the provisions of this
Act or any rules made thereunder;

(f) collects any amount by way of tax in contra-
vention of the provisions contained in section 9A,+

he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which
may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both; and
when the offence is a continuing offence, with a daily fine
which may extend to fifly rupees for every day during
which the offence continues.

Section 13.—Powers to make rules:

(5) In making any rule under this section the State
Government may direct that a breach thereof shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees and when the offence is a continuing offence, with
a daily fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day
during which the offence continue.

पे, Tap Weauta-Tsx Act, 1957 (27 or 1957)

Section 17.—Wealth escaping assessment: 11 the Wealth
Tax Officer —

_{9) has reapon ta kelieve that by reason of the
omisston or failure on the part of the assessee to make


91
APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

a return of his net wealth under section 14 for any
assessment Year or to disclose fully and truly all
material facts necessary for his assessment for that
year, the net wealth chargeable to tax has escaped
assessment for that year, whether by reason of under-
assessment or assessment at too low a rate or other-
‘wise, or

(b) has, in consequence of any information in his
possession, reason to believe, notwithstanding that
there has been no such omission or failure as is re-
ferred t» in clause (०), that net wealth chargeable to
tax has escaped qssessment for that year, whether by
reason of under-assessment or assessment at too low a
rate or otherwise he may, in cases falling under clause
(व) at any time within eight years and in cases falling
under clause (0) at any tjme within four years of the
end of that assessment year, serve on the assessee a
notice containing all or any of the requirements which
may be included in a notice under sub-section (2) of
section 14, end may proceed to assess or reassess such
net wealth, end the provisions of this Act shall, so
far as may be, apply as if the notice had issued under
that sub-section.

Section 18.—Penalty for concealment:

(1) If the Wealth-tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Com-
missioner, Commissioner or Appellate Tribunal in the
course of any proceedings under this Act is satisfieq that
any person --

(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish
the return of his net wealth which he is required to
furnish under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section 14 or section 17 or has without reasonable cause
failed to furnish it within the time allowed and in the
manner required; or

(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply
with a notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4)
of section 16; or

(c) has concealed the particutars of his assets or
deliberately furnishéd inaccurate particulars of his
asseis or debts,

he or it may, by order in writing direct that such person
shall pay by way of penally—

(i) in the case referred to in clause (a), in addition
to fhe amount of wealth-tax payable by him, a sum not
exceeding one-and-a-half titnes thé arnount of such tax,
an

(i) in the case referfed to in clause (b) or clause
(c) in addition 10 the amount of wealth-tax payable
by him, a sum not exceetling one-and-a-half times the
amount of the tax, if any, which would have been


92
APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

avoided if the net wealth returned by such person had
been accepted as correct.

(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) unless
the person concerned has been given reasonable opportu-
nity of being heard.

(3) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall
be instituted in respect of the same facts in relation to
which a penalty has been imposed under this section.

(4) The Wealth-tax Officer shall not impose any penalty
under this section without the previous approval of the
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Wealth-tax,

Section 36—Prosecutions :
(1) If a person fails witkout reasonable cause—

(a) to furnish in due time any return mentioned
in section 14;

(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, on or
before the date mentioned in any notice under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 16 such
accounts, records and documents as are referred to
in the notice;

(2) to furnish within the time specified any
statement or information which such person is
bound to furnish to the Wealth-tax Officer under
section 38;

he shall, on conviction before a magistrate, be punish-
able with fine which may extend to ten rupees for every
day during which the default continues.

(2) If a person makes a statement in a verification
mentioned in section 14 ur section 23 or section 24 or see-
tion 26 which is false, and which he either knows or
believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he
shall be.punishable with simple imprisonment which
may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend
to one thousand rupees, or with both.

(3) A person shall not be proceeded against for an
offence under this section except at the instance of the
Commissioner, .

(4) The Commissioner may either before or after the
institution of proceedings compound any such offence.

Explanation —For the purposes of this section, “Magis-
trate” means a Presidency Magistrate, a Magistrate of
the first class or a Magistrate of the second class specially
empowered by the Central Government to try offences
under this Act. .


93
APPENDIX 2 (contd)
8. Tue Expenpiture Tax Act, 1957 (29 oF 1957)
Section 16.—Expenditure escaping assessment:
Tf the Expenditure-tax Officer—
(a) has reason to believe that by reason of the
omission or failure on the part of the assessee to make
a return of his expenditure under section 13 for any
assessment year, or to disclose fully and truly all
material facts necessary for his assessment for that
year, the expenditure chargeable to tax has escaped
assessment for that year, whether by reason of under-
assessment or assessment at too low a rate or other-
wise: or
(b) has in consequence of any information in his
possession reason to believe, notwithstanding that
there has been no such omission or failure as is refer-
red to in clause (७), that the expenditure chargeable
to tax has escaped assessment for any assessment year,
whether by reason of under-assessment or assessment
at too low a rate or otherwise,
he may, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time
within eight years and in cases falling under clause (b) at
any time within four years of the end of that assessment
year, serve on the assessee a notice containing all or any of
the requirements which may be included in a notice under
sub-section (2) of section 13, and may proceed to assess or
reassess such expenditure, and the provisions of this Act
shall, so far as may be, apply as if the notice had issued
under that sub-section.

Section 17.—Penalty for concealment:

If the Expenditure Tax Officer, appellate Assistant
Commissioner, Commissioner, or appellate Tribunal in the
course of any proceedings under t Be Act is satisfied that
any person—

(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish
the return of his expenditure which he is required to
furnish under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section 13 or section 16, or has without reasonable
cause failed to furnish it within the time allowed and
in the manner required; or

(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply
with a notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4)
of section 15 or

(०) has concealed the particulars of any expendi-
ture or deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars
thereof, he, may by order in writing direct that such
person shall pay by way of penalty...

Section 32.—Prosecutions:

(7) If a person fails without reasonable cause—

(a) to furnish in due time any return mentioned

“in section 13;


94
APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

(9) to produce, or cause to be produced on or
before the date mentioned in any notice under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 15 such
accounts, records and documents as are referred to
in the notice;

(०) to furnish within the time specified any state.
tent or information which such person is bound to
furnish to the Expenditure-tax Officer under section
34;

he shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punishable
with fine which may extend to ten rupees for every day
during which the default continues.

(2) If a person makes a statement in a verification
mentioned in section 13, section 21, section 22, or section
24, which is false, and which he either knows or believes
to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be
punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend
to one year or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees or with both.

(3) A person shall not be proceeded against for an
offence under this section except at the instance of the
Commissioner.

(4) The Commissioner may either before or after the
institution of proceedings compound any such offence.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section “Magis-
trate” means a Presidency Magistrate, a Magistrate of the
first class, or a Magistrate of the second class specially em-
powered by the Central Government to try offences under
this Act.

9. Fre Girt-Tax Act, 1958 (18 or 1958)
Section 16.—Gift escaping assessment:

(1) If the Gift-tax officer—

{a) has reason to believe that by reason of omis-
sion or failuré on the part of an assessee to make a
réturn under section 13 for any assessment year or’ to
disclose fully and truly all material facts necessasy
fer His assessment for that year, any taxable gift has
escaped assessrnent for tht yeat, whether by reason
of under-assessment or assessment ét too low a rate or
otherwise; or iad

(b) has, in consequence of any mformation in his
possession, reason to believe, notwithstanding that
there has been no such omission or failure as is refer:
red to in clause (a), that atiy taxable gift has escaped
assessment for any year; whether by reason of under-
as: essment or assessment at too low a rate or other-

5


95
APPENDIX 2 (contd.}

he may, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time
within eight years and in cases falling under clause (8) at
any time within four years of the end of that assessment
year, serve on the assessee a notice containing all or any of
the requirements which may be included in a notice under
sub-section (2) of section 13, amd may proceed to assess or
reassess any taxable gift which has escaped assessment,
and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be,
apply as if the notice had issued under that sub-section.

(2) Nothing containing in this section limiting the time
within which any proceedings for assessment or re-assess-
ment may he commenced shall apply to an assessment or
re-assessment to be made on the assessee or any person in
consequence of or to give effect to any finding or direction
contained in an order under section 22, section 23, section
24, section 26 or section 28.

Section 17—Penalty for default and Concealment.

(1) If the Gift-tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Com-
missioner, Commissioner or Appellate Tribunal, in the
course of any proceedings under this Act, is satisfied that
any person—

(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish
the return which he is required to furnish under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 13, or section
16 or has without reasonable cause failed to furnish it
within the time allowed and in the manner required;
or

(0) has without reasonabie cause failed to comply
with a notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4)
of section 15; or

(९) has concealed thé particulars of any gift or
deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars thereof,
he or it may, by orde# in writing, direct that such person
shall pay by way of penalty—

(४) in the case referred to in clause (4), in addi-
tion to the amount of gift-tax payable by him, a sum
not exceeding one and a half times the amount of such
tax, and

(४४) in the case referred to in clause (9) or clause
(c), in addition to the amount of gift-tax payable by
him, a sum not exceeding one and a half times the
amount of the tax, if any, which would have been
avoided if the return made by such person under sec-
tion 13, section 14, or section 16, as the casé May be,
had been accepted as correct.

(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) unless

the person concerned has béeti givén a reasoriable oppor-
tunity of being heard. छः


96

APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

(3) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall
be instituted in respect of the same facts in relation to
which a penalty has been imposed under this section.

(4) The Gift-tax Officer shall not impose any penalty
under this section without the previous approval of the
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax.

Section 35.--Prosecution.
(7) If any person fails without reasonable cause—

(a) to furnish in due time any return of gifts
under this Act;

(9) to produce, or cause to be produced, on or
before the date mentioned in any notice under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 15, such
accounts, records and documents as are referred to in
the notice;

(c) to furnish within the time specified any state-
ment or information which such person is bound to
furnish 10 the Gift-tax Officer under section 37,

he shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punishable
with fine which may extend to rupees ten for every day
during which the default continues.

(2) If a person makes a statement in a verification in
any return of gifts furnished under this Act or in a verifi-
cation mentioned in sections 22, 23 or 25 which is false, and
which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not
believe to be true, he shall on-conviction before a Magis-
trate, be punishable with simple imprisonment which may
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to
rupees one thousand or with both.

(3) A person shall not be proceeded against for an
offence under this section except at the instance of the
Commissioner,

Explanation

For the purposes of this section “Magistrate” means a
Presidency Magistrate; a Magistrate of the first class or a
Magistrate of the second class specially empowered by the
Central Government to try offences under this Act.

10. THe Income-rax Act, 1961 (43 or 1961)
Section 276.—Failure to make payments or deliver returns
or statements or allow inspection:

If a person fails without reasonable cause or excuse—

(a) to grant inspection or allow copies to be taken,
in accordance with the provisions of section 134;


97
APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

(8) to furnish in due time any of the returns or
statements mentioned in section 133, sub-section (2) of
section 139, section 206, section 285 or section 286;

(०) to produce, or cause to be produced, on or
before the date mentioned in any notice under sub-
section (1) of section 142, such accounts and docu-
ments as are referred to in the notice;

(व) to deduct and pay tax as required by the pro-
visions of Chapter XVII-B or under sub-section (2) of
section 226; or

(e) to furnish a certificate required by section 203,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
ten rupees for every day during which the default
continues.

As to penalties imposable by Income Tax Officers, see
Sections 270 to 274 Income Tax Act, 1961.

Section 277.—False statement in declaration, (As amended
by section 41 of the. Finance Act, 1964—Act
5 of 1964):

If a person makes a statement in any verification under
this Act or under any rule made thereunder, or delivers an
account or statement which is false, and which he either
knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be
true, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years;

Provided that in the absence of special and adequate
reasons to the contrary to be recorded in the judgment of

the court, such imprisonment shall not be for less than six
months.

Section 278-—Abetment of false return, etc. (As amended
by the Finance Act, 1964 section 42):

Tf a person abets or induces in any manner another
person to make and deliver an account, statement or
declaration relating to any income chargeable to tax
which is false and which he either knows to be false or
does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years:

Provided that in the absence of special and adequate
reasons to the contrary to be recorded in the judgment of

the court, such imprisonment shall not be for less than six
months.

Section 281—Transfers to defraud revenue void:

Where, during the pendency of any proceeding under
this Act, any assessee creates a charge on or parts with ‘he
possession by way of sale, mortgage, exchange or any other
mode of transfer whatsoever, of any of. his assets in favour
of any other person with the intention to defraud the


98
APPENDIX. 2 (contd.)

revenue, such charge or transfer shall be void as against
any claim in respect of any tax of any other sum payable
by the assessee as a result of the completion of the said
proceeding:

Provided that such charge or transfer shall not be void
if made for valuable consideration and without notice of
the pendency of the proceeding under this Act.

11. Tue Customs Act, 1962 (52 or 1962)
Section 133.--Evasion of duty or prohibitions:

Without prejudice to any action that may be taken
under this Act, if any person—

(a) is in relation to any goods in any way know-
ingly concerned in any fraudulent evasion or attempt
at evasion of any duty chargeable thereon or of any
prohibition for the time being imposed under this Act
or any other law for the time being in force with res-
pect to such goods, or

(b) acquires possession of or is in any way con-
cerned in carrying, removing, depositing, harbouring,
keeping, concealing, selling or purchasing or in any
other manner dealing with any goods which he knows
or has reason to believe are liable to confiscation
under section 111,

he shall be punishable—

(i) in the case of an offence relating to any of
the goods to which section 123 applies and the market
price whereof exceeds one lakh of rupees, with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to five years
and with fine:

Provided that in the absence of special and ade-
quate reasons to the contrary to be recorded ‘in the
judgment of the court, such imprisonment shal} not
be for Jess than six months;

(ii) in. any other case, with imprisonment for a@
term pehich may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

12. Super Prorits Tax Acr, 1963 (14 oF 1963)

Sections 10, 19, 21 and 22 may be seen.

13. Tae Compantes (PRoFITs) SuRTAx Act, 1964 (7 or 1964)
Section 8—Profits escaping assessment:
It—

(a) the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe
that by reason of the omission or failure on the part


99
APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

of the assessee to make a return under section 5 for
any assessment year or to disclose fully and truly all
material facts necessary for his assessment for any
assessment year, chargeable profits for that year have
escaped assessment or have been under-assessed OT
assessed at too low a rate or have been made the sub-
ject of excessive relief under this Act, or
{b) notwithstanding that there has been no omis-
sion or failure as mentioned in clase {a) on the part
of the assessee, the Income-tax Officer has in conse-
quence of information in his possession reason to
believe that chargeable profits assessable for any
assessment year have escaped assessment or have been
under-assessed or assessed at too low a rate or have
been the subject of excessive relief under this Act,
he may, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time, and
in cases falling under clause (b) at any time within four
years of the end of that assessment year, serve on the
assessee a notice containing all or any of the requirements
which may be included in a notice under section 5, and
may proceed to assess or re-assess the amount chargeable
10 surtax, and the provisions of this Act, shall, so far as
may be, apply as if the notice were a notice issued under
that section.

Section 20.—Failure to deliver returns etc,

If any person fails without reasonable cause to furnish
in due time any return under sub-section (2) of section 5,
or to produce, or cause to be produced, any accounts or
documents re quived to be produced under section 6, he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees, and with a further fine which may ex-
tend to ten rupees for every day during which the default
continues.

Section 21.—False statements:

If a person makes in any return furnisned under sec-
tion 5, any statement which is false, and which he either
knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be
true, he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 22—Abetment of false returns, etc.

If a person makes or induces in any manner another
person to make ani deliver any account, statement or dec-
jJaration relating to chargeable profits liable to surtax
which is false and which he either knows to be false or
does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with
simple imprisonment which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.


EXISTING STATUTORY PROVISIONS PENALISING MISUSE
MISAPPROPRIATION AND BREACH OF tRUSTT,

APPENDIX 3

OF POSITION BY PuBLiD Servants (OTHER THAN THEFT, BRIBERY,
OCCURRING IN VARIOUS STATUTES

Offences regarding misuse of position, etc.

The Act
I

Section number
2

Gist of the Section
3

1 The Preventi
(2 of 1947)

2. The Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)

ion of Corruption “Act, 1947 5(1)(d) & (2)

(i)168
(ii)169

(iii)217

{iv)218

If a public servant, by corrupt or illegal means or by
otherwise abusing his position as public servant, ob-
tains for himself or for any other person, any valu-
able or any other pecuniary advantage, he shall be
deemed to have committed the offence of “criminal mis-
conduct in the discharge of his duties” as defined in
section 5(1)(d) and shall be punishable under section
502) with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than one year, but which may extend.
to 7 years, and shall also be liable to fine; provided
that the court may, for any special. reasons recorded
in writing, impose a sentence of imprisonment of less
than one year.

Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.

Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for pro-
perty.

Public servant disobeying directions of the law with intent
to save person from punishment or Property from
forfeiture, is liable to imprisonment which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both,

Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with

intent to save person from punishment or Property
from forfeiture.

vGt


3. The Indian Post Office Act, 1898
1898).

(6 of

(219

{vi)220

(wii)221

(wiit)222

(ix)225A

sale)

(०56

Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making
report, order, verdict or decision which he knows is
contrary to law.

Whoever, having legal authority to commit persons for
trial or to confinement, or to keep persons for con~
finement, corruptly or maliciously commits any person
for trial or confinement or keeps any person in confine-
ment in the exercise of that authority, knowing that in
so doing, he is acting contrary to Jaw, is punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to seven years,
or with fine, or with both.

Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public
servant bound to apprehend.

Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of the
public servant, bound to apprehend person under
sentence or lawfully committed.

Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape on part
of public servant, in cases not otherwise provided for
in the Indian Penal Code.

Whoever, being an officer of the Post Office, being en-
trusted with the delivery of any postal article, know-
ingly demands or receives anv sum of money in
respect of the postage thereto which is not chargeable
under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years, and shall
alse be punishable with fine

An Officer of the Post Office, who sends by post, or
puts into any mail bag, any postal article™upontwhich

postage has not been paid or ?charged in the manner
prescribed by this Act, intending thereby to defraud

TOL


१५

‘The Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (6 of 1898)
—contd,

4. Lhe Prison Act, 1894 (9 of 1894) .

56

(16०

42 (later part)

the Government of the postage on such postal article,
is made punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years, and is also made
punishable with fine.
Whoever, being appointed to sell postage stamps —
(a) takes from any purchaser for any postage stamp or
quantity of postage stamps, a price higher than
that fixed by any rule made under section 16(3)(a),
shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to Rs. 200/-, or with both;
or

(6) commits a breach of any other rule made under sec-

tion 16 (such as regarding fixation of price of
postage stamps, regulating the custody, supply
and sale of postage stamps and prescribing the
duties and remunerations of persons selling pos-
tage stamps etc. etc.), shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to Rs. 200/-.

An officer of a prison who, contrary to any rule under
section 59 of the Prisons Act, knowingly suffers any
prohibited article to be introduced into or remove
from any prison, to be possessed by any prisoner, or
to be supplied to any person outside the limits of
the prison, or communicates or attempts to commu-
nicate with any person or abets in such an offence,
is made liable to imprisonment for a term not ex-
ceeding six months, or to fine not exceeding rupees
200/-, or to both,

20t


श्र
1

$. The Reformatory Schools Act, 1897 Section 27 (later Any officer or person incharge of a reformatory school
(8 of 1897). part). who, contrary to any rule made under section 26 of
this Act, knowingly suffers any prohibited article’ to
be introduced into or removed from any reformatory
school or contrary to any such rule, communicates
or attempts to communicate with any youthful
offender outside the limits of the reformatory: school
or abets in such offence; is made liable to imprisonment
ve ete wee for a term not exceeding six months, or with fine not
exceeding Rs. 220/-, or to both.
6. The Income-Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) Section 280 read with A public servant who discloses any particulars, the
section 137(2). disclosure of which is prohibited by section 137, -ई
made punishable with imprisonment which’ may ‘ex?
tend to six months, and also to fine. . ae
7- The Customs Act, 1962 (52.0f 1962), » ६) 33689) If any officer of Customs enters into or acquiesces if]
* any agreement to do, abstain from doing, permits,
conceals or connives at any act or thing whereby any
duty of customs leviable on any goods or things pro-
hibited for the time being, enforced under this Acts
may be evaded, he is made punishable with imprison
ment for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine or with both. toe
(ii) 136(2) If any officer of Customs corruptly requires any person.
_ to be searched for goods liable to consfication or any
document relating thereto, or wrongfully arrests any
Person or wrongfully searches or authorises any other
ee NS . ot officer of Customs to search any place, he is made
punishable with inprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(iii) 136(3) If any officer of Customs wrongfully discloses any
7 particulars learnt by him in his official capacity: in
tespect of any goods, he is made punishable with

‘

a


APPENDIX 3 (concld.)

‘The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962)—coned.

&. The Mfianipur (Sale of Motor Spirit &
Lubricants) Taxation Act, 1962 (55 of
1962).

® The Indian Forest Act, 1937 (16 of 1927}

‘

The Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948).

2

&

Pd

3

imprisonment for a term-which may ‘extend to-six
months, or with fine, or with both.

If any officer or person exercising power ‘tindér ‘ids
Act, wrongfully enters or searches, 07 caiists “tobe
entered or searched, any building, vessel, vehicle
or building; or vexatiously or unnecessarily ‘stizes
the property of any person; or vexatiously ‘and ‘un-
necessarily detains or seatches any person, hevts nmde
punistrable with fine which may extend to Re. $60}.

Any forest officer or police officer whb “veiditibudly
and unnecessarily seizes any proptity ch ‘pfetente
of seizing property liable to-confiscation under this
Act, is punishable with imprisonmem ‘which say
extend to six months, or with ‘fine ~witkch ‘indy
extend to Rs. 500/-, or ‘with both.

Whoever (inciuding a public sétvent) ipwbtistes
or disctoses to any person the results of a ‘eimilpets
of the Government Analyst, made under sectite ‘gt
except in so far as they may be necessafy for the pire
poses of a prosecution for any offerite penishulsie
under this Act; is made punishable wih ‘ihipiivent-
ment which may extend to three momtlis, ‘dr ‘With
fine, or with both.


11, The Estate Duty Act, 1953 (34 or 1953) 80 The provisions of section 54 of the old Indian Income-

tax Act, 1922 which made penal the disclosure by
any public servant of any particulars contained in
any statement made or return furnished or accounts
or documents produced under the provisions of that
Act or in any evidence given or affidavit or deposition
made in the course of any such proceeding under
that Act or in any record of any assessment proceed-
ing or any proceeding relating to the recovery on
demand prepared for the purposes of that Act, had
been made applicable to the Estate Duty Act, 1
1953-
1a, The Wealth Tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957) 42(1) This is similar to section 80 of the Estate Duty
Act aad makes the provisions of section $4
of the (old) Indian Income-tax Act, 9922 applicable
to this Act,

13.. The Expenditure Tax Act, 1957 (29 of 38(a) This is similar to section 80 of the Sstate Duty

1957). Act and makes the provisions of section $4

of the old Indian Income-tax Act, 2922 applicable
to this Act.

34 The Gift Tax Act, 1958 (18 of 1958). 4७) This is similar to section 80 of the Estate Duty
Act and makes the provisions @f section 54

of the old Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 applicable
to this Act.



7 APPENDIX 4

EXISTING STATUTORY PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFENCES IN THE NATURE oF
BREACHES OF CONTRACTS RESULTING IN DELIVERY OF GOODS NOT ACCORDING

TO SPECIFICATIONS.

There are no direct provisions penalising such breaches of contracts for
delivery. But these may be noted: —

Section 420, Penal Code ++ Punishes ‘cheating’.

Rule 125(3)(dd),_ Defence of Authorises the making by the Govern~
India Rules, 1962. ment of an order for securing the pro-
duction, manufacture, supply or sale,
according to the prescribed standards
and specifications of any article or
thing which appears to the Govern-
ment as essential to any of the pur-
poses specified in Rule 125(2).

The various enactments relating These would be relevant for the use of
to weights and measures (tisted false weights or measures.
in the Second Schedule to the
Standards of Weights and Mea-
sures Act, 1966).

Section 5, Indian Standards This would be relevant for goods falsely
Institution Act, 1952 read with bearing the standard mark.
section 13. See also the Agri-
cultural Produce (Grading and
Marketing) Act, 1937 and the
Drugs Act, 1940.

1, See Banwari Lal v.State ALR, 1963 S.C. 163.

4

106


ee “TUSUTUI2A0D,
MIG & 01 JO IUAWIUIEADH [७०००७
i जप) 0} YDOIs Ou Jo 14ed payroads ४ 20
गु०्पक atp []as 01 ApouOs fenuessa
~ Aue yoos ul Suipjoy uosied Aue Bur
-ainbar Joy गण soy dey AqTLeurp
~10 Alspoutwos yenuassa Aue 10 pes
wo yeasipyyra oy Sunrqiyosd so} (०)
Aupow
>-१७00 Jenuessa Aue Jo Uondumsuod Jo
asn ‘uonisinboe ‘fesodsip ‘uonnqiy
-stp ‘uodsues ‘oBvsois 94) asIMOIO
Jo syued ‘saouac Aq SunetnSor (p)
‘aausn{ Jo spua oy your £ pjos 10
, ued eI JT auy AJUo preme y8n0q २१ Avus Apouruto [enUassa
[/ ‘paps02ar aq ० 8प088+7 JO} “UBD ue YoryM 16 ३जउ0 ay BurpForIUOS उणु (0),,
woo sy Ang “sUYy soy भपणा
ospe pue iweutuostidul (हा aq Aeus sapio
६ oidn : st soouayo जग yous yy) Sayers “aBpnonred प्रा (Z)E एणा००५
JO ysow Joy yustuysiund : ६ “sapIpowmwos yenuassa Jo “919 ‘Atddns
uonses JO ण्गराशुणु& JO¥ say ‘uoONpord oy1 = alejnaI 01 IwOUWTIa "(5561 Jo 01) $$61 ५० ए
~peuad saquosaid (1 YONdeg -AODH [eNUED oI) stomodua (7)६ uONIEg (E+. sompourwon, Jenuossy oy £
‘ a

z I .

Jaguinu
Arpeuad UWOIID9S IY Jo ISIN) uotidsg

PY ayrjo aueyy

ONTLAMYVIN-MOV'Il GNV DNIGUVOH OL SV SNOISIAOYd AYOLNLVLS ONILSIXG

& XIGNGddV


APPENDIX 5 (contd.)

‘The Essential Commodities Act, Section 3(1)—

1955 (10 of §9$4)—~(comtd, ) “If the Central Government is of the
opinion that it is necessary to do so
for controlling the rise in prices,
or preventing the hoarding of
any foodstuff in any locality
it may, by notification, direct that
notwithstanding anyting contained
in sub-section 3, the price at which,
a food stuff shall be sold in that
locality in compliance with an order
made with reference to clause (f)
of sub-section 2, shall be regulated
im accordance with the provision
of the sub-section.

2, The Industties Section 15 empowers the Central Govern-
10 Act.) 1953 (65 ment to conduct an investigation into the
affairs of a scheduled industry under cer-

tain specified contigencies.

snd Regula 5

May Section 16(1) provides that if by virtue of
such investigation, the Central Government
is satisfied that some action is desirable, it
nay issue directions to the said industries
which may include “controlling the prices,
or regulating the distribution of any article

Section prescriines pennies
for violation of such direc-
tions: imprisonment extending
upto six months or with
fine extending to Rs. 5,000 or
with both. An additional fine
may be levied for continuing
contravention,


er class of articles which have been the
subject-matter of the investigation”.

A Sectoin 18-A provides that where such a

direction is not complied with or where

it is considered to be detrimental to the

scheduled industry or ta the public inte-

rest, the management of the industry may

be taken under the control of the Govern-
ment.

8-G (1) The Central Government, if it considers
necessary or ndient for securing the
Sirprices distribution and availability at

है! ore of any article or class of articles,
may for regulating the supply
and ees ibution thereof and commerce
therein.

{a) In particular, the Central Government
may order for controlling the prices at
which any such article or class thereof may
be bought or sold ; for regulating by li-

cences, permits or otherwise the distribu-

tion, transport, disposal, possession of

be article; for prohibiting the with-
dtgwal from sale of any such article or
sfass_ thereof ordinarily Kept. for sale ; for
requiring any person manufacturing, pro-

ducing or holding in stock any such article
to sell. the whole or part of the article to
such persons as may be specified in the
ont for requiring exhibition of the

Price-list etc.



APPENDIX 5 {contd.}

3

3. The Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953) 30

4. The Cotton Cloth Act, 1978
(23 of 1978).

42)

Section 30 of this Act closely follows the
provisions of the Industries (Development
& Regulation) Act, 1951 as referred to
above.

The object of the Act is to encourage and
* maintain the supply of cloth to poorer
classes at reasonable rates.

Section 4(2) empowers the Collector to issue
orders inter alia requiring any person; who
drdinarily manufactures cotton cloth, to
manufacture standard cloth in such quan-

UH} © tity and of such quality as the Collector

91)

1 (1)

may direct and fixing the prices to be
paid to the manufacturer for standard
“cloth.

Section 9(1) empowers the State Govern-

ment to .“fix the price at which alone a
_ Standard cloth or any class of standard
+. cloth shall be sofd to the public”.

No person shail! sell-or keep or offer-or ex-
‘pose for sale to the public, standard cloth

Section 43(1) prescribes similar
punishment as is prescribed
under section 24 of the Act 65
of 1951 referred to above with
this difference that this Act
does not prescribe additional
penalty for continuing con-
travention.

Section 8 prescribes punishment
for contravention of section 4
with imprisonment upto six
months or with fine or with
bot!

Section 10(2) punishes those con-
travening sub-section 1o(1)
with imprisonment which may
extend to six months or with
fine or with both,


otherwise than at which price as may be

fixed by the State Government. ....

1, 1942 (7 of 16 The Central Government may fix the prices
पु दि न | at which coffee be sold wholesale or retail
ria in the Indian market. No one can_ sell

coffee at a price higher than the one fixed
under this section.

5 Section 25 provides that any excess coffee
produced, shall be delivered to the Board
for inclusion in the surplus pool.

ye

6, The Preventive Detention Act, 3(1Xa)(iii) The Central Government or State Govern-
1950 (4 of 1950), ment may, with a view to prevent a per-
son from acting prejudically to ‘the main-
tanance of supplies, and services essential
Eto the community”, direct that such a per-
‘son shall be detained. Section 3(2)
enumerates some other competent au-
thorities to exercise similar powers.

7. The Rubber Act, 1947 (240f 13 Section 13 empowers the Government to
W947). NY fix.the maximum or minimum prices or
Woe 2.2 1 gee ईडी 5 the maximum and minimum prices to be
charged in the course of a business of any

oe a~-"~ class of rubber specified in the order.

eget : oo veg eecanp eats esate

: x

Section 36(1) prescribes penalties

for violation inter alia vat

sections 16-17. The punish.

ment may ext end upto a fine
of Rs. 1,000.

Section 38A prescribes punsish-
ment for violation of section
25(1) : fine upto Rs. 1,000,
and the excess produce may
also be confiscated.

Section 13(3) states that any
person who buys or sells rub-
ber at a price which is more
than the maximum price or
less than the minimum price,
shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which
may. extend to one year or
with fine or with both.



APPENDIX 5 (concld.)

3

ee

है. The Drugs (Control) Act

3950 (26 of 1950).

Act,
eae ध ०

Section 4 empowers the Chief Commissioner
to fix, in respect of any drug, the maxi-
mum price or rate to be charged by a dealer
or a producer; the maximum quantity
which may, at any time, be possessed by
a dealer or a producer.

Section 5 prohibits sale of such drugs at a
price higher than the fixed rate or to hold
more than the quantity of the drugs ex-
ceeding the maximum quantity fixed by
the Chief Commissioner under section 4.

Section 7 requires that excess stocks
should be reported to the Chief Com-
missioner.

Section 8 prohibits the refusal to sell within
the quantity prescribed.

Section 3 empowers the State Government
to declare any area to be controlled area,
fix a minimum or maximum price of su-
garcane etc,

Section 13(1) prescribes that if
any one violates the provision
of the Act, shat be  pynish-
able with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to 3
years, or with fine, or with
both.

Section 13(2) further empowers
the competent Court to order
the forfeiture.

Section 5 states thas whoever
purchases near ot a lessen
price than the one
shall be punished with fine
which may extend to Ra,
2,000,


0, The Deftnar: of india deh. Section 3(2)(37) empowers the-Central Gov-

1962 (91 af (oe).

erament to frame rules for “the preven-
tion of hoarding, profiteering, black-mar-
keting, adulteration or any other unfair
pinctioes in relation to any goods procured

yy or supplied to the Government or noti-
fied by or under the rules as essential to the
life of the community”. Ri 125(2)
(9).(b) (ob) (be) (०) of the Defence of India

les, 1962 may be seen.



APPENDIX 6

EXISTING STATUTORY PROVISIONS RELATING TO ADULTERATION OF
FOOD AND DRUGS

1. Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860)

Section Marginal note

Relevant text

272 Adulteration of food or Whoever adulterates any article of food

drink intended for sale.

or drink, so as to make such article
noxious as food ‘or. drink, intending
to sell such article as food or drink,
or knowing it to be likely that the
same will be sold as food or drink,
shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which
may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thou-
sand rupees, or with both.

273 Sale of noxious food or Whoever sells, or offers or expases for

drink.

274 Adulteration of drugs.

sale, as food or drink, any article which
has been rendtred or has become
noxious, or is in’ a state unfit for
food or drink, knowing or having
reason to believe that. the- same is
noxious as food or drink, shall. be
punished with imprisonment of either

for a term which may
extend to 6 months or with fine which
may extend -to one thousand rupees,
or with both.

Whoever adulterates any drug or ma-
dical preparation in such a ue: ro
as to lessen the efficacy or chi
the operation of such durg or medieal
preparation,.or to make it noxio'
intending that it shall be sold ‘Sr
used for, any medicinal purpose, के जा
it had not undergone such adykér-
ation, shall ‘be punished with-ii-
prisonment of either descripti
for a term which may extend tay
months, or with fine which हक ay
extend to one thousand rupee& dr
with both. alee 3

=

4 . ~


APPENDIX 6 (comd.).

Section Marginal note

Relevant‘ text

275 Sale of adulterated drugs. Whoever, knowing any drug or me-

276 Sale of drug as a different
drug or preparation.

dical preparation to have been adul-
terated in such a manner as to lessen
its efficacy, to change its operation or
to render it noxious, sells the same, or
offers or exposes it for sale, or issues
it from any dispensary for medicinal
Purposes as unadulterated, or causes
it to be used for medicinal purposes
by any person not knowing of the
adulteration, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description
fora term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may ex-
tend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.

Whoever knowingly sells, or offers or
exposes for sale, or issues from a
dispensary for medicinal purposes,
any drug or medical preparation, as
a different drug or medical preparation
shall be punished with imprisonment

. of either description for a term which
may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thou-
sand rupees, or with both.

284 Negligent conduct with Whoever, does with any poisonous
respect to poisonous'sub- substance, any act in a manner so

stance.

rash or negligent as to endanger
human life, or to be likely to cause
hurt or injury to any person,

or knowingly or negligently omits to
such care with any poisonous
substance in his possession as is
sufficient to guard against any pro-
bable danger to human life from such

poisonous substance,

shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which
may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thou-
sand rupees, or with both.



Section

‘ APPENDIX 6 {eontd.)
2. Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 19$4

(37 of 1954)

Marginal note

Relevant text

16

Penalties

(7) If any person—

(के

@)
(०

(४)

७)

Whether by himself or by any
person on his behalf imports
into India or manufactures for
sale, or stores, sells or distributes
any article of food in contra-
vention of any of the pro-
visions of this Act or of any
rule made there under, or
xxx XXX

XxX XXX

being a manufacturer of
an article of food, has in his
Possession, or in fad the
premises occupied by him, an:
material which ma: be employed
for the purpose of adulteration,
or

being a person in whose safe
custody any article of food has
been kept under sub-section
(of section 10, tampers or in

any other manner interferes with
such article, or

= =x

mx =

he shall, in addition to the pen-
alty to which he may be liable
under the provisions of section
6, be punishable—

(6) for the first offence, with

imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year, or with
fine which may extend to two
thousand rupees, or with both.

(#) for 2 second offence, with
Peels which

imprisonment fora term
my gatend to cwo years and



APPENDIE 6 (evaid)
Section Marginal note Relevant text
16 Penaleies Provided that in the absence of special
(contd) {contd.) and adequate reasons to the contrary

to be mentioned in the judgement
of the court, such imprisonment shall
not be less than one year and such
fine shall not be less than two thou-
sand rupees,

(i) for a third and subsequent
offences, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to
four years and with fine:

Provided that in the absence
of special and adequate reasons
to the contrary to be mention-
ed in the judgement of the
court, such imprisonment shall
not be less than two years
and such fine shall not be less.
than three thousand rupeess.

(3) If any person convicted of an offence
under this Act commits a like
offence afterwards it shall be law-
ful for the court before which the
second or subsequent conviction
takes place to cause the offender’s
name and pace, of residence, the
offence and the penalty imposed to be
published at the offender’s expense
in such newspapers or in such other
manner as the court may direct.
The expenses of such publication
shall be deemed to be part of the cost

attending the conviction and shell
be recoverable in the same manner
as a fine.

17 Offences by companies. (1) Wherever an offence under this Act
has been i

of, and was responsible दे ae
company for conduct ’
the walt



ies
APPENDIX 6 (comtd,}

Section Marginal note Relevant text
WW Offences by ~ as the company, shall be deemed
(contd.) companies to be guilty of the offence and
(conid.) shall be liable to be proceeded

against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained
in this sub-section shali render
any such person liable to any
punishment provided in this Act
if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due dili~
gence to prevent the commission
of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything con-
tained in sub-section (7) where an
offence under this Act has been
committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable
to any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary of
other officer shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished

मर accordingly. Explanation—For the
not purposes of this section—

(a) “Company” means any body
corporate, and includes
a firm or other association
of individuals ; and

(6) “director” in relation to
=“ a firm means a partner in
the firm.

18 Forfeiture of property. Where any person has been convicted
under this Act for the contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule thereunder, the article of
food in respect of which the contra-
vention has been committed may be
forfeited to the Government.



19
APPENDIX 6 (contd.)

Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930
हैं: of 1930)

Section Marginal note Relevant text

6 Control of Central Govern- (1) No one shall manufacture any manu-
ment over manufacture factured drug, other than prepared
of manufactured drugs. opium, save in accordance with rules

made under sub-section (2) and with
the conditions of any licence for
that purpose which he may be re-
quired to obtain under those rules.

(2) The Central Government may
make rules permitting and regula-
ting the manufacture of manufac-
tured drugs, other than prepared
opium, and such rules may prescribe
the form and conditions of licences
for such manufacture, the autho-
tities, by which such licences may
be granted and the fees that may be
charged therefor, and any other
matter requisite to render effective
the control of the Central Govern-
ment over such manufacture,

(3) Nothing in this section shall apply
to the manufacture of medicinal
opium or of preparations containing
morphine, diacetylmorphine or co-
caine from _ materials which the
maker is lawfully entitled to possess.

12 Punishment for contra- Whoever, in contravention of section
vention of section 6. 6, or any rule made under that section,

or any Condition of a licence granted

thereunder, manufactures any manu-

factured drug, shall be punishable

with imprisonment which may extend

to three years, with or without fine.

16 Enhanced _ punishment Whoever, having been convicted of an
for certain offences af- offence punishable under section 10,

ter previous conviction. —_ section 12, section 13, or section 14;

is guilty of any offence punishable

under any of those sections, shall be

subject or every such subsequent

offence to imprisonment which may

rend to four years, with or without

47 Law—9. i - we


120
APPENDIX 5 (contd.)

4. Opiugs Act, 1857
G3 of 1857)

Section Marginal note Relevant text

¥4 Confiscation of adulterated When opium delivered by a cultivator
opium. either to a receiving officer, or at
the sadar factory, is suspected of
being adulterated with any foreign
substance it shall be immediately
sealed up pending examination by
the Opium Examiner, and notice
of such intended examination shall
be given to the cultivator.

If upon such examination the opium
shall be found to be so adulterated
the Agent on the report of the Exa-
miner may order that it be confiscat-
ed, and the order of the Agent shall
be final and not open to question
in any Court.

5. Drugs (Control) Act, 1950
(26 of 1950)
None.

6. Poisons Act, 1919
(12 of 1919)
None.

7. Drugs Act, 1940
(23 of 1949)

12 Power of Central Govern- (1) The Central Government may, after
Ment to make rules. consultation with the Board and
after previous publication by notifica~
tion the Official Gazette, make
rules for the purpose of giving effect
to the provisions of this Chapter ;

Provided that....said rules.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing power, such rules
may—

(७) xxx XXX XXX

(8) prescribe the methods or iest
or analysis to be émployed in
determining whether a drug is of
standard quality;



Section wal note

pps! lt
NDIX 6

fe

(Conta)

Relevant text

Sn

3 Power of Ceiitral Govern-
(contd.) ment to make rules (contd.)

2

13 Offences .

fc) xxx XXK XXX
(d) xxx XXX xxx
(e) xxx XXX XEX
Cf) xxx XXX XXX
(g) XXX XXX XXX
(h) xxx XXX ऋण
(i) xxx xxx XEX
(7) झड़ XxX XXX

(k) prescribe the conditions to be
observed in the packing in bot-
ues, packages or other contai~
ners, of imported drugs;

@® xxx XXX = -KXX,

(m) prescribe the maximum propor-
tion of any poisonous substance
which may be added to or contain-
ed in any imported drugs, prohibit
the import of any drug in which
that proportion is exceeded, and
specify substances which shall
be deemed to be poisonous for
the purposes of this Chapter and
the rules made thereunder;

(n) xxx XXX XEX

(0) xxx XXX XXX

. (1) Whoever contravenes any of the

provisions of this Chapter or of any
rule made thereunder shall, in ad-~
dition to any penalty to which he
may be liable under the provision of
section 11, be punishable with im-
prisonment which may extend to
one year, gr with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, of
with both.

(2) Whoever, having been convicted

under sub-section (7), is again con-
victed under that sub-section shall,
in addition to any penalty as afore-
said, be punishable with imprison-
ment which may extend to two years,
or with fine which may extend to
one thousand rupees, or with both.

(Note :—Section. 11 relates to powers
of Customs

Officers under
Sea Customs Act, 1878) -

rt,


122

APPENDIX 6 (contd.)

ft “MM >)>a>s>a—?WNNNFE
न
Section Marginal note Relevant text ~~...
14 Confiscation . . Where any offence punishabie under

section 13 has been committed, the
consignment of the drugs in respect
of which the offence has been com-
mitted shall be liable to confisca-
tion.

17. Misbranded drugs . For the purposes of this Chapter a drug
shall be deemed to be misbranded—

(a) if it is an imitation of, or substi-
tute for, or resembles in a manner
likely to deceive, another drug
or bears upon it or upon its label
or container the name of another
drug, unless it is plainly and ccn-
spicuously marked so as to re veal
its true character and its lack
of identity with such other drug;
or

(6) if it purports to be the product of a
place or country of which it is
not truly a product ; or

(०) if it is sold, or offered or exposed
for sale, under a name which be-
longs to another drug ; or

(d) if'it is so coloured, coated, powdered
or polished that damage is con-
cealed, or if it is made to appear
of better or greater therapeutic
value than it really is ; or

(2) if it is not labelled in the pres-
cribed manner ; or

(f) if its label or container or anything
accompanying the drug bears any
statement, design or device which
makes any false claim for the drug
or which is false or misleading in
any particular ; or

(g) if the label or container bears the
name of an individual or company
purporting to be the manufacturer
or producer of the drug which
individual or company is ficti-
tious or does not exist.



323
APPENDIX 6 (contd.)

Section Marginal note Relevant text

18 Prohibition of manufac- | From such date as may be fixed by the
ture and sale of certain State Government by notification in
drugs. the Official Gazette in this be

half, no person shall himself or by
any other person on his behalf—

(a) manufacture for sale, or sell, or
stock or exhibit for sale, or dis-
tribute—

(2) any drug which is not of stan-
dard quality;

(ii) any misbranded drug;

(iif) any patent or proprietary medi-
cine unless there is displayed in
the prescribed manner on the
label or container thereof the
true formula or list of ingre-
dients contained in it in a
manner readily intelligible to
the members of the medical
profession ;

(iv) any drug which by means of any
statement, design or device ac-
companying it or by any other
Means, purports or claims to
prevent, cure or mitigate any
such disease or ailment, or to
have any such other effect as
may be prescribed;

(v) any drug, in contravention of any
of the provisions of this Chap-
ter or any rule made there-
under;

(8) sell, or stock, or exhibit for sale, or
distribute any drug which has
been imported or manufactured
in contravention of any of the pro-
visions of this Act or any rule made
thereunder;

© * 7 8 # *

Provided that....the medicine, _ ह 1

eee



A
APPENDIX 6 (contd.

Section Marginal note Relevant text

27 Penalty for manufacture, Whoever himself or by any other person
sale, etc. of drugs in on his behalf manufactures for sale,
contravention of this sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or dis-
Chapter. tributes any drug—-

(a) deemed to be misbranded under
clause (a), clause (6), clause (c),
clause (d), clause {f) or clause (g)
of section 17 shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than one
year, but which may extend to three
years and shall also be liable to
fine:

Provided that the Court may, for any
special reason to be recorded in writ~
ing, impose a sentence of imprison-
ment of less than one year;

(8) other than a drug referred to in
clause (a) in contravention of any
of the provisions of this Chapter
or any rule made thereunder shalt
be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both,

28 Penalties for giving false (1) Whoever in respect of any drug
warranty or misuse of sold by him gives to the purchaser a
warranty. false warranty that the drug does not

in any way contravene the provisions

of section 18 shall, unless he proves
that when he gave the warranty he
had good reason to believe the same
to be true, be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to
one year, or with fine which may ex-
fend to five hundred rupees, or with

(2) Whoever applies or permits to be
applied to any drug sold, or stocked
or exhibited for sale, by him, whether
on the container or label or in any
other manner, a warranty given in
respect of any other drug, shal! be pu-
nishable with imprisonment which
may extend to one year, or with fine
which may extend to five hundred
rupees, or with both.



cd
APPENDIX 6 (contd.)

Section Marginal note Relevant text

30 Penalty for subsequent (2), Whoever, having been convicted ofan
offences. offence—

(व) under clause (4) of section 27 is
again convicted of an offence under
that clause, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than two
years but which may extend to
five years and shall also be liable
to fine,

Provided that the Court may, for any
special reasons to be recorded in
writing, impose a sentence of less
than two years;

(0) under clase (७) of section 27, is
again convicted of an offence under
that clause shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to five years, or
with fine, or with both.

(2) Whoever, having been convicted
of an offence under section 28 or sece
tion 29 is again convicted of an
offence under the same section shall
be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both.

(Nore.—Section 29 deals with penalty
for use of Govt. analysis report
for advertising).

31 Confiscation, (1) Where any person has been con-
victed under this Chapter for con-
travening any such provision of this
Chapter or any rule made thereunder
as may be specified by rule made in
this behalf, the stock of the drug in
respect of which the contravention has
been made shall be liable to con-
fiscation.

{2} Without prejudice to the provisions
contained in sub-section (z), any
drug in respect of which the Court is
satisfied, on the application of an
Inspector or otherwise and after such
inquiry as may be necessary, that
the drug is not of standard quality
or is a misbranded drug, shall be
liable to confiscation,



326

APPENDIX 6 (contd.)

Section Marginal note

Relevant text

32 Cognizance of offences

34 Offences by companies

35 Publication of sentence
passed under this Act.

(x) No prosecution under this Chapter
shall

be instituted except by an Ins-
pector.

(2) No Court inferior to that _ of a Pre-
sidency Magistrate or of a Magistrate
of the first class shall try an offence
punishable under this Chapter.

(3) Nothing contained in this Chapter
shall be deemed to prevent any per-
son from being prosecuted under any
other law for any act or omission
which constitutes an offence against

this Chapter.

Same as section 17 of Food Adulteration
Act, 1964.

(1) If any person is convicted of an
offence under this Act, it shall be
lawful for the Court before which the
conviction takes place to cause the
offender’s name, place of residence,
the offence of which he has been
convicted and the penalty which has
been inflicted upon him, to be pub-
lished at the expense of such person
in such newspapers or in such other
manner as the Court may direct.

(2) The expenses of such publication
shall be deemed to form part of the
costs relating to the conviction and
shall be recoverable in the same
manner as those costs are recover-
al न



APPENDIX

EXISTING STATUTORY PROVISIONS AS TO THEFT AND MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND FUNDS

The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947

Name of the Act Section Gist of the section Penalty
number
0) (2) (3) (4)

i. The Prevention of Corruption

_ Act, 1947 (2 of 1947).

5 Section 5(1)(c) provides that a public ser-
will be considered to have com-
mitted the offence or criminal misconduct
if he dishonestly or fraudulently mis-
appropriates or otherwise converts for
his own use any property entrusted to
him or under his control or allowing any
other person so to do.

Section $(2) punishes such a
person with imprisonment for
a term not less than one year
but it may extend to seven
years and shall also be liable
to fine. A discretion is, how-
ever, given to the court to
award a sentence less than one
year for any special reason to
be recorded in writing. Accord-
ing to section 5(2)A, the amount
involved in such a misappro-
priation, will have to be taken
into consideration in fixing
the fine.

rm
is
3


APPENDIX 7 (contd.)

(0) (2)

(3)

(4)

The Prevention of Corruption Act, 5(3)
1947 (contd.)

2. The Criminal Law (Amend+ 61
ment) Act, 1962.

3.'The Indian Post Office ‘Act, $2
1898 (6 of 1898),

Ditto - $6

Section 5(3) introduces a presumption that
where an accused or any person on his
behalf is in possession of pecuniary re-
sources or property disproportionate to
his known source of income, he will be
deemed to be guilty of misconduct unless
he has satisfactorily explained.

Section 61 empowers the State Govern-
ment to appoint special judges to try cor-
ruption and misappropriation cases under
sections 161—165 and 165A, Indian Penal
Code and section 5(2) of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1947.

’ Section 2 states that any officer who com-

mits theft or dishonestly misappropriates
any postal article shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to seven years and shall also be
punishable with fine. Postal article is
defined in s. 2(1).

Section 56 makes it an offence for those
postal employees who post or put into
any postal article without paying the re-
quired charges, intending thereby to de-
fraud the Government of the postage.

The punishment may extend to
Imprisonment upto two years
or with fine or with both.

as


4. The Railway Stores (Unlawful
Possession) Act, 1955 (51 of
1955)

5. The Navy Act, 3957
(62 of 1957).

6. The Air Force Act, 1950 (45
of 1950).

67

$2

Section 3 provides that if any person is
found in possession of any article of rail-
way stores, reasonably suspected of being
stolen or unlawfully obtained and cannot
account satisfactorily for the same, shall
be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years or
with fine or with both.

Section 67 prescribes that any person sub-
ject to naval law, who breaks bulk on
board any vessel taken as a prize, with
intent dishonesty to misappropriate any-
thing therein, shall be punished with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend
to two years.

Section 36B states that any person, subject
to this act, breaks into any house etc. in
search of a plunder, shail be punished
with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to 14 years or such less pun-
ishment as is otherwise provided in this
Act. If the offence is committed while
not in active service, the maximum pun-
ishment that can be awarded is seven
years,

Section 52 provides that any person subject
to this Act, who commits any of the follow-
ing offences, that is to say—

(०) commits theft of any property be-
to the Government or to any
Military, Naval or Air Force mess;

or

Gal


APPENDIX 7 (contd.)

(4)

(1) (2) @)
The Air Force Act, 198० (45 of 1950) (6) dishonestly misappropriates or con-
{contd.) verts to his own use any such pro-
perty; or

(c) commits criminal breach of trust in

respect of any such property; or
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any
such property in respect of which any
of the offences referred to above,
knowing or having reason to believe
the commission of such offence. ...
shall be punished with imprisonment
extending upto ten years or such less
punishment as in this Act is men-

t
Section 67 makesan attempt to commit any
such offence punishable for a term which
may extend to one half of the longest term
provided for that offence or such less
punishment as is mentioned in this Act.
But for an attempt to become an offence,
some act should be done towards the
commission of the offence.

The Army Act contains almost similar pro-

visions as in the Air Force Act, 1950.

Ditto 67

7. The Army Act, 1950 (46 of
1950).

See section 36B, section 52 and section 66,


8. The Assam Rifles Act,
1941 (5 of 1941).

9, The Central Reserve Police oJ
Force Act, 1949 (66 of 1949)

14

10. The Indian Forest Act, 1927 3300
(46 of 1927).

a1. The Indian Reserve Force 6

Act, 1888 (4 of 1888).

man plunders, destroys or damages any
property of any kind.

Section 9J provides, inter alia, that every
member of the force on active duty, who
breaks into any house or other place for
plunder or plunders, destroys or damages
property of any kind, shall be punishable
with transportation for life etc.

Section 14 provides that whenever any wea-
pon, part of the weapon or ammunition is
Jost or stolen, the Commandant may im-
pose a colfective fine upon subordinate
officers and men of such unit whom he
considers to be responsible for such a loss

or theft.

Section 3x 1) provides for certain offences

which partake of the character of

theft and piseppropri riation of public pro-

perty. The ent may extend to

six months’ imprisonment or fine up to
Rs. 500 or with both.

Section 6 states that if a person belonging to
the Reserve Forces, fraudulently obtains
any pay or other sum,{contrary to any rule

onconviction by Court-

Martial, be punishablefasithe court under

“Q” Section 7 “Q” makes it an offence if a rifle The punishment may extend to

one year or with fine up to
Rs, 200 or with both



APPENDIX 7 (contd.)

@

@

@)

The Indian Reserve Force Act,
1888 (contd.)

12, Administration of Evacuee
Property Act, 1950.

13. The Indian Electricity Act,
1910 (9 of 1910).

14. The Indian Penal Code (.
of 1860). 45

32

49

389

the Army Act can award. But this
punishment shall be short of death,
transportation. or imprisonment exceeding
one year,

Section 32 states that any person who un-
lawfully converts to his own use any
evacuee property, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may
fxtend to three years or with fine or with

Section 39 states that whoever dishonestly
abstracts, Consumes or uses any energy,
shall be deemed to have committed theft
within the: meaning of the Indian Penal
Code and the existence of artificial means
for such an abstraction shall be presumed
to be evidence of such an abstraction.

Section 49 extends the application of section
39 to cases where the energy is supplied
to works belonging to Central or State
Governments.

Section 389 provides that whoever, being a
clerk or servant, commits theft in respect
of any property in the possession of his
master or employer, shall be punished with

@


imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to 7 years and
shall also be liable to fine.

495 Section 405 provides that whoever, entrust- Section 406 prescribes punish-
ed with property, dishonestly misappro- ment for criminal breach of
Priates or converts to his own use that pro trust: imprisonment of either
perty or dishonestly uses or disposes of description for a term which
the property in violation of any direction May extend to 3 years, or with
of the law ete., he will be deemed to have _fine, or with both.
committed criminal breach of trust. One
of the illustrations given under this secticn
is: “A, a revenue officer, is entrusted
with public money and he is directed by
law, or bound by a contract, expressed or
implied, with a Government to pay into
certain treasury all the public money which
he holds. A dishonestly appropriates the
money. A has committed criminal breach.
of trust.”

407 Section 407 provides that whoever, being
entrusted with a property as a carrier,
wharfinger or warehouse-keeper, commits
criminal breach of trust in respect of such
Property, shall be punished with impri-
sonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine.

408 Section 408 states that whoever, being a
clerk or servant, entrusted in such capacity
with property commits criminal breach of



APPENDIX 7 (coneld.)

(1) (2)

@)

(4)

The Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860) (conzd.)

409

1§.The Indian Telegraph Act, 25
1885 (13 of 1885).

25A

27

trust in respect of that property, shall be

punished with imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend

seven years and shall also be liable to
ine.

Section 409 provides that whoever, being in
any manner entrusted with property in his
capacity of a public servant etc., commits
criminal breach of trust in respect of that
property, shall be punished with impri-
sonment for life or imprisonment of
either description for a term which may
gxtend to ten years, shall also be liable to

2.

If any person intending, inter alia, to commit
mischief, damages, removes, tampers with.
or touches any battery, machinery tele-

graph lines etc., it is an offence.

Section 25A makes provision for punishment

and fine against those who wilfully or
negligently damage any telegraph mater-

Section 27 punishes telegraph officers who,

with an intention to defraud Government,
send messages without paying the required
charges.

Punishment may extend to im-
prisonment upto three years,
or with fine, or with both.

The punishment sriay extend to
imprisonment upto three years,
or with fine, or with both.


33 Section 33 makes provision for appointment
of additional police force in those areas
where ‘wrongtel damage to telegraph
property is repeatedly and maliciously
committed. The expenses involved in the
employment of such police force are to be
borne by the inhabitants of such place.

16. The Telegraph Wires (Unlaw- 5 Section 5 provides that whosoever is in The punishment may extend to
ful Possession) Act, 1950 possession of any quantity of telegraph imprisonment upto 5 years, or
(74 of 1950). wires shail be punishable, unless he proves with fine, or with both!.

that they are in possession lawfully.

1 The offence is regarded as graver
than theft. See Banchhanidhi v.
State है नर, 1959 Orissa 177, 179,
para 10.


APPENDIX 8

EXISTING STATUTORY PROVISIONS RELATING TO TRAFFICKING IN
LICENCES, PERMITS, ETC.

There are no direct provisions on the subject of trafficking in liceases..
The provisions of the following enactments, however, may be noted.

Industries etc. Act, 195%

Sections 11, 11 (a), 12 6), 13 18 (G) (1)@), read with section 24 which
is the general penalty section, and section ५ which is the penal section er
false statements. See also section 30 (1), @) (7), (9 (9 (m) and (४).

The Imporis and Exports (Control) Contravention, etc., of an order made
Act (18 of 1947) section 3(1) under the Actor any condition:
read with section 5 which isthe of a licence granted under arty
penalty section. such order is an offence punish-

able with an imprisonment upto one

year or with fine or with both. The

previous decisions as to whether a

breach of condition of a licence would

amount to an offence* are now

obsolete after the amendment Act (4

of 1960). The goods can also be

confiscated under section 3(2) read
with the Customs Act. See A.LR.

1957 S.C. 648 on this point.

The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (7 of 1947) section 4 (1), section
8(1), sections 21 and 22 (contracts in evasion of the Act, and false statement).
Penalty is dealt with by section 23 for various situations, and also by section
23A.

NorTE :—Sometimes such offences may fall under sections 420, 467, 457 1.F.C.
also, if permit books have been tampered with?.

1A.LR. 1957 Cal. 33.
A.LR. 1957 Cal. 606.
°Cf, State of A. P. v. Subbaiah A. 1. R. 1961


APPENDIX 9

PROVISIONS OF THE DEFENCE OF INDIA RULES—1G62 RELEVANT OR
ANALOGOUS TO THE OFFENCES IN QUESTION

Rule
1

Gist
2

35 (6) (h), g 0) (0, (0, 07), 00,

0) an
36
37
4l

125

Certain “prejudicial acts”.

Sabotage.
Receiving of sabotage property.

Prohibition of prejudicial acts, publi-
cations and communications (punish-
ment is imprisonment) upto five
years or fine, or both.

General control of industry. Under
sub-rule (9), penalty for contravention
of an order under thi - imprson
ment upto three years or fine or both-
If the contravention is made by re-
sorting to any corrupt practice or
other malafide action or by inducing
any person to abuse his authority,
then imprisonment may extend to
seven years. Forfeiture to Govern-
ment of the property in respect of
which an order passed under the rule
is contravened, is allowed for if the
order so provides.

Defence of India Rules

126A to 126Z

132

133

Gold Control Rules.

Prohibition regarding coins and notes.
This is to be read with s. 13, Indian
Coinage Act, 1906 (3 of 1906).

Regulation of dealings in security.
(Government securities are defined
in section 2 of the Public Debt Act,

1944).

137


APPENDIX 10

LisT OF CENTRAL ACTS PERTAINING TO ANTI-SOCIAL OFFENCES,
OTHER THAN OFFENCES LISTED BY THE SANTHANAM COMMITTEE

+ Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 (19 of 1929).

- The Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933 (2 of 1933), and other
Acts regarding labour.

- The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisemens)
Act, 1954 (21 of 1954).

+ The Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955 (22 of 1955).

+ The Spiritous Preparations (Inter-State Trade and Commerce) Con-
trol Act, 1955 (39 of 1955).

» The Prize Competitions Act!, 1955 (42 of 1955).
» The Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, 1956 (93 of 1956).

- The Orphanages and other Charitable Homes (Supervisions and
Control) Act, 1960 (10 of 1960).

. The Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

1 See State v. Bennet Coleman & Co. A.I.R. 19$4 Bom. 213.

138


APPENDIX 11

PROVISIONS OF THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 (43 OF 1961) REFERRED TO IN
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION—PAGE
271 (MIDDLE) AS OFFERING SCOPE FOR EVASION

Section Number
(1)

Gist of the Section
2)

10(3)

10(4)

Ir

13

37

Excludes from total income receipts of
casual and non-recurring nature (un-
less they are capital gains or receipts
arising from business or exercise of
a profession or receipts by way of
addition to the remuneration of an
employee).

Excludes from total income in the case
of non-residents income from interest
etc. on bonds issued by the Central
Government under a loan agreement
with the international bank etc. or
bonds similarly issued by a Financial
Corporation ete.

Excludes from total income (subject to
the provisions of sections 60 to 63)
income from property held for chari-
table or religious purposes.

Excludes the application of section
It in certain cases (roughly speaking
in respect of property held for a
private religious purpose, where
the trust does not ensure for the bene-
fit of the public, and trust or charitable
institution created for the benefit
of any particular religious community
or caste or for the author of trust or
his relative).

Allows expenditure (subject to certain
exceptions) laid out or expended
wholly and exclusively for the pur-
poses of the business or profession.



140

APPENDIX 11 (contd,)

@

@)

52

60

64

67

68

73
74
92

93
94

104

Deals with acquisition of capital asset
from an assessee, where the person
acquiring is directly or indirectly
connected with the object of avoidance
or reduction of the liability of the
assessee under section 45. Section 45
provides for charge of income-tax or
capital gains.

Provides that all income—arising by
virtue of a transfer whether revo-
- cable or not, shall be chargeable to
income-tax as the transferor’s income
where there ts no transfer of the assets
(as to the meaning of “ transfer”,
see section 63).

Provides that in computing the total
income of any individual, there
shall be included all such income as
arises directly or indirectly to the
spouse or minor child of such in-
dividual through membership of a
firm or from assets transfered to
the spouse or minor child.

Deals with method of computing a
rtner’s share in the income of the
rm.

Deals with cash credits.
Deals with unexplained investments.
Deals with losses in speculation business.

Deals with losses under capital gains.

Contain special provisions relating to
avoidance of tax, mainly in relation to
non-residents and in relation to sale
or purchase back of securities, and
other transactions involving securi-
ties.

Deals with super tax on undistributed
income.



APPENDIX 12

SUMMARY OF CERTAIN POINTS aS TO TAX EVASION EIC., DISCUSSED IN THE
Report oF IncoMsE-rax INVESTIGATION COMMISSION, 1949 PRESIDED OVER
BY SHRI VARDACHARIAR

The Income-tax Investigation Commission, constituted under the
Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act (30 of 1947);
was required to investigate and report on all matters relating to taxa-
tion on income, with particular reference to the extent to which the
existing law etc. was adequate to prevent the evasion thereof. Ques-
tions 33 to 37 of the Questionnaire issued by the Commission (pages
269 and 270 of the Report) specifically dealt with certain matters
concerning evasion. In its Report the Commission dealt with evasion
and avoidance at various places. The important points are sum-
marised below:

Page of the Report Gist

7. पु : पु पु . Distinction between avoidance and
** evasion *”

“79 to 83 (paragraphs 181 to 183) Avoidance and evasion.
See also page 21, paras. 47, 86, Under-statement of income on re-
and 193. turns described as one of the principal
ways of practising fraudulent eva-
sion.

Pages 103 to 105, paras. 231 10 236 Income-tax offences,



APPENDIX 13

Points AS TO EVASION AND AVOIDANCE DISCUSSED IN THE REPORT OF THE
TAXATION ENQuIRY COMMISSION (1953-54)

«@) (2)

Report, Vol. II, pages 189 and 190, Evasion i.e, deliberate distortion of
paras. 1 to 6 (contain a general facts after the liability is incurred
discussion on the subject), asto and avoidance i.e. so arranging one’s
income tax, affairs before the liability is incurred

so as to prevent its occurrence or
to reduce the incidence of the tax
have been discussed.

Avoidance, though legal, was regarded.
as anti-social. It was suggested, that
the Department should keep a vigi-
lant eye on inroads into revenue
by avoidance, so that prompt reme-
dial action by Jegislation is taken by
Government.

As regards evasion, it was stated that
it could be tackled effectively only
by improving and strengthening the
enforcement machinery, the existing
arrangements were reviewed under
the following heads :—

@) administrative measures adopted
for tracing ‘new’ assessees (i.e.
those who have taxable incomes
but fail to send in  returns),,
and for verifying the accuracy
of the returns submitted by exist-
ing assessees, by

{a) external survey;

(6) exchange of information collected
from the records of existing
assessees available in the In-
come-tax Department;

(c) Collection and collation of in-
formation obtaining from out-
side sources (including infor-
mers);

142


143

APPENDIX 13 (contd.)

(1)

(2)

Report, Vol. II, pages 189 and 190, (सर) Special arrangements for dealing:

paras. 7 to 6—{contd.)

with cases of substantial eva-
sion; वि

(iii) legal provisions for enforcing ‘back
duty’, ic, section 34 of the
Income-tax Act, ete.;

(iv) public censure as a remedy for
evasion;

(v) proper representation in income-
tax proceedings;

(vi) strict enforcement of collections;
and

(vit) voluntary disclosure of conceal-
ments.

Report, Vol. II, page 202, paras. 36 Recommendations were made to in-

and 37 (Income-tax.}

Report, Vol. If, page 320, para. 11

(Customs duties).

crease the maximum limit of penalty
to three times the amount of tax.
evaded and to provide that abetment
or instigation to evasion should be
made an offence punishable as the
main offence. It was also observed,
that prosecutions under sections 51
and 52 of the Income-tax Act, 1922
were seldom resorted to in actual
practice.

Certain recommendations were made
/ as to the law relating to smug-

Report, Vol. II, pages 353—361, Summarises the various recommenda-

paras. 142 to 197.

tions relating to evasion and avoid-
dance. Most of these concern ad-
munustrative matters or topics.

Report, Vol. III, pages 72, 73,74, Discusses the reasons for evasion and

Paras. 19, 20, 21 (Sales Tax).

avoidance of sales-tax. (See also

Pages 49 and 65, para. 5). At page

72, para. 19, the practice of show-

ing the sales-tax separately in the

cash memo is also discussed as a

source of evasion. At page 74,

the following categories of methods-

of evasion are listed: —

(7) Manipulation of accounts; omis-
sion of some of the taxable:
sales from books and records;.
suppression of other transactions.



144

APPENDIX

13 (concld.)

(1)

2

Report, Vol. III, pages 72, 73> 74>
paras. 19, 20, 27 (sales Tax) (contd.)

@)

‘Report, Vol. III, page 99, 7!
(Stamp duties).

(e.g. purchases) in the light of
which the sales can be verified;
under-estimation of production,
imports and sales by manufac-
turers and importers; falsified,
entries in declaration forms and
certificates; showing separately
sales of bullion and sales of ser-
vices even when ready-made
gold, and silver ornaments are
sold; and

Carrying on business without re-
gistration; splitting up of business
so that the turnover may
be below the taxable limit;
changing place of business, name
of firm, etc., when assessment
becomes due, or disappearing
altogether from the jurisdiction
of the particular State.

ara. 12 Observes that since stamp duty is

levied on the instrument, it is theore-
tically possible that the party may
refrain from executing the instrument,
but the scope of such evasion is very
limited, as an instrument would later
be required as legal proof. But

undervaluing the transaction is a com-
mon method of evasion, Another
common method was to show a
type of instrument which was not
in conformity with actual facts (e.g.
pro-note instead of a bond). Prac-
tice of blank transfers was mentioned
as an example of “avoidance”.



APPENDIX 14

SUMMARY OF THE POINTS MADE IN “InoIAN Tax REFORM” BY
Mr. Katpor, Department or Economic Arrarrs, Muvis-
TRY OF Finance, GOVERNMENT oF InpIa (1956)

One of the problems dealt with in the Report of Mr.
Kaldor was the problem of tax evasion. The matter” was
dealt with at pages 103 to 115 of his Report. The possible L
remedies, considered by him are summarised below:—

(i), his proposals or resubmission of a single’ per-
sonal tax, with a number of different taxes which were
bound to reduce the “incentive to evade”,

(Page 106, para. 189 of the Report).

(i) Proposal for the submission of a comprehen-
sive return concerning the personal income of each
tax-payer and the introduction of a reporting system
on all capital transactions by means of tax vouchers.

(Page 109, para. 194 of the Report).

(iti) Compulsory auditing of accounts of tax-
payers whose income exceeds a certain minimum.

(Page 107, para. 197 of the Report).
(iv) Status and obligations of auditors,
(Page 111, para. 198 of the Report).

Mr. Kaldor’s Report
(०) Scrutiny of accounts by the Department.
(Page 112, para. 201 of the Report).
(vi) Prevention through deterrents,

{Pa cy ats para. 2 of the pert). ¢ adm:
4५ ovement of st inistra-
tion in the Department ४ 8 stra

(Page 114, para, 205 of the Report).
(vtid) Gold hoarding and taxation.
(Pages 115 to 120, Paragraphs 206 to 218 of the
Report).
APPENDIX 15

‘TAX EVASION—PROSECUTIONS Oy INDIA FOR-EXTRACTS yROM
Report or tHe Dirgcr Taxgs ADMIVISTRATION Enquiry
ConmmrrTeR (1958-59) .

{Pages 150 and 169-170, para. 7.12 and 7.63, 7.64).

“7.12. One important reason for the prevalence of evasion Absence of
stated to be that in actual practice no deterrent punish- eae nt
ment like imprisonment is being meted out to tax evaders

45,


146

APPENDIX 15 (contd.)

when they are caught. Though the direct taxes Acts pro-
vide for prosecution and imprisonment in cases of conceal-
ment and false statements in declarations, the Department
has not, during the last 10 years, got even a single person
convicted for evasion. It is seen that prior to 1939, prose-
cutions were being freely resorted to in suitable cases. We
feel that unless it is brought home to the potential tax
evader, that attempts at concealment will not only not pay
but also actually land him in jail, there could be no effective
check against evasion. At present, a tax evader even if
caught, has only to pay the tax sought to be evaded and a
pereentage thereof as penalty. Though the maximum
penalty leviable is 150 percent of the tax sought to be
evaded such a high penalty is rarely levied. Even the mode-
rate penalties levied by the assessing officers are reduced to
nominal sums by appellate authorities. Both these factors,
the non-resort to prosecution and the non-levy of deterrent
penalties have, no doubt, encouraged the growth of evasion.

“7.63. We have suggested in para. 7.60 that in the matter
of levying penalties, a distinction should be made be-
tween the different kinds of defaults and offences, and
that the penalties leviable should be specified in a detailed
schedule. In our opinion, a similar distinction shoald be
made in the matter of requiring the prior approval of the
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner for levying penalties,
and such approval should be obligatory only in cases of
more serious offences, where the quanta of penalties levi-
able are heavier. Further, the Inspecting Assistant Com-
missioner should be statutorily req uired to give a hearing
to the assessees before according his approval to the levy
of penalty in such cases. In order to avoid unduly long
delays in the finalisation of penalty proceedings, we also
recommend that the law should be amended so as to re-
quire such proceedings to be completed within one year
of the passing of the relevant assessment order or of the
appellate order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner
or the Appellate Tribunal or of the revision order of the
Commissioner, as the case may be.

“7.64. Section 51 of the Income-tax Act and the corres-
ponding sections of the other direct taxes Acts provide for
the prosecution of a person who fails, without reasonable
cause or excuse, to deduct taxes at source and pay them to
the Government or to furnish such certificates, returns
or statements, or to allow inspections as required under the
Acts. He is punishable, on conviction before a magistrate,
with fine which may extend to Rs. 10 for every day of de-
fault. Under Section 52 of the Income-tax Act, if a person
makes a false statement in the verification contained in the
return of income, the return of dividends, application for
registration, appeals, etc., he is punishable, on conviction
before a Magistrate, with simple imprisonment which may
extend to six months or with fine which may extend to-


Of. Sections
427 and 431
Indian Penal
Code,

Section 126
Railway Act,

Wi
APPENDIX 15 (concld.)
Rs. 1,000 or both. The period of imprisonment prescribed
in the other direct taxes Acts for such offences, is, however,
one year.”

APPENDIX 16

EXTRACTS FROM THE CRIMINAL 2008 07 THE HUNGARIAN
People’s Repustic, 1962

Section 124

(1) Whoever causes considerable prejudice by his acti-
vity in the province of his office, service or public charge
in order to undermine or weaken the state, social or econo-
mic order of the Hungarian People’s Republic or does so by
omission in his duty or by not doing it properly, shall be
punished with loss of liberty ranging from five to twelve
years,

(2) Punishment shail be loss of liberty ranging from
ten years to fifteen years, or death, if—

(a) the crime has caused particularly grave pre-
judice; :

(b) the crime has been committed in times of war.

(3) Whoever carries out a preparatory act for sabotage,
shall be punished with loss of liberty ranging from six
months to five years and in times of war with loss of liberty
ranging from two years to eight years.

Section 125

(1) Whoever destroys, renders useless or damages a
public facility, plant, production unit, general traffic, tele-
communication plant or equipment, public building or
structure, stock of products or produce, war material or
other property of similar importance by its purpose, and
does so with the aim of weakening the state, social or
economic order of the Hungarian People’s Republic, shall
be punished with loss of liberty ranging from five years to
twelve years,

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
ten years to fifteen years or death, if—

(a) the crime has caused particularly grave pre-
judice;

(b) the crime has been committed in a manner
causing public danger or

(6) in times of war.

(3) Whoever carries out a preparatory act for destruc-
tion, shall be punished with loss of liberty ranging from
six months to five years and in.times of war with loss of
liberty ranging from two years to eight years.

Sabotage.

Destruction,


Abuse of
Official
Power,

Trading in
influence,

Crime
committed
with harmful
articles of
general
consumption,

‘Traffic in
drugs.

148

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)
Section 144

An official person who infringes his official duty, ex- cy.
ceeds his power or abuse his official position in any way OX «
in order to cause unlawful prejudice or to procure an un- Breve पका
lawful advantage for himself or for another, shall be Act, 1947
punished with loss of liberty not exceeding three years. and Section
166, Indian
Section 153 Penal Code.
(1) Whoever demands, asks or accepts for himself or for
another an advantage for using his real or pretended influ-
ence with an official person shall be punished with loss of
liberty not exceeding three years.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from six
months to five years if the person trading in such influence—-

(a) has alleged or pretended that he will bribe an हु
official person or atcotd an advantage to him; . Seqtions
164,
(9) when committing the act or using his influence Jodian
has pretended to be an official person. Code,

(3) Pun:shment shall be loss of liberty ranging from two
years to eight years if the crime has been committed

professionally.
Section 196

(1) Whoever roakes or stores with the aim of putting Cf, Section
into circulation an article for general consumption injurious Oa)
to health, shall be punished with loss of liberty not exceed- of Food,

ing one year, etc, Act,
1954

(2) Whoever puts into circulation the article defined in
para. (J) shall be punished with loss of liberty not exceeding
three years.

(3) Whoever commiis by negligence the crime defined in
para. (2) shall be punished with loss of liberty or correc-
tional-educational work not exceeding one year.

Section 198

(1) Whoever makes, procures, keeps or puts into circula-
tion a drug suitable for pathological enjoyment by infring-
ing or evading the prescription of the authorities, shall be
punished with loss of liberty not exceeding one year.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty not exceeding
three years, if the crime was committed—
(a) professionally,

(b) by a recidivist, or

(c) in criminal partnership.


Cf. Section
BOO
efence of
India Rules
1943.

149

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)
Section 224
(2) Whoever infringes his duty based on law or on a dis- Tnfringement
position issued on the strength of law, which duty relates to ol ie
the production, utilization, circulation, declaration, putting a he
at disposal, kecping on stock, or handling cf products OF economy.
produce and by doing so causes considerable economic pre-
judice, shal! be punished with loss of liberty not exceeding
three years.

(2) Punishmen: shall be loss of liberty ranging from six

f months to five years if the crime—

(a) was committed by a recidivist,

(b) in respect of a considerable quantity of products
or produce or of products and produce of considerable
value.

(3) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from two
years to eight years, if the interests of the people’s economy
were gravely prejudiced by the crime.

(4) Whoever committed the crime by negligence shall be
punished with a fine and if the interests of the people’s eco-
nomy were gravely prejudiced with loss of liberty or correc-
tional-educational work not exceeding one year.

Section 225

(7) A worker, authorized to take dispositions indepen- Wasteful
dently, of a state organ, social organization or co-operative, Husbandry.
who gravely or systematically infringes the requirements
of rational economy, displays an economic activity involving
considerable waste of money, material, power or labour,
shall be punished with loss of liberty not exceeding three
years.

(2) Punishment shail be loss of liberty ranging from two
years to eight years, if the interests of the people’s economy
were gravely prejudiced by the crime.

(3) Whoever commits the crime by negligence, shall be
punished with loss of liberty or correctional-educational
work not exceeding one year and, if the interests of the
people’s economy were gravely prejudiced. with loss of
jiberty not exceeding three years.

Section 226

(1) Whoever misleads the competent organ of the peo Misl eading:
ple’s economy by supplying untrue data, concealing data, the organs”
or in any other manner, in order to obtain the granting of ben
an investment or credit or the approval of the economic onOmy.
plan, or to influence the distribution of fixed and circulating *
funds, the fixing of a price or to obtain permission of the
foreign exchange authority, shall be punished with loss of
liberty not exceeding three years.

2


Obstructing
economic
control and
collection of
economic
data.

Misuse of
inventions.

“Crime

‘inf ringing
discipline in

“investments
and finance.

150
APPENDIX 16 (contd.)

(2) Punishment shall be Joss of liberty ranging from six
months to five years if considerable economic prejudice was
caused by the crime.

(3) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from two
years to eight years, if the interests of the people’s economy
were gravely prejudiced by the crime.

Section 227

(1) Whoever misleads the organ entitled to carry out
economic control or to collect economic data by supplying
untrue data on the management, by concealing data or in
any other way, or refuses to comply with the obligatory
supply of data or of reports, systematically fails to keep the
prescribed accounts and registers or presents in them the
prescribed data systematically falsified, or attempts in any
other way to frustrate control, shall be punished with loss.
of liberty or correctional-educational work not exceeding
one year. :

(2) The same punishment shall be inflicted on a person,
who takes a hostile measure against a worker for having
supplied correct data to the organ mentioned in para. (1).

Section 228

(1) Whoever sends abroad or publishes in Hungary
without the permission prescribed by Jaw an invention, or
other exploitable teehnical idea, shall be punished with
loss of liberty not exceeding three years, if no graver
crime was committed.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
two years to eight years, if the interests of the people’s
economy were gravely prejudiced by the crime.

Section 229

(1) Loss of liberty not exceeding one year shall be in-
flicted on :

a person who infringes or evades a duty or prohibition
defined in the statutory provisions on the credit system,
money circulation and on investment and renewals by—

(a) granting directly or indirectly an unautho-
rized credit or making use of such credit,

(b) using for another purpose a credit granted
for a definite purpose or the funds granted for a defi-
nite investment or renewal,

{c) realizing an investment without permission,
an investment or renewal with fynds from a not per-
mitted source or a renewal with funds to be used for
sanother purpose,


131

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)

(d) diverting totally or partly the cover of the
credit, preventing enforcement of the securities of the
credit (lien, mortgage, statutory priority to satisfac-
tion, assignment, suretyship, etc.) or frustrating in
another way satisfaction of the creditor from the
eover, :

(७) arranging that wages be paid not to the debit
of the wage fund, or that some other payment than
wages be made to the debit of the wage fund.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty not exceeding
three years. if interests involved in the order of invest-
ments and money economy were gravely prejudiced by
the crime. .
Section 230
Putting into

(1) A worker in a managerial position or responsible in
for quality control of an industrial or commercial enter- gp industrial
prise or co-operative, who acts in such a manner that an product of
industrial product of bad quality be put into circulation bad quality.
as a good quality product or does not prevent the putting
into circulation of such product in this manner, though
obliged so to do by his sphere of activity, shall be punished
with loss of liberty not exceeding one year, if no graver
crime was committed.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty not exceeding
ihree years, if the crime was committed in respect of a
considerable quantity of industrial products or industrial
products of considerable value.

(3) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
six months to five years, if the interests of people’s economy
were gravely prejudiced by the crime.

(4) Whoever commits such a crime by negligence,
shall be punished in the case defined in para. (2) with loss
of liberty or correctional-educational work not exceeding
one year and in the case defined in para. (3) with loss of
tiberty not exceeding three years.

Saws es Section 231

(1) Whoever infringes the rules relating to the fixing Puccing
of the quality of industrial products, shall be punished with into ¢
loss of liberty or correctional-educational work not exceed- indus
ing one year, if, as a consequence, a considerable quantity product of
of industrial products or industrial products of consider- quality.
able value had been put into circulation included in a
higher quality category than laid down by a standard of
the Hungarian People’s Republic or by another binding
prescription.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty not exceeding
three years, if the interests of the people’s economy were
gravely prejudiced by the crime.
47 Law—11, .



circulation

an industrial ments are

product of
bad quality.

False at-
testation of
quality.

Putting into
Produc)
roduce)
ded
oath 8 false
matk.

Bribery.

152

APPENDIX 16 (contd)
Section 232
(2) An industrial product, for which quality require-
fixed by a standard of the Hungarian People’s
Republic, शी be deemed to be of bad quality, if it does
not comply even with the lowest quality requirements
defined in the standard.

(2) If the quality of an industrial product is not fixed
by a standard of the Hungarian People’s “Republic, it shall
pe deemed to be of bad quality if it does not even comply
with the lowest quality requirements defined in the tech-
nical specification approved by the superior organ or organ
otherwise competent for such approval.

(3) If in foreign trade the quality of the industrial pro-
duct is fixed not on the basis of the standard of the Hunga-
rian People’s Republic, such product shall be deemed to
be of bad quality if it does not comply with the contrac-
tual stipulations, provided that it is for this reason com-
pletely unsuitable for performing the conditions of the
contract or made suitable only by causing considerable
economic prejudice.

(4) In addition to the cases referred to in the above
paragraphs such an industrial product shall be deemed to
be of bad auality, which cannot be used for its proper
purpose or whose usefulness is considerably reduced,

Section 233

(1) Whoever attests in a quality certificate or in an-
other document guaranteeing quality untrue data on the
quality of products or produce, shall be punished with loss
of liberty not exceeding three years.

(2) Whoever commits the crime by negligence shall be
punished with loss of liberty or correctional-educational
work not exceeding one year.

Section 234

Whoever puts into circulation products or produce with CY. S. 5,6

a quality mark, standard mark or other mark, with which and 33 .
the product or produce does not comply or puts into cir- Standards,
culation or causes to be put into circulation di e product or etc. Act, 36
produce provided not wi ith the mark of the real producer, of 1962. +

ut with that of another, shall be punished with loss of
liberty or correctional-educational work not exceeding
one year, if no graver crime was committed.

Section 235
(1) Whoever asks, demands or accepts an advantage
for infringing his duty in his sphere of activity with a state
enterprise, other state economic organ or co-operative,
shalt be punished with loss of Hberty not exceeding three
years. हि ok हि


153
APPENDIX 16 (contd.}
(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
six months to five years if—

(a) the perpetrator is a recidivist;

{b) considerable economic prejudice was caused
by the crime.

(c) the provisions of section 154 shall also be
applied to bribery. .

Section 236

(1) Whoever,— 1 Speculation,

(4) carried on commercial activity or maintains
an industrial enterprise without a proper licence,

(9) carried on unjustified intermediate trade with
goods or speculates with them in any manner leading
to profiteering,
shall be punished with loss of liberty not exceeding three
years. i

(2) Punishment shal} be loss of liberty ranging from
six months to five years, if speculation was committed—

(a) professionally,

(0) by a recidivist,

(c) in criminal partnership,

(d) in respect of a considerable quantity of goods
or of goods of considerable value,

(e) was camouflaged to give the impression fhat
the economic activity involved by it had been carried
cn by a state enterprise, other state economic organ or
co-operative within the scope of its regular activity.

(3) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
two years to eight years, if the interests of the people’s
economy were gravely prejudiced by the speculation and
if in this case the crime also falls under para (2), punish-
ment shall be loss of liberty ranging from five years to
fifteen years.

(4) In the cases defined in para (2) and para (3) confis-
cation of property may also be applied as supplementary
punishment and a recidivist may also be punished with
expulsion from certain places of the country.

Section 237
(1) Whoever carries on foreign trading activity with- Unauthorised
out being properly authorized so to do, shall be punished foreign trade
with loss of liberty not exceeding three years. बाण,
(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
two years to eight years, if the in’ Tests of the people’s
economy Were gravely préjudited by thé crime.


Profiteering

Defrauding
the custo-
mers.

184

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)

(3) Whoever commits the crime by negligence shall
be punished with a fine and, if the interests of the people’s
economy were gravely prejudiced, with loss of liberty or
correctional-educational work not exceeding one year.

Section 238

(1) Whoever,—

(a) demands, stipulates or accepts for goods a
price higher than that fixed by the authority, or
(b) in the absence of a price fixed by the authori-

ty demands, stipulates or accepts a price including cf Section
1X6

profits in excess of an equitéble gain,
shall be punished with loss of liberty not exceeding three
years,

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from AIS,

six months to five years if profiteering was committed-—
(a) professionaly,
(b) by a recidivst,
(९) in criminal partmership,
(d) in respect of a considerable quantity of goods
or goods of considerable value.

(3) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
two years to eight years, if the interests of people’s econo-
my were gravely prejudiced by the crime.

(4) In the cases falling under paragraphs (2) and (3)
confiscation of property may also be inflicted as supple-
mentary punishment and if profiteering is committed pro-
fessionally by a recidivist, he may also be expelled from
certain parts of the country.

(5) A person committing the crime by negligence shall
be punished with a fine.

(6) The act of a person, who does not exceed the guid-
ing price fixed by the authority, shall not be subject to
‘para (1) clause (9).

Section 239

(1) Whoever defrauds the customers in retail trade
by false weighing, counting or by injuring the quality of
goods, shall be punished with loss of liberty not exceeding
one year. |

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty not exceeding
three years, if the crime was committed—
(६) professionaly,
(b) by a recidivist or
(2) if the crime involved considerable 1055 to the
purchaser, H


155

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)
Section 240

(1) Whoever, to the prejudice of public supplies

(a) destroys, makes useless, hides, conceals or
utilizes the stock of products or produce at his disposal
despite a prohibition by Taw or by violating the rules
of proper economy.

(0) stores, in Felation to his requirements, an
excessive quantity of products or produce and there-
by creates difficulties for others in obtaining them.

(c) obtains by misleading eonduct a licence for
the acquisition, putting into circulation or transport of
products or produce or speculates with such licence,
shall be punished with loss of liberty not exceeding three
years.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
six months to five years, if the crime was committed—

(a) by a recidivist,

(b) in respect of a considerable quantity or pro-
ducts or produce or products or produce of consider-
able value.

(3) In the cases falling under para (2) confiscation of
property may also be applied as supplementary punish-
ment.

(4) Whoever commits the crime by negligence shall be
punished with a fine,
Section 241
(1) Whoever,—
(a) counterfeits or forges money in current tender
for the purpose of putting it into circulation,

(0) acquires money counterfeited or forged by an-
other for putting it into circulation, or
(c) puts into circulation false or forged money,
shall be punished with loss of liberty ranging from two
years to eight years.
(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
five years to twelve years, if money forging was committed
(a) in criminal partnership,
(b) in respect of a great quantity of money or
money of great value.
(3) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from six
months to five years, if coins were counterfeited or if the

quantity or value of the false or forged money is not con-
siderable. |

Crimes
relating to
public snp-
Plies.

Licences.

Money forg-
ing.


‘Money forg-
ing.

Money
forging.

Money
forging.

Stamp
forging.

156

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)
(4) For money forging, confiscation of property may
also be inflicted as a supplementary punishment.
Section 242

(1) If in the case falling under clause (c), para (1),
section 241 the perpetrator had lawfully acquired the false
or forged money in the belief that it was genuine, and
subsequently recognized that the money was false or
forged, punishment shall be loss of liberty or correctional-
educational work not exceeding one year.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty not exceeding
three years, if the crime was committed in respect of a
great quantity of money or money of great value.

Section 243

Whoever carries out an act of preparation for money
forging, shall be punished with loss of liberty or correc-
tional-educational work not exceeding one year.

Section 244
(1) For the application of section 241 such alteration
of money withdrawn from circulation, that it should have
the appearance of money in circulation, shall be consider-
ed counterfeiting of money in circulation,

application or removal of a mark serving to show that
the money is only valid in a certain country shall be con-
sidered money forging, reduction for the precious metal
content of money shall also be considered as forging.

(2) In applying sections 241 to 243 money shall mean
metal or paper money and bank notes.

(3) Securities issued by the State and other bearer’s
securities—if in general circulation—shall be adjudged in
the same way as paper money.

(4) Foreign money and securities shall be granted the
same protection, as Hungarian money and securities.

Section 245
(1) Whoever counterfeits or forges stamps with the aim
of putting them into, circulation or fpr use, or acquires
stamps counterfeited or forged by another person for the
same purpose, shall be punished with loss of liberty not
exceeding three years.

(2) The same punishment shall be inflicted on a person
who puts into circulation or uses false, forged or already
used stamps as genuine or unused ones.

(3) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from six
months to five years if stamp forging was committed—

‘a) in criminal partnership,


157

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)

(8) in respect of a great quantity of stamps or
stamps of great value.

(4) Punishment shall be loss of liberty not exceeding
one year, if the quantity or value of the stamps utilized or
put into circulation is not considerable.

Section 246

(7) In applying section 245 the word stamps shall peta
comprise:

(०) stamps intended for postal or financial use,
which are in circulation, withdrawn from circulation,
or not yet put into circulation,

(b) stamps in circulation, withdrawn from _circu-
fation, or not yet put into circulation, intended for use
in any field of activity of the post, postal meter
cancellation impressions, special and other overprints,
international reply coupons, postal, receipts, further
any inscription of mark applic by the post in connec-
tion with postage, .

(c) state administration prints under strict con-
trol, both with stamp impressions and without such
impressions,

(d) official marks or seals, serving for taxation,
to prove the nature and content of metal, acceptance,
quality or quantity of material, or applied by a finan-
cial authority or organ,

(e) stamps and seals, used by the office of weights
and measures for certifying, gauging, and examination
of measuring devices and for marking the volume of
barrels.

(2) In applying section 245 putting into circulation
shall alsa mean putting into circulation for stamp collec-
tion, and forging shall mean any unauthorized alteration
of stamps for collection.

(3) Foreign stamps shall be granted the same protec-
tion as Hungarian stamps.

Section 247

(1) Whoever infringes or evades a duty or prohibition Crimes
defined in statutory provisions on foreign exchange control violating
and in statutory provisions regulating possession and cir- foreign
culation of precious metals and objects made from precious anon
metals, shall be punished with loss of liberty not exceeding
three years.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
six months to five years, if the crime was committed.

(a) professionally,
(b) by ७ recidivist,
(c) in connection with considerable value.


Tax
Fraud,

Tax evasion.

Customs
amy crimes.

158

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)
(3) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
two years to eight years, if foreign exchange control
interésts were gravely prejudiced by the crime.

(4) In the case falling under paragraphs (2) and (3)
confiscation of property and expulsion from certain parts
of the country may also be applied as supplementary
punishment.

(5) Whoever commits the crime by negligence in con-
nection with considerable value shall be punished with a
fine.

Section 248
(1) Whoever,—

(a) presents untruly or conceals before the autho~
rity a fact (data) of importance in determining his
liability to tax and thereby or by any other type of
conduct reduces

(09) by deceiving the authority takes advantage of
exemption from taxation or tax allowance, to which
he is not entitled,

(c) in the absence of the condition fixed by law,
or without official permission, diverts from inland
revenue control, a product or produce reserved to in-
land revenue or acquires, hides or helps to alienate
for pecuniary profit a product or produce diverted by
another shall be punished with loss of liberty not
exceeding three years.

(2) Punishment of the crime shall be loss of liberty
ranging from six months to five years, if committed by a
recidivist.

(3) In applying this section, it shall be deemed to in-
clude duties.

Section 249
(1) Whoever,—

. (a) diverts dutiable goods from customs duty
control or makes to the authority a false declaration
relating to circumstances essential for customs of the
dutiable goods (smuggling),

{b) acquires, or hides for pecuniary profit smug-
gled dutiable goods or co-operates with the same
purpose in alienating smuggled dutiable goods (receiv-
ing smuggled goods) shall be punished with loss of
liberty not exceeding three years.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
six months to five years if the perpetrator is a recidivist.


159

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)
Section 250

() In cases of infringement of duties in connection Confiscation.
with economy, speculation, profiteering, crimes relating to
public supplies, crimes violating foreign exchange control
and of tax fraud as defined in clause (c), para. (I), section
248, money or other objects with which the crime was
committed and belonging to the perpetrator, shall be con-
fiscated.

(2) Confiscation may also be applied, if the money or
other object is not the property or the perpetrator, but
the proprietor had previously known that the crime would
be committed.

(3) In cases of a customs duty crime the goods in res-
pect of which the crime was committed shall be confiscated;
goods being the property of a state organ or of a co-opera-
tive cannot be confiscated.

(4) -If the money or other object, in respect of which
the crime was committed, cannot be confiscated, the perpe-
trator shall be obliged to pay the value of the object
subject to confiscation.

(5) The Court may omit confiscation or the obligation
on the perpetrator to pay the value subject to confiscation,
if that would mean for the perpetrator an inequitable
prejudice not in proportion with the nature of the crime.

Section 251

Criminal proceedings for the crimes enumerated below Information.
may only be instituted on information lodged by the organ
defined in a statutory provision: infringement of duties in
connection with the economy (section 224), wasteful
husbandry (section 225), misleading the organs of the
people’s econom: (section 226), obstructing economic
control and collection of economic data (section 227),
misuse of inventions (section 228), crimes infringing disci-
pline in investment and finance (section 229), putting into
circulation and industrial product of bad quality ( sections
230 to 232) unauthorized foreign trade activity (section
237), tax fraud (section 248) and customs duty crime
(section 249).

Section 252
In applying this chapter—
A Expl.
1. Price fixed by the authority shall mean the price Proveions.”

prescribed by the authority or to be applied by virture of
a disposition of the authority.

2. Goods shall be deemed also be include industrial or
other services of an economic character and price shall be
deemed also to include the equivalent (fee) of such
services and in general also any valuable consideration of
pecuniary value due for the. goods (performance).


Theft

Embezz!2-
ment.

Fraud

Malversation

Punishment
of theft,
embezzle-
ment, fraud
and malver-
sation to the
prejudice
‘of social
property.

Commission
to report a
crime to whe
prejudice
‘of social
property.

160

APPENDIX 16 (contd.)
Section 291

Whoever removes the property of another with an un-
lawful intent commits a t.

Section 292
Whoever unlawfully appropriates the property of

another entrusted to him or disposes of it as if it were his
own commits an embezzlement.

Section 293
Whoever for unlawful gain induces or keeps another
in error or ignorance of the facts and causes thereby
prejudice commits a fraud.
Section 294
Whoever being entrusted with the management of
another’s property causes, violating his duty under such a
commission, damaged in such property, commits a malver-
sation,

Section 295

(1) Whoever commits theft, embezzlement, fraud or
malversation to the mejudice of social property shall be
punished with loss of liberty ranging from six months to

five years.

(2) Punishment shall be loss of liberty ranging from
two years to eight years if the crime was committed

(a) by a recidivist,
(b) in criminal partnership,
(०) in a place where it caused public danger.

Punishment shall be,—

(6) loss of liberty ranging from five years to
twelve years if particularly grave prejudice was caused
by the crime;

(0) loss of liberty ranging from ten years to
fifteen years or death if particularly grave prejudice
was caused by a crime committed in criminal partner-
ship or by a recidivist.

Section 308

(1) Whoever obtains credible knowledge that the com-
mission gf a wilful crime to the prejudice of social property
is under preparation or that such crime not yet detected
has been committed and doés not report this to the autho-
Tities as soon as ible, shall be punished with loss of
liberty not excee: ding ig one year. .


161

APPENDIX 16 (concld.)

(2) Under para. (I) a relative of the perpetrator cannot
be punished.

Section 298

(1) Whoever, being entrusted with the management Nesligent

or supervision of social property infringes or neglects the
duty ensuing from this commission and thereby causes
damage and prejudice to such property, shall be punished
with loss of liberty not exceeding one year.

(29) Punishment shall be loss of liberty not exceeding
three years, if particularly grave prejudice was caused by
the crime. 7

(3) Whoever manages the property of another by virtue
of an official commission or approval (guardian, curator)
and while doing so, infringes his duty by negligence,
thereby causing a loss in the value of the property, shall
be punished with loss of liberty or correctional-educational
work not exceeding one year..

APPENDIX 17

EXTRACT OF CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE PENAL Cope or Norway
(“Norwactan Penat Cope”, 1961) PUBLISHED IN THE
AMERICAN SERIES OF ForEIGN PENAL Cones.

88. Anybody who, in time of war, fails to fulfil a con-
tract relating to the supplies or the transport of the
military forces or a matter of importance to military or
civil defence, or is accessory thereto, shall be punished by
imprisonment up to ten years. If the act has caused heavy
damage to the defence of the country, or the death or serious
injury to body or health of another, a maximum of life
imprisonment may be imposed,

If the breach of contract results from negligence, the
perpetrator shall be punished by fine, or jailing or im-
prisonment up to six months.

Anybody who commits such an act against a state allied
with Norway, or at war with a common enemy, shall be
similarly punished'. (12-15-1960).

123. If a civil servant misuses his office to violate some-
body’s rights by undertaking or omitting an official act,
he shall be punished by fines or loss of office or by
imprisonment up to one year.

If he has acted for the purpose of obtaining an unlaw-
ful gain for himself or another, or if the felony has pur-
posely caused serious injury or a violation of rights,
imprisonment up to five years may be imposed.

For a study of “ White Collar Crime in ” see Aubert, “ White
Collar Crime and Social Structure”. American of Sociology (1952-53),
Page 265, cited in Reckless, The Crime Problem (1965), page 224.

Management.


162
APPENDIX 17 (contd.)

153. Anybody who by breach of assumed obligations or
by spreading of false rumours, brings about famine or
scarcity of necessities, or is accessory thereto, shall be
punished by imprisonment up to eight years.

273. Anybody who spreads incorrect or misleading
information in order to influence the prices of goods,
securities or other objects, or is accessory thereto, shall be
punished by imprisonment up to four years. Fines may
be imposed together with imprisonment. Under extreme
jy extenuating circumstances, fines alone may be imposed
(5-11-1951)

APPENDIX 18

EXTRACTS OF CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE ARGENTINA Penat, 700४8
TAKEN FROM THE TRANSLATION PUBLISHED IN THE AMERICAN
Serres or Foreign Pena. Copes (1963).

249. Any public official who illegally omits, refuses to
do or delays any act of his office, shall be punished by a
fine from one hundred to ene thousand pesos and special
disqualification from one month to one year.

300. Jailing from six months to two years shall be
imposed on:

1. anybody who causes the price of any merchandise
to be raised or lowered, bond or security to be raised or
lowered, by means of false news, fictious negotiations or
by connivance or coalition among the principal holders -
of any merchandise or product, with the purpose to sell it
only for a fixed price,

2. anybody who, disguising or concealing true facts or
circumstances, or affirmatively stating or suggesting false
facts or circumstances, offers any bond or security of any
corporation or society;

3. any founder, president, manager, or receiver of any
vorporation or co-operative or any other commercial estab-
lishment, who publishes or authorizes a false or incomplete
balance or report regardless of the purpose he had to
publish it.

APPENDIX 19

ENcLisH LAW RELATING TO SPREADING FALSE RUMOURS TO
AFFECT PRICES, ETC.

At common law, every practice or device by act, cons-
piracy, words or news to enhance the price of victuals or
other merchandise was held to be unlawful. These prac-
tices came under “forestalling” {practices to enhance
prices) including ingrossing (buying up standing corn,
etc.) for regrating 1.6. selling at monopoly prices and


16
APPENDIX 19 (contd.)

similar offences. Spreading false rumours was also one
example of such practices. The bare ingrossing of a whole
commodity in order io sell it at an unreasonable price was
also an offence’. By a statute of 18447, the several offences
of badgering (buying up cern, ete, and carrying them
elsewhere for re-sale), ingrossing, forestalling and regrat-
ing were abolished. But section 4 of that Act preserved
the common law offence of spreading false rumours to
enhance or abate the prices of vendible commodities. The
section is quoted below

“Nothing in this Act contained shall be construed
to apply to the offence of knowingly and fraudulently
spreading or conspiring to spread, any false rumour,
with intent to enhance or decry the price of any goods
or merchandise, or to the offence of preventing. or
endeavouring to prevent, by force or threats, any
goods, wares, or merchandise being brought to any
fair or market, but that every such offence may be
inquired ef, tried. and punished as if this Act had not
been made.”

APPENDIX 20
Position aT ENGLISH Law REGARDING CERTAIN OFFENCES

Bribery and corruption—It is a misdemeanor at com-
mon law for an officer who has a duty to do something
in which the public are interested, to receive a kribe
either to act in a manner contrary to his duty or to show
favour in the discharge of his functions?. The offence is
punishable by fine and imprisonment, whether the bribe
is accepted or not. The matter is now provided for in
greater detail by several enactments‘, including—

(i) The Public Bodies Corrupt Practices Act, 1889
(52 and 53 Vic., ०. 63).

(ii) The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1906
(6 Edw. ec. 37). .

(iii) The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1916
(6 & 7 Geo. 5, ०. 64).

(iv) Section 9, Customs and Excise Act, 1952
(19 & 16 Geo. 6, c. 44).

(v) Section 123(2y, Local Government Act, 1933
(23 & 24 Geo. 5, ८. 51).

(vi) Sections 171 and 99, Representation of the
People Act, 1949 (12. 13 & 14 Geo. 6, ८. 68).

Russell on Crime (1953), Vol. 2, page 1683.
orestalling, regrating, etc., Act, or Conspiracy Act, 1944 (7 & 8
24) (now repeated).
जगत (1962), para. 3483. चर
thbold (1962), para 3483, 3484, 3996 and 3953.



164
APPENDIX 20 (contd.)

Conspiracy.—A person may be convicted of “criminal
conspiracy” even where the act conspired to be committed
would not be an offence if committed by a single person.
It is from this point of view that the offence of criminal
conspiracy assumes some importance. The generally
accepted definition of conspiracy is that given by Justice
Wilkes on behalf of all the Judges, is one 235९, namely,
an agreement of two or more to do an unlawful act or to
do a lawful act by unlawful means’. The case-law that
has developed on this subject has brought out the wide
scope of this offence. Of interest for the present purpose
are the following conspiracies held to be criminal—

(i) conspiracy to injure the public health, as by
selling unwholesome 10097;

(ii) conspiracy to combine to violate the provisions.
of a statute or statutory rule, etc, where the violation
of such statute or statutory rule would be a mis-
demeanour at common law or criminally punishable in
some specified manner. हि

(iti) conspiracy to do acts contrary to the public
morals. The latest case on the subject is that of
Shaw*.

Conspiracy to cheat and defraud.—tit is stated, that it is
really criminal to conspire to commit frauds in trade or
public cheats, whether the fraud or cheat, if done by an
individual without conspiracy would give only a ground
for civil remedies at law or in equity, or would be crimi-
nally punishable. Examples of this conspiracy are combi-
nation of bankers or officers of companies to deceive and
defraud their shareholders by publishing false balance-
sheets, or ‘by concealing the insolvency of the bank, and
agreements to take part in deceptive schemes in order to
raise the price of stocks and shares above their true value,
or to raise the price of commodities by fictious sale*-".

Conspiracy te prevent, obstruct, pervert or defeat
justice—This falls under three classes : हु
(४) conspiracy to make false accusations of c:imes.
or unfounded civil claims;
(ii) conspiracy to threaten to make false accusa-
tions or claims; and

'Mucahy v. R., Law Reports (1868), 3 H.L. 306, 317.

4See discussion in Russell on Crimes (1958), Vol. I, pages 213 and 215.

*Russell on Crime (1958), Vol. 2, page 1703.

Russell on Crime (19%), Vol. 2, page 1700, and Archbold (1
Para 4053.

*Shaw v. Director of Public Prosecugion (1961), 2 W.L.R. 897.
case relating to the Ladies Directory).

“See cases cited in Russell on Crime (1958), Vol. 2, pages 1712, 17.
1715.

7$ee also Archbold (1962), para 4058.



165

APPENDIX 20 (contd.}

(iit) conspiracy to interfere with a fair trial of
pending procecdings'.

Of particular interest is a recent case? where the alleged
conspiracy by certain police officers to take rewards to
hinder prosecutions by not bringing the offenders before
the courts or by warning persons concerned of intended
prosecutions was in issue.

Conspiracy or combinatien affecting trade—These have
been the subject-matter of legislation particularly in rela-
tion to trade disputes. Subject to such legislation, a
criminal conspiracy in restraint of trade which has been
detined as an agreement between two or more persons to
do or procure to be done any unlawful act in restraint of
trade (e.g. violence, threats, fraud, or coercion?-*) is punish-
able.

How far combinations to monopolise or divert trade
would fall within this definition is a moot question.
Criminal prosecutions do not seem to have been tnder-
taken in England in respect of such combinations as being
conspiracies in restraint of trade®.

Cheating —This is an offence at common law in many
cases*. It is unnecessary to enumerate the various cate-
gories, Akin to this offence is an offence of obtaining
goods by false pretences governed by section 32 of the
Larceny Act, 19167. (6 and 7 Geo. 5 ८, 50).

Conspiracy.--See above.

Embezzlement.—See section 17 of the Larceny Act, 19168
हा! and 7 Geo. 5, ९. 50). There are several other special Acts
also. .

False pretences.—See under cheating.

Food.—At common law it is a misdemeanour to sell
fond or drink with the knowledge that it is dangerous
or unfit for human consumption». The Law on the
subject is now contained in Food and Drugs Act, 1955
{4 & 5 Eliz. 2 ch. 16), which consolidates the previous Acts

*Russell on Crimes (1958), Vol. 2, page 1707.

2R, v. Hammersley (1958), 42 Criminal Appeals Reports, 207 cited ii
Archbold (1962), para. 4062. ppeals Reports, 207 cited in

Russell on Crime (1958), Vol. 2, page 1719) ¢t seq.
‘Russell on Crime (1953), Vol. 2, page 1678.
‘Russell on Crime (1958), Vol. 2, page 1679.
‘Russell on Crime (1958), Vol. 2, pages 1322 to 1344.

oot on Crime (1958), Vol. 2, page 1336 ; Archbold (1962), para.
*Archbold (1962), para. 1701.
*Archbold (1962), para. 3735.


1€6
APPENDIX 20 (contd.}

of 1238, 1959 and 1954 and certain other enactments. Sec-
tions 1 te 12 of the Act are mainly of interest as dealing
with offences committed in the preparation and sale of
injurious ioog and adulterated drugs, falsity in libel and
advertising in food and drugs and sale of goods unfit हु for
human consumption. (The common law offence is classified
either as a public nuisance or as a common law cheating) .*

Forgery.--The main provisions relating to forgery are
contained in section 3 of the Forgery Act, 1913%. There are
numerous enactments relating to forgery of documents. Of
these a few may be noted, namely, section 302 of the Cus-
toms and Excise Act, 1952%. (15 & 16 Geo. 6 ८. 44). Sec.
ion 36 of the Criminal Justice Act, 1925 (15 & 16 Geo. 5 c. 86)
reiating to forgery of passport‘, frauds relating to stamps
zie dealt with by section 13 cf the Stamp Duties Amend-
ment Act, 18915. (54 & 55 vic. ०. 38). Forgery of several
public documenis is specificalty dealt with the section 302)
wud 3(3) of the Forgery Act, 1913 (3 & 4 Geo. 5 ८. 27),

Malicious Damage is dealt with in detail by the Mali-
einus Damage Act, 1861.

Misconduct by public servants (other than bribery).—
Neglect by public officers’ duty imposed on them at com-
mon law or by statute is indictable, and the remedy of
criminal information is of interest’ in this connection®.
Misconduct by judicial officers in the nature of malfeasance
or culpable non-feasance has figured in several cases’,

Abuses in respect of honours are specifically dealt with
by the Honours (Prevention of Abuses) Act, 19255 (15 & 16
eo. 9 ९. 72).

Profiteering.—See Prices of Goods Act (1939) section 1,
ger हद and Services (Price Control) Act, 1941 (4 & 5
e0. 6 ¢. 31).

Public mischief—The offence of conspiracy to commit
a public mischief is an offence which has a very wide scope
and its definition is not ‘aid down by statute. Its exact
scope is indefinite, but until the decision in Newland, it was
understood that many acts such as dissemination of
Tumours calculated to cause widespread alarm, and. building

'Russell on Crime, (7959), Vol. 2, pages 1606, 1589, 1322.

*Archbold (1962), para. 2166,

*Russelt on Crime (1958), Vol. 2, page 1465.

*Rusell on Crime (1958), Vol. 2, para. 1467.

“Russell on Crime (1958), Vol. 2, page 1463.

“Archbold (1962), paras. 301 and 3334.

*Archbold (1962), para. 3491.

“Archbold (1962), para. 4000.



17

APPENDIX 20 (contd.)

defective air-raid sheliers and making to the police false
statements concerning imaginary crimes, fall within the
offence of public mischief,

In the case of Newland’, it was held that these offences
were part of the law of conspiracy. If the act is committed
by an individual and not in conjunction with others, then
it is indictable only if it is an offence in itself at common
law or by statute.

Sabotage.—See “Malicious Damage”.

Share pushing—See section 13 of the Prevention cf
Fraud (Investments) Act, 1958 (6 & 7 Eliz. 2 ch. 45).
Roughly stated, it punishes a person who, by publishing a
misleading statement, promise or forecast or by any dis-
honest concealment of facts or by reckless statement, etc.
induces another person to enter into an agreement for
acquiring or subscribing for securities, etc.

Smuggling.—See the Customs and Excise Act 1952, sec-
tion (45) (1) and section 3044.

Tax.—As various enactments relating to taxation con-
tain penal provisions, i: would not be Possible to summarise
them here. But apart from statute, the making of false
statements relating to income-tax with intent to defraud
the Revenue has been held to amount to a common law
misdemeanour®--’?, Section 5 of the Perjury Act, 1911
Gé 2 Geo. 5c. 6) which is quoted below, is also of
interest :—

“5. False statutory declarations and other false
statements w'thout oath—If any person knowingly and
wilfully makes (otherwise than on oath) a statement
false in a material particular, and the statement is
made- -

{a) in a statutory declaration; or

(0) in an abstract, account, balance sheet, book,
certificate, declaration, entry, estimate, inventory, 191 and 19
notice. report return, or other document which he Indian Pe
is authorised or required to make, attest, or verify, Code.
by any public general Act of Parliament for the
time being in force; or

tArchbold (1962), para. 3481.

AR. ४. Newland (1953), 2 8. 8.7, 1067 (CCA).

*See Report on Share pushing (1982, Cmd. 5539 and (1941) Annuals Of
Gynggiean Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 217, Crime in the

‘See Archbold (1962), paras. 3341—~3342.
‘R. v. Huon (1966), 1 AER. 814 (1956), 2 0.8. 352. dson,
‘Archbold (1962), para. 3547.
‘Halsbury 3rd Edn., Vol. 20, Page 720, para. 1448,
47 M. of Law—12.


168
APPENDIX 20 (contd.)

(०) in any oral declaration | or oral answer
which he is required to make by, under, or ‘n
pursuance of any public general Act of Parliament
for the time being in force;
he shall be guilty of misdemeanour and shall be liable
on conviction thereof on indictment to imprison-
ment....for any term not exceeding two years, or to
a fine or to both such imprisonment and fine.”.

A false statement on vath before an income-tax Appeal
Tribunal consisting of two Commission amounts to per-
jury, as such a tribunal falls within section 1(2), Perjury
Act, 1911".

The provisions of the Income-tax Act in U.K. do not
affect any criminal proceedings for felony, etc., or for mis
demeanour, under section 503 of the Income-tax Act, 1952
(15 & 16 Geo. 6 ०. 10).

The following criminal remedies are open against a
person for frauds on the taxation law?:-~
(९) Fraud at common law, under the decision in
के, v. Hudson’,
(ii) Offences under the Perjury Act, 1911 [section
167) for false statement on oath at the appellate hear-

ing before the Special Commissioner and section 509)

for false statement not on oath knowingly and wilfully

made in a return ete. required by Act of Parliamentt.]

(ii) Offence under the Forgery Act, 1913 (3 & 4,
Geo. 5, ०. 275);

(iv) Conspiracy to defraud®;

(v) Other suitable offence according to the circum-
stances.

In addition. there are pena! provisions in the Income-
tax Act, 1952, section 43(3) and section 505. As to profit tax,
see section 28 of the Finance Act, 1943, and section 44 of
the Finance Act, 194.

Under section 468 of the Income-tax Act, 1952, a person
who is knowingly a party to the doing of any act amount-
ing to something which is unlawful under the provisions
against avoidance of income-tax or profit tax liability by a
hody corporate taking certain steps as to residence in the
United Kingdom is punishable with imprisonment up to

1 R. ४. Hood-Bars (1943) K. 8. 455» (1943) 1 A.E.R. 665.

3 Cf. Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 20, page 720, para. 1448.
# R. y. Hudson (1956), 20B,¥252 3 ALR. 814.

4 See also Halsbury, 3rd Hdn., Vol. 10, page 623.

3 Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 10, page 840-

¢ See Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 10, pages 834-835.

7 See Halsbury, 305 Edn., Vol. 2० page 665, and page 722.


169

APPENDIX 20 (concld:)

2 years or fine up to £10,008. Consent of the Attorney
General is required for prosecution under. this provision.

There is no general provision creating the offence of
evading or avoidance of tax.

APPENDIX 21
EconoMic CRIMES IN CERTAIN EasTern-EvROPEAN COUNTRIES
Apart from Russia and Hungary, provisions relating to

economic crimes exist in certain other countries of Eastern
Europe. A brief summary of the important provisions is

given below.
Albania

The Criminal Code, 1952 of Albania’ contains Chapters

dealing with penalties for theft, waste, misuse and other

- forms of destruction of Government or social property
(Chapter 2) as well as:detailed provisions relating to
economic crimes (Chapter 3).

The economic crimes include crimes in industrial pro-
duction and against: the monopely. of foreign trade, offences
against regulations of internal trade and against: financial
regulations, evasion of taxes, and failure to d-liver agri-
cultural quotas. Certain nnportant features are—

(०) Death penalty is permissible for economic
crimes’,

(89) Confiscation of property is mandatory in
economic crimes, excepting in 3 cases. (Under
Article 25, certain objects like furniture, foodstuffs
etc. are not confiscated.)

(c) The prosecution can transfer cases relating to
economic crimes. to military courts.

Bulgaria

The Criminal Code of 1951 (Bulgaria), Chapter 4, deals
with the crimes against the national economy. Important
provisions are quoted below*:—

“Section. 113.—An official who fails to apply suffi-
cient care in the direction management or protection
of the property entrusted or the work assigned to him,
which failure results in considerable damage, destruc-
tion or waste of property, or partial or total non-
fulfilment of the economic assignments, or in any
cther considerable damage to the enterprise, shall be

4iSee_G. & G. Government Law in the Soviet Union, pages 979, 981
and 982.

3. For wilful destructien of Sta'e property also, death sentence can be
awarded under articles 85 and 89.

* See 6. & 6. Government Law in the Soviet Union ete:, Page.998, .



170
APPENDIX 21 (conid.)

published by confinement up to five years or correc-
dional labour. If the act has been committed inten-
tionally but does not contain the elements of a grave
crime, the punishment shall be confinement from.
three to ten years. .

Section 117.—Whoever fails to carry out a lawful
regulation concerning performance of work or deli-
very of products in connection with the economic plan
or the economic undertakings of the government, shall
be punished by confinement up to three years, or, in
cases of minor importance, by correctional labour or
fine up to 20,000 leva.

Section 119.—Whoever uses agricultural products
received from the State for purposes other than those
for which they have been issued shall be punished by
confinement up to three months or fine up to 50,000
leva. ~

Section 121—Whoever without proper authoriza-
tion purchases with the intent to sell or resell agri-
cultural products or other goods of mass consumption
shall be punished by confinement up to five years or
correctional labour”.

Czechoslovakia

Sections 85, 135 and 136 of the Criminal Code for Courts
(as amended in 1956) are quoted below*:—

“85. (1) Whoever fails to discharge; or violates;
ov evades the duty of his profession, occupation, or
service; or commits any other act from hostility
toward the People’s Democratic order with the intent:

(०) of frustrating or obstructing the carrying
out or accomplishment of the Government plan
for the development of the national economy in
some sector; or

(b) of causing serious disturbance in the acti-
vity of a public authority or other agent, national-
ized enterprise, people’s co-operative, or any other
organization of the socialist sector shali be
punished by confinement for from 3 to 10 years.

Section 135— (1) Whoever, negligence, frustrates
or obstructs the operation or the development of the
government, national, communal or other public enter-
prise or of a people’s co-operative, particularly by failing
to discharge or by violating the duty of his profession,
occupation, or his service by evading the fulfilment of
such a duty shall be punished by confinement not to

°Based on.G. & G, Government Law, etc. in Soviet Union, eic.,
1017 and 1019- ‘ 9 eee का ‘Union, efc., pages



171

APPENDIX 2 (contd.)

exceed 1 year and by fine or (under aggravating circum-
stances) by confinement for from 3 months to 3 years and

by a fine.

Section 136.—If a private businessraan or other person
who is responsible for the management of his enterp rise
fails—-even through negligence--to discharge an obliga-
tion resulting from the uniform economic plan or from
required public deliveries or public works, he shall be
punished by confinement not to exceed 6 months.”.

Poland?

Economic crimes in Poland are dealt with in the “Small
Criminal Code” of 1946, Chapter III (Articles 39-45) and
other special laws’. A brief summary of important provi-
sions is given below:—

@ (2)

Article 39 . . . . Adversely affecting the level cf pro-
duction, or lowering the prc ducti-’
vity of an individual’s own work
or that of subordinate personnel, or
for dereliction of duty either in
taking proper care of the tchnical
equipment of the enterprise, cf its
raw materials, or produced goods
or causing deterioration of equip-
ment or wactage of raw materials
for goods. (Punishment up t 1§
years’ imprisonment),

Under the amendment of Decree of
4th March, 1953 (penalties for Mar-
keting of Goods of defective quality),
penalties for introducing into dis-
tribution goods unfit for consump-
tion or of inferior quality compared
with official standards have been

- enhanced.

Article go . . . . Diverting to a free marke of goods
assigned for distribution through
Government stores. (Punishment up
to 15 years’ imprisonment).

The position as in 1960 has been stated here. Thereafter, there was movement
for reform, but material about that could not be obtained. नि
‘Summarised from material in 9 & G, Government पं ००५ .in Soviet. Unity. +
page 1064 et seg. -


172

APPENDIX 21 (eontd.)

(1)

@)

Acticle 41

Article 42

Decree of March 4, 1953

(Decree for Protection of Buyers’
Interest in Trade).

Unintemtional transgression by failure
to exercise proper control and super-
vision is a lesser offence. (Punish-
ment up to 5 years’ imprisonment).

Offences against the planncd  distri-
bution of goods, whether committed
with criminal intent or without in-
tent. (Punishment up to 15 years’
imprisonment).

Wilfl or constant failure by the
manager of an enterprise to take
proper care the welfere of
subordinate 1, thus adversely
affecting their interests. (Punish-
ment up to 5 years’ imprisonment).

Section 1 of Article 1 of the Decree
is quoted below :-—
“Whoever speculates with articles of
everyday consumption or other
goods, in particular by buying up
goods in establishments or other
places of retail with the purpose
of selling them for profit ; hides
or hoards goods of everydayycon- .
sumption, with such purpose in
excessive amounts charges pri-
ces in such establishments, for
any goods, thus gaintig  ex-
cessive profit in cases in which
there is no properly fixed price ;
or by any action contributes to
difficulties in __ retailing goods,
conducted deliberately with spe-
culative purposes shall be  puni-
shed by detention (maximum 5
years) and fine or by imprison-
ment up to five years and fine.”
(Under Article 1, section 2 of this
decree, punishment for habitually

engaging in speculation for  re-
peated conviction is imprison-
ment from 2 to 10 years and
fine.)

1 In @ case decided on 14th Minch, 1950 on the previous section—Articte ro

section 1 af Law of June 4, 1957-0n High Priees, stc.,
hoarding goods in excess of his

4 person buying up or

Gourt explained that
‘wes guilty.

normal needs


173
APPENDIX -21 (contd.)

(1) (2)

Two decrees of March 4, 1953, Under Article 1, section 1 of the first
concerning strengthening of the Decree, stealing, appropriating, ob-
protection of socialist property taining without intent to pay or in
and concerning the protection of | any way seizing socialist goods is
socialist property against petty punishable by imprisonment up to
theft (bo. ameadted by the De- 5 years. On a second conviction,
cree of December 23, 1954). imprisonment up to 10 years can

be awarded under section 2. In
aggravating circumstances, the theft
of socialist property is punishable
by imprisonment up to 10 years
and not less than 2 years, under
section 3. If the offender has caused
major damage to the economic in-
terest or the defence of the State,
the punishment cannot be less than
5 years’ imprisonment and even im-
prisonment for life can be awarded.

Decree of March 28, 1952. . Offences against foreign currency regu-
lations can be punished with imprison-
ment up to 15 years or even for life,
and there are provisions for a mini-
mum sentence of 2 or 5 years’ im-
prisonment.

Article 286, Penal Code of 1932. Abuse of power. (This has been now
widely interpreted as covering not
only cases of dishonesty, but as also
including negligence and lack of
foresight.) .

For severai offences, including many economic crimes, “Summary
Criminal Proceedings” are permissible under the Polish law, and
these offences include crimes committed to the detriment of the State,
public authorities, institutions of a public character, co-operatives,
enterprises owned or managed by the State or public authorities,
and other criminal acts which endanger the economic interests of
the People’s Republic or expose it to considerable losses. For these
offences, death sentence or imprisonment for life can be awarded',
(irrespective of the punishment prescribed in the statute relating to
the particular crime’).

1 See G & G, Government Law, etc., in the Soviet Union, pages 1073, ttem (6)
and 1074, middle.

2 Law of November 16, 1956 (amended in 1949) on summary _proseedings {n
criminal courts.


174
APPENDIX 21 (contd.)

Rumania

The main articles in the Criminal Code of Rumania
relating to economic crimes are articles 268, 242 and 385 of
the Criminal Code (No. 927). Economic crimes are re-
gulated under the title of “Offences against the Economic
System” and under the sub-title of “offences affecting the
public administration”.

The main economic crimes are: —
(a) violations of regulations regarding production
and distribution of consumer goods;
(b) distribution of products, which do not meet
mandatory rules of standardization;

(c) establishing fictitious co-operatives;

(d) failure to observe legal provisions with
“intent to evade”, even without criminal intent or
negligence;,

(e) non-observance of legal provisions regarding
State monopolies of foreign commerce;

() failure to pay taxes in time;

(g) evasion of tax;

(h) public officer guilty of carelessness, lack or
laxity in the performance of his services, thus causing
delay or difficulty in the fulfilment of the official
economic plan, disturbance to the proper functioning
of collective organization or damage to collective pro-
perty or to the general interests of the citizens
(article 242);

(i) failure to deliver agricultural goods reserved
for Government stores;

(9) hoarding of goods;

(k) breach of collective labour contracts;

(1) infringement of regulations concerning ration
ecards.
(m) counterfeiting currency and bonds (article
383). Punishment upto 25 years’ imprisonment can
be awarded for counterfeiting; and if the act has caused
or would have caused considerable damage to the finan-
cial system, total confiseation of property can be
ordered;

{n) Article 536 contains detailed provisions for
offences affecting collective property.

, ‘Summarised from material in G & G, Government Law, etc., in Soviet
Union, pages 1093—1096.


175

APPENDIX 21 (conceld.)
Yugoslavia
In Yugoslavia the Criminal Code of 1951, sections 213
to 248 (Criminal Offences against the National Economy)
deal with economic crimes. The important provisions
are :—
(a) sellers giving special favours to individual
buyers (section 228) ;
(b) barter (section 229);
(०) failure to fulfil the contractual duty of delivery
of a fixed quality of products to Government (section
236);

(d) owner of land failing to cultivate the land or
reducing his livestock (section 238) ;

(९) members of agricultural cooperatives opposing
the management of the affairs of the cooperatives (sec-
tion 240);

() illegally carrying on a trade as a professional
practice, or illegally selling, purchasing or bartering
goods or articles the traffic in which is forbidden or
limited; or illegally keeping such goods or articles for
commerce or producing or processing goods the produc-
tion or processing of which is forbidden (section 226):
(Confiscation of the goods can also be ordered).

APPENDIX 22
Tax Evasion Provision iN U.S.A. (Section 7201, InrERNaL
Revenue Cope)

There is a general provision as to tax evasion in section Section
7201 of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States of एटा
America, and it will be of some use to deal with it in Revenue
detail: The section is quoted below:— Code.

“7201: Any person who wilfully attempts in any Ademptto
manner to evade or defeat any tax imposed by this evade or
title! or the payment thereof shall, in addition to other defeat
penalties provided by law, be guilty of a felony, and, °
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than
$10,000: 00 or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or
both, together with the costs of prosecution.”

1Summarised from G & G, Government Law, etc., in Soviet Union,
Pages 1120 to 1122.
The taxes covered by the various sub-titles of the Internal Revenue
Code are—
A. Income Taxes ;
8. Estate & Gift Taxes;
0. Employment Taxes;
D. Miscellaneous Excise Taxes;
E. Alcohol, Tobacco and certain other Excise Taxes.



176

APPENDIX 22 (contd.)

There is another section dealing with wilful failure to
file return, but we are not concerned with that section
here.”

This section has replaced section 145 (b) of the In-
ternal Revenue Code, 1939, which in its turn had replaced
section 1017(b), Revenue Act, 1924. The old section was
regarded as the “capstone of a system of sanctions which
singly or in combination were calculated to induce prompt
and forthright fulfilment of every duty” under the income
tax law*. The important words in the section are
“wilfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any
tax”. The constitutional validity of the section (with refe-
rence to the due process clause) appears to have been
upheld?.

Prosecutions under the section have been instituted
mainly in the following situations (if the requisite
intent is proved):—

(a) substantial understatement of income;
{b) substantial overstatement of deductions;

(c) attempted evasion of tax by ‘ evading joint
income-taxes of spouses (where ihe spouse or spouses
charged are party to the fraud);

(d) lawyers and accountants participating in tax
frauds;

(e) officials of corporations attempting evasion of
the tax payable by the corperation concerned;

(f} false claims to exemption.

Section 7203 of the Internal Revenue C. de is quoted below :—

“79203, Wilful failure to file return, supply information, or pay tax. —Any
person required under this title to pay. any estimated tax of tax, or requit-
ed by regulatio;:s made under authority thereof to make a return (other
than a return required under authority of section 6055 or section 6016),
keep any records, or supply any information, who wilfully fails to pay
such estimated tax, make such retutn, keep such records, or supply
such information, at the time or time required by law or regu-
lations, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be guilty
of misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more
than $ 1०,०00, or imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both, together
with the costs of prosecution.”

3 Spies v. United States (1943), 317 U. 5. 492, 497.

goo, UY Skidmore, 123 F. 2d, 604 cert. denied (1942) 315 US.
300.

* A husband and wife can file a joint return. Tax is computed on half
the combined income and multiplied by two, Sections 2(@) and 6013(a),
Interenal Revenue Code. हि


17

APPENDIX. 22 (conitd.)

We may first take up the word “wilful” in the section.
This requires proof beyond reasonable doubt of 2 specific
intention to evade or defeat the tax or its payment. A
bona fide belief in a particular legal position would take
away the case out of “wilful”. ...#ढ

Intent

The intent must be specifié, that is to say, a mere
general intention to perform an illegal act is not sufficient.
Nor is it presumed or inferred merely from the filing of an
incorrect or understated tax return. ‘The concealment of
an obligation known to exist, as distinct from a genuine
misunderstanding of what the law requires, is essential’.
It something more than “intentionally” and requires an
evil motive ४5 well as want of justification. Honest mis-
take and belief in good faith are complete defences to a
prosecution for evasion. And negligence can never amount
to wilfulness.

But since intention can never be gathered by direct
evidence, all relevant circumstances are taken into account,
including the background and education of the accused, the
nature of the acts involved, his professional experience
etc’, पु

Mere possession of large amounts of unaccounted cash,
while it may be some evidence, does not always establish
the taxability of the amounts involved‘, It has been held
by the Supreme Court that an “affirmative act” is required
in proof of “wilful evasion”. This, it is stated, is implied
from the word “attempt”’.

. Many of the “affirmative” acts have been enumerated Agirmative
by the United States Supreme Court in the Spies case’, °%*
though the court took care to observe that what it enun-
ciated was merely by way of illustration, and pointed out
that Congress had not defined or limited the methods by
which a wilful attempt to defeat and evade might be
accomplished and, that perhaps the Congress did not define
lest its effort to do so result in “some unexpected limita-
tion”. The illustrations given by the Supreme Court in the
Spies case are quoted below.
le eee affirmative wilful attempt may be inferred
from conduct such as keeping a double set of books,
making false invoices or documents, destruction of

1 Of. James v. U.S., (1961) 366 U,S. 215.
* United States v. Martell, 199 Federal 2d cert. denied
3७ USES, 99 670, denied (1953)
503 * Capone v. U.S,» 56, Federal od 296, cert, denied (1232) 286 U.S.
4 United States v. Nunan, 236 Federal jenied
33 US 472, i, 23: 24 576, cert, di (3957)
5 Spies v. U.S. (1943) U.S. 492, 498.
* Spies v. United States, (1 17 United Stet. (Jadieson
« delivering the opinion of dy 23749 499



Va'se return.

Understate-
ment.

Attempt.

178

APPENDIX 22 (contd.)

books or records, concealment of assets or covering wy

sources of income, handling of one’s affairs to avol

making the records usual in transactions of the kind,
and any conduct, the likely effect of which would be
to mislead or conceal.; If the tax-evasion motive plays
any part in such conduct the offence may be made
out........ 7

Besides the enumeration given in the Spies case, the
following have been used as evidence of wilful intent to
defraud :—

(a) use of large amounts of currency;?

(b) a much visited safety deposit box;?

(ec) purchase of property in the names of others;*
(व) bank accounts in fictitious names;

(०) diversion of funds from business; and

(f) failure to keep books and records coupled
with under statement of income.*

Since the illustrative list given in the Spies case does
not say anything about filing false income-tax return, the
question has been raised whether that would amount to
attempt to evade tax. The question seems to have been
answered in the affirmative by Appellate Courts. The-
Supreme Court has also held, that the positive act of wil-
fully filing a false claim in order to defeat the tax supports
a charge under this section’. The question, however,
cannot be regarded as absolutely settled. ~

Mere understatement of income does not support an
inference of wilfulness, ete., but a consistent pattern of
under-reporting large amounts of income may support it®.

As regards the expression “attempt” to evade tax, it has
been decided’ that the attempt need not consist of conduct
which would have culminated in a more serious crime but
for some impossibility ete. The prosecution can only be
for the attempt. The attempt itself is an independent
crime. Nothing is added to its criminality by success or
consumation.

‘Schuermann v. United States, (1949) 174 F 2d 397; certiorari demed
338 U.S. 831. .

"bid.

"Tid.

‘Holland v. U.S., (1954) 348 U.S. 121, 137 & 139.
SAchili v. United States. (1957) 358 U.S. 373.
*Holland v. U.S. (1954) 348 U.S. rar.

Spies v. United States, (1943) 317 U.S. 492.


179

APPENDIX 22 (contd.)

Though both the words “evade” and “defeat” have been eye,

used, and they are divided by the conjunction “or”, the two

are usually treated as synonymous, and indicate cheating

on iaxes by any devise. It must be added that an attempt

to defeat the payment of taxes by obstructing the processes

for collection has also been regarded as evasion’.
Failure to pay tax by itself, however, is not “evasion” *.
Similarly, mere failure to file return would not ordi- Failure to

narily amount to an offence under this section’, in the Bo

absence of some affirmative act showing “wilfulness”. A

mere passive neglect of the statutory duty of filing a return

does not fall under section 7201. Prior failure is, however,

sometimes regarded as evidence of an attempt to evade,

though the position on this point is not very clear. Courts

usually treat section 720] as one intended to secure enforce-

ment of the substantive provisions of the tax law, and sec-

tion 7203 as one intended merely to secure the enforcement

of its administrative provisions.

Prosecutions under section 7201 are mostly in respect of Taxes
income-tax, but prosecutions have been instituted for avoided.
attempted evasion of the following taxes, namely, excess
profits tax, social security taxes, estate duties, admission
taxes, ete.

The limitation period for prosecution is six years‘ from
the date of the wilful attempt. Ordinarily, the filing of the
false return is the mode of evasion charged, and the time
therefore runs from the date of the return.

While penalties for making false or fraudulent returns
with intent to defeat or evade tax have been there in
American law since the first Income-tax Law passed on
5th August, 1861, the two World Wars focussed attention
on the need for an efficient machinery for investigating tax
frauds. The Intelligence Bureau of the Internal Revenue
was formed in 1919. In 1924, wilfully attempted tax
evasion was changed from a misdemeanour to a felony.
The discovery of rackets in business and operations in
black-market after the Second jWorld War led to increased
activities in prosecution of offenders for tax evasion also.
In recent years, the investigating staff of the Internal
Revenue Service has been strengthened.

A prosecution for evasion of tax is not ordinarily insti- Principle
tuted, unless (i) there is a proof that the tax-payer is followed.

United States v. Bardin, 224 Federal, 2d 225, cert. denied ia
(3956) 350 U.S. 383. “4 5 cere dene

*Failure to pay tax or file return may however fall i
Internal ® fo pay ‘2 r file ret may under section 7203,

*Spies v. U.S. (1943) 317 U.S. 492. | ~
«Section 6531 of the Internal Revenue Code.


Administra-
vive
machinery.

APPENDIX 22 (contd.)

guilty beyond reasonable doubt, and (it) there is a reason-
able probability of securing a conviction. “Civil” penal-
ties charging extra tax can also be imposed, and in most
cases only the civil penalty is applied. The distinction
between civil and criminal fraud may depend on the .
flagrancy of the offence, the available evidence and the
Government’s burden of proof'.

Administrative Machinery

The Internal Revenue Service (an Agency of the
Treasury Department) collects the taxes imposed by the
Internal Revenue Code. Its headquarters are in Washing-
ton, and it has 9 regional offices, 64 district offices and

over 1,200 sub-offices*.
So far as the question of invest
concerned, its hierarchy is as follows*:
(7) National office at Washington Intelligence
Division—
(a) Tax Fraud Branch;
(b) Special Investigations Branch.
(2) Office of the Chief Counsel—
Assistant Chief Counsel (Enforcement).
(3) Office of the Regional Commissioner—
Regiona) Commissioner.
Regional Counsel.
(Chief Counsel's Office).
Assistant Regional Commissioner  (Intelli-
gence).
(4) District Director's Office—
(०) District Director;
(0) Assistant District Director, Tntelligence
Division—
(a) Tax Fraud Branch;
(b) Special Investigation Branch.
Criminal cases relating to tax evasion are investigated
by the officers of the Internal Revenue Service, scrutinis-
ed by the Enforcement Division of the Regional Counsel
and prosecuted by the Tax Division of the Department of
Justice. That Department has a full-fledged Criminal Tax
Section, having several Attorneys.
1 Crockett, Federal Tax System of United States, (1955), Page 136.
4 Crockett, Federal Tax System of U.S., (1955), page 136.
* Based on information given ia Crockett, Federal Tax System of U.S.,
(7959, pages 243, 246.

ation of frauds is



181

APPENDIX 22 (contd.)

in each district, there is a District Director of Internat
Revenue, contrelled by the Assistant Regional Commis-
sioner, Intelligence. Ordinarily speaking, the District
Director, acting through the Chief, Intelligence Division,
is in charge of investigation of criminal violations of the
Revenue laws. Special officers of the Intelligence Divi-
sion (called “Special Agents”!) investigate cases of frauds,
and the District Director, with the concurrence of the
Chief, Intelligence Division, recommends prosecution and
sends the recommendations to the Assistant Regional
Commissioner (Intelligence). If the latter agrees with
the recommendations, he transmits the papers io the
Regional Counsel, and the case is assigned in the latter's
office to an Attorney in the Enforcement Division, who
determines whether the evidence shows guilt beyond
reasonable doubt and a reasonable probability of convic-
tion. Hle then sends the case to the Criminal Tax Section
of the Department of Justice.

Important cases are scrutinised by the Chief Counsel,
Enforcement Division at Washington.

The Tax Division of the Department of Justice, through
its Criminal Tax section, is the final authority to decide
whether to proceed with the prosecutien or not®. Its
attorneys are highly specialised in tax frauds work. If a
tax-payer asks for discussion at a conference, the request
is granted. The object of this conference is not settle-
ment: it is intended to give the tax-payer an opportunity
to explain suspicious circumstances. Tax-payers are
allowed to appear through Counsel in such conferences.

Actua] prosecution is conducted by a United States
Attorney®.

Where there is no intent to defeat a tax, a compromise
might be entered into; otherwise it is not entered into. The
civil liability is discussed only after the criminal case is
disposed of, unless the court directs otherwise. The judi-
cial determination of the amount of the proposed civil
liability is supplied to the tax payer. but seftlement of
the civil liability is not discussed until the penal case is
decided’. This course is adopted in erder to render futile
any attempt to offer to pay the civil tax liability and get
the criminal cese dropped. It is also believed. that since
prosecution is a graver penalty, it must be disposed of
first. Lastly, a prosecution in order to achieve its deter-
rent object, must occur at a time close to the date of the
offence.

व Casey, Federal Tax Practice, (1955), Vol. 4, Paragraph 15-3
and 15°4.

® Casey, Federal Tax Practice, (1955), Vol. 4, para. 15°5.

+ Gasey, Federal Tax Practice, (1955), Vol. 4, para 15°6.


Other
sections.

182
APPENDIX 21 (coneld.)

Apart from section 7201 of the Internal Revenue Code,
there are certain other sections in the Internal Revenue
Code which deal with wilful failure to collect ete. tax or
to file a return or to pay tax or to keep records ete.
section 287 (false claims for refund), section
371 (conspiracy to defraud), section 1001 (false statement)
and section 1621 (perjury) of the Criminal Code (U.S.
Code 18) can also be used for punishing various types of
offences relating to tax. It is not, however, necessary to
quote them here.

Further,

APPENDIX 23
Tue Pena, Cope AND THE PREVENTION OF CoRRUPTION,
eve, AcT

The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 creates only
one substantive offence, namely, “criminal misconduct”,
which is defined in section 5(1), The main object of the
Act was to deal with the kind of “misdemeanour in which
Government servants or public officers with no ostensible
means of support or inadequate support are living ob-
viously above their income and are in a position to invest
in property, which it appears on the face of it to be im-
possible that they should have had the money to acquire
or at any rate that they should have got those resources
honestly”, It was felt that it was difficult to pin down,
because in such cases all that the Government or the police
could find was that the Government servant could have
no ostensible source, which could be accounted for as the
basis of extravagant expenditure. No specific action
could be alleged against him or proved in the way of
accepting a bribe or obtaining the money by corrupt
means. The object of section 5 was to make it possible
to detect and punish officers who had “managed to evade
detection in that way”®.

The proposal for enacting the Act arose out of the
recommendation made by a Committee appointed in
Bengal in 1944, which suggested that legislation was
necessary to tighten up the law relating to bribery and
corruption. The Provincial Government of Bengal referred
the matter to the Central Government, suggesting Central
legislation’.

The recommendation was, that a new offence should
be created to provide, that if a public servant was in
possession of accretion of wealth, he should be deemed
guilty of the offence of criminal misconduct, etc., unless

4Speech of Mr. Porter, Home Secretary, Council of State Debates,
dated 25th Feburary, 1947, Vol. I, No. 5, page 180 «tf seq.
Ibid.

*$peech of Mr. ‘Portcr, Council. of State Debates, 25th February’
1947 Vol. 1, No. 5, page 180 ef seq. » agth


183
APPENDIX. -23 (contd.)

he could prove that the accretion was honestly obtained.
Now, it was not possible to frame a substantive clause
creating such an offence. The only way in which the
object (of making the unaccountable possession of more
money than a public servant ought to have an offence)
could be achieved, was the enactment of the presumption
in section 5(3}. Clause (c) was put to make it clear, that
of the various ways by which a public servant could im-
properly acquire wealth, this was one’. It may not be
possible to pin a public servant down that he has received
a money as a bribe or by misappropriation or by abuse.
All that could be proved was, that the public servant had
been buying property or acquiring a fleet of motor cars,
ete., beyond his means. That explains the form of section
5.

While bribery is a form of curruption, the long title of
the Act makes it clear that other forms of curruption are
also sought to be checked by the Act. As it is a socially
useful measure conceived in the public interest, it is to be
liberally construed so as to bring about the desired object
of preventing corruption among public servants and at
the same time, harassment of the honest among them’.

Though four classes of misconduct are mentioned in
section 5(2) (a) to (d), apparently a charge merely under
section 5(2) would suffice’.

The ingredients of the offence are described in section
5(1), and the penal provision is in section 5(2)*.

It would be useful to note the points of difference
between the Indian Penal Code and the Prevention etc.
Act. The latter Act contains various special rules of
evidence, investigation and procedure which show how
the provisions of the Act differ from the Indian Penal
Code. The most important provision of the Act is section
5(3), under which possession of pecuniary resources or
property disproportionate to the known sources of income
raises a rebuttable presumption that the accused is guilty
of “criminal misconduct”, Another presumption is that
enacted in section 4 about motive, etc.®-’.

म Ibid.
1 M. Narayanan v, State of Kerala, (1963), 2 Crim, L.J. 186.
3 Compare Sajjan Singh v. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1964. S.C. 464.

* Ram Sagar v. State of Bihar, (1964) 2 Criminal Law Journal 65,
68, para. 8 (Supreme Court).

> Sajjan Singh v. State of Purgab, ALR. 1964 5.0. 464.
* See State of Madras v. Vaidyanathan, A.LR. 1958 S.C, 61.
"Inte P.S. Aravamudiu, ALR. 1960 Mad. 27 (Rameswamty J),
47 Law—13.

हि


18६

APPENDIX 28 (contd.)
{As to section 4(1) of the Prevention etc. Act, it may

be pointed out that the presumption under that is

gatory™*].

obli--

The points of difference as to substantive provisions:

are analysed below.

Cnart No. 1
(Obtaining gratification)

Section 161, Indian Penal
Code.

Section 5 (ya), Prevention
हार, Act,

Offence can be committed by Offence can be committed only

a person who ts or expects to

be a public servant.
An isolated act is enough.

by a public servant.

+ There must be habitual accept-

ance, etc., of gratification.

The punishment is imprison- The punishment is imprisonment

ment upto 3 years or fine
or both.

up to 7 years, and also fine.
Further, the — imprisonment
shall not be less than one
year in the absence of special
reasons to the contrary.

Section 5 (2). As regards fine,
the court must take into
consideration the various
factors mentioned in section
5 (2A).

Cnarr No, 2
(Obtaining valuable thing without consideration)

Section 165, Indian Penal
Code.

An isolated act is enough

Punishment is imprisonment
upto 3 years or fine or
both.

Section § (1)(b), Prevention,
etc., Act.

There just be habitual accept-

ance, etc., of any valuable
thing without consideration,
ete,
Punishment is imprisonment

upto 7 years, and also fine.
Imprisonment should not be
less than one year in the
absence of special reasons
to the contrary. Section 5(2),
Regarding fine, the factors:
mentioned in section 5 (2A)
should be considered.

3 Dhanvantrai Desai v. State of Maharashtra ALR. 1964 S.C. 575.

2 State of Gujarat v, Madhav Bai, A.1R. 1964 Gujarat 206.

* On Pa 5 (7) (a) generally, See Ram Krishna v. State, ALR 1944
» Cs 476. ‘


185

APPENDIX. 23 (contd.)

Cuart No. 3
(Misappropriation, etc.)

Section 405, Indian Penai
Code.

Section 5 (77०) Prevention,
ete, Act.

There must be dishonese mis-
appropriation or conversion
for own use or use or dis-
pesal in violation of law, etc.,
under section 405.

Regarding use or disposal, it
must be in violation of a
direction of law or legal con~
tract.

The public servant must be
“ entrusted ” with property
or with any “ dominion”
over it.

If the public servant does not
commit the misappropriation
himself, it is requisite that
he must “ wilfully suffer”
any other person to do.

Punishment 15

imprisonment
upto 10 years and also fine.

It is enough if there is “*dis-
honest” or ‘‘ fraudulent”
misappropriation’ or othersvise
conversion for own use’.

This is not necessary.

The property must be entrusted
to the public servant, or must
be under his control as a public
servant.

is sufficient if he allows
another person to do so.

Tt

Punishment is imprisonment
upto 7 years and also fine.
Imprisonment must be
for at least one year etc.,
section 5 (2).

(By corrupt, etc., means or abuse of position obtaining any

valuable

thing, etc.)

No provision in Indian
Penal Code.

Section 5 (z)(d) Prevention,
etc, Act.

The offence of obtaining etc.
a valuable thing or pecuniary,
advantage by “corrupt or
illegal means or by other-
wise abusing his position as a
public servant ” (and thus com-
mitting criminal misconduct)
is new.

1 Cf, Om Prakash v. State of U.P, ALR. 1957 S.C. 458.
* Lending Government money to others is also red, Munna Laly.
U0, AIR 1964 S.C. 28, part 10. 1 ame cove ale

3 Public Prosecutor v. Pachiripilli. AJR: 19$5 Mad. 214.


186
APPENDIX 23 (contd.)

No. provision in Indian Section 5 (Xd) Prevention,
Penal Code. etc., Act.

The words “pecuniary  ad-
vantage” include cash pay-
ment also'.

Section 5 (70६) is not confined
to direct benefit, and covers
cases where a public servant
causes wrongful loss to the
Government by _ benefiting
a third party*.

It may be noted that section
5 (2X@) does not require
habitual acceptance of bribe.*

The clause has been interpreted in the under-mentioned
case‘,

Section 5(1) (d) has two main ingredients, first, the
means adopted, and the second, the end attained. ‘The
means adopted are described as—

(9 currupt, or

(मं) illegal means, or

(iii) otherwise abusing his position as public
servant.

The expression abuse of position is not defined, but
“dishonesty”, it has been held,’ is implicit in the word
“abuse”.

As regards the end to be obtained, it is provided that
the public servant must have obtained— .

(a) for himself, or
(0) for any other person, a valuable thing or
pecuniary advantage.

It is not necessary that the public servant must do
something in connection with his duty.*-t

1 Mahfus Ali v. The State, ALR. 1953 All. 110 (B. Muketii J.)
6 ©) M. Narayanan Nambiar v. State of Kerala (1963) 2 Crim, L.J. 186

* Mabfuz Ali v. State, A.LR. 1953 All. 110, 112, para. 15.

+ Bhagwan Sahai v. State of Pusjab, A.I.R. 1960. S.C. 487.

5 M. Narayanan ४. State of Kerala (1963), 2 Cr. L.J., 186 (S.C,)

* Dhaneshwar v. Delhi Administration. ALR. 1962 S.C. 1965,

7 Inte K. V. Ayyaswamy, ALR. 1965 AP. 105.



187

APPENDIX 23 (coneld.)

Section 5(7) (d) is thus wide enough to cover—

(a) almost all acts which would be offences under
section 5(1) (a) to (c), or the relevant Section of
the Indian Penal Code, and

(6) many acts which would not be offences under
section 5(7) (a) to (०)

APPENDIX 24
SUBSTANDARD GOODS AND CHEATING

The point for consideration is whether, where a ‘person
has supplied goods of inferior quality, or goods which are
not according to specification, or of lesser quantity than
stipulated, his act comes within the scope of section 420,
Indian Penal Code.

(1) There is only one reported Indian case in which
the matter seems to have been directly dealt with’. The
facts were these. The accused contracted to deliver to
Rau Brothers 260 “dokras” of fully good, machine-ginned
cotton. In pursuance of this contract, the accused deliver-
ed 260 “dokras” largely composed of cotton-seed, kapas
and rubbish, carefully packed into the middle of the
dokras, while all around the sides was I laced good ginned.
cotton. The admixture of inferior stuff was found in all
the “dokras”, and it varied from 6 to 15 per cent against
the quantity of 3 or 14 which might be expected ordinarily
to be found in dokras. it was held, that the accused was
guilty of the offence of cheating under section 420 of the
Penal Code. [

(2) Of course, the general rule is? that a mere breach
of contract cannot give rise to a criminal prosecution.
The distinction between a case of mere breach of contract
and one of cheating depends upon the intention of the
accused at the time of the alleged inducement, which
may be judged by subsequent aets; but the subsequent
act is not the sole criterion of this intention’. Where
there is no clear and conclusive evidence of the criminal
intention of the accused at the time the offence is said to
have been committed and where the party said to be
aggrieved has an alternative remedy in a civil court, the
matter should not be allowed to be fought in the criminal
courts?.

(3) As has been held‘, the representation can be implied
from conduct'.

Bmp. <. Kasji Shivaji (1912). 14 Bom. LR. 137, 1g Indi
669 (Chandavarkar and Batchelor 1). 37 14 Indian cases

°Si g a 6) 37 Cr. LJ. High |.
Ai 1) ez, ¥. Tat (193 37 L J 38, (Patna High Court) (Fazl.

३568 A.LR. 195

9 Tripura १25...
\Khoda’ Bo. र. SLLR. 32 Ce.
won bet Balers हे 38 941 947 (शा and

*. tha facts in M.A. Kelech ¥. Emp. AIR. 1927 Mad. $44.


188
APPENDIX 25

Some Provisions or Hinpu Law REGARDING HIGH PRICES
AND ADULTERATION

Provisions penalising adulteration and high prices
were known to ancient Hindu law-givers. By way of ex-
ample one may refer to certain texts of “Yajnavalkya! "—

False weights

He who abstracts one-eighth share (of an article sold)
py a (false) measure or balance, shall be fined two
hundred (panas). Where a greater or lower (share is
abstractea), a proportionately (higher or lower fine
should be imposed).

Adulteration

He who adulterates with inferior (articles) vendible
medicines, oils, salt, perfumes, corn, coarse sugar and the
like, shall be made to pay sixteen panas.

When (by some operation) inferior earth, hide, gem,
yarn, iron, wood, bark, or cloth is made (to appear to be
of) a superior kind, the fine is eight-fold of the (commo-
dity) to be sold.

Palming off

He who pledges or sells a sealed casket (fraudulently)
substituted (for a superior casket shewn) or the counter-
feit of a natural vessel shall be fined (in the following
manner).

“(When the value of the thing palmed on the buyer, or
a pledge is) less than a pana, ‘the fine is fifty (Panas)
(when) a pana one hundred (panas), (when) two panas,
two hundred (panas) when the value is higher, (the fine

is) higher.

Prices

For those knowing whether (the price set by them)
is higher or lower (than the maximum rates fixed by the
kind) unite in fixing a price too heavy for Karus
(workmen) and Siplins (artisans) the fine is the highest.

For those traders who conspire to obstruct (the sale
of a commodity by demanding it), or selling it at an im-
proper price, the highest fine is laid down.

The sale or purchase (of articles) should every day be
made at the rates fixed by the king, the profit derived in
this manner is declared (to be) propitious for traders. ;

*Sen-Gupta, Evolution of Ancient Indian Law, (1953), page 316. f



1383
APPENDIX 25 (concld.)

A trader shall make five per cent as profit on commo-
alities of the same country, and ten (per cent) on the
foreign, if the purchase and sale take place immediately,
(ie. on the same day as that of the purchase).

The rates should be so fixed (by the king) as to be
advantageous both to the buyer and the seller after add-
ing to be (cost) value of the commodity, the expenses in-
curred.”

APPENDIX 26
Foop ApULTERATION LaWstOF SOME COUNTRIES

A list of the laws relating to adulteration of food (food
legislation) in some of the countries of the world is given
below: —

Australia

In Australia each State has its own Pure Food Act.
But uniformity is secured after the creation of the Na-
tional Health and Medical Research Council which
makes recommendations for uniformity in legislation’.

Burma
Food and Drugs Act, 1928 is the main law.
Canada

The present law in Canada regarding pure food is con-
‘tained in the Food and Drugs Act, 1953, which is a federal
statute, The Department of National Health and Wel-
fare is responsible for the administration of the Act
through the Food and Drugs Directorate. The Directo-
rate, besides its headquarters establishment, maintains
Alistrict and regional offices. High priority is given 10
activities involving a hazard to heal Fa; second priority is
given to hygienic violations relating to filth, decomposi-
tion of foods ete. and third priority to mere frauds and
.other economie violations.

The validity of the Act as falling under “criminal law”
bas been upheld’.

Ceylon
Food and Drugs Act, 1949 is the main law.

Note prepared mainly om the, basis of information contained in (a) Food
and Agriculture Organization (United Nations) pamphlets relating to “Food
Additive Controt” in Canada Denmark, Germany, U.K. and France, and (७)
in the Report of the F.A.O. Regional Seminar on Food Legislation for Asia
and Far East (27th August to 3rd September, 1962), F.A.O. Report No.
1582 (Rome 1962).

3868. “Pure Food and Pure Food Legislation”—edited by Amos (But-
rerworth). :

*Standard Sausage Co. v. Lee, (1934) 1 DLR, 706.



190

APPENDIX 26 (contd.)
Deamark

As far back as 22nd October, 1701, an Order concerning
the Administration of the Poliee directed that the Com-
missioner of Police should not permit the offering for sale
of food or beverages that were tainted or unwholesome
or might cause sickness. Later Ordinances and Regula-
tions covered certain aspects of purity of food. On 1st
May, 1860, a Milk Control Order was issued. First law
on the examination of food was passed on 9th April, 1891.
In 190 an Act for the examination of food was passed.
Subsequent amendmentg, dealt with certain aspects of
food purity. : %

Enforcement of food '5 is by the local health autho-
rities, the local public health medical officer, the police,
the customs, the National Veterinary Service etc., and the
National Control Board for Dairy Products. The National
Health Service deals with the subject. A National Food
Institute was established under an Act of 5th June, 1959.
The Institute is to look after the work of the various
laboratories and also have a Central Laboratory for food
control and an independent labouratory for food toxico-
logical research. .

England

It is said that England was the first country in the
English speaking world to have a separate law for Adul-
teration of Fi in 1860, In fact, in the 15th Century,
steps to deal with adulteration of food were initiated not
by the Government but by the important Merchant com-
panies of London who managed to obtain official regula-
tions or jegislation to check frauds in the particular arti-
cles handi by them. In the 16th Century, the excise
authorities t interest in the matter and legislation
regarding purity of food was enacted in the interest of the
revenue. It was the extensive af tion of the microscope
to the examination of food by on Hassall that gave a
new turn to the subject. Parliament appointed a Com-
mission to consider the question of adu! ftoration and its
report in 1960 led to an Act for the Prevention of Adul-
teration of articles of Food and Drugs in 1860, The Act of
1875 (Sale of Food and Drugs Act, 1875) made compulsory
the appointment of public analysts by local authorities.
Thereafter a number of enactments dealing with special
articles of food followed. The main Act now in force is
the Food and Drugs Act, 1955 (for England), and it
eonsolidates almost all the previous enactments.

In England, the Food and Drugs Act, 1955 (4 Eliz 2c.
16) is the main Act dealing with adulteration of food and

Pure Food and Pure Food Legislation”"—edited Amos fo
westh) (Papers of the 1960 ccbbretions for cemenary of the 220, (फिर:



19

APPENDIX 26 (contd.)

drugs. The general penal sections are sections 106 and 107
in the 1955 Act. There are certain special punishments
provided for in sections 5(3), 18 (4), 22(1), 23(1). (3),
27(1), 52(4), 55(1), 57(1), (3), 59, 60, 69(2), 100(5) and
105(1), (8). Certain additional punishments are provided
for in sections 8(4), 12(2), 68(3), and Schedule II, para-
graph 5.

(There are separate Acts for Scotland etc.)

Duties of administering and enforcing the Act are en-
trusted to the local “Food and Drugs authorities” ie. the
Common Council of the City of London, the Councils of
many larger boroughs and urban districts and the country
councils. Each food and drug authority has to appoint a
duly qualified public analyst with the approval of the
appropriate Minister. Sampling officers are also appointed
by these authorities. In matters of general interests of
consumers, the Minister of Agriculture and Food may
also direct a departmental officer to procure samples.
Samples are divided into three parts, one part being given
to the seller, the other part being given to the Public
Analyst and the third retained for possible future com-
parison, The Public Analyst analyses with all due expe-
dition the samples, and gives to the sampling officers a
certificate showing the result of the analysis. The seller
is entitled to a copy of the certificate on nominal fee.
certificate showing that the sample does not comply with
the law does not necessarily lead to a prosecution, as the
public health inspector (under whose instructions the
sampling officer usually acts) may ask the seller or manu-
facturer for observations on an adverse report, and the
explanation offered may be considered before 8 prosecu-
tion is undertaken.

The decision to take proceedings usually lies with the
public health committee or the medical officer of health

of the local authority. On the request of a party, the
court may cause the retained part of the sample to be
sent to the Government Chemist for analysis and his
certificate can be used in evidence.

Besides the Act of 1955, the Therapeutic Substances
Act, 1956 is also of interest.

France

The basic law in France is the law of Ist August, 1905
for the prevention of fraudulent practices. The purpose
of this law is to check frauds perpetrated in connection
with all merchandise, ie, all deception or attempt at
deception intended to mislead the buyer as to essentials.
(६ als» provides for checking adulteration of foods, drinks
and drugs ete. As early as the year 1268, a Code was
drawn up by the trade guilds of Paris containing regula-
tions applicable to producers and dealers of foods. The-


we
APPENDIX 26 (contd.)

Code was approved by Provost Etiennee Boileau. Addi-
tion of unauthorised seeds injurious to the human body to
spices from the East was also prohibited. Fines, confisca-
tion, whipping, pillorying of a vendor of rotten eggs and
of the seller of adulterated butter was ordered. A person
who sold watered milk was to have a funnel placed in his
throat, and the watered milk was to be poured down until
doctor or a barber declared that the man could not
ow any more without danger.

Articles 423, 318 and 475 of the French Penal Code of
1510 contain somewhat scanty provisions regarding adul-
ation. But, towards the middle of 19th Century, adul-
ion and falsification of food became increasingly
frequent, as fraudulent operators learnt to exploit skil-
fuily the progress made by chemistry to cover their un-
lawful activities. Numerous international congresses on
public health, medicine etc. discussed the question of
dulteration of foodstuffs. Ultimately in 1905, it was
ded to intensify and centralise the controls of foods,
which had been left for long to the mercies of insufficient-
ly skilled municipal officials.

Enforcement of the law is mainly under the charge of

_ the Technical Activities Division of the Ministry of Agri-
culture whose Inspectors carry out inspection.. There are
specified contingents whose jurisdiction is nation-wide.
They exercise special and very strict control over certain
products, such as fruits and vegetables for export, wines,
flour. textiles etc. Laboratory service is extensive, con-
sisting of three Government laboratories and about 100
other approved laboratories, the Jaiter doing part-time
work for prevention of fraud. There are specialised labo-
ratories for dairy products, wines, fertilizers, seeds, etc.
The inspection branch has 270 officials and 110 agents, and
about 200 scientific personnel. In addition, in Paris, the
Police Department has the Inspection Corps (70 persons)
and there is the Paris Municipal Laboratory (25 persons).
Control of medicine and drugs is exercised by the phar-
macy inspectors; military supplies are checked by special
staff, wholesomeness of water is checked by departmental
inspectors of public health and so on.

The perfects are responsible for transmitting to the
Public Prosecutor files containing reports of violations and
official laboratory results indicating frauds, adulteration, or
a breach of regulation. The Public Prosecutor may—

(® file the matter, if there is no offence; or

{ii) place it before the court, if the evidence is
sufficient, or

(#i) send it to the Examining Magistrate if further

information is necessary or if the party concerned
claims the right to submit expert counter-evidence.



193

APPENDIX 26 (contd.)

Fraud and adulteration are punishable with imprison-
ment (three months to 2 years) or by fines. Where
adulteration is injurious to heaith, imprisonment is
mandatory.

Germany

In the Federal Republic of Germany, the Food Act of
1927 and the Colour Act of 1887 are the two main laws;
the former has been extensively amended by the Food Act
of 215६ December, 1958. Various rules (called Ordinances)
under the two Acts deal with matters of detail, Apart from
the Federal Health Department, the German Research
Association (through its Food Additive Commissions) and
the Federation of Food Law and Food Science do useful
work in preparation of relevant legislation. The German
Research Association has done considerable work on Food
culouring and food preservatives. The Federation for Food
Law and Food Science consists of members of major food
producing and food trading corporations, and holds a
“mediatory” position between the “stringent demands” of
the Government and the interests of the food industry.

The Amendment of 1955, section 4{b), sub-section 4
specifically prohibits sale of foods in which there are resi-
dues of insecticide, Pesticides, herbicides etc. exceeding the
maximum permissible amount,

There are institutes financed by the Federal Ministry of
Food which analyse food and determine food additives.
There are such separate institutes for grain, fish, food pro-
ducts, dairy fat, ete.

Hongkong
Publie Health and Urban Service Ordinance, 1960 is the
main law.
India

In addition to the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act,
1954, reference may be made to the Agricultural Products
(Grading and Marketing) Act, 1937. The Fruit Products
Order of 1955 and Vegetable Oil Products Control Order
also regulate the concerned products.

Japon

Main laws are Farm Products Inspection Law, Agricul-
tural Standard Law and Export Inspection Law; Law for
the Control of Food and other Articles, 1900; Food Sanita-
tion Law, 1947. Food legislation _is administered by the
Ministry of Health and Welfare. Fraudulent sale in any
commodity, including foodstuffs, is dealt with by the Fair
Trade Commission under the Anti-Monopoly Law, 1947.


104
APPENDIX 26 (concld.)

Korea
Food Sanitation Law (20th January, 1962), is the main
law.
Malaya

Sale of Food and Drugs Ordinance, 1952 is the main
law.

APPENDIX 27
BASIC PRINCIPLES FOR PURE FOOD LAWS

The two main objectives of food legislation are—
(i) to check adulteration; and
(४) to prevent frauds.

1n the minds of the public, “pure food” means food that
is wholesome and free from anything that is in any way
harraful to health and free from the addition or substrac-
tion of anything which might impair wholesomeness, and
present to the public in a forthright and factual manner’.
The consumer has to be safeguarded against dangers to his
health as well as against commercial frauds.

Foods are by their very nature products of many differ-
ent varieties, composition and degrees of purity, and are
subject, with respect to production, transportation and
distribution, to many different nutritional, hygienic and
fabelling requirements. Therefore, the basic law can only
lay down broad general principles, while regulations must
contain detailed provisions governing different categories
of products*.

In modern times, the minimum standards below which
food should not be sold have also been emphasised, as these
grade standards are important in featuring the produce of
a country and thus gaining a reputation for it.

Thus pure food laws deal with (i) health, (ii) frauds,
(४४) marketing.

At the Regional Seminar on Food Legislation’, the
important Tequirements for facilitating enforcement were
thus described: —

“(a) definitions of such key words as food, label,
advertisement, adulteration, sale, package, misbranding,
warranty and unsanitary conditions, etc, rather than
rely Pv the common or dictionary meaning of such
words;

(0) procedures for sampling and analyses;
4F.A.0. Regional Seminar on Food etc. Report, (1962), page 7.

*[bid, page 7.
*F.A.0. Regional Seminar on Foad etc. Report, (1962), page 8.



APPENDIX 27 (contd.)
(८) powers of inspection and the procedures to be
followed;
(०) penalties;
(e) warranties and guarantees;
(f) prohibition of the importation of articles not
complying with the law.”.

The Seminar recommended ! that each country should
have same law on the basis of basic principles
given in its Report, that maximum and- minimum
penalties be prescribed depending on the nature
and gravity of the offence, that detailed standards
for new, traditional and processed foods may be
prescribed; and that each Government should set up
a Statutory Co-Ordinating Committee on Food Control,
consisting of representatives of the various Government
Departments responsible for the many aspects of food legis-
lation (Agriculture, Industry, Trade, Health etc.) and of
trade and manufacturing interests. The Seminar also
stressed the need for immediate steps in establishing appro-
priate training programmes for the field staff, laboratory
technicians and other personnel.

As regards enforcement, its recommendations may be
quoted in detail’: —

“@, Governments should pay attention to the enforce-
ment of food legislation in places where food is produced
or manufactured in order to ensure at the source that food
js not exposed to health hazards or subjected to adultera-
tion or fraud.

7. Governments should take steps at an early date to set
up or strengthen their marketing organizations, taking the
necessary legislative action so as to be able to progressively
grade and quality-mark according to well-defined standards,
all important food articles produced or manufactured in the
country for sale or distribution, and thus facilitate the
euforcement of food laws and make them effective.

8. In view of the important role of the consumers and
consumers’ association in the enforcement of food legisla-
tion, Governments provide for the education of consumers
and of those involved in the handling of foods, and assist
consumers’ associations in becoming acquainted with the
food legislation and control measures.

9. Governments keep the Legislation Research Branch,
F.A.O, Headquarters, Rome, Italy, regularly informed on
any new food legislation enacted or rules framed there-
under or any amendments to existing laws or regulations
and supply, when possible, English or French translations
of the texts. This would enable the F.A.O. to act as the

38,७.0, Regional Seminer on Food, etc, Report, (1962), page 17.
penn be Regional Siminar on Pood, ew., Repert, (1962), page 18,



186

APPENDIX 27 (concld.)

Central body for the exchange of information on food legis-
lation between the countries in the Region with the aid
of prometing further improvement and harmonisation of
their food legislation.”.

The variety and complexity of food legislation justify
these observations :—

“Sound food legislation must depend upon know-
ledge in several different fields.”.

Of these fields, three are of outstanding importance—
the agricultural and veterinary sciences concerned with
raw materials, the chemical sciences concerned with prepa-
ratory measures, and the biological sciences concerned with
the effects of food.'

It should be realised, that “the price of pure food is
eternal vigilance on the part of the Food Chemists in indus-
try and the Public Analyst”.?

APPENDIX 28
PROVISIONS IN TASMANIA (AUSTRALIA) REGARDING ANTI-
SOCIAL, ETC., OFFENCES

I 2

Evasion and avoidance of (1) Stamp Duties Act, 1931
taxes lawfully imposed. Section 23, sub-section

(s) (०) (० and (f).

(2) Deceased Persons’ Estates
Duties Act, 1931.
Section 38.

(3) Land and Income Taxation
Act, 1910.
Sections 195, 197 and 198
(Extracts attached).

Adulteration of foodstuffs Public Health Act, 1962.

and drugs. Sections 90 to 98, and 100
(Not copied).
Theft, etc. Sections 226 to 234 Criminal
Code Act 1924.

Misuse of their position by Criminal Code Act, 1924.
public servants in making of Sections 83 to 87, 100, 115,
contracts and disposal of 265, 266 and 297.
public property, issue of (Extracts attached).
licences and permits and
similar other matters.

4A.C. Frazer in “Pure Rood and Pure Pood Laws” (Edited by Amos)
153) 155-

J.H. Hamence in “Pure Food and Pore: Food Laws’ etc. (Edited by
Amos), $, at page 20. +


197

APPENDIX 28 (contd.)

Copy of sections 195, 197 and 198 from the Land and Income
Taxation Act, 1910.

“195. (1) Any person who—

(a) fails or neglects to duly furnish any veturn or
information, or to comply with any requirement of the
Commissioner as and when required by this Act, or by
the Commissioner;

(8) without just cause shown by him, refuses o1
neglects to duly attend and give evidence when requir-
ed by the Commissioner or any officer duly authorised
by him, or to truly and fully answer any questions put
10 him, or to produce any book or papers required of
him by the Commissioner or any such officer;

(c) makes or delivers a return which is false in
any particular, or makes any false answer, whether
verbally or in writing; or

(d) aids oc assists any other person in any manner
whatsoever to commit an offence against paragraph (c)
of this sub-section,

shall be guilty of an offence.

Penalty.—Not less than two pounds nor more than one
hundred pounds.

(2) A prosecution in respect of an offence against para.
graphs (a), (c), or (d) of sub-section (1) of this section may
be commenced at any time.

(3) Any person who, after conviction for an offence
against this section, continues to fail to comply with the
requirements of this Act, or of the Commissioner, in respect
of which he was convicted, shall be guilty of an offence and
punishable as provided in section one hundred and ninety-
eight,

(4) It shall be a defence to a prosecution for an offence
against paragraph (c) of sub-section (1) of this section if
the defendant proves that the false particulars were given,
or the false statement was made, tl rough ignorance or
inadvertence.

197. If, in any prosecution under paragraph (c) of sub-
section (1) of section 195, it is proved that the tax-payer has
wilfully made or delivered a false return with intent to
defraud, the amount by which his actual income for the
year in respect of which such return was made, exceeds the
amount of income shown in such return, shall be deemed
to be income tax payable by the tax-payer; and may be
recovered accordingly. ~

Offences.

Under-
statement
of income.


Avoiding
‘taxation.

Corruption
of public
officers.

Extortion by
public
officer :
Oppression.

Public
officers
Interested
sn Contract.

198
APPENDIX 28 (contd.)

198. Any person who, by any wilful act, default, or
neglect, or by any fraud, art, or contrivance whatever,
avoids, or attempts to avoid, assessment or taxation, shall
be guilty of an offence.

Penalty.—Not less than fifty pounds nor more than five
hundred pounds, and in addition an amount not exceeding
double the amount of tax payment whereof he has avoided
or attempted to avoid.”

Copy of sections 83 to 87, 110, 115, 265, 266 and 297 of the
Criminal Code Act, 1924.
“83. Any person who—

(a) being a public officer, corruptly solicits, re-
ceives, or obtains, or agrees to receive or obtain, any
property or benefit of any kind for himself or any other
Person on account of anything done or omitted, or to
be done or omitted, by him in or about the discharge
of the duties of his office; or

(b) corruptly gives, confers, or procures, or pro-
mises or offers to give, confer, or procure, or attempt
to procure, to, upon, or for any public officer, or any
other person, any property or benefit of any kind on
account of anything done or omitted, or to be done or
omitted. by such officer in or about the discharge of
the duties of his office,

is guilty of a crime.
Charge: —
Under (a): Official corruption.
Under (b): Bribery of a public officer.

Tasmania

84. (1) Any public officer who, under colour of office and
otherwise than in good faith, demands, takes, or accepta
from any person for the performance of his duty as such
officer, any reward beyond his proper pay and emoluments,
is guilty of a crime.

Charge:—Extortion as a public officer.

(2) Any public officer who, in the exercise or under
colour ot exercising his office, wilfully and unlawfully in-
flicts upon any person any bodily harm, imprisonment, or
other injury is guilty of a crime.

Charge: —Oppression.
85. (1) Any public officer who knowingly holds,
directly or indirectly, any personal interest in any con-

tract made by or on behalf of the Government of this
State concerning any public matter is guilty of a crime.


198
APPENDIX 28 (contd.)

Cherge:~ Being interested in a contract as a public
officer,

(2) A person is not deemed to be interested in any
such contract as aforesaid because he is a shareholder in
a@company of mere than twenty members which is a
party thereto, unless he is a director of such company.

Corruption

86. Any person appointed to act as a valuator or arbi- of valuator.

trator to determine the value of any land, or of any in-
jury done to any property who—

(6) having to his knowledge any substantial in-
terest in such property acts as such valuator or arbi-
trator without disclosing the fact that he holds such
interest to the person appointing him; or

(b) acts corruptly or dishonestly as such valuator
or arbitrator, i
is guilty of a crime.

Charge:—Dishonest dealing as a valuator or as an arbi-
trator. L

87. Where by any statute any person is authorised or False
required to certify to any fact, any such person who gives Satetory
a certificate which to his knowledge is false in any ficates.
material particular is guilty of a crime.

Charge: —Giving a false certificate.

110. Any public officer who discloses (except to some Disclos «
person to whom he is authorised to publish or communi- Cocrete,
cate the same) any fact which comes to his Possession, *
by virtue of his office and which it is his duty to keep
secret, is guilty of a crime.

Charge: —Disclosing official secrets.

115. (1) Any public officer who wilfully and without Omission
lawful excuse omits to do any act which it is his duty to by public
do as such officer is guilty of a crime. officer to

हु पा

(2) No person shall be prosecuted under this section
without the consent in writing of the Attorney-General.

Charge: —Omitting to perform duty as a public officer.

265. Any public officer charged with the Teceipt, CUS- False

~dy, or management of any part of the public revenue acou ng
Property who knowingly furnishes any false state- by pub ०
5 or return of any money or property received by him °Micer
entrusted to his care, or of any balance of money in
possession or under his control, is guilty of a crime.

charge:—Falsely accounting as a public officer.


Socret

commupi- -

cations,

car

, 200

APPENDIX 28 (contd.j
266. (1) Any person who—

(a) corruptly gives or agrees to give, or offers to
an agent, or to any other person on his behalf; or

(0) being an agent, corruptly solicits, receives,
obtains, or agrees to accept for himself or any person
other than his principal,

any gift or consideration as an inducement or reward for
doing or forbearing to do, or for having done or forborne

> to do, any act in relation to the principal’s affairs or busi-

Conspiracy

ness, or for showing or forbearing to show favour or dis-
favour to any person in relation to the same, is guilty of
a crime.

Charge: —Corruption in relation to business.

(2) Any person who knowingly gives to an agent, or
any agent who knowingly receives or uses with intent to
deceive his principal, any receipt, account, or other do-
cument in respect of which his principal is interested or
which relates to any dealing, transaction, or matter in
which his principal is interested, and which contains any
statement which is false or erroneous, or defective in any
material particular, is guilty of a crime.

Charge: —Corruptly using a false document.
(3) For the purposes of this section—

(a) “agent” includes any person employed by
or acting for another, and any person serving under
the Crown or under any corporation or public body;

(0) “consideration” means any kind of valuable
consideration;

(c) “principal” includes any employer.

(4) In any Proceedings under this section, where it is
proved that any consideration has been solicited or re-
ceived by an agent from, or given or offered to an agent
by, any person having business relations with the prin-
cipal, the burden of proving that such consideration was
not solicited, received, given, or offered in contravention
of the provisions of this section shall be on the accused.
In any such proceedings as aforesaid it shall be a defence
to prove that the consideration was solicited, receiyed,
given, or offered with the principal’s knowledge, and Mat
he was aware of all facts material to the transaction,

297. (1) Any person who conspires with another—

{a) to kill any person, whether a subject of \ Hia
Majesty or not, and whether he is in this State \, or
elsewhere, under circumstances which, if he were
killed in this State, would constitute murder;

JS


202

APPENDIX. 28 (concld.}
(8) to obstruct, prevent, pervert, _or defeat the
due course of justice, or the administration of the law,
whether such purpose is to be effected in this State
or elsewhere;
(०) to commit any crime;
(4) to cheat or defraud the public, or any parti-
cular person, or class of persons;
(2) to extort, by any means, any property what-
ever from any person;
(f) to inflict by any unlawful means any injury
or harm upon the public, or any particular person or
class of persons;
(9} to facilitate the seduction of a woman;
(h) to do any act involving, and known to be
likely to involve, ‘public mischief: or
(8) to do any act without lawful justification or
excuse with intent thereby to injure any Person,
is guilty of a crime:

Charge:-—Conspiracy,

(2) A husband and wife are not criminally responsible
for any conspiracy between themselvey only.

(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions
of the Trades Unions Act, 1889, or of the Conspiracy and
Protection of Property Act, 1889.”

APPENDIX 29
Canapian Laws as To ANTI-SOCIAL, ETC, OFFENCES
(1) Economie Crimes
(i) Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, Ch. 814, The
Combines Investigation Act.
(2) Evasion of Taxes
(i) Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, Ch. 58, The
Customs Act.
(8) Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, Ch, 60, The
Customs Tariff Act.
(it) Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, Ch, 99, The
Excise Act.
{iv) Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, Ch. 148,
Income-tax Act,
(3) Misuse of position by public servants
6) Canadian Criminal Code—Sections 7103,
(extracts attached) : हु

a


202

APPENDIX 29 (contd.)

(4) Delivery of sub-standard goods

(@) Canadian Criminal Code—section 2, su
section (36), sections 360-363. (extracts attached)
(5) Profiteering ete.

Not cognizable as offences in Canada.

(6) Adulteration of food etc.
(0 Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, Ch. 123, Food
and Drugs Act.
(ii) Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, Ch. 126,
Fruit, Vegetables and Honey Act.
(8) Revised Statutes of Canada, 1952, Ch, 177,
The Meat and Canned Goods Act.
(These Statutes deal with the processing, packaging,
inspection and control of sanitary conditions as well as
purity of the products concerned).

(7) Theft, ete.
Canadian Criminal Code—section 269, 280, 288,
(8) Trafficking in licences, ete.

No specific provision exists except general provi-
sions as to misuse of position by public servants,

Extracts From Canapian Criminar Cope, 1955
Sections 99—103
99. In this Part,

(a) “Evidence” means an assertion of fact, opinion,
belief or knowledge whether material or not and
whether admissible or not;

(b) “Government” means

(i) the Government of Canada,

(i?) the Government of a province, or

(४४) Her Majesty in right of Canada or in
vight of a province;

(९) “Judicial proceeding” means a proceeding
(i) in or under the authority of a court of
justice or before a grand jury,

(४) before the Senate or House of Commons
of Canada or a Committee of the Senate or House
of Commons, or before a legislative council, legis-
lative assembly or house of assembly ora com-
mittee thereof that is authorized by law to admi-
“ister an oath,

or (ii) before a court, judge, justice, magistrate
“oner, ' i
‘,

_ r


206

APPENDIX 29 (conid.)

(iv) before an arbitrator or umpire, or a
person or body of persons authorised by law ta
make an inquiry and take evidence therein under
oath, or ot

(०) before a tribunal by which a legal right
or legal liability may be established, whether or
not the proceeding is invalid for want of jurisdic-
tion or for any other reason;

(d) “Office” includ

(i) an office or appointment under the govern-
ment,

(i a civil or military commission, and

(ii) a position or employment in a public
department; !

(९) “Official means a person who

(i) holds an office, or

Gi) is appointed to discharge a public duty:
and H

(7) “Witness” means a person who gives evidence
orally under oath or by affidavit in a judicial proceed~
ing, whether or not he is competent to be a witness,
and includes a child of tender years who gives evidence
but does not give it under oat th, because, in the opinion
of the person presiding, the ild does not understand
the nature of an oath.

100. (2) Bribery of Judicial Officers, ete—Every one
who

(@) being the holder of a judicial office, or being
a member of the Parliament of Canada or of a legis-
lature, corruptly
(४) accepts or obtains,
{ii) Agrees to accept, or
(ii) attempts to obtain, any money, valuable
consideration, office, place cr employment for him-
self or another person in respect of anything done
or omitted or to be dane or omitted by him in his
official capacity; or

{b) gives or offers cot rruptly to a person whe holds

a judicial office, or is a member of the Parliament of

Canada or of a legislature, any money, valuable con-

sideration, office, place or employment in respect of

anything done or omitted or toe be done or omitted by
him in his official capacity for himself or another
person,
is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisop
meut for fourteen years.

(2) Consent of Attorney General—No procepsee
against a person who holds a judicial office shall iy, f
tuted under this sectiom without. the consent in / 8 0
the Attorney General of Canada,


204
APPENDIX 29 (contd.)

101, Every one wha . t
(a) Bribe-y of Officers—heing a_ justice, police
commissioner, peace officer, public officer, or officer
of a juvenile court, or being employed in the adminis-
tration of criminal law, corruptly
(i) accepts or obtains,
(it) agrees to accept, or
(8) attempts to obtain, for himself or an¥
other person any money, valuable consideration,
office, place or employment with intent
Gv) to interfere with the administration of
justice, . i
(v) to procure or facilitate the commission of
an offence, or i {
(wi) to protect from detection or punishment
a person who has committed or whe intends to
commit an offence; or

(8) Idem—gives or offers, corruptly, to a person
mentioned in paragraph (व) any money, valuable con-
sideration, office, place or employment with intent that
the person should do anything mentioned in sub-para-
graph (iv), (v) or (wi) of paragraph (०),

4s guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprison~
ment for fourteen years,

102. (7) Frauds upon the Government—Every one com-
mits an offence who
(a) Offer o7 gift to influence official—directly or
indirectly

{i} gives, offers, or agrees to give or offer to
an official or to any member of ‘his family, or to
any one for the benefit of an official, or

Gs) being an official, demands, accepts or
offers or agrees to accept from any person for him-
self or another person, a loan, reward, advantage
or benefit of any kind as consideration for co-
operation, assistance, exercise of influence or an
act or omission in connection with

(iii) the transaction of business with or any
matter of business relating to the government, or

{iv) a claim against Her Majesty or eny bene-
fit that Her Majesty is authorised or is entitled to
bestow, whether or not, in fact, the official is able
to co-operate, render assistance, exercise influence
or de or omit to da what is proposed, as the case
may be;

out Q Giving rewgrd oricommission to official with.
*ent—having' dealings of any kind: with the


205
APPENDIX 29 (contd)

government, pays a commission or reward ta or cou-
Jers an advantage or benefit of any kind upon an em
ployee or official of the government with which he
deals, or to any member of his family, or to any one
for the benefit of the employee or official, with respect
to those dealings, unless he has the consent in writing
cf the head of the branch of government with which he
deals, the proof of which lies upon him;

(९०) Aeceptance of Commission or Gift without
consent—being an official or employee of the govern-
ment, demands, accepts or offers or agrees to accept
from a person who has dealings with the govern-
ment @ commission, reward, advantage or benefit of
any kind directly or indirectly, by himself or through
a member of his family or through any one for his bene-
fit, unless he has the consent in writing of the head of
the branch of government that employs him or of
which he is an official, the proof of which lies upon
him; .

(०) Compensation for procuring settlement of
cleim, etc.—having or pretending to have influence
with the government or with a minister of the gov
ernment or an official, demands, accepts or offers or
agrees to accept for himself or another person a re-
ward, advantage or benefit! of any kind as consider-
ation for co-operation, assistance, exercise of influ-
ence or an act or omission in connection with

(i) anything mentioned in sub-paragraph

(ili) or (iv) of paragraph (a),

(४) the ap pointment of any person, including
himself, to an office; or !

(2) Offer of reward for appointment—offers, gives
or agrees to offer or give to a minister of the govern-
ment or an official a reward, advantage or benefit of
any kind as consideration for co-operation, assistance,
exercise of influence or an act or omission in connec-
tion with

(i) anything mentioned in sub-paragraph (ii)
or (iv) of paragraph (a), or

(ii) the appointment of any person, including
himself, to an oflige; or

(f) Reward for withdrawal of tender—having

made a tender to obtain a contract with the government

{i) gives, offers or agrees to give to another

person who has made a tender, or to a member है
his family, or to another person for the benefig,
that person, a reward, advantage or benefit 2 tha
kind as consideration for the. withdrawa!
tender of that person, or .


266

APPENDIX 29 {contd}

(ii) demands, accepts or agrees to accept from
another person who has made a tender a reward,
advantage or benefit of any kind as consideration
for the withdrawal of his tender.

(2) Contractor subscribing to election fund.—Every
ome commits an offence wht, in order to obtain
or retain a contract with the government or as a term of
amy such contract, whether express or implied, directly or
indirectly subscribes, gives, ar agrees to subseribe or give,
to any person any valuable consideration

(a) for the outpose of promoting the election of a
candidat: or a class or patty of candidates to the Par-
liament of Canada or legislature, or

(b) with intent to influence or affect in any way
the result of an election conducted for the purpose cf
electing persons ६0 seTve ir the Parliament of Canada
or a legislature.

(3) Punishment.—Every one who commits an offence
under this section is guilty of an indictable offence and is
liable to imprisonment for five years.

103. Breach of Trust oy Pubtic Officer—Every official
who, in connection with the duties of his office, commits
fraud or a breach of trust is. guilty of an indictable offence
and 1s liable to imprisonment for five years, whether or
not the fraud or brea¢h of trust would be an offence if it
were committed in relation to « private person.

ExtRacts FROM CanapIan CRIMINAL CODE
Section 2(36) and seetions 360—363.

2. (36) “Publig stores” includes any movable property

that is under the care, supervision, administration or con-

tro] of a public department or of any person in the service
of a public department:

360. (1) Applying or removing marks without autho-
rity.—Every one who,

(a) ‘without lawful authority, the proof of which
lies upon him, applies a distinguishing mark to any
thing, or

(b) with intent to goncgal the property of Her
Majesty in public stores, removes, destroys or obli-
terates, in whole or in part, a distinguishing mark,

is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprison-
ment for two vears. .
wi?) Unlawful transactions in public stores.—Every one
himithout lawful authority, the proof of which lies upon
stores“eives, possesses, keeps, sells or delivers public
of ¢ he knows hear a distinguishing mark is guilty


207

APPENDIX 29 (contd)

(a) an indictable offence and is liable to imprison-
ment [or two Years, or
(b) an offence punishable on summary conviction.

(3) “Distinguishing mark”’.—For the purposes of this
section, “distinguishing mark” means a distinguishing mark
that is appropriated for use cn public stores pursuant to
section 359.

361. (1) Selling defective stores to Her Majesty—Every
one who knowingly sells or delivers defective stores to Her
Majesty or commits fraud in connection with the sale, lease
or delivery of stores to Her Majesty or the manufacture of
stores for Her Majesty is guilty of an indictable offence and
is liable to imprisonment for fourteen years.

(2) Offences by officers end employees of corporations.—
Every one who being a director, officer, agent or employee
of a corporation that commits, by fraud, an offence under
sub-section (2),

(a) knowingly takes part in the fraud, or

(09) knows or has reason to suspect that the fraud
is being committed or has heen or is about to be com-
mitted and does not inform the responsible government
or a department thereof, of Her Majesty,

is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprison-
ment for fourteen years.

362. Unlawful use of military uniforms or certificates—
Every one who without lawful authority, the proof of
which lies upen him,

(व) wears a uniform of the Canadian Forces or any
other naval. army or air force or a uniform that is 50
similar to the uniform of any of those forces that it is
likely to be mistaken therefor.

(8) wears a distinctive mark relating to wounds re-
ceived or service performed in war, or a military medal,
ribbon, badge, chevron or any decoration or order that
is awarded for war seTvices, or any imitation thereof,
or any mark or device or thing that is likely to be mis-
taken for any such mark, meda!, ribbon, badge, chevron,
decoration or order,

(९) has in his possession a certificate of discharge,
tertificate of release. statement of service or identity
card from the Canadian Forces or any other naval, army
or air force that has not been issued to and does nv
belong to hirs, cr nt

4

(d) has in his possession a e¢ommission or wate.
or a certificate of disel + का of relepCer or
ment of service or id age. card ees top”

va
4

yy,


208

APPENDIX 29 (concld.)

person in or who has been in the Canadian Forces or
any other naval, army or air force, that contains any
alteration that is not verified by the initials of the officer
thereta lawfully authorised,

is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

363. (1) Military stores——Every one who buys, receives.
or detains from a member cf the Canadian Forces or a
deserter or absentee without leave from those forces any
military stores that are owned by Her Majesty or for which
the member, deserter or absentee without leave is account
able to Her Majesty is guilty of

(2) an indictable offence and is liable to imprison-
ment for five years, or

(0) an offence punishable on summary conviction.

(2) Exception—No person shall be convicted of an
offence under this section where he establishes that he did
not know and had no reason to suspect that the military
stores in respect of which the offence was committed
were owned by Her Majesty or were military stores fot
which the member, deserter or ebsentee without leave was
accountable to Her Majesty.

APPENDIX 30

ConsrIRacy १० COMMIT PUBLIC MISCHIEF—ENGLISH LAW.

1. A brief discussion of the offence of conspiracy as
known to English law appears to be useful, first, because
it has been used often to punish a conspiracy to defraud, and

secondly, because its wide scone is illustrated by certain
recent decisions’.

2. The following statement in one text-book" seems to
sum up the law neatly: --

“An agreoment by two or more persons :—
(2) To commit a crime; or

(2) Subject to possihle qualifications mentioned
in the explanation’, to commit any other unlawful
act; or

(3) To do any sect which is (a) immoral or
(b) tends to the public mischief;

is a common law miisdemeanour punishable with a fine
and imprisonment,”.

wee Shaw ४. D.DP, (1961) 2 AER. 446 (1967) 2 WLR. 897 GL)
9's, & Jones, Introduction to Criminal Law (1964), 297, article 99

perhaps: ~valification stated ig to the effect that the second head would ,
एज “uly to torts involving the of fraud and of malice.
Introduction to Crintinal Las sty त 961 prac 95.



209
APPENDIX 30 {contd.)

3. The cffence covers not only a conspiracy te commit a
breach cf statute, bit also an agreement to contravene a
law, whether statute-made or otherwise?-2,

4, That the offence has not become obsolete, will be
shown by the charges of conspiracy framed in connection
with the recent Great Train Robbery?, and the charges of
“conspiracy to pervert the course of justice” framed against
Detective Sergeant Challenor* (later found to be insane and
unfit te plead), and the ease-law relating to conspiracy to
commit summary offences®.

Certain ayecies of the offence of conspiracy in crimi-
nal law have become contreversial*. Of these, the cons-
Piracy “to corrupt the public morals” and to commit a pub-
lic mischief is one’,

The recent decision of the House of Lords*-° leaves no
doubt that the law recognises such a conspiracy"

6. Some important instance of conspiracy to defraud!?
may be noted. Agreements to do the following things
have, been regarded as punishable as conspiracy to de-
aud—

Gee R, v. Jacobs. 1944 1 All Eng. Reo. 4855 (1944) KB. 417; 88 Soli-
citors’ Journal, 188; and discussion thereof "Babutal King Emp.
1945 Nag. 218, 221 (Vivian Bose J.)

*Sce also R. v. Sorsky (1944) 2 All Rep. 333 (C.C.A} and Hals
bury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 10, page 311, para. 569 (middle).

‘See R. v. Fisid (1964), 3 WLR. 605, 607, 608 (C.C.A.).

अर, x, Pedrini, (September, 1964), 7 Current Law, 366—a, Notes of
recent cases (CCA).

‘See Rv. Blamires Transport Services Lid. (1963) 3. AER. 1703
(1963) 3 WLR. 496 (CCA)

*Sec the discussion in Glanville Williams, Criminal Law, The General
Part (1961). Chapter 15.

88, :Ror carlier cuses, see Stllybrass, “Public Mischief” (1933) 49 LQ.R
3, 19%.

"Shaw v. D.P.P. (1961) 12 AE.R. 466; (2961) 2 W. LR. 897 CELL)
discussed exhaustively by Gocdhard. “The Shaw case; the law
morals” (1961) 77 Modern Law Review 5६

3586 also C.C. Turpin, “Conspiracy to Corrupt Public Morals”(1961)
Camb LJ.

Other cases relevant to this ate—
fa) के. ४. Newland (1933) 12 Al Eng. Rep. 1067 (C.C.A.).

(@)Board of Trade v. Owem (1957) A.C. 6023 (1957) 4 All Ev
Rep. 411 (H.L.) Discusses history of the offence D. -"

For earlier cases see Stallybrass “Public Mischief’ (1933), 4
183, 191

¢ Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. ,10, page 834, footnote (7),

bly


210

APPENDIX 30 (concld.)

() to raise the price of. public funds on a purti-
cular day by false rumours};

{vi) to make and publish a false balance-sheet,
the shares of a company on the official list of stock
exchange, in order to give a fictitious value to such
share";

(aii) to induce a false belief among investors
that there is a bona fide market for certain shares; hy
making sham. sales, ete., at high prices*.

(iv) to make and publish a false balance-sheet,
misrepresenting the financial condition of company‘.

(v) to defraud a railway by obtaining non-trans-
ferable excursion tickets and selling them to other’.

7. The common law offence of conspiracy can be used

»for frauds in relation to passports, it

8. As to conspiracies and strikes, see discussion in the
under-mentioned study’. पु

9. In New Zealand®*, the offence of conspiracy has
been narrowed down to specific classes of conspiracy.

An important feature of the crime of conspiracy to
defraud is that it does not require “false pretence”. As
has been pointed out!, the crime of obtaining by false
pretences requires a false pretence, but conspiracy to de-
fraud does not.

Another feature worth noting is that the obtaining
of property or the éxecution of some kind of document,
which is necessary for the offence’ obtaining by false
pretences in English law, is not necessary for conspiracy").

- Thus, where the buyer of a mare entered into plan with
another person te deceive the seller into supposing that
the mare was unsound (so that the seller agreed to
accept less than the price originally fixed), the plan was
held to be punishable as conspiracy to defraud the seller

of the balance of price, though no property was obtained".

“UR. v,_ De Berenger (B14), 3M & S, 67. See Turner and Armitage;

. Cases on Criminal Law is) page 161 (as cxplnined in Rv. apna,

: a). .

3 R. ९. Aspinall (1876), 2 Q-B.D. 48, 50 (C. A.).

3.5 y. B ac, Co, (71892), 2 0.8. (CA).

- Burch (1865), 4 ee BR ane 74 )

v. Absoion & Clark (1859), 1. F & F. 498.

"See Halsbury, 3rd Edn Vol. 7, page 265,

पट, W. Wdderburn, “Intimidation and the right to strike” (1964), 27

Modern Law Review 257, 267.
See sections 155, 126, 257, 309, 310 (New Zealand) Crimes Act, 19616
oo se also sections 43, 13% 135, 412, 558 to 561, Criminal Code of Western
alia.
+ 690. i Glan Williams, Criminal Law, The General Part (1961), page

1sCatwitle Wiliams Crimingl Las The General Par, pages 690, 697.
+ Halsburys 3204), Dea, CC. 337; 169 (BR 750 (CCR). See
Vol. 40, page 835-


21

APPENDIX 30 {concld.)

These two features also show that a conspiracy to
defraud is criminal even if the act which it is agreed to
da may not be criminal if done by only one person!-*.

In a recent case’, an agreement by a debtor (entering
into a scheme of arrangement) to confer a fraudulent
preference upon one creditor was regarded as punishable
as conspiracy. Though the actual decision does net go to
the length of holding that it was a conspiracy to defraud,
the cases cited in the arguments for the Crown‘ throw
a good deal of light on the subject, and also show that
ultimately such agreements are “bottomed in fraud, which
is a species of immorality”.

APPENDIX 31
PROPOSALS AS SHOWN IN THE FORM OF DRAFT AMENDMENTS
To THE INoisy PrxsL Coos
(This is a tentative draft only)

‘Js of 1860, 1. After section 379 of the Indian Penal Code (herein-

after called “the Code”), the following section shall be
inserted, namely: —
Section “379A. Whoever commits theft in respect of any Theft of
39928. public property shall be punished witk imprisonment public
Me Section of either description which may extend to seven 1२५१ आ

years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation.—In this section, “public property” means Cf. section
the property of the Government, and includes the property 1
of India

(&) a corporation established by or under 6 Cen- Penal
tral, Provincial or State Act; Cote an by
| (09) a Government company as defined in section Act 40
T of 1956. 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; and of 1964.
(c) a local authority.”
2, After section 420 of the Code, the following section
shall be inserted, namely: —

1 _ “480A, Whoever, in pursuance of any contract Section
Cf. Section for the delivery of any goods, the construction of any & 4.
25, India. building or execution of other work, cheots the Gov- Cheating
fi कमल ernment or other public authority— : puchorkion,

है (a) in the case of a comtract for the delivery New -
है of goods, by suppiying goads hick are less हा
| quantity then, ar inferior in guaiity to, these he
s contracted to deliver, or which are otherwise not
in accordance with the contract, or
‘Rov. Whitaker (914) 3 KB, 1283 (CCR).
*Halsbury, 3ed Edn, Vol. 10, page 313, para 570.
अरे, v Potier, (1953), 1 All Eng. Reports, 296.
‘See the arguments of Veale, 0. C. for the Crown.

Cf. Cockshott ५. Bennett (1788), 2 Term Re, 765; 100 English Re-
ports 413. हि



212
APPENDIX 31 (coneld.)

(b) in the case of a contract for the construc-
tion of a building or execution of other work, by
using goods which ere less in quantity than, or
inferior in quatity to, those he contracted to use,
or which are otherwise not in accordance with the

contract,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either des-
gf. cription for a term which may extend io seven years,
Section and shal? be also liable to fine.
420 Tadian Explanaticon,—In this section, “public authority”
meadns—
(a) 4 corporation established by or under a
Central, Provincial or State Act;
५
(0) a Government company as defined in 2 of 7956
Cf. section section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; and
21, Twelfth,
-clauso (c) a locel authority.
Indian _
Penal
Code, as APPENDIX 82
by Act 49 PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE Code or Carmina
of 1964. Procepung, 1898.

(This is a tentative draft only)

In the Second Schedule to the Code of Criminal Pro- § of 1838,
cedure, 18981,

(i) after the entry relating to section 379, the
following entry shall be inserted, namely:—

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 §
379A Theltof May Warrant Not Notcom- Imprison- Any
public arrest bail pound- ment of — Magis«
property without able able either des- trate
warrant cription for
7 yeare
and Bne

Gi) after the entry relating to section 420, the
following entry shall be inserted, namely: —

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
420A Cheati-g May Warrant Bail- Not imprison- Court of
public arrest able com- méntof — Session
authori- without Pound- either = Presidency
Ties. Warrant able descrip- Magistrate

tion for or Magis-
गए years trate of the
and fine. first class.

‘These amendments are consequential on those proposed in the Indian
Penal Code.

GMGIPND—T.8.5.—47 M- of Law-—3-1-68-—1,850.