“CONFIDENTIAL—-Not for Publication”.

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

THIRD REPORT
(LIMITATION ACT, 1908)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA-@ MINISTRY OF LAW


CONTENTS

Parr I--PRELIMINARY

‘Cuartsr 1—Introduction.. ers
Part I1—Spcrions

Carrer Il—Proposals retating ta Sections «+ जन

छल TI—ARTtcLEs
<CHapren [i]—General .. aoe on
‘Cuapter [V—Suits on contract and tort. = **
‘CHAPTER V—Suits relating to movable property ..
‘CHaPreR VI—Suits relating to trusts and trust property ..
CuapTer VII—Surts relating to immovable property ..
CHAPTER VIII—Suits relating 10 other claims

<Cuapter IX-Appeals . a a oe बह
‘CHAPTER X—Applications -«..|*«« os oe a
‘Note by Dr. Sen Gupta a

_ANNEKXURS—The proposals as inserted in the existing Act. «

Aprennix I—Effects of proposals on the persods of Imitation. .,
Aprenpix II—Comparative table showing the articles in the
existing Act and the corresponding articles in the

Schedule to the Annexure.
Aprenpix TI—Suggestions relaang tootner Acts -. ++

Pages
“4

4-35

23-28

45-46

61-63


Law Comaussiow.

New Deux
July 21, 1956.
Shri C, C. Biswas,
Minister of Law -
& Minority Affairs,
NEW DELHI.

My puan Mouster,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the third Report
of the Law Commission, on the Limitation Act.

2. At its first meeting held on the 17th September, 1955, the
Commission decided to take up the revision of the Limitation Act
afid entrusted the task to a Committee consisting of Sri P. Satya-
narayana Rao and Sri V. K. T. Chari.

3. The consideration of the subject was initiated by Sri Rao,
the senior Member of the section of the Commission dealing with
Statute Law Revision who formulated a scheme for the revision
of the Act. The principles underlying the scheme were discussed
at a meeting of the second section held on the lith February 1956
A draft Report prepared in the light of the discussion was circu-
lated to all the Members of the Commission and their views in-
vited thereon. These views with the draft Report were discussed
at meetings of the Statute Revision Section held on the 11th March
1956 and the 14th April 1956. Important suggestions made by
Members at these meetings were accepted and certain questions
were referrred to the Committee for further consideration. The
Report was again discussed at a meeting of the Statute Revision
Section held on the 12th May 1056 and it was left fo the Chairmen
and Sri Satyanarayana Rao to finally settle the Report in the light
of the discussion.

4. Dr. N. C, Sen Gupta while signing the Report has added a
‘separate note on two points on which he has taken a view differ-
ent from that in the Report. Sri 8. M, Sikri being outside India
is unable to sign the Report but he concurs in its recommendations,

Yours sincerely,
M. C. Setalvad.


REPORT OF THE LAW COMMISSION
ON THE LIMITATION ACT
PART I-—PRELIMINARY

Cuapren I--Lwrnopucrron

The utility of a statute of limitation has never been & Limitation
matter of serious doubt or dispute. It has been said that 33
the statute of limitation is a statute of repose, peace and
justice, It is one of repose because it extinguishes stale
demands and quiets title; in the words of John Voet,
controversies are restricted to a fixed period of time lest
they should become immortal while men are mortal. It
secures pepce as it ensures security of rights, and it
‘secures justice, as by lapse of time evidence in support of
rights may have been destroyed. There can thus be no
doubt that it rests on sound policy) The operation of
the law of prescription has been explained by Lord
Plunket in a striking metaphor. He stated thet Time
holds in one hand a scythe and in the other, an hour-glass,
The scythe mows down the evidence of our rights, while
‘the hour-glass measures the period which renders that
evidence superfluous. Commenting on this, a learned
author observes that the metaphor could have been
completed by adding, so far as India is concerned,
that the frame-work of the hour-glass would certainly
decay, the glass be broken, and the sand escape.

2. Under the Hindu jurisprudence there was only a law History.
of prescription and no Law of Limitation as such. For
the acquisition of title by preseription, a period of 20
years was laid down by certain Smriti writers, though
others differed regarding the length of the period. The
main occupation of the people being agriculture and there
being very little of commerce or trade, concentration was
more on the land and the rights therein. This was the
position not only in Hindu society but also in other
countries; thus in England, before the James Statute of
3023 there was no specific law of Limitation.

an
i कॉम कि te [095० 1 KB. 96


3. Before 185%, two systems of law of Limitation were
administered by the courts in-India. In the territories
within the original jurisdiction of the courts established
by Royal Charter in the Presidency towns of Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay, the English Law, and in the mofussil
courts, the law as laid down by the Regulations, was
administered. The first attempt to introduce a uniform
law of Limitation applicable alike to courts established
by Royal Charter and other courts was made by the
Limitation Act, 1859 (XIV of 1859) which .came inte
operation in 1862, It was followed by Act IX of 1871,
which emended the law laid down by the former Act on
the basis of the decisions of the courts. The Act of 1872
was soon replaced by Act KV of 1877 which introduced
some alterations, There were other amending Acts
which followed the Act of 1877. Finally, as a result of
the decision of the Privy Council in Vasudeva v. Stinivasa™
on the applicability of article 132 to suits on mortgages
for sale (over-ruling the earlier decisions which applied
article 147), the question of consolidating and amending
the law relating to Limitation for suits, appeals and
applications was taken up and this resulted in the passing
of the Limitation Act of 1908 (Act IX of 1908). This Act
was also amended from time to time particularly after the
report of the Civil Justice Committee of 1924-25. This is
the Act now in force. It applies to Part A and Part C,
as well as to Part B States, subject to the modifications
made by Act III of 1951.

Analysis of 4. The Act of 1908 consists of 30 sections and 183 articles.
The sections deal with general principles applicable to
extension of time whether by reason of disability or by
acknowledgment and part payment, and they are divided
into five parts. Part I is preliminary, Part II (sections 3
to 11) deals with limitation of suits, appeals and
applications, Part III {sections 12 to 25) deals with
computation of period of limitation, Part IV (sections 26
to 28) deals with acquisition of ownership by possession
and Part V (sections 2 and 30) contains saving provisions.
Of the 183 articles, articles 1 to 149 relate to suits (the
first division), articles 150 to 157 relate to appeals, (secon¢
division) and articles 158 to 183 relate to applications,
{third division), The ‘articles relating to suits are divided
into 10 parts on the basis of the periods of limitation and
not on the nature of suits, The periods range from 30
a eS 7 ए7एएपएपएएएाएणए“एणणयणएए्एणणएणए


days to 60 years. For appeals there are 6 periods
ranging from 7 days to 6 months. For applications there
are 9 periods ranging from 10 days to 12 years.

Necd for
5. The need for reform of the Law of Limitation in reform a

India has been felt for quite a long time. One of the
questions formulated by the Civil Justice Committee of
1925 was, “In what cases do you consider that the Law
of Limitation might be made more stringent?” and in
response to this, a number of suggestions were made for
the deletion or atmendment of various sections and articles
of the Limitation Act. As, however, the revision of the
Act involved more labour than that Committee could
bestow, in its report it confined its observations to a few
articles. In a note appended to that report Sir Tej
Bahadur Sapru particularly adverted to the fact that the
seemingly izmocuoug provision in Article 182 of the
“Limitation Act providing limitation for the execution of
decrees afforded a standing temptation to dishonest
decree-holders and dishonest judgment-debtors to trouble,
annoy and cheat each other and to proiong the execution
at their will and pleasure. He also drew the attention
of the Committee to the fact that the commentary in
Rustamji's edition of the Limitation Act on that Article
covered 75 closely printed pages. (In the fifth edition, it
covers nearly 20¢ pages). The provision of different
articles for different categories of suits and a residuary
article providing a longer period of limitation is
responsible for conflicting decisions and the attempt of
the plaintiff has always been to bring his suit, if possible,
within the article providing a longer period of limitation
while the defendant attempted the opposite. It cannot
be gainsaid that the law should be simple and certain.
The time of the courts should ‘not be wasted in disputes
eoncerning the shadow and not the substance. As far as
Possible, legislation should avoid the possibility of conflict
between various articlss and not allow the residuary
article ta confer any additional advantage. It is desirable
that people should hot be exposed to the risk of “stale
demands” after they have last all evidence—doeumentary
or oral—in support of their claims. The nearer the action
to the ken of events, the easier it is to discover the truth.
The periods of limitation should neither: be too long nor
toe short, It should also accord’ as far as possible with
the notions of a layman,,such as, that for recovery of land
the period is twelve years and for other cases three years.

F2a-59/2/Law/ 76-77


4

‘Pie हां 6. In England, the Law Revision Committee appointed

Act, 1939. in 1934 submitted its Fifth Interim Report suggesting the
lines on which the various Statutes of Limitation in
England should be consolidated and amended. As @
result of these recommendations the Limitation Act, 1939,
was enacted. The law in England has been codified in
34 sections without any schedules. Actions are classified
according to their nature and limitation is prescribed on
that basis. For common law actions founded on contract
or tort a uniform period of 6 years has been provided. .
Actions to enforce recognisances, actions to enforce an
award, where the submission is not by an instrument
under seal, actions to recover any sum recoverable by‘
virtue of any enactment other than a penalty or
forfeiture or any sum by way of penalty or forfeiture
are also governed by the same period of limitation. For
actions for account and actions on a specialty, periods
of 6 years and 12 years respectively have been provided.
For actions relating to the recovery of land as well as
for actions for the recovery of money charged on land, a
period of 12 years is provided. Separate provision has
been made for actions relating to trust, and actions
against public authorities. A special period of 30 years
is provided for actions by or on behalf of the Crown.
The Act then deals with the extension of periods of
limitation in cases of disability, acknowledgment, part
payment, fraud and mistake. It has not adopted the
scheme of further dividing actions founded on contract
or on tort as ‘under the Indian Limitation Act. The
period is made to run in each of these cases from the date
when the cause of action accrues. The scheme adopted
under the English Act is, therefore, simple and does not
give much room for conflict of judicial opinion,

7. We proceed to examine the provisions of our
Limitation Act with a view to see in what manner it
can be simplified and modernised in the light of judicial
decisions which have brought to light difficulties and
doubts. We do not propose any substantial change in
the structure of the Act and would accordingly retain
its division, into Sections and Articles,

PART II—SECTIONS
Cuaprer TI—PRoposSats RELATING TO SECTIONS
8. The Sections of the Act deal with certain general
principles which are applicable to a}l suits and

¥,2B-59/2/Law/76-77


proceedings and control the period of limitation under
the articles. In the succeeding paragraphs of this
chapter, the Sections are examined. We may, at the
outset observe that in our view, the Illustrations are
unnecessary and sometimes misleading and we
accordingly recommend that they should be deleted
wherever they occur.

Section 2—Definitions:

9, We recommend that a new definition of the word Ape
“application” so as to include any petition, original or .
otherwise, should be added. The object is to provide
aperiod of limitation for original petitions and
applications under special Jews as there is no such
Provision now. Consequential alterations in the
definition of the word ‘applicant’ should also be made.

10. There are numerous articles in the present Act*Contract”,
relating not only to contract, as the word is commonly
understood, but also to transactions coming under the
head of ‘implied contracts’ and ‘quasi-contracts” One
obvious way of simplifying the Act would be to have a
comprehensive definition of the word ‘contract’ for the
purposes of this Act and to make a single provision for
all suits based on contract. The question is how to
frame a suitable definition of the word ‘contract’. For
this purpose, it is necessary to digress a little into the
field of the law of contract, to help us to realise the correct
implication of the words ‘contract’, ‘implied contract’
and ‘quasi-contract’ (all of which we propose to bring
under one definition for the purposes of the Limitation
Act). It is also necessary to trace the development of
this branch of law in England, as 10688 based on English
Common law were imported into many of our early
statutes.

11. In England, the development of the law of contracts
was peculiar due to historical reasons. The common law
courts paid more regard to the form of action than to its
nature. The ection of indebitatus assumpsit was the
foundation of the development of this branch of the law.
Apart from obligations ex delictu and ex contractu,
certain relationships between parties giving rise to
obligations (such as actions for money had and received)
came to be treated as if they had a contractual origin.
With the dichotomy of actions into contracts and torts


in the 19th century, obligations of this kind were treated
as quasi-contracts. Some text-book writers have
classified quasi-contracts under various heeds. Chitty
> includes the following under this head:—
(i) action on judgments, English and foreign,
(2) action for money paid by the plaintiff at the
request of the defendant,
(3) action for payment by sureties,
(4) action for contribution between joint-contractors,

(5) action for money had and received (which is-

treated as based on implied contract) including
money in the hands of a stakeholder,
{8) action for recovery of consideration when it has
failed,
(7) action for money paid by mistake,
(8) action for money obtained by fraud or extortion,
(9) action for money paid under .an illegal contract,
(10) action for money paid under a void judgment.
Prof. Winfield defines. a quasi-contract as foliows:---
“The liability not exclusively referable to any
other head of the law imposed upon & particular
person to pay money to another particular person on
the ground that non-payment of it would confer oo
“the former an. unjust benefit.”
He classifies quasi-contracts, under four heads:
(1) pseudo quasi-contracts. हि
(2) pure quasi-contracts, »

(3) quasi-contracts alternative to some other form of*

Liability, and,
(4) doubtful quasi-contracts.
On the other hand, Cheshire adopts only a two-
fold classification :
(1) genuine quasi-contracts, and
(2) doubtful quasi-contracts.

Under the former are ineluded actions for money paid’

by the plaintiff to the defendants, actions for money paid’ .

under a mistake of fact, actions for money paid in
pursuance of an ineffective contract and claims on
quantum meruit, Under © the latter, actions on

judgment-debts, on money due under statute by law of :


| inn
custom, and claims for necessaries suppkied to persons
under incapacity are included. From this classification
it would be seen that various kinds of actions are
included under quasi-contracts. The law was developed
from the observations of Lord Mansfield in Moses
vy. Macferian* In the decision in Sinelair v. Brougham*
Lord Sumner observed that the action for money had
and received was founded on an implied contract (its
origin was in the writ of assumpsit) and that it should
thereforé, be classified as a contractual action. This
view evoked severe criticism in acedemic and judicial
circles, In the recent pronouncement in Re Diptock®
the view of Wynn-Parry J., in the court of first instance,
that the action for money had and received is a common
law action on the case founded on an implied promise
to pay, was accepted by the Court of Appeal though it
reversed the judgment on other grounds. In the House
‘of Lords, the decision of the case turned on another
point (Minister of Health v. Simsor).* In the Fibrosa
case’ Lord Wright thought that the legal basis for an
action under quasi-contract was restitution. He said:
“Tt ig clear that any civilised system of law is
bound to provide remedies for cases of what has
been called unjust enrichment or unjust benefit
ie. to prevent a man from retaining money or
some benefit derived from another which it is
egainst conscience that he should keep. Such.
remedies in English law are generically different
from remedies in contract or in tort and are now
recognised to fall within the third category of
common law, which has been called quasi-contract
or restitution.”

He dismissed the observations of Lord Sumner in
Sinclair's case as obiter dicta, In United Australia v.
Barclays Bank’, Lord Atkin pointed out that the action
was based upon fictitious contract and characterised the
fiction as obviously fanciful in these words:

“These fantastic resemblances of contracts
invented in order to meet requirements of the law
as to forms of action which have now disappeared

ry fanaa Burrow, 1005.
है fs ५

&) a
1948) Che 5. वह.
4) (1951) A.C. 251.
'5) (1943) A.C. 32, 61.
(6) (7947) A.C p. Pat p. 29.


should not in these days be allowed to affect actual
rights. When these ghosts of the past stand in the
path of justice clanking their medieval chains, the
proper course for the judge is to pass through them
undeterred.” हे

Notwithstanding these strong observations by two
eminent judges, it cannot be said that the English courts
have accepted the principle of unjust benefit as the basis
‘of English quasi-contract. Lord Porter stated’ that
though the law of unjust enrichment occupies a
permanent place in the Jaw of Scotland and in the
United States, it formed no part of the law of England
and that the doctrine of restitution so described would
‘be too widely stated. Under English law it has not
yet been accepted that the true basis for quasi-contracts
and actions for money had and received is the doctrine
of restitution on the basis of unjust enrichment. Denning
L. J., in a recent book “The Changing Law” (at pp- 62-63)
has stated that the decision of Lord Porter does not rule
‘out the law of restitution though it excludes the law of
unjust enrichment. According to his view the law of
restitution covers those cases ‘which cannot be brought
withir the scope of contract or tort but in which
nevertheless the plaintiff can recover money under the
smoney counts or under some positive rule of law such
as that applied in the Cairo case or even under the rules
of equity as in the case of Customers of Birkbeck Ban! ”
(pp. 66-67). He advocates the recognition of a third
category of the common law distinct from contract and
tort to be called “restitution”. The underlying principle
of the law of restitution is that no one should unjustly
enrich himself at the expense of his neighbour. It may
be said, as was felt by Denning L. J., that the conception
ig too indefinite to be stated as a principle of law. Yet

he observes, at p. 65:

“Tt sufficiently indicates a new category. Just
as the .conception of contract is enforcement of
promises, and the conception of tort is damages for
prevention of unjust enrichment. Once this
category comes to be accepted into the law, the
all remedies into the straight jacket of contract and

“G@) (1981) AG. 512


9

tort but will be able to develop a comprehensive
category with its own distinct principles” (p. 85).

42. In India, the law of contract is to a large extent.
governed by statute. Where there is provision in the
Contract Act, the Court will not apply common law, «6
for example the doctrine of frustration, in view of
Section 56 (vide Satyabrata Ghosh v. Mangneeram').
The Act, however, is not exhaustive and does not purport
to embody all the principles of the law relating to
contrect including relations resembling those created by
contract. It is no doubt true that in Chapter V sections
68 to 72, the principles of the common law which are
described as quasi-contracts or implied contracts are
enacted. But even there the Act does not cover all the
principles which form part of the substantive law of
contracts. Thus, the legal basis of an action for money
had and received for which a period of limitation is
prescribed by article 62 of the Limitation Act is nowhere
to be found in the statute book. Courts in India have,
however, applied the principles of that action to
situations arising in India. It will be necessery when
dealing with the law of Contracts to bring into the ambit
of the Act of all such principles of English law as have
been extended to India on the principle of justice, equity
and good conscience, but have not been embodied
in the Act. In order to simplify the law znd to avoid
labels adopted in England which have given rise to
conflicting decisions, we may embody in the Contract
Act the principles which should apply to India having
regerd to the doctrine of restitution adumbrated by
Denning L. J. The law must progress and should not
remain stagnant. ‘The doctrine of unjust enrichment has
been applied in other countries end justice requires that
aman should not unjustly benefit himself at the
expense of another. To what extent the doctrine of
unjust enrichment should be adopted in the Contract Act
will have to be considered. The principle underlying
Section 68 to 72 of the Contract Act would be the same
whether the claim be described as being for reimburse-
ment or for restoration or for contribution or for
restitution.

13. The expression “implied contract” is used in two
different senses. Section 9 of the Contract Act draws
Wis SCRae ज._.३्लजझ्६श्श्श्कश््््चछ



““Plajntith*

a &
“Defenans,”

10

4 distinction between express and implied promises. If
the proposal or acceptance of promise is made in words,
the contract is express. If such a proposal or acceptance
is made otherwise than in words, it is an implied
contract. This is the strict and orthodox meaning of
“implied contract”. But the expression is also used in
a wider sense to include legal relations in which the
essential element of a contract is lacking. As observed
by Lindley L. J.. in Re Rhodes! the expression “implied
contract” has been used to denote not only a genuine
contract established by inference but also an obligation
which does not arise from any real contract but which
can be enforced as if it has a contractual origin. Some
obligations which are labelled as quasi-contracts under
English law will come under the second category of
implied contracts in the wider sense. They are not
strictly contracts ag the obligations do not arise from
the consensus of the parties.

14. So far as the Limitation Act is concerned, we may
adopt an extended definition of the word “contract”, to
include in its ambit all implied contracts and quasi-
contracts, ie., not only implied contracts which are
consensual and would be contracts under the Contract Act
but also all such obligations which the law imposes or
imputes having regard to the relationship between the
parties and the circumstances of the case in order to
prevent one party from retaining an unjust benefit and
to force him to return such benefit by way of restitution.
This would help in the consolidation of numerous articles
and thereby in the simplification of the Limitation Act,

15. The definitions of “plaintiff” and “defendant” as
they stand in the Act include a person from or through
whom a plaintiff or defendant derives his right or
liability to sue or to be sued. The object of this
inclusive definition is to make it clear that the cause of
action for a person in whom the right to sue is vested and
the person on whom the right has subsequently devolved
is one and the same. The position holds good in the
case of executors, administrators and representatives also
and we think it necessary that the definitions should be
enlarged so es to include not only a person from whom
the plaintiff derives his title but also a person whose
estate is represented by an executor, administrator ot
other representative.



ii

16. The applicability of article 144 ‘of. the Limitation
Act may be taken to illustrate the need for this. The
third column of that article states that the time begins
to run “when the possession of the defendant becomes
adverse to the plaintiff”. If the “plaintiff” therein referred
to is the person to whom the right to sue had accrued and
who in fact files « suit for recovery of possession, there
will not be any difficulty. But if the plaintiff who
institutes the suit is the person on whom the right to sue
‘devolved, the adverse possession of the defendant against
the predecessor of the actual plaintiff would be of no
avail and time would rum only from the moment when
the actual plaintiff derived his title. The object of the
definition of “plaintiff” in the Limitation Act, as it is
now, is to resolve this difficulty by making it clear that
the cause of action for both is the same and the date
of its accrual is the date when the defendant's possession
became adverse against the original owner. A similar
‘situation may also arise in the case of executors,
administrators or other representatives. Perhaps this
was not noticed at the time when the present Act was
passed.

17. Under section 306 of the Succession Act many causes
‘of action survive to the executors etc., and in respect of
all those causes of action the executors ‘etc. are in the
same position as derivative title holders though they are
mot treated as such.

18. The Courts haye gone to the length of holding that
if a father to whom the right to sue had accrued gave
notice under section 80 C-P.C. and died before filing the
suit and the suit was actually instituted by the son, there
should be a further notice by the son as the section
contemplated notice by the actual plaintiff and not the
person who had the right of suit. (See Mahadeva
Dattatreya Rajarishi v. Secretary of State)! In the
absence of 4 clear definition a similar interpretation
might be placed on the word “plaintiff” in the Limitation
Act when any executor, etc. happens to institute
proceedings. To cover this lacuma we propose an
extended definition, The same reasoning would apply
to the definitions of “defendant” and “applicant” and
they too should be amplified as stated in paragraph 15.

—WAIR nj bm 3970. ह> ७" जज क्चख्ऊकफ

F .3A+59/2/ Law! 76-77



12

19, The executor, administrator or other representative
has an independent right of suit and is under an indepen-
dent liability im cases arising under the Lega
Representatives Suits Act, 1855 and the Fatal Accidents
Act. These stand on a different footing.

“Tort” 20. There should be a definition of the word ‘tort’ so as
to include within it not only torts strictly so called, but
also any breach of statutory duties of care which result in
injury and damage to the person or property. The Limi-
tation Act itself draws a distinction between breaches of
contract and wrongs independent of contract, vide section
23. A definition of ‘tort’ so as to include all civil wrongs
independent of contract may be adopted.

“Promissory 21. The definitions of “promissory note”, “Bill of Ex:
‘eee change” and “Bond” need not he retained as we propose to
change” Consolidate all articles relating to Contract in one article,
Pond” andas a result of which these words will not find a place in
the revised Act. The definition of the word “Easement”
inay also be dropped if sections 26 and 27 are deleted as

proposed by us.

Period 22. The expression “period prescribed” occurring in

prescribed.” Section 4 has been construed differently by different courts.
Some courts take the view that it means only the periods
of limitation prescribed in the Schedule to the Act and
dees not attract the extensions of the periods of limitation.
under the Sections, which is obviously not correct, As.
the expression occurs in other sections also, it would be
better if a new definition clause for “period prescribed”
is inserted te the effect that it means the period of limita-
tion computed in accordance with the provisions of ihe
Act. We recommend accordingly.

Section 3,

23. There is some conflict of decisions between the High.
Courts as to when exactly time ceases to run in the case
of applications by notice of motion. One view is that it
stops when the application is filed and the other is that
it stops only when the notice of motion is actually taken
up by the Court!. This controversy may be set at rest, by
fixing & definite point of time in this behalf. We thinic

ay 6: tee को Nv. 5
1) Imre, Senet कर) ) 5 Kutttayans Ellappy (7 ML}. 2139)

F3BB9/2/Law/ 76-77


3

that the view more favourable to the applicant should be
adopted and, therefore, recommend that the time should
gease to run on the date on which the application is pro-
perly presented in court. A suitable amendment on
those lines may be effected.

24. With regard to a counter-claim and a claim for
set-off, difficulty is experienced as to the date on which
limitation is to be reckoned. We think that in respect of
a claim for set-off which, unlike a counter-claim, arises
from the same transaction, it should relate back to the
date of institution of the suit. Set-off should include a
legal set-off as well as an equitable set-off. This follows
the rule under the English Limitation Act, 1939 (vide
Sec. 28 of that Act). In respect of a counter-claim how-
ever, it should be regarded as a separate suit filed on the
day on which such claim is made.

Section 4.

25. The Privy Council in Magbul Ahmad v. Pratap
Narayan! settled the law that section 4 does not extend the
period of limitation but saves limitation if the suit or
appeal or application is filed on the day of the reopening
of the court in cases where the limitation expired on a day
when the court was closed. The section does not, there-
fore, require any further change.

Seetion 5.

26. We are of opinion that instead of leaving it to the
different States or the High Courts to extend the application
of section 5 to applications other than those enumerated
in the section, a uniform rule should be adopted applying
it to all applications except those arising under order XI
of the Code of Civil Procedure relating to execution. In the
ease of special or local laws, it would be open to such laws
to provide that section 5 will not be applicable.

Sections 6 and 7.

27, There is a difference of opinion between the Madras
and the other High Courts regarding the interpretation of
section 6 of the Act. The question arose under section 7 of
the old Act which corresponds to the present section 6. In
the Madras High Court the view taken by Justice Bhash-

(1) 57 All. 242.



14

yam Ayyangar in Ahinsa Bibi v. Abdul approved by the
Full Bench in Periasamy v. Krishna Ayyen® was that in
view of the definition in the General Clauses Act, the word
“person” includes a plurality of persons, Accordingly,
where a right is vested jointly im 2 piurality of persons,
the protection given by this section extends only to cases
in which each of the persons, jointly entitled to sue or to
apply for execution, is affectea by disability at the time-
from which limitation has to be reckoned; if any of them
is then free from disability, section 6 is inapplicable.
But the other High Courts were of the view
that the section applied irrespective of the question whe--
ther all or one or some of the several joint-creditors or
claimants were under disability. In view of the present
section 7 (which was amended subsequent to the said’
decision) whatever mey be the interpretation of section.
6, and whether the one view or the other is correct, if one.
of several persons is able to give a valid discharge with-
out the concurrence-of the person under disability, time
Tuns against them all. If, on the other hand, no such dis-
charge can be given, time will not run against any of them
until one of them becomes capable of giving such discharge:
without the concurrence of the others or until the disabi-
lity has ceased. In view of this section, in the case of per-.
sons jointly entitled to institute a suit or make an applica-
tion for the execution of a decree, all persons whether
major or minor wit get the benefit of the extended period
of limitation so Jong as any one of them is a minor and sO.
Jong as there is none capable of giving a discharge with-
out the concurrence of the other. But that is the result of
substantive law under which one Person cannot give a
discharge on behalf of others unless he is an executor or
a partner duly authorised or the manager of a Mitakshara
joint Hindu family. The Madras High Court has taken
the view in Annepurnamma v. Akkayya (FB. that one
joint creditor could give a valid discharge so as to bind the:
others, basing the argument on section 38 of the Contract
Act. But this view has not been accepted by any of the
other High Courts and we think that the view taken by
the other High Courts is correct; in this connection, the
Contract Act may be suitably amended. There is no need:
to alter Section 6 for this purpose.

हे 25 Mad. 26.
(7 25 Mad. 43.
(7 36 Mad. 544 (F.B.).


15

28. Sub-section 4 of section 6 requires clarification.
For the words: “at the date of death affected by any such
disability”, the words “at the date of the death of the per-
son whom he represents” should be substituted, as other-
wise the death of the first mentioned person under disabi-
lity might be taken as the starting point, which will be
meaningless.

29. There is a conflict of decisions on the question whe-
ther when a person under a disability dies, after the dis-
ability ceases, but within the time allowed to him by law
to institute a suit, his legal representative can take advant-
age of the extended period to the same extent as in the
ease where the disability of a person continues up to his
death. The denial of the benefit to the representative is
inequitable and should be rectified by a suitable amend-
ment of Section 6.

30. The use of the word “discharge” in section 7 has
given room for the argument that the section applies only
to money claims such as debts, but does not extend to
other rights such as the right to bring a suit impugning
an alienation. All the courts, however, have adopted a
liberal interpretation of the word ag including not only
money claims but also other rights of the plaintiffs inelud-
ing rights in immovable property. To make the position
clear we suggest that an Explanation giving effect to the
liberal interpretation may be added as Explanation (1) to
section 7.

31. In this connection, a reference is necessary to an
apparent conflict of decisions on the scope of Section 7.
One line of cases! held that a suit brought by two brothers
of an undivided Mitakshara family to set aside an aliena-
tion by their guardian, filed more than three years after
the elder brother attained majority but within three years
of the date of the younger brother attaining majority was
barred. The other line applied the decision of the Privy
Council in Jewahir Singh’s Case* wherein it was held that
the right of the younger son to challenge an alienation of
the father was not extinguished by the omission of the
elder brother to file the suit within the period prescribed
for him. If the cases are examined with reference to their
facts, it will be found that there is really no conflict bet-

है: From 38 Mad. 115 (Doraivan ©, NowBamt Stacting from 38 Mad. 1,
¢ ADAM 152. 3



16

ween them. In the second line of cases, the father was.
alive and was a party defendant in the suit and hence the
elder brother though a major was not in law the manager
and could not give a valid discharge even with the con-
turrence of the other members. In the former line of
cases, on the other hand, the father was not in existence
and the elder brother was the manager capable of giving
a valid discharge. The ccrrect position, therefore, is thet
if there is a manager capable of giving a discharge and if
he does not institute a suit within the time allowed by
law, the suit by the minor members though instituted
within three years of their attaining majority will be
barred.

32, After the decision of the Privy Council in Jawahir
Singh’s case, controversy became acute also on the ques-
tion whether in the case of a manager of a Hindu joint
family, it was necessary to establish that the person cap-
able of giving discharge as manager wes not only the de
jure but also a de facto manager. There was also a further
‘question whether to establish that a person was a de facto
Manager, it was sufficient to prove one act of manage-
ment or more than one act of management and whether
it was necessary that there should be property of the
family other than the alienated property. One view is
that unless it is established that a de jure manager had
also acted as a manager, i¢., was ७ de facto manager, he is
not a person capable of giving a discharge (e.g. Ganga
Dayal v. Mani Ram) The other line of cases would make
it a matter of presumption that a de jure manager has also
acted as a de facto manager (Baktavatsalu v. Rao. In our
pinion the former view is the better one, for the reasons
given below.

33. The “managership” under the Hindu law. is a crea-
tion of law and devolves according to settled rules. The
power and the capacity to give a valid discharge 3७ as to
bind other members of the family are conferred upon the
manager for the reason that he is in possession of the
property of the family and represents the family in ali
transactions relating to it. He can incur debts for the
necessities of the family, discharge and realise debts and
receive the income of the family properties. This is so
because he is in possession of the property and is not

(31. AIL 2583 apppaved in 48 Al. 752 P.C. (ididy
©) LL.R. (19450 Mad. 752.


पा

merely an agent created by law so as to bind the others
by giving a discharge in respect of debts either actually
or notionally. It seems to us, therefore, that to clothe a
de jure manager with power to give a valid discharge so
as to bind others when he is net in possession of any pro-
perty of the family or when the family does not possess
any property will be to jeopardise the interests of the
other members of the family. If he collects the debts and
walks away with the money the other members may have
no remedy against him if he has no property. The idea
underlying sections 6, 7 and 8 is to protect the minor and
not to place him under a disadvantage. We, therefore,
think that an Explanation shculd be added making it clear
that the authority of a manager of a joint Hindu family
to give a valid discharge can. be inferred only when he is
both a de jure and a de facta manager. It would not be
wise to define the circumstances from which a de facto
managership can be inferred. The question must he leit
to the decision of the courts having regard to the facts and.
circumstances of each case.

Sections 8, 9, and 11.

34. Sections 8, 9 and 11 do not, in our opinion, require-
any alteration.

Section 10.

$5. The word “express” in the marginal note may be
omitted, as the section includes transactions which, though
not express trusts, are deemed to be trusts for a specific
purpose.

Section 12.

36. It is not possible to prefer an application for leave
to appeal unless the appellant or the applicant has a copy
of the judgment on which the decree is based. As a matter
of practice some courts are allowing the time taken for
obtaining a copy of the judgment in such cases to be
excluded under section 12 as “time requisite’. This
practice may be legalised by introducing suitable addi-
tions to section 12.

37, Some courts have taken the view that the delay in
drafting the decree before an application for a copy is
made should be deducted as “time requisite”. But we


8

think that a delay of the office before the application for
a copy is made should not count in favour of the party, A
suitable provision should be added to make this clear.

38, In this connection our attention has been drawn to
& practice obtaining on the Original Side of the Calcutta
High Court relating to the drafting of decrees and orders,
The decree is not drawn up by the officer of the court as
a matter of course; the party has to make an application
for a ‘compieting der’ and after an elaborate procedure
the decree is draw. up and only thereafter can a party
apply for a ९००५ of ft. It has been suggested to us that
to avoid hardship to the litigants in such cases, the time
taken for drafting a decree should also be excluded in
computing the period of limitation. We have given care-
ful consideration to this suggestion and we are not con-
vinced of the need to make any special provision in this
respect. The'diffculty being due to rules peculiar to the
Original Side of the Calcutta High Court, the appropriate
course would be to alter the relevant rules. We refer in
this connection to the recommendation made in the Report
of the Judicial Reforms Committee for the State of West
Bengal presided over by Harries, C. J. of the Calcutta High
Court. It states: “there are serious defects in the present
procedure of the Original Side. England has largely re-
medied these defects, but here they still remain. For
example, the procedure for settling decrees and orders
followed on the Origina! Side is cumbersome to a degree
and frequently the cause of large delay and unnecessary
expense.” We endorse this view and we do not know why
this recommendation has not been implemented. We hope
that the necessery changes would be made in the Original
Side rules of the Calcutta High Court, to save the litigants
from the hardship pointed out.

33. As we have provided a period of limitation for revi-
sion applications also, Sub-sec. (1) should be amended
suitably.

Section 13.
40. Sec. 13 does not. in our opinion, require any altera-
tion. .
Section 14.

41, The Rankin Committee suggested that, following the
language of sec. 11 of the C. P. Code, in sec. 14, for the words


19

“cause of action” the words “matter in issue" may be
substituted. The words “cause of action” have the effect
of making the relief too narrow and adequate relief would
be available if, as suggested by the Civil Justice Commit-
tee, the words “matter in issue” are substituted for the
words “cause of action”. We are also of the view that
prior proceedings in a court of Revision shoyld be brought
within the scope of this section. We recommend amend-
ments to section 14 to give effect to these suggestions,

42. The view has been taken that Order 23 Rule 1(2) of
C.P.C. supersedes this section even in cases where the
grounds of withdrawal are identical with the grounds
under section 14 on which a suit or application could not
be entertained by a court. If the withdrawal is based on
grounds net covered by section 14, the plantiff should not
be allowed to take advantage of the exclusion of time
under section 14, But there is no reason to deny him that
right when the grounds of withdrawal are those contem-
plated by that section. To avoid this hardship, it is neces-
sary to introduce a suitable amendment in section 14 to
the effect that if a suit or application is withdrawn on
grounds similar to those specified in that section, the liti-
gant should be allowed to exclude the time spent in pro-
secuting such proceedings. Rule 2 of Order XXIII C.P.C.
should not apply in such cases.

43. A suggestion was made that a further explanation
to section 14 should be added extending the scope of the
expression “other cause of a like nature” so as to bring
Within its ambit cases where the High Court exercising
ats jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution re-
jects a petition in the exercise of its discretion on the
ground that the applicant has an alternative remedy by
way of suit. The object of section 14 is to give relief to
@ person who institutes proceedings which by reason of
some technical defect are thrown out. If a party know-
ing that he has a remedy by way of suit which has to be
instituted within the period of limitation waits till the
last moment and considers it better or more convenient
to have resort to a cheaper remedy by invoking the
jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226 of the
Constitution and the Court dismisses the application on
the ground that the party has another remedy, such rejec-
tion should not be treated as a technical defect by reason
of which the applicant could not obtain the relief he
wanted. He elects between two remedies and the Court

ह GA-S9/ flaw! 16-77


20

rejects the application on the ground that the appropriate-
remedy was by way of suit. There may be cases of suits
or other proceedings in which similar situations might
arise, Thus the supposed hardship is confined to an ap-
plication under article 226 of the Constitution. To accept
this suggestion would be to extend the policy under-
lying the section to cases not contemplated by it. The
ground suggested cannot be regarded as a “cause of a like
nature”.
हि Section 15.

44. Sub-see. (2) of Sec. 15 provides for the exclusion.
of periods of statutory notices, such as those under sec.
80 of C.P.C. In this connection we may refer to the pro-
visions of sec. 86 and 87 of the same Code requiring that
in respect of suits against foreign rulers, ambassadors and’
envoys, the consent of the Central Government should be:
obtained before filing the suit. Generally, it takes a long
time for such consent to be given and the principle behind
the existing provision for exclusion of the period of notice
under section 80 C.P.C. should logically apply to such
cases also. We recommend that the time requisite for
obtaining such orders should be excluded.

45. It is common knowledge that by the time a receiver
or liquidator is appointed in insolvency or liquidation
proceedings and the receiver or liquidator after getting
information about the assets and liabilities of the estate
settles down to the task of realising the assets of the
estate, claims in favour of such estate or company get
barred to the detriment of the persons entitled to the
benefit of the assets. To avoid this hardship, we think it
just that in respect of suits on behalf of an insolvent or
a company in liquidation the period between the date of
the filing of the petition for adjudication or winding up:
and the appointment of the receiver or liquidator, and a
period of three months thereafter (to enable him to ac-
quaint himself with the affairs of the estate) should be-
excluded in computing the period of limitation for suits
by or on behalf of an insolvent’s estate or the company.
The benefit of this provision should also enure: to any”
interim receiver or provisional liquidator.

Section 16.

46. It was held in B. K. Roy. v. Ashutosh! that the ex-
clusion of time under this section would net apply to
“@*Ow Naw |. फनफन6तततत्््््क

F ,48-59/ 2/Law/76-77



25

suits governed by article 144. We have now proposed
that the’ scope of article 144 be enlarged so as to include
matters covered by articles 137 and 138. The exclusion ef
time contemplated by this section should apply to all such.
suits by an auction-purchaser.

Section 17.

47, Section i7 is confined to rights of action aceruing
after death. There is no reason to restrict the section in
this manner. The Privy Council observed in Meyyappa
v. Subramenya' that when the cause of action arises in
favour of the deceased person after his death time will at
once begin to run. Some courts have applied the section
to cases where the right accrues on death, as in the case
of partnerships. Section 17 should be made applicable
to rights of action accruing on death or thereafter.

Section 18.

48. We think that this section should be recast so as to
include actions based on fraud and also for relief
founded on mistake. In this respect, section 26 of the
English Act is more suitable and that section may be
adopted with suitable alterations. The _ existing
provision relating to concealment ef documents should
be retained and the protection in favour of bona fide
purchasers for valuable considerations should also be
extended to those cases.

49. As we are recommending the incorporation of
section 48 €.P.C. in this Act the principle contained
in the proviso to that section in regard to the power of
courts to order execution after the period of limitation
will have to be preserved. We however consider that
the benefit of this provision should be available only if
‘the application is filed within one year from the date of
discovery of the fraud. ~

Sections 19 and 20.

50. The Civil Justice Committee expressed the view
that clause 2 of section 19 is a fruitful source of false
Pleas and that the date is so essential a part of the
acknowledgment itself that unless it is in writing like
the rest of the acknowledgment it should not operate to

Ow CWP



22

save the bar of limitation. They therefore suggested an
amendment to that effect to Section 19, We do not think
that this is necessary. In England, oral evidence is
admussible to prove the date and this was recognised in
Edmunds vy. Downes', and Jayne v. Hughes’. Oral
evidence was admitted even to show that the document
was executed after the date which it bore. No alteration
of the law was effected in England by the Limitation Act
of 1939, If all the terms of a document are already in
writing and if the date is missing it would be unjust and
inequitable to deprive a party of the benefit of relying
upon the document as censtituting an acknowledgment
by adducing evidence regarding the date of the document
and thus supplying the omission.

51. The question whether an acknowledgment made
after a transfer would bind a transferee has been
considered by several High Courts and there have been
conflicting decisions. It was, however, finally decided
by the Privy Council in Bank of Upper India v. Robert
Herecus* that an acknowledgment made by the mortgagor
to the mortgagee after parting with his mterest does not
bind the transferee. One would have thought that the
language of section 19 is clear and does not give room for
any divergence of opinion, for it requires that the
acknowledgment of liability in respect of property or a
right should be made in writing signed by the party
against whom such property or right is claimed. If,
therefore, the right is claimed against A, it has. to be
established that there was an acknowledgment by him
but that acknowledgment should not be availed of
against B for there was no acknowledgment by him.
The law as settled by the Privy Council is in consonance
with the language of the section. We do not think that
any alteration. is necessary, Part payment under
section 20, however, stands on a different footing, as the
section states that if there is a payment by the person
liable to pay the debt, the period of limitation should be
counted from the time when the payment was made but
it does not state that such part payment should be taken
into account against the payer only. It saves the

(2) (1854) 10 Exch. (2.६ € also Morrell ७. Studd & Willingdon (ars) 2
Ch. 643 at 888 Norton “ontDeeds (Second Edition, pages 190. 191}; s—
bury's Laws of Engiand, 3rd Edition, Vol. 11, Page 403. :

@) ILR (1942) All. 660.



23

limitation against all persons for the debt, liability or
tight. This was pointed out by the Madras High Court
in Thayyonayeki v. Sundareppa’ where the question was
whether a part-payment by a mortgagor who sold his
equity of redemption but was liable on his personal
covenant could give a fresh starting ef time against the
purchaser of the equity of redemption. The answer
was in the affirmative and in support of that view the
decision of the Privy Council in Lewin v. Wilson? was
relied on. No alterztions im section : 19 and 20 are
required in this respect.

52. Sections 19 and 20 apply to execution applications
also, as has been made clear in the Explanations to those
sections. We recommend the deletion'‘of -Articles 182
and 483 and the substitution of the provisions of Section
48 of CP.C. As it is our intention that the time
limit of 12 years laid down by that Section should be
absolute subject to the exception therein, we are of the
view that there should be no scope for extension of
time by acknowledgments and part payments, in respect
of execution applications. Sections 19 and 20 should be
amended suitably,

Section 21. ~

53. Section 21 was amended in 1927 ab a result of the
report of the Civil Justice Committee and does not require
any further change.

Section 22,

54. we consider that an omission to implead a person
owing to a bona fide mistake should not deprive the
plaintiff of his rights against that person. Relaxation
of the law of limitation providing for such mistakes in
good faith have been recognised in Section 14 and
elsewhere. Section 22 should be amended to exclude
from its operation cases where due to inadvertence and
in good faith there has been non-joinder of parties.

Sections 23, 24 and 25..

55. These do not in our opinion require any alteration.

अंक LTR 1942 Mad, 508
it AC "630


Sections 26 and 27.

56. These sections apply to States to which the
Easements Act has not been extended, i.¢., to States other
than Andhra, Madras, Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, Coorg,
Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. We consider that uniformity
should be secured by extending the Easements Act to the
whole of India, If this is done there would be no need
to retain sections 26 and 27 of the Limitation Act. We
recommend accordingly.

Section 28.

57. Section 28 deals with the extinguishment of rights
and it applies to all property immovable and movable.
unlike in England where the rule df prescription applies
only to immovable property, The section requires no
change. a

Section 29.

58. Section 29(1) provides that Section 25 of the Contract
Act which permits a barred debt to be regarded as valid
consideration for a contract, is not affected by the
Limitation Act. This may be retained.

59. The combined operation of sub-clauses (a) and (09)
of sub-section 2 is that so far as special and local laws
are concerned, only sections 4, 9 to 18 and 22 of the Act
apply and that too subject te such modifications as may
be prescribed. We consider that there is no need for
thig restriction end that the principles contained in
sections 4 to 25 should be made applicable to all special
and local laws, leaving it open to the legislature to
exclude the application of any or all of these sections, in
any given case.

60. Sub-section (3) makes this Act inapplicable to suits
umder the Divorce Act, 1869. There are other Acts like:
the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act and the Special
Marriage Act, dealing with marriage and divorce. The
reasons for excluding proceedings under the Divorce Act
1869 are equally applicable: to proceedings under these
other Acts. We recommend that the sub-section may be
amplified to include all Acts relating to matrimontal
causes. The Acts to be included may be specified whea
drafting the amendment to the section.

61. Sub-section (4) of this section would become
unnecessary and may be deleted if, as we recommend.
sections 26 and 27 are repealed.


Saving Provision.

62, A saving provision has to be made.in the new Act
to provide for the transitional period. This may be
framed on the lines of the similar provision made in 1908,
providing @ sufficient time for the change over. Appendix
I to this report shows the effect of our proposals on the
existing periods of limitation for suits, appeals and
applications. The period has been reduced (a) from 6
to 3 years, (b) from 12 to 3 years, (c) from 60 to 12 years
and (d) from 60 to 30 years. In the case of appeals the
period has been made uniform by reducing it in very
many cases to 30 days. In the case of applications also
the periods have been altered. In cases where the
period is increased but the cause of action has already
become barred under the existing law the new Act will
not have the effect of reviving rights arising out of such
causes of action in view of Section 6 of the General
Clauses Act. But in cases where the period is reduced
it will be inequitable and unjust, if no provision is made
to obviate the resulting hardship. The period that
should be allowed in such cases is a matter of policy and
may be decided by the Government, We have not,
therefore, made any suggestion in this behalf, except in
the case of suits for redemption, in respect of which our
‘proposal is contained in paragraph 129 of this report.

PART III—ARTICLES
CHaprer II[—GENERAL

63. The existence of so many articles in the Limitation
Act has undoubtedly made the subject very complex and
has also been responsible for conflict of judicial decisions.
All this can be avoided, firstly, by classifying the articles
on 8 rational basis and secondly, by prescribing a uniform
period of limitation for suits or proceedings of the same
nature. It is, of course, not quite easy to classify the
articles of the Act in water-tight compartments but a
‘road categorisation should be attempted if simplification
is to be achieved. In the present Act, the articles are
grouped according to the periods prescribed. This is
neither tational nor convenient. A proper approach
would be to adopt the subject-matter as the basis of
elassification. A perusal of the articles relating to suits
reveals that most of them fall under distinct subjects. If
the articles are grouped subjectwise and a uniform



26

period is fixed for suits of the same nature we would have
achieved a considerable measure of simplicity. Similarly,
av regards articles relating to appeals and applications, it
would conduce to simplicity if uniform periods are pres-
eribed as far as possible.

64. Taking as an illustration the articles relating to
suits on contract and tort, it will be found that they ae-
count for us many as 81 of the 149 articles relating to
suits. If. therefore, adopting the English model a single
provision js made for all such suits with a period of three
years from the date of the accrual of the cause of action,
we would be able to eliminate as many as 80 articles.
The most important point to consider in this connection
is whether the existing entries in column 3 of the first
schedule to the Limitation Act, i¢., the dates of the starting
point for limitation admit of such treatment. In this
connection, it is necessary to bear in mind that the Limi-
tation Act is not a statute which creates a cause of action
or confers a right of. suit; these are matters which are
governed solely by the substantive law. It is not, there-
fore, permissible in a statute of limitation to provide a
sterting point for limitation which does not cortespond
with the date of the accrual of the cause of action under
the substantive law. We, therefore, propose that ail
articles in which the date in column three coincides with
the accrual of the cause of action should be grouped te-
gether and the date of the accrual of the cause of action
be specified as the starting point of limitation. Where,
however, the two dates do not coincide, the existing article
should be retained with such changes as may 92 neces: |
sary.

65. At the outset it is necessary to consider what is
meant by the term “cause of action.” The principles for
determining when the cause of action arises in any parti-
cular case qf contract or tort have been fairly well settl-
ed in England and in India, The expression “cause of
action” has been defined by Viscount Dunedin (Vide:
Board of Trade v. Cayzer Irvine Co., Ltd.) as mezning
“thet which makes action possible.” In the leading case
of Read v. Brown? Lord Esher defined it as:

“fvery fact which would be necessary for the
plaintiff to prove if traversed in order to support his

(J 927) A छठ at 817
@) 11888) 22 QBD. 128,


27

right to the judgment of the court, There must be a
plaintiff who can succeed and defendant against whora
he can succeed.”

(See also Reeves v. Butcher and Coburn v. College’)

The courts in Indie have adopted the above definition
eg, A Brault v, Kaul’. It is best to adopt an objective
test rather than enact a definition. It must be left to the
eourts to determine what constitutes the cause of action in
each case applying well-established principles to proved
facts.

66. A question may be raised whether the removal of
the detailed entries in the first schedule of the present
Act, is not likely to open up fresh avenues of litigation.
it may however be pointed out that under the Code of
Civil Procedure the Court is under a duty to determine
whether the plaint discloses a cause of action and if so,
the place at which such cause of action arose to sustain
its jurisdiction to entertain the suit. Further, what con-
stitutes the cause of action for the several categories of
suits has already been settled by the substantive law snd
it will not therefore be difficult for the Court, which has
thus necessarily to go into the question of the cause of
action, to determine the date of its accrual by applying
these settled principles of law. It seems to us, therefore,
that the apprehension that the alteration in the law would
give rise to new controversies is not justified.

67. We may also refer to one other aspect of the matter
which may be raised as an objection to our proposals. In
the process of evolving a uniform period of limitation for
suits of the same nature, it is necessary to increase the
existing periods in some cases. This is inevitable, ifa
uniform period is to be prescribed for suits of the same
nature. As pointed out above, such uniformity will put
an end to the ever arising conflicts under the existing law.
Further, an increase in the existing period is not tae to
work any hardship as it does not prevent the plainti from
filmg a suit on any earlier date if he so desires.

68. The articles in the Act fall under three | divisions,
viz, 6) Suits (i) Appeals & (43) Applications, ~The

(7) (i891) 2 QB.D. ses.
(2) (897) 5 QED. 702.
G1 60 Cal. grt,

है SAS9/2/Lawi76-77


28

articles relating to suits can be grouped under:
1. Suits relating to contract and tort;
IL. Suits relating to movable property;
वा, Suits relating to trusts and trust property;
IV. Suits relating to immovable property, including—~

(a) Suits relating to Mortgages’ and charges, and

(०) Recovery of possession;
V. Suits based on other claims i.e. suits

(a) for accounts,

(०) for declaration,

(०) for setting aside instruments,

(a) for relief on the ground of fraud and mistake;
& VI. Residuary article, providing for suits which do not

fall under the above descriptions,

We proceed to examine the articles on the basis of the
above classification.

Cuaprer [V—Surts एस CONTRACT AND TORT
above classification.

69. In the light of the discussion in the previous
chapter, our recommendation is that for all suits un con-
tract and tort the period of limitation should be three
years from the date of accrual of the cause of action. In
the succeeding paragraphs of this chapter we proceed to
examine in what manner the articles of the Limitation
Act relating to contract and tort can be grouped. The
articles relating to contract including implied contract
and quasi-contract are, 7 to 9, 30, 31, 43, 50 to 64, 36.
87, 97, 99 to 102, 107 to 111, 113, 115, 116 and 131

7 70. Article 7 provides a period of one year for recovery
vot & 509. 01 wages of a house-hold servant, artisan or labourer
and time starts from the date when the wages accrued
due. Along with this article, articles 101 and 102 which
provide for seamen’s wages and for wages not otherwise
expressly provided for may be considered. In the case
of seamen’s wages the period provided is three years
and time runs from the end of the voyage during which
the wages are earned. Article 102 is the residuary
article for wages providing a period of three years from
the date when the wages accrued due. These three

8 5B-59/ 2/ Law/ 76-77


a9

carticles relate to suits ©.* contract i.e., contract of ser-
vice. Under the substentive law, the cause of action for
recovery of arrears arises when the wages accrued due.
‘Under article 7 which provides a shorter period of limi-
tation, questions have arisen and troubled the courts
‘whether a cook is a household servant, whether a lay
man employed to work in a ship or a person employed
to assist a salesman in a deeler’s shop or a bus conductor
is an artisan or labourer, to determine whether the
shorter period under Article 7 or the longer reriod
cunder the residuary article applies. The attempt of the
plaintiff is neturally to obtain advantage of the Icnger
period under the residuary article (Art. 102} while the
defendant endeavours to get the benefit of the shorter
period under article 7. If a uniform period is laid down
this conflict can be avoided. The cause of action is the
breach and it arises on the date of breech. This is the
time from which limitation begins to run. In the case
of seamen the cause of action for the recovery of wages
does not accrue until the voyage is completed. This was
settled long ago in Hyde y. Partridge! Section 2 (6) of
the English Limitation Act of 1939 provides that sub-
section 1 of section 2 of that Act should apoly to sea-
men’s wages though it is an action enforceable in rem.
It is treated as an action founded on contract for which
a uniform period of limitation of six years is provided.
Under the Indian Law, the remedies available for the
‘recovery of a seamen’s wages are:—

€1) Under section 63 of the Indian Merchant Ship-
ping Act, 1923, he has a right to recover wages
in a summary manner before a magistrate pro-
vided the amount cleimed does not exeeed
Rs. 500. He has a lien on the ship for his wages.

(2) When the claim is less than Rs. 500 he can sue
in the Court of Small Causes and when it ex-
ceeds that amount, in the ordinary civil courts.

It. is for the second class of remedies that article 101
provides a period of limitation of 3 years from the ter-
mination of the voyage. Under article 102, the wages
become payable only when they accrue due and it is on
that date that the cause of action arises. All these three
articles, therefore, relate to suits founded on contract
and the time when limitation starts for these suits

छत (708) 2 Raym. i204.
556 Law—3. ee



30

coincides with the time when the cause of action accrues
under the substantive law.

71, Article 8 provides a period of one year for the
xecovery of price of food or drink sold by the keeper
of a hotel or tavern and the cause of action arises when
the food or drink is delivered. Article 9 provides a
period of one year for a suit to recover the price of
todeing and the cause of action accrues when the price
becomes payable. These are also actions founded on
contract and the cause of action arises when the food or
drink is delivered or when the price of lodging becomes
payable. There is no particular reason for providing a
shorter period of limitation for these cases and for not
bringing them under the, uniform period of three years.

72. Article 30 is for a suit against a carrier for loss of
or injury to goods and the cause of action accrues when
the loss 07 injury occurs. The period of limitation is
one year, Article 31 is for a suit against a carrier for
compensation for non-delivery of, or delay in delivering,
goods and the cause of action arises when the goods ought
to be delivered, the period of limitation heing one year.
The liability of a common carrier not being a railwey
owned by the State or by a private person is governed
by the English common law as modified by the Carriers
Act, 1885. His liability is to some extent affected by the
Contract Act which was enacted subsequently. This
was settled by the Privy Council in Irrawady Flottilla
Co. ए. Bhagwan Das.1 The liability of a railway is, how-
ever, governed by section 72 of the Indian Railways
Act, which expressly negatives the application of the
English Common law and the Carriers Act (II of 1865).
Though by the definition of a common carrier in section
2 of the Carriers Act, a State-owned railway is excluded
from the purview of the Act, articles 30 and 31 are appli-
ed to all carriers whether common carriers or State-own-
ed railways or privately-owned railways. The langu-
age of the articles clearly indicates that they apply to
suits based on contract as well as on tort. The cause of
action accrues on and coincides with the time indicated
in the third column of the Ist Schedule to the Limitation
Act. If the same period is prescribed for suits founded
on contract as well as tort much of the discussion relat-
ing to the basis of the suit, as to whether {t is founded on

उ GL छठ 7एएणणएणएएणएणएएशए एक 7



६)

contract or on tort, would become unnecessary. The period
of one year is undoubtedly too short and should be made
three years. In the case of railways, it is’ common
knowledge that a long time is spent by the con-
signee in correspondence with the railway autho-
tities and it is only after a long-drawn correspondence
that the aggrieved party files a suit. The Carriage by
Air Act (XX of 1934) by rule 29 of the First Schedule
Provides that the right fer damages for non-delivery of
goods shall be extinguished if an action is not brought
within two years from the date of arrival at the desti-
nation or from the date when the air-craft ought to have
arrived. This rule is based on international conventions
and should not be altered. Article 8 of the First Schedule
to the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act (XKVI of 1925) pro-
vides that the provision in the rules shall not affect the
tights and obligations of the carrier under any statute
for the time being in force relating to limitation of the
Hiahility of owners of sea-going vessels. This provision
also need net be altered.

73. Article 50 relates to a suit for the recovery of hire
of animals, vehicles, boats or household furniture and a
period of three’ years is provided. Time starts when the
hire becomes ‘payable, which 1s also the time when the
cause of action accrues. This is clearly a suit on con-
tract but it is immaterial whether the suit falls under
the article relating to contract or under the residuary
article as the period will be three years in either case.

74. Article 51 relates to a suil for the balance of
meney advanced in payment of goods ४७ be delivered.
A period of three years is provided and the time begins
to run when the goods ought to be delivered. Article 52
relates to a suit for the price of goods sold and delivered.
where no fixed period of credit is agreed upon and the
time runs from the date of the delivery of the goods:
the period is three years. Article 53 is for the price of
goods sold and delivered to be paid for after ‘the expiry
of a fixed period of credit. Time begins to run when the
period of credit expires according to the terms of the cont-
fact. Article 54 is for the price of goods sold and delivered
to be paid for by a bill of exchange, no such bill being
given. The period of limitation is three years and com-
mences when the period of the proposed bill elapses. All
these four articles relate to the sale of goods and the
event from which time begins to run is fixed according

Ar

Act


Arts. & 56°

Arts, 57-58

32

10 the terms of the contract either when the goods ought
to have been delivered or when they are delivered or
when the period of credit expires or when the period of
the proposed “bill of exchange elapses. The event, on
the happening of which the time starts, is identical with
the time when the cause of action accrues under the
eontract. There is no necessity, therefore, for these se-
parate articles.

78. Article 55 is for the price of trees or rowing crops
sold by the plaintiff to the defendant where no fixed
period of credit is agreed upon. Naturally, the time runs
trom the date of sale. Article 56 is for the price of
work done by the plaintiff for the, defendant at his re-
quest, where no time has been fixed for payment. Time
begins to run when the work is done and the period
is three years. These two cases also are instances of a
breach of contract and the cause of action arises at the
moment specified in the Act es the starting point for
limitation,

76. Articles 57 and 58 relate to money lent by a
cheque. In respect ef both of them the time of accrual
of the czuse of action coincides with the time from
which the period of limitation begins to ran. A cheque
is paid when it is cashed by the lender's bankers. It is
only then that the money passes "from the lender to the
berrower, and, therefore, time is made to run from the
moment when the cheque is pzid. Mere giving of the
cheaue by the lender to the borrower does net amount
to payment.

पा. Article 59 is tor money leni under an agreement
that it shall be payable on demang and the period of
three years begins to run when the loan is made. In
the absence of ¢ special condition, when money is lent
the debt becomes due immediately and the fact that
money is payable on demand makes no difference. This
was settled very early in Norton v. Ellam.'. The demand
is not treated as an essential part of the contract and
time is made to run from the date of the loan and not
from the date of demand. The article can, accordingly,
be merged with other articles dealing with contracts.

78 Article 60 relates to deposits of money including
money of a customer in the hands of his banker and

7 व कागज M&W का (See also 20 Hals., and Edn. pp.6og& 60s).



33

provides a period of 3 years from the date when the
demand is made. In the case of deposit, the cause of
action arises, when a demand for payment is made, In
the case of a current account it has now been settled by
the Court of Appeal in England (Joachimson v. Swiss
Bank)! that it is a term implied in the relationship of a
banker and customer that demand is necessary. The
question was also considered by the Privy Council in
Mahomed Akbar Khan v. Atiar Singh? and Sulaiman
Haji v. Haji Abdulla® and it may, therefore, be
taken as settled law that in the case of a customer's
current account with a bank, the cause of action does
not accrue and the time does not start until the demend
is made by him upon the bank (Vide also 20 Hals. 2nd
Ed., 9. 610). The substantive law, therefore, settles the
cause of action and the time from which it accrues
coincides with the entry in the third column.

99. Articles 61 and 62 do not relate to express con-
tracts, Atticle 61 applies to cases in which a plaintiff
would be entitled to recover money paid by him for the
defendant to which sections 69 and 70 of the Contract Act
apply. It has been held that this article applies to cases
of contribution between co-debtors but not between joint
debtors in respect of which article 99 makes a provision.
Article 62 relates to what in Engiand is knowm as action
for ‘Money had and received’. As Lord Mansfield puts
it,

गु| ig a kind of equitable action and lies when the
defendant has received money which in justice and equity
belongs to the plaintiff under circumstances which
render a receipt by the deféndant for the use of the
plaintiff”.

This action was discussed by the House of Lords in the
well known case of Sinclair v. Brougham‘. The action is
treated as based on an implied contract and therefore falls
within the proposed definition of contract. For both these

_ articles, the starting point of limitation coincides with the

« accrual of the cause of action.

Art
61 & 62५

80. Article 63 deals with the payment of interest on Art. 53,

the money due from the defendant to the plaintiff. This

uy 193) K B10.

3 LL.B. 17 Lah. 557.
a {rae} Kar 277.
* (1914) A.C. 395.


34

can only be under the terms of a contract between the
garties and the time at which the cause of action arises,
viz, When the interest becomes due, coincides with the
time when the period of limitation begins to run. If the
contract is a registered contract, article 116 would apply
This makes it clear that the suit is based on contract.

81. Article 64 relates to suits on “account stated”
between the parties, and time begins to run when the
accounts are stated in writing signed by the defendant or
his agent duly authorised in this behalf, unless where the
debt is, by a simultaneous agreement in writing signed as
aforesaid, made payable at a future time and in that
event limitation starts when the time arrives. The “ae-
count stated” does not extinguish the original debt.
The account stated may arise from a mere admission of
the debt as correct or out of an agreement for considera-
tion such as by reduction of the amount or from striking
a balance by setting off debts against credits. The origi-
nal debt and its acknowledgment or a fresh agreement
to pay are undoubtedly contractual obligations. In Sequira
v. Noronha’ the Privy Council described it as “a promise
for good consideration to pay the balance”. It may also
be considered as a settlement from which arises 8 pro-
mise to pay the balance shown in the account which consti-
tutes the consideration for the contract (Bishan Chand v.
Girdhari Lal)? The transaction contemplated by article
64 differs in some respects from an acknowledgment under
section 19 of the Limitation Act and an express promise
contemplated by section 25 of the Contract Act, An
“account stated” is always the result of mutual agreement
between the parties, It implies a promise to pay and the
promise need not be expressly stated. As Blackburn वे.
observed in Laycock v. Pickles* the real account stated is
when sevéral items of cross claims are brought into
account on either side and being set against one another a
balance is struck and the consideration for the payment
of the balance is the discharge on either side; each party
tesigns his own rights on the sums he can claim in consi-
deration of a similar abandonment on the other side and
of an agreement to pay and to receive, in discharge of the
balance found due. Such an account stated when in writ-
ing and signed by the defendant or his agent is tant-
TT fread) ACP. 932.

2. 56 AIL 376 PC.
3. (1883) 33 LJ. (0.8.) 43.



35

amount to a new contract and is a substantive czuse of
action in itself and a suit can be maintained on it. This
establishes that a suit on an account stated is really a suit
founded on a contract and the cause of action arises at the
time specified in the Limitation Act for this article.

82. Article 65 refers to a suit founded on contract. The
suit is for compensation for breach of a promise to do
anything at a specified time or upon the happening of a
specified contingency. Naturally the cause of action arises
only when the specified time arrives or when the specified
contingency happens. This is the starting point of limi-
tation stated in the third column,

83. Similarly, article 66 provides for a suit on a single
bond where a day is sperified for payment and time
begins to run from the said date. According to the terms
of the contract. the case of action will erise only when
the specified day arrives.

84. Article 67 provides for a suit on a single bond,
where no date of payment is specified and the cause of
action arises on the date of the execution of the bond,
which coincides with the starting point of limitation.

85. Article 68 relates to a suit on a bond subject to a
condition and provides a period of three years from the
date of the breach. Being a conditional contract, it ia
obvious that until the condition is broken there is no right
of suit. The two dates therefore coincide.

86. Article 69 relates to a suit on a bill of exchange or
Promissory note payable at a fixed time after date. The
cause of action arises when the bill or note falls due and
that is the time from which the period runs under the
Limitation Act (vide 20 Hals, II Edn. p. 606. See secs.
22, 23, 25, of the Negotiable Instruments Act).

87, Article 70 deals with a suit on a bill of exchange
payable at sight or after sight, but not at a fixed time and
time starts when ‘the bill is presented. Unless the bill
is presented there can be no cause of action, because it is
presentation that gives rise to it (See section 61 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act).

88. Article 71 refers to a suit on a bill of exchunge

accepted, payable at a particular place, and time begins
ta ran when the bill is presented at the place and that is

है ,68-५५/ 2/ सन्त 78० ५

Art. €5.

Art. 66.

Art. 68.

Art. 69.

AML 70,

Art. 71.


Art. 72.

Hk 23.

Are. 74.

Am. 75.

36
the cause of action as presentment at that place is essen—
tial under the Negotiable Instruments Act. (See Sectiom
61 of the Negotiable Instruments Act).

89. Article 72 is for a suit on a bill of exchange or pro-
missory note payable at a fixed time after sight or after
demand. When the fixed time expires the cause of action
arises and time begins to run from that moment. (See
sections 23 and 24 of the Negotiable Instruments Act.)

90. Article 73 relates to a suit on a bill of exchange
or promissory, note payable on demand and not accom
panied by any writing restraining or postponing the right
to sue. Time runs from the date of the bill or the note
which also corresponds to the date of cause of action.

91. Article 74 relates to a suit on a promissory note or
bond payable by instalments. Time starts from the expi-
ration of the first term of payment -as to the part then
payable; and for the other parts, the expiration of the
respective terms of payment. The general principle of
law is that when under 2 contract money is payable on =
particular date the cause of action arises on that date.
The two dates accordingly coincide.

92. Article 75 relates to a suit on a promissory note or
a bond paysble by instalments which provides that if a
default is made in payment of one or more instalments,
the whole shall become due. The cause of action arises
when the default is made, except where the payee or
obligee waives the benefit of the provision. In auch a
case the cause of action arises when -a fresh default is
made. In the case of an instalment bond, which provides a
penalty in case of default, it is accepted law that it is
open to the payee or obligee to waive the default and
wait for the next default, which gives rise to a freah cause
of action. The date in column 3 corresponds to the ac-
¢rual of cause of action.

98. Article 76 relates to a sult on a promissory note
given by the maker to a third person to be delivered to the
payee after the happening of a certain event. Time starts
from the date of delivery to the payee. This article ig
based on Savage v. Aldren.' The coincidence of the two
dates exists here.

94. Article 77 relates to a sult on a dishonoured foreign
bill where protest has been made and notice given. Time-

माप: 7.

F 68-59/2/Law/76-77


37

begins to run when the notice is given and that gives rise
to the cause of action, See Whitehead v. Walker.

95. Article 78 is for a suit by the payee against the
drawer of a bill of exchange which has been dishohoured
by non-acceptance. The cause of action is afforded by
the refusal to accept and time starts from that date.

96. Article 79 is for suits by the acceptor of an accom-
modation bill against the drawer; -the cause of action
arises and time also runs from the date of payment by
the acceptor of the amount of the bill. The accommoda-
ting party has a right of indemnity against the party to
whom he lent his name (Padmalochan Patar v. Girish
Chandra)? This is a case of implied contract.

97. Article 80 relates to a suit on a bill. of exchange,
promissory note or bond not expressly provided for in
the Act, The period is three years from the date when
the bill or note or bond becomes payable. This is a
residuary article which provides for cases not governed
by the previous articles and here, too, the date of cause
of action coincides with the starting point of limitation.
This one article would have been sufficient to cover the
other articles above referred to, relating to bills of ex-
change or promissory notes or bonds.

98. Then we have a group of articles relating to con-
tmbution. Article 61 is for a suit by a surety against the
principal debtor and time begins to run when the surety
pays the creditor. Article 62 is for a suit by a surety
against a cosurety and time runs from the date
when the surety pays anything in excess of
his own share. In these two cases the event on
the happening of which the cause of action arises
under the substantive law coincides with the time
from which the period begins ‘to run. Under section
145 of the Contract Act the law implies an obligation by
the principal debtor and a co-surety to indemnify the
surety and liability arises by reason of an implied obli-
gation. Sections 146 and 147 of the Contract Act pro-
vide for payment of the amount by sureties. Article 83
is for suits on-any other contract to indemnify and the
starting point of limitation, as also of the accrual of the

“तक ke के... 13.4 followed in 5 igs.

Art. 7%

Asta,
81-33.


Art, 84,

Art. है:

Art 87.

Asta. 43. 97)
99, 090 &
107-109.

Je, TE,

33

cause of actiun under the substantive law, is when the
plaintiff is actually indemnified.

99. Article 84 is for a clzim by an attorney or vakil
for his cosis of a suit and the cause of ection accrues on
the termination of the suit or business which  corres-
ponds w the date in col. 3. This is a contractual obliga-
tun implied by law.

100. Article 86 is for recovery of money under
an insurance policy. The plaintiff would be entitled
to recover, in the case of a policy of life  insur-
ance, from the date of the death of the deceased
and in the case of other policies, the date of the occur-
rence causing the loss. [The article has no application
to endowment policies payable after a particular dete.)
This is also a contractual obligation and the time from
whieh limitation begins to run synchronises with the
date of the accrual of the cause of action,

101. Article 87 relates to a suit by the assured to re
cover premia paid under a policy yoidable at the elee-
tion of the insurers and the time begins to run and the
cause of action accrues when the insurer eiects to evoid
the policy. in a case in which there is a contract which
becomes void, section 65 of the Contract Act imposes an
obligation to refund the benefit. This may be also treat-
ed as an action for money had and received (Morrison
y. Universal Mercantile Insurance.}'

102. Articles 48,97,99,100 & 107 to 109 relaté to suiis
not based on express promises but on obligations implied
or imposed by law which we have brought uncer the
definition of contract. In all these cases, the cause of
action crises on tbe dates on which limitation starts
under the Act.

103. Article 110 is for the recovery of arrears of rent
and time begins to ran when the arrears become due, the
period of limitation being 3 years. The contract of lease
may be express or implied. It may be inferred from
mere occupation of property. It is a suit based on cont
ract and the time when the cause of action arises coin
aides with the starting point of limitation.

104. Article 111 is for a suit by a vendor of immoy-

vie property for persona] payment of unpaid purchase

-aney. No charge is claimed and the suit contemplated

tT. 8 Exch. 42%.


39

is a mere porsonal action. The suit is founded on contract
and the money becomes payable at the time fixed for
completing the sale, or where the title is accepted after
the time fixed for completion, on the date of accept
ance of the title. This corresponds with the date of the
starting point of limitation.

105. Article 113 is for a suit for specific performance
ef a contract. Such a suit is based oa contract and the
date of accrual of cause of action coincides with the
starting point of limitetion. Article 115 is a residuary
article for breach of a contract and time starts when the
contract is broken or where there are successive
breaches, when the breach in respect of which the suit
is instituted, occurs, or when the breach is continuing,
when it ceases. These dates also correspond with the date
of the accrual of the cause of action.

108. Article 116 provides for compensation for breach
of a contract in writing and reg'stered end a period of
vix years is provided; time star‘s when the period of
Hrnitation would begin to rum m a suit brought on a
similar contract not registered. J1 has been held hy the
Privy Council in Tricomdas Cooverfi v. Shri Gopi Nathi
that the word “compensailon” is not. used in this
article in thé sensé. of unliquidated damages and that
it also applies to recdvery of a liquidated amount, as- for
example, rent under a lease. If the: contract happens to
be a registered contract, the period of limitation is .ex--
tended to six years, énd time runs from the event men-
tioned in column 3 of the Schedule to the Act. This
atticle has been applied to very-manr cases covered by
other specific articles where the “contract is registered,
which is an indication that all those suits are founded
on contract. Article 131 also relates to suits on contract,

107. If simplification is desirable, as undoubtedly it is,
all the above-mentioned articles may be omitted and a
provision may be made as in the English Act, that in
case of suits founded on contcuct, time runs from the
date on which the cause of action accrues and a uniform
period of. three years may be ‘prescribed. It is not neces-
sary to retain the period of oi years in case of registered
contracts: -on the analogy specialty debts under
Faglish law.

|. OLR. 44 Cal. 759 (B.C)

Arts D3
ms,

Ams & |


Arty 2.

49
CHaprer [V—Surts FouNpep oN TORT

108. What has been stated in paragraphs 44 and 6%
above, applies equally to the articles governing snits on
tort. It will be found from the discussion which follows
that al! the articles releting to suits on torts can be
grouped together and brought under one head, providing
a period of three years limitation from the date of the
accrual of the cause of action. These articles are;
Articles 2, 19 to 29 and 32 to 42.

109. Article 2 is for a suit for compensation for doing
or for omitting to do an act alleged to be in pursuance
of any enzctment in force for the time being in India.
The period of limitation is 90 days and time begins tc
run when the aet or omission takes place. This article
is intended to cover the case provided for in England,
by section 8 of the Public Authorities (Protection) Act,
1893. The provisions therein are somewhat elaborate
and the period of limitation is six months. The object
of the Legislature in England and in India seems to be
to provide a shorter period of limitation in the ease of
actions against public authorities for any act done in
pursuance or execution or intended execution of any Act
or of public duty, or authority, or in respect of any
neglect or default in the execution of such Act, duty or
authority. It protects the public authorities by providing
a shorter period of limitation. It has been held that so
long as the officer concerned acts honestly and bona fide,
he gets the advantage of the shorter period of limitation.
16 the statute authorises the injury, no action lies. If
an officer purporting to act, in pursuance of a statute,
does something which causes an injury or by reason of
कांड omission to do qn act an injury results, the person
so injured is entitled to cl2im compensation for the
neglect or default. If he abuses the power, the shorter
period of limitation will not apply and the action will be
outside the article. The law in England was altered by
the Limitation Act of 1939 {Section 21) which provided
a period of one year instead of six months. Time wes
made to run from the date of the accrual of the cause of
action instead of from the act or neglect or default
complained of, as under section 8 of the Public Authorities
(Protection) Act. Owing to public agitation, the English
Limitetion Act was amended in 1954 and the period of
jimitation was increased to three years for actions relating
to personal injuries. By the amending Act, Section 27



al

of that Act was repealed and a proviso to sub-section 1
of section 2 was added, cutting down the period of six
‘years, which epplies for actions founded on torts, to three
years in such cases. The period, therefore, under the
English law for actions on tort as respects personal
injury, whether caused by a privite individual or by a
public authority, is now three ye-Ts instead of six years
as in thé case of other actions based on tort. This
article would come under the general provision for all
suits on tort for which we propose to prescribe a period
of 3 years from the date of accrual of the cause of
action. There does not seem to be any justification for
meking a distinction between public authorities and a
private citizen except in matters like notice under see-
tion 80 C.P.C. Further, if a shorfer period for suits against
Public authorities is prescribed, it will compel parties to
rush to a suit without exhausting the possibility of getting
redress by negotiations which necessarily take time. One
of us, Dr. Sen Gupia, is inclined to take a different view
and has added a separate note to this Report on the sub-
ject. After a full consideration of his views we think that
the consideration mentioned above in favour of a uniform
‘period for suits against public authorities and private
citizens should prevail and that no change is needed in
‘the proposals suggested above.

110. Article 19 provides for suits for compensation for Art. 19.

false imprisonment, a period of one year from the time
the imprisonment ends. This is a stit based on tort.
Tt is a continuing wrong within the meaning of
section 23 of the Limitation Act and terminus ad quem
‘is reached when the imprisonment ends.

111. Articles 20, 21, 33, 34 and 35 may be considered Arts 20, ar |

together.

112. The Maxim of English law “actio personalis mori-
tur cum persone” has been modified in India by various
Acts. The Fatal Accidents Act provides that in the case of
death of = person injured by a wrongful act, neglect or
‘default, a right of suit accrues to recover damages for
the benefit of the wife, husband, parent and child, if any,
of the person who dies. But the suit has to be
instituted in the name of the executor, administrator
-or representative of the deceased person. Under the
Legal Representatives’ Suits Act, XII of 1855, the executor,

33 34 wed
35.


admusistrater or representative of amy deceased person
has been given a right to bring 8 suit for a wrong com-
mitied in the life time of suth person which occasioned
pecuniary loss to his estate, provided the suit was m res-
pect of a wrong committed within one year before the
death. Death will not abate any cause of action relating to
loss or damage to property. The damages recovered form
part of the estate of the deceased. A suit may be maintain-
ed against the executor, administrator or representative of
the deceased for any wrong committed by him in his life
time for which he would have been subject to an action if
the wrong was committed within one year before his death.
Section 2 of that Act further provides that the death
of either party to a suit shall not abate the suit, Section
306 of the Indian Succession Act provides that the right
to proseeite or defend any action or spécial pro-
ceeding existing in favour of or against a person at the
time of his death survives to and against his executor,
administrator or representative. But an exception is
made in respect of a cause of action based on defzma-
tion, assault as defined in the Indian Penal Cade, or
other persons] injury not causing the ita of the party.
In England, until recently, the maxim above referred
to applied generally till it was abrogated by the Law
Reform (Miscel?ancous Provisions) Act, 1934. But ever
under this Act, a cause of action for defamation or se
duction or for inducing one spouse to leave or remain
apart from the other and for damages on the ground of
adultery were excepted, The law, ‘tuerefore, both in
England and in Indiz at the present moment is more or
less the same. The difference lies only in the excep-
tions existing under the Indian law and the English law.

1B, Article 20 relates to a suit filed by a legal repre-
sentative on forts causing precuniary loss to the estate
while article 21 relates to a suit filed by a legal represen-
tative for damages for death, which has to be a repre-
sentative action, The other group of Articles, 33, 34, &
35 telate io suits against the legal representatives.
Under articles 20 end 21, the date of death of the person
is taken as the starting point of limitation. Under the
Patal Accidents Act, the suit is for damages for causing
dezth by any wrongful act, neglect or default and the
suit is for the benefit of the dependants. The suit under
the Legal Representatives’ Suits Act is restricted to
wrongs which ocresion pecuniary loss to the estate of


43

the deceased and the cause of action in respect of which
according to the law then prevailing did not survive.
Under the Succession Act, all rights of action survive to
the executors or administrators except actions for defa-
mation, assault or personal injuries not causing the
death of a party. The substantive law preventing the
abatement of the cause of action is laid down by the
said Acts. The cause of action under the Fatal Acci-
dents Act is the death and time under Art. 20 begins to
run from the date of the accrual of the cause of action.
However, under the Legal Representatives’ Suits Act, as
the suit is in respect of a wrong committed in the life
time of a person but time is made to run from the date
of the death, the running of time does not synchronise
with the date of accrual of the cause of action. On the
other hand. under Articles 33 & 35. a period of 2 years
is provided which runs from the date when the wrong
complained of is doné. This synchronises with the date
of the accrual of the cause of action. The suits contemp-
lated under the two Acts, ie., Legal Representatives’ Suits
Act and the Fatal Accidents Act relate to torts. No
special period of limitation is provided for actions con-
templated by section 306 of the Succession Act, as it was
assumed that the provisions laid down in the Limitation
Act will govern such actions.

114, A provision for the survivel of the -right of
action haying been made, the action may be treated as
one. founded on tort whether it is by or against an exe-
cutor, administrator or representative and the time for
limitation may be made to commence with the <ccrual
of the cause of action. If a period of three years from
the accrual of the cause of action is provided no hard-
ship will be caused to either party.. In view of the pro-
posed period of 3 years from the date of “accrual of
the cause of action the period of one year before death
provided in the Legal Representatives’ Suits Act. will
haye to be abrogated. It may be observed here that in-
stead of leaving the question of survival of the cause
of action to be dealt with by three separate Acts, a'con-
solidating amendment in an appropriate manner’ may be
made in section 306 of the Indian Succession Act

115. There is 2lso a conflict of decisions under Sec-
tion 306 of the Indian Succession Act as to whether a
right to an action for malicious prosecution is ohe relat-
ing to personal injury not causing the death of the party

¥.7A~59/ 2) Lau! 76-77


45

foreign buyer “which occasions the export”, and which
is implemented in accordance with the terms of the
contract by an actual export which is the sine qua non
‘of “a sale in the course of export”.

“A. case on the other side of the line would be one
where the sale is effected to a resident purchaser who
effects the export by sale of the goods purchased to a
foreign buyer. Here the first sale to the buyer who
enters into the export sale would not be a “sale in the
course of export”, for it would not be the particular
sale which occasions the export, notwithstanding that
the purchase might have been made with a view to
effect the export sale, or to implement a contract of
sale already entered into with a foreign buyer. That
such a sale is not one “in the course of export” has
been repeatedly held by this Court.1-*-9-4,

“This second type of case involves two sales—one
to a resident purchaser who purchases it with a view
to effect an export and the second, the export sale or
sale in the course of export by the purchaser to a
foreign buyer. The existence of the two sales and the
-consequent dissociation between the first sale and the
export causes a hiatus between ‘that sale and the
export and destroys’ the integrality of the two events
or transactions viz., the sale and the factual export.

“The sales involved in the present appeals are not
-of the second type for here there isa single sale direct
to a foreign buyer, the conttact being concluded with
and the goods sold delivered to his agent. It is hardly
necessary to add that for purposes relevant to the de-
cision of the question before us there could be no dif-
ference in legal effect between a sale'to a foreign buyer
present in India to také delivery of the for
transport to his country'and ‘a’ sale to his resic Seat agent
for that’ purpose. Pausing ‘here, we should mention
that there is no dispute (1) that’the persons who bid
at the auction at Fort Cochin and purchased the teas
of the assessees were agents of foreign buyers or (2)
regarding their having made these purchases under
the directions of their foreign principals in order to
despatch the goods to the latter—a contractual obli-
gation that they admittedly. fulfilled.

ee

+t. State of Tranvancoor-Cochinv. 30 ha Vilas Cashew Nut Factorys
(1954) S.C.R. 533 ALR. 19§3 0४2 333:

2. State es ‘Madras v. Gurviah Naidu and. Co, Ltd., A.ILR. 1956 S.C. 1583
6 S.T.C. 717.

3. State of Mysore v. Mysore Spinning etc. Co. Lid. A,ILR. 1958 S.C.
1002 ; (1958) 9 S.T.C.- 188.

4. Bast India Tobacco Co, v. The State of Andhra Pradesh, (1963) 1 S.C.R.

4०43 A.LR. 1962 S.C. 17335 13 F.C. 399.


46

of the Act. At the same time in respect of immovable
property articles 134(A) to (C) were introduced. Article
134 includes trust property as well as mortgage pro-
perty. This article may be split up and the portion re-
lating to trust property may be brought under the above
head. (See also paragraph 130). The existing period in
all the above articles may be retained but the articles
mezy be grouped as indicated in the Annexure.

123, The starting point of Limitation for suits cover-
ed by Art. 134-B is the date of death, resignation or
removal of the transferor. This has. given rise to some
difficulties in certain cases. Thus, an Endowment Com-
missioner may find it necessary to challenge an aliena-
tion by one of the previous Managers, zfter decades; or,
there may be a gap of more than 12 years between the
death, resignation or removal of one manager and the
appointment of his successor. In such cases, it would be
more cquitable to make the dete of the plaintiff's ap-
pointment as Manager the starting point for limita
tion. But there may be cases and circumstances where
the existing provision may be more favourable to the
institution. To provide for both contingencies, the later
of the two dates should be taken as the starting point of
limitation.

Cuarrer Vil—Svurrs Revatina to Inmovas.e PRorerTy

Mortgages
124. Articles 105, 182, 184 (second part), 135, 146, 147
and 148 relate to mortgages. The Transfer of Property
Act as amended in 1929 deals with the following kinds of
mortgages:
(1) Simple mortgage,
{2) Mortgage by conditional sale,
(3) Usufructuary mortgage,
(4) English mortgage,
(5) Mortgage by deposit of title deeds
and (6) Anomalous mortgage.
Apart from suits on the covenant to pay, if any,
the remedies available to a mortgagee. are stated in sec-
tion 67 of that Act. After the mortgage money becomes
payable the mortgagee is entitled under the Act to a
decree either for foreclosure or for sale depending on


47

the nature of the mortgage. The right of foreclosure
is given only to a mortgagee under mortgage by condi-
tional sale or a mortgagee under an anomelous mortgage
by the terms of which he is entitled to foreclosure.
Under the law as it stood before 1923 the English mort-
Zagee was entitled to foreclose or sell. As the right of
foreclosure is restricted under the present Act to the
two kinds of mortgage stated above, a simple mortgage
or an English mortgage or = mortgage by deposit of title
deeds carries with it only a right of sale. In the case
of an anomalous mortgage the remedy depends upon the
terms of the mortgage; the mortgagee under it may be
entitled 10 foreclosure oy sale, or possession. The only
right of a usufructuary mortgagee is to recover posses-
sion of the property but he cennot sue either for sale or
for foreclosure. Though there was some difference of
opinion before the amendment as to whether a usuf-
ructuary mortgage could be created without deiivery of
possession to the mortgagee, the amended definition of a
usufructuary mortgage enables the creation of a usuf-
ructuary mortgage even without delivery of possession.
Tf the usufractuary mortgagee is not put in possession or
if his possession is disturbed, he is entitled te recover
possession of the property.

125. Before the decision of the Privy Council in Vasu-
deva V. Srinivasa’ the view was taken that a suit by
a mortgagee for sale of the property was governed by
article 147 which gives a period of 60 years for fore-
closure or sale. This view is no longer tenable in view
of the decision of the Privy Council where it wes pointed
out that article 147 applied only to an English mortgage
under which the mortgagee has the alternative of either
bringing a suit for foreclosure or for sale and that the
proper article to apply in the case of a suit for sale
under a simple mortgage was article 132 which provides
a period of 12 years from the date when the money
sued for becomes due. Under the existing law, the
English mortgagee has no right of foreclosure. Like a
simple mortgagee, he has to institute 2 suit for sale.
Whether in view of the definition of English mortgage in
the Transfer of Property Act he is entitled to recover
possession also, is a debatable point.

126. In the Limitation Act there are two articles, 135
i rovide a period of limitation for recovery

Arte, 135
& 146.


50

a suitable explanation to the new article in order to make
the position clear.

132. Articles 142 and 144 have introduced a good deal
of confusion in the law relating to suit for possession by
owners of property. The Jaw as it stamds whether in a
suit under section 9 of the Specific Relief Act or in one
covered by article 142 seems to favour a trespasser as
against an owner. The anomaly is due to the decisions
Which have held that in an ejectment action by the owner
of property it is not sufficient for him to establish his title
but if he has averred in his plaint original possession and
subsequent dispossession or discontinuance of Possession
he should go further and establish that his title was
subsisting at the date of suit, in the sense that he was in
possession of the property within 12 years before the date
of the institution of the suit. That article 142 applies to
2 suit by the owner of the property as well as a person
suing merely on the basis of a possessory title is the view
taken by some courts [vide the Full Bench decisions in
Official Receiver, E. Godavari v. Govinderaju! and
Bindhyachal Chand V. Ram Gharib®} while others res-
trict its applicability to a suit based on a possessory title
alone {vide Jaichand Bahadur v. Girwar Singh?; Mt.
Jijibat v. Zabut; and Kaenheiyalat v. Girwar and
others*]. A person who is the owner of the property when
he sues for recovery of possession has thus to establish
not only his title but also that he was in possession of the
property within 12 years if he frames his plaint as one
for possession after dispossession.

133. The decision of the Privy Council in Agency Co. v.
Short’ which was given under an analogous provision in
3 and 4 William 4, 6. 27 (Act I] of 1837 in the
Colony of New South Wales) finally settled that the rule
of prescription should be applied not to cases of want of
actual possession by the plaintiff but to cases where the
plaintiff has been out of possession and another was in
possession for the prescribed time. Two conditions must
be satisfied. There must be both an absence of possession
by the person who had the right and actual possession by
another, whether adverse or not, to bring the case within

शत “TLR oqo Mad. 3953. 1999 ‘Mad. 1953.
3. 47 All. 669.
4. 150 LC, 679 (Nag.)
3 §1 All. 1042.

»

| व
. (2888) 13 AppealCases, 793,



st

the statute. The Supreme Court of New South Wales
took the view that the period of prescription continued to
ran notwithstanding that the intruder had abandoned the
jand long before the expiry of 20 years from his first
entry and no other person had taken possession of such
land and that the owner should prove, even in sach a
case, that there was actual entry by him after the intruder
had abandoned possession and vacated the land. It wes
this view that was negatived by Lord MacNaughten in the
Privy Council.

134. The language in column 1 of articze 142 does not
refer to title and it speaks only of a suit for possession in
which the plaintiff claims that while in possession of the
property, he has been dispossessed or has discontinued the
possession. The words “dispossession” ang “discontinu-
ance” have a particular significance in law. Dispcssession
cceurs where a person comes in and puts another out of
possession while discontinuance of possession takes place
where the person in possession goes out and another per-
son takes possession. It is not, therefore, encugn to cons-
titute ‘discontinuance’ that z person goes sut of posses
sion; this should be followed by the possession of another
person. The words dispossession and discontinuance are
used in the article in this sense. The view teken in the
Full Bench decisions cited above docs not accord with
this interpretation of the article and has led to very un-
just consequences. In the very Full Bench decision affirm-
ing this rule*, Leach C. J. observed: “it may be a hardship
that a person who proves a title to property should lose it
to a trespasser unless he can also show that he has been
in possession within 12 years of suit, but that is what the
Limitation Act says and the court must administer the
Law.” We propose that this hardship should be reme-
died. If the defendant wants to defeat the right of the
plaintiffshe-rmust establish his adverse possession for ove: 12
years which has the effect of extinguishing the title of the
owner by the operation of section 28 of the Limitation Act
read with article 144. If he fails to do so there is no rea-
son for non-suiting the plaintiff merely because he was not
able to prove possession within 12 years. The inequity of
this requirement is illustrated by the following example:
if A, B, and C are independent and successive trespassers
on the property and the smit for possession is brought by
the true owner against C, it must fail unless the plaintiff

TTL. treqo) Mad. 953 at p. 962. ~~



52

proves his possession within 12 years, though the | last
trespasser C was not in possession except for a short
period.

135. In our opinion, articlé 142 must be restricted in its
application only to suits based on possessory title. The
plaintiff in such a suit seeks protection of his previous
possession which falls short of the statutory period of
prescription, to recover possession from another trespas-
ser, The plaintiff's prior possession no doubt entitles him
to protection against a trespasser though not against the
true owner, The true owner's entry would be a rightful
‘entry and would interrupt adverse possession. But if the
‘defendant trespasser is a person who wishes to oust the
plaintiff who was himself a prior trespasser or a person
who did not come into possession as a trespasser but con-
tinued to hold it as such, in order to enable the plaintiff
to continue his wrongful possession without disturbance
and to enable him to acquire a title by adverse possession,
the law must undoubtedly step in and give relief to the
plaintiff. As against the true owner a person who is in
possession for a length of time short of the statutory
period is not entitled to any protection but the net result
of the decisions under article 142 is that the true owner
must prove that he had a subsisting title on the date of
suit. We, therefore, ‘suggest that in order to avoid injus-
tice and iequity to the true owner and to simplify the
law, article 142 should be restricted to suits based on pos-
sessory title and the owner of the property should not
lose his right to it unless the defendant in possession is
able to establish adverse possession. Article 142 may,
therefore, be amended as follows:

“For possession of immovable property based on
possessory title when the plaintiff while in possession
of the property has been dispossessed--12 years from
the date of dispossession.”

136. The new article to which reference has already
been made will govern suits for possession of immovable
property or any interest therein based on title, the period
being 12 years from the time when the possession of the
defendant becomes adverse to the piaintiff. The article
as amended will cover cases at present falling under
articles 136, 137 and 138. Articles 140 and 141 may be
deleted and a suitable explanation may be added. Arti-
cles..136, 137, 138, 140, 141 become unnecessary. Article



33

143 relating to a suit for possession on forfeiture or
breach of condition should in our opinion be retained as it
is. Some complications may result if this article is merg-
ed in the general article relating to suits for possession
based on title.

Cuapter VII[—Surts ON OTHER CLAIMS

137. Suits for Accounts.—Articles 85, 88. 89, 90 and 108
relate to suits for accounts. Of these, Article 85 is based
on well established commercial usage and it would not
be advisable to change it. We do not recommend any
change in regard to the other articles also. All these
articles may, therefore, be retained in their present form.

138. Suits for a declaration —Articles 92, 93, 118, 119
and 129 relate to suits for a declaration in respect of
yarious matters. In Arts. 92 and 118, the starting point of
limitation is the knowledge of the plaintiff. These articles
should be retained in their present form except that the
period of limitation in the case of Article 118 should be
reduced to 3 years. Arts, 93, 119 and 129 may be consoli-
dated into one Article and the date when the right to sue
first aecrues may be made the starting point of limitation.
For all these articles, we recommend that a uniform period
of three years should be provided.

139. Suits to set aside documents and decrees.—
Articles 91 and 114 fall under this group. A consolidated
article with a period of three years from the date
when the facts entitling the plaintiff to have the instru-
ments cancelled or set aside or the contract rescinded, first
becomes known to him, may be substituted. Suits for
setting aside decrees should also be brought under this
article.

140, Article 44 which falls under this head has to be
retained in its present form. It applies to voidable
transactions and time does not begin to run until the ward
attains majority, the period being three years. If this
article be deleted and the matter is left to be governed by
Article 144 the quandom minor would have 12 years from
the date of majority. The intention of article 44 is to
limit the time for the exercise of the option to set aside
the transfer to three years after attaining majority. To
extend the period of 12 years would result in keeping the
alienece’s title in an unsettled state for a long period. It


34

is well settled that disputes as to title should be decided
as early as possible.

141, Where there is more than one ward, the provisions
of Sec. 7 will apply. There is, however, one difficulty
which has to be provided for. Section 6(3) will not apply
where article 44 applies. If the ward dies before attain-
ing majority or within three years after attaining majority.
the law is not certain on the question as to the period
within which the legal representative should institute a
suit (vide Alamelu Amme Vs. Krishna Chetty & others).!
In the case of an assignee it was held that the oftion
should be exercised within three years after ettaining
majority. The same should apply to a legal representative
also, If the ward died while a minor, leaving a legal re-
presenttative’ who is a méjor ot is under no disability, we
consider twat the latter should have a period of only three
years from the date of death of the minor ward. The
question remaining to be considered is whether a provi-
sion is necessary to cover cases where such legal re-
presentative is under any disability or when the ward
Jeaves more than one legal representative, all such
legal representatives are under disability. We consider
that such eases would be very rare and we do not there-
fore deem it necessary to make eny special provision.

142. For relief on the ground of freud or mistake.—Arti-
eles 95 and 96 relate to suits for setting aside a decree
obtained by fraud or for relief on the ground of fraud or
mistake; the period of limitation is 3 years from the time
when the fraud or mistake becomes known to the plaintiff.
In the proposed section 18 we have provided that for
relief on the ground of fraud‘or mistake, the period of
limitation should not begin tp run until the plaintiff has
discovered the fraud or the mistake, as the case may be,
or with reasonable diligence could have discovered it.
Suits for relief on the ground of fraud or mistake may be
founded either on contract or on tort or the relief claimed
may be to set aside an instruments or a decree. If the
former, the suit would come under the article for contract
and tort read with section 18 and the result would be
the same as that provided in the present Act. If the
relief claimed is to set aside an instrument on the ground
of fraud or mistake or to set aside a decree on the ground
of fraud the suit will fall under the proposed article 23.
$ is, therefore, unecessary to retain articles 95 and 96.
“Tusa Mad. 6875. overraling A.LR. 1930 Mad. $22,



55

143. It is no doubt true that the proposed article which
is to replace articles $i and 114, would provide that the
linitatian should cammence to run from the date of the
knowledge of the facts entitling the plaintiff to the relief
claimed. Suits which fall under the proposed article
may also be covered by section 18: but there may be
cases in which the relief to cance! or set aside an insiru-
ment may not be based either on fraud or mistake and.
therefore. by way of abundant caution it would be safer
to retain the proposed article though this mav result in
some overlapping.

144. Other suits Article 1 provides a period of 30
days for contesting an award of the Board of Revenue
under the Waste Lands (Claims) Act. 1863 (XXIII of
1863) and time begins to run when notice of the award is
delivered to the plaintiff. The suit contemplated by this
article is not based either on contract or tort. Under the
Waste Lands (Claims) Act a special procedure is pres-
eribed for disposal of claims and objections by persons in
cases Where government disposes of waste land. The claim
or objection has to be filed under the Act before the
Collector end the party aggrieved is entitled to take the
matter to the Board of Revenue against his determination.
If the decision of the Board is adverse to the party, he has
to file a suir to establish his claim or right in 9 Court
specialiy constituted under the Act. Article 1 applies
to such suits. This Act has been repealed, so far as
Bombay is concerned, by Bombay Act IX of 1943, Waste
Lands Claims (Bombay) Repeal Act, 1943. It is not
known whether the other States are following the pro-
cedure under this Act when disposing of waste lands.
The only reported case under this article was decided in
1866 (Taranath Dutt V. Collector of Sylthet.'} It seems
unnecessary, therefore, to retain this article in the Limita-
tion Act as the Waste Lands (Claims) Act itself does not
apply in many States. It is open to a State to enact a
law continuing it, as under item 34 of the State list, the
subject matter is within the exclusive legislative power
of the States and a State may prescribe a period of
limitation in the Waste Lands (Claims) Act itself. We
therefore recommend that the article be deleted.

145. Article 3 provides a period of limitation of six
months for the summary remedy 10 recover possession of

(86h) 5. WRT

Art. 1.

Art. 3.


Art. 6.

56

land provided by section 9 of the Specific Relief Act.
Whether section 9 of the Specific Relief Act should be
retained or repealed is one of the questions to be consider-
eg when dealing with that Act. I[t seems to us an unneces-
sary provision resulting in multiplicity of suits. Any
order made under that provision is not final as even if
the plaintiff recovers possession the unsuccessful defend-
ant can institute a regular suit to establish his title and
get back possescion of the Jand. The section does not serve
the purpose of preventing a breach of the peace for
which provision already exists in section 145 of the Crimi-
wal Procedure Code. Whoever fails in proceedings under
that Code has necessarily to institute a suit to establish
his tight. The necessity, therefore, for this provision is
atobvious. The provisions of the Criminal Procedure
Code are adequate to prevent breach of the peace. For
recovery of possession by a person having only a posses-
sory title our proposal in respect of article 142 will he
more than sufficient to protect the trespasser’s possession
as against another trespasser. We, therefore, recommend
the deletion of article 3. On this topic also our colleague
Dr. Sen Gupta takes a different view which he has stated
in a note appended to the Report. Notwithstanding the
considerations stated in that note we are of the view that
section 9 of the Specific Relief Act does not serve any
useful purpose and that article 3 should be deleted.

146. (Article 4 has been deleted by section 3 of the
Amending Act XX of 1937). Article 5 provides a period of
one year for what are sometimes called “under chapter
suits”. In Bombay, this article was repealed by the Indian
Limitation (Amendment) Act (XXX of 1925) and article
64A was inserted, providing a period of three years so far
as that State is concerned. To make the law uniform
in all the States we suggest that the period may be left
to be governed by the appropriate article for ordinary
suits. The Civil Justice Committee recommended such a

” course as far back as 1925. There 1s no reason for penalis-

ing a person who wants to take advantage of the summary
procedure by cutting down the ordinary period of fimita-
tion to which he would otherwise be entitled. This
article may, therefore, be deleted.

147, Article 6 preseribes a period of one year for a
suit for recovery of a penalty or for forfeiture and time
runs from the date when the penalty or forfeiture is
incurred. Such a suit may well fall either under the


57

article for ‘contract’ or the residuary article. A learned
commentator has doubted the usefulness of a similar pro-
vision in England. If any such right of suit exists in
favour of any person, it will fall under the residuary
article under which we propose to fix a period of 3 years
from the date when the right to sue accrues.

148. Article 10, relating to pre-emption, being for a Art. 10.
special caiegory of suits should be retained, but in view
of the conflicting judicial opinion on the interpretation of
the word ‘whole’ in the lst part of column 3, an amend-
ment of that part is necessary. The words “of the whole
or part of the property” may be added before the words
“when the instrument of sale is registered”.

149. If the application or dbjection may be treated as & Are. 11-14.
suit and disposed of instead of first making a summary
order, and then requiring a suit to be filed to set aside the
order under O. 21 Rule 63 or O. 21 Rule 103, multiplicity
of proceedings will be avoided and articles 11, 11-A and 13
will be unnecessary. But, if they are to be retained, they
may be recast and put into one article. Similarly, Articles
12 and 14 may be recast as indicated in the Annexure. As
Patni sales are peculiar to Bengal and the subject is within
the legislative competence of the State, the existing expla-
nation to article 12 may be deleted.

150. Articles 15 and 16 are for suits against Govern-
ment (i) to set aside any attachment, lease or transfer of A
immovable property by the revenue authorities for
arrears of Government revenue and (ii) to recover money
paid under protest in satisfaction of a claim made by the
revenue authorities on account of arrears of revenue cr on
account of demands recoverable as such arrears. A three
year period of limitation seems to us suitable for these
suits. We would, therefore, omit these articles and leave
these suits to be governed by the residuary article.

151. Article 17 provides a period of one year for re A
covering from Government compensation for land acquir
ed for public purposes and time runs from the date of
the determination of the amount of compensation. Under
Section 11 of the Land Acquisition Act, the Collector is
enjoined to determine the compensation which, in his
opinion, should be allowed for the land acquired. Under
Section 16, after the award is made. under section 11, the
Collector is entitled to take possession of the land which
vests absolutely from that moment in the Government free

1s


58

from all encumbrances. Part Til of the Act provides for
a veference to the court in a case where the person inter-
ested does not choose to accept the award. On such a re-
ference, the court determines the amount of compensation
to be awarded for the land acquired and under section
26(2) of the Act the award made by the court is deemed
te be a decree and a statement of the grounds of such
award is a judgment within the meaning of subsections 2
and 9 respectively of section 2 of the Civil Procedure
Code. This sub-clause, it is common knowledge, was in-
serted by an amending Act of 1921 as the Privy Council
held in Rangoon Botatoung Co. V. Collector of Rangoon'
and Special Officer Salsette Building Sites V. Dassa Bhai?
that there was no right of appeal against the award made
by the court as it was not a decree. Section 54 of the Act
which was inserted by the amending Act ef 1921 confers
a right of appeal to the High Court under the award and
a further appeal from the appellate decree of the High
Court to the Supreme Court subject to the provisions of
the Code of Civil Procedure. Under section 310) of the
Act, the Collector is enjoined to pay the compensation
awarded by him under section 11 to the person interested
and entitled thereto according to his award. If the person
refuses to receive it or if there is no person competent to
alienate the land, the course the collector has to follow
is indicated in the Act. In a case which does not end in
a reference to a court under section 18 of the Act, the
Collector’s award under sevtion 1 is <l determines
the rights of the parties. If the Coli + chocse
“to tender or pay the amount as required by su 1 31 of
the Act, no machinery is provided under the Act fo com-
pel the Collector to pay the amount. Bui the Limitation
Act (article 17) provides that a person in such a situation
can file a suit against the Government for the recovery of
the amount within one year from the date of the determi-
nation of the amount of compensation. The period provid-
ed is very short and it is difficult to see why a provision
is not made in the Act itself to compel the Collector to
pay the amount by making the award executable against
him instead of driving the aggrieved party to a suit after
giving the statutory notice required by section 80 of the
Civil Procedure Code. Such a suit itself may drag on
for a long time with the result that a person who has un-
wisely accepted the award as final would not be

71. 40 Cal. 21.
2. 37 Bom. sot.


59

able to recover compensation for a long time though the
property would be taken possession of by the Collector
immediately after the award is made. In fact, there have
been cases in which aggrieved persons have beer. compelled
to go to court. The absence of a provision such as we have
indicated appears to be a lacuna in the Land Acquisition
Act, The situation should be remedied by amending that
Act and making the award enforceable by treating it as a
decree within the meaning of section 2(2) of the Civil
Procedure Code. If this is done, the injustice to the
citizen will be remedied and there will not be any need
for the retention of article 17 of the Limitation Act.

152. A similar reasoning will apply to article 18. Under
section 48 of the Land Acquisition Act, it is open to Gov-
ernment to withdraw from the acquisition of any land
of which possession has not been taken; but sub-section 2
of that section provides that in that event the Collector
shall determine the amount of compensation due for the
damages suffered by the owner in consequence of the
notice or of any proceedings thereunder and pay such
amount to the person interested with all costs reasonably
incurred by him in the prosecution of the proceedings
under the Act. Sub-section 3 of that section makes the
provisions of Part III of the Act applicable for the deter-
mination of such compensation. Here again, if the Col-
lector does not choose to pay or does not agree to deter-
mine the compensation, the only remedy of the party is to
institute a suit for the recovery of such compensation
within one year from the date of the refusal by the Col-
lector to complete the acquisition. The proper course in
such a contingency would be to entitle the party to have
the amount of compensation determined by an application
to the court and to make such determination by the court an
executable decree. It may be observed that when the
matter is referred to the court under section 18 of the Act,
the award of the court is deemed to be a decree by reason
of sub-section 2 of section 26. The object of the Amend-
ing Act of 1921 which provided that the award was to be
deemed to be adverse was merely to enable the aggrieved
person to appeal to the High Court and to the Privy
Council. From the form in which the court makes an
award, it is not always clear whether it is an executable
decree. If the award as drafted, is not executable, there
may be a difficulty in realising the amount from the Col-
lector if he does not choose to pay it. It is necessary,



Arts.
45, 46.and
12,

Art.

47.

Arts. 98,

134 to 126,

121, 138&
eA,

60

therefore, that the Land Acquisition Act should be suit-
ably amended so as to fix a time-limit, say, six months
within which the Collector must pay or deposit the com-
pensation and a provision made in Section 31 ए the Act
thet on the failure of the Collector to pay or deposit
an application may be made by any person interested, for
a direction that the compensation be deposited in court.
If these amendments are made in the Land Acquisition
Act, articles 17 and 18 of the Limitation Act will be un-
necessary. If, however, it is decided not to give the per-
son a summary and speedy remedy as suggested, there is
no reason to restrict the period of limitation to cne year as
at present. The matter may be left to be governed by the
proposed residuary article with its period of three years.
In any view, therefore, it is unnecessary 10 retain these
articles.

453. Articles 45, 46 and™121 may be omitted as they
relate to subjects in the State list and the States may well
provide suitable periods of limitation for these matters.

154. Article 47 cuts down to three years the period of
12 years available against a trespasser in possession where
an order under 245 Criminal Procedure Code has been pass-
ed. If a suit is not fled within three years, the title itself
would be extinguished. This Article may be omitted and
the person aggrieved may be left to file the suit within the
period allowed under the new article corresponding to
Article 144,

155. Articles 98, 124 to 128 and 146-A relate to special
categories of suits and as it has been found not possible
to bring them under other heads these articles may be
retained in their present form. The period under Article
128 may be reduced to 3 years as suggested by the Civil
Tustice Committee.

156. Article 94 has to be retained in its present form, as
the starting point of limitation is the date of knowledge
after insanity had ceased, which will not coincide with the
dste of accrual of the cause of action.

157. Article 112 relates to a suit for a call by a Com-
pany registered under any Statute or Act. Such a suit
will fall under the article relating to Contract or under
the residuary article. Articles 103 and 104 which relate
to suits for dower might be left to be governed by the re-
siduary article. All these articles may, therefore, be
deleted.


6

158. Articles 117 and 122 relate to suits upon a foreign Arts.
judgment (as defined in the CPC.) and upon a judgment ‘784%
or recognisance. The periods provided now are respec-
tively 6 years and 12 years from the date of judgment or
vecognisance. In England, such suits are treated az suits
on contracts. Adopting that principle, we propose te fix
for these suits the same period as for suits provided on con-
tracts, viz., three years from the dete cf judgment or recog-
aisance. We would frame one article dealing both with
judgments and recognisances.

159. Article 120 is the residuary article for suits. This Art. 1200
is intended to provide for the omission of any other kind
of suit. Under the existing scheme we find that a num-
ber of residuary articles are provided, one at each stage.

This is unnecessary. A single residuary article may be

“provided fixing the period of limitation as three yeers

from the time when the right to sue accrues. The period
should not, as now, differ with different groups of suits
and should be the same whether it is a suit found-
ed on tort or concwact or on any other right of action.

160. Article 123 relating to legacies etc. may be retain- 4, 17३
ed in its present form subject to an amendment which will
bring it in aceord with the Privy Council ruling in Ghulam
Muhammad v. Sheikh Ghulem Hussain, to the effect that
the article only applies where the suit is brought against
an executor or administrator or some person legally charg-
ed with the duty of distributing the estate.

161. A suit under Article 130 for resumption or assump- 44 130.
tion of rent-free land is of very rare occurrence. As will
appear hereafter, the Government will have thirty years
even if the residuary article applies. This article may
therefore be omitted.

162, Article 149 relates to suits by or on behalf of the Art ua
Government. The period is 60 years from the time when
the period of limitation would begin to run in a like suit
by a private person. We recommend that that period may
be reduced to 3¢ years as under the English law. This will
bring the period in accord with that prescribed for local
authorities under Article 146-A.

Cuapter IX—Apreats
163. For an appeal against a death sentence, Article 150 Ars, 150
prescribes a period of 7 days. This in our opinion is too i> 135,

जा के 54 All 293 (PG).
556 Lawes



62

short a period and it should be increased to 30 days. Arti-
cle 154 provides a period of 30 days for an eppeal under
the Code of Criminal Procedure to any court other than the
High Court and article 155 provides a period of 60 days
for an appeal to the High Court against a conviction under
the same Code. We think that this distinction should not
exist. Instead of articles 150, 154 and 155, one single arti-
cle may be substituted, for appeals to any court under the
Criminal Procedure Code, providing a period of 30 days
from the date of the sentence or order appealed from.
Article 153 prescribes a period of limitation for an appeal to
a High Court fram an order of a subordinate court refusing
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court. This article may,
therefore, be deleted. -

104. Article 151 provides for appeals against decisions
of asingle judge of a High Court in the exercise of its ori-
ginal jurisdiction It applies only to the High Courts of
Caleutta, Madras Bombay and Punjab in the exercise of
their original jurisdiction. Article 162 relating to applica-
tions for review of judgments in the exercise of original
jurisdiction by the High Court applies to Nagpur also.
Some of these High Courts, namely, Madras, Caleutta and
Bombay exercise ordinary original jurisdiction within
defined territorial limits, Others do not exercise ordinary
original jurisdiction but only extraordinary or special sta-
tutory original jurisdiction. We consider that there is no
reason for providing for differing periods in regard to the
various High Courts and that a uniform period should be
prescribed. We also think that the existing period of 20
days under Article 151 is too short and attempts are often
made to get an extended period by first applying for leave
to appeal as a pauper (for which a period of 30 days is pro-
vided) and then on failure to obtain such leave to ask for
time for payment of a court fee, the delay in such payment
being excused by the court. We, therefore, recommend
that a uniform period of 30 days be prescribed for all
appeals to ४ High Court against its own decrees or orders.

185. With regard to appeals under the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure a distinction is made between appeals to the High
Court from mofussil courts and appeals to the subordinate
appellate courts. In the latter case a period of 30 days is
provided while in the former it is 90 days. We think that
a uniform period of 30 days for all appeals, should be pro-
vided. No hardship will result from a reduction of the
period because usually considerable time is taken in obtain-
ing copies of the decree and judgment, and the time taken


fie.

63

for that purpose is excluded under section 12 of the Limita-
tion Act. Normally, even for the purpose of an appeal from
the subordinate courts to the district court more than a
month or two is required to obtain such copies. That will
give sufficient time for preferring the appeal. In the case
‘of appeals to the High Court the time taken for obtaining
copies is much longer as in many cases judgments have
to be printed. Even in cases where printing is dispersed
-~with the parties will be able to add the time spent in obtain-
ing copies to the period provided. Perhaps formerly there
was justification for providing a longer period for appeals
to the High Courts as they were at a distance and means
of communication were difficult. But this consideration is
not of importance now that means of quick transport are
-available.

166, Article 157 provided a period of 6 months limita-Ar.

tion for ah appeal against an order of acquittal. The re-
cent Act amending the Criminal Procedure Code has sub-
stituted a period of 3 months for 6 months. We do not pro-
pose any alteration of that period though we think that
even the present period is too Jong to enable the State to
make up its mind to file or not to file an appeal against an
order of acquittal. The recent amendment to the Code also
provides for an appeal against an acquittal in cases institut-
ed on private complaints if the High Court grants special
leave. This application for special leave should, under Sec-
tion 417(4), be filed within 60 days of the date of the order
of acquittal. We recommend that the appeal itself should
be filed within one month from the date of grant of leave
to appeal under section 417(3) of the Code.

167, It may be pointed out that in England the time
provided for appeals is less than a month except in the
‘case of appeals to the House of Lords, for which it is six
months.

CaarTer X—APPLICATIONS

168. Firstly, as regards applications for special leave to
sappeal to the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court itself has,
under the authority vested in it by law, provided the
following pericds of limitation for such applications:

(1) 90 days from the date of judgment or order sought
to be appealed from,

(2) 60 days from the date of the refusal of leave te
appeal by the High Court,


Acts, 78
733.

64

(3) Applications for special leave to appeal in a case
involving death sentence, 30 days from the dafe of
the judgment, final order or sentence.

Items (1) & (2) apply te civil as well as criminal
matters. (Vide Order XII Ri. & Order XXII RI of
Supreme Court Rules, Item (3) is covered by Order
जरा, RZ]. In all these cases power is reserved to the
Supreme Court to extend the time if sufficient cause is
shown. These rules cover applications for special leabe
contemplated by Article. 136 & 122{2) of the Constitution.

169. New provisions are necessary prescribing period!
of limitation for making applications to the High Court
for a certificate of fitness to appeal to the Supreme Court
in the following cases:

(1) for applications under Article 132(1) for a certifi~
cate that the ease involves a substantial question
of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution.
(This applies to civil, criminal and other proceed-
ings);

(2) for applications for a certificate under Article 133°
(Civil matters);

(3) for applications for a certificate under article
134(1) (९), (Criminal matters),

Article 179 of the Limitation Act, as it now stands, pro-
vides a period of 90 days for applications under the C.P.C.
and does not prescribe a period of limitation for other
applications. A comprehensive provision Has, therefore, to
be made for applications to the High Court for a certifi-
cate of fitness for appeal to the Supreme Court. For all
such applications a period of 30 days may be prescribed.

170. Article 182 has been a very fruitful source of liti-
gation and is & weapon in the hands of both the dishonzst
decree-holder and the dishonest judgment-debtor. H
bas given rise to innumerable decisions. The commentary
in Rustomji’s Limitation Act (5th Edn) on this article
itself covers nearly 200 pages. In our opinion the
maximum period of limitation for the execution of a
decree or order of any civil court should be 12 years from
the date when the decree or order became enforce-
able (which is usually the date of the decree) or
where the decree or subsequent order, directs any
payment of money or the delivery of any property


65

to be made at a certain date or at recurring periods, the
date of the default in making the payment or delivery in
respect of which the applicant seeks to execute the decree.
‘There is, therefore, no need for a provision compelling the
decree-holder to keep the decree alive by making an appli-
cation every three years. There exists a provision already
in section 48 of the Civil Procedure Code that a decree ceases
to be enforceable after a period of 12 years. In England also
the time fixed for enforcing a judgment is 12 years.
Either the decree-holder succeeds in realising his decree
within this period or he fails and there should be no pro-
vision enabling the execution of a decree after that period.
To this provision an exception will have to be made to
the effect that the court may order the execution of a
decree upon an application presented after the expiration
of the period of 12 years, where the judgment-debtor has,
by fraud or force, prevented the execution of the decree
at some time within the twelve years immediately preceed-
ing the date of the application. Section 48 of the Civil
Procedure Code may be deleted and its provisions may be
incorporated in this Act. Article 183 should be deleted
and the decrees of the High Court must be placed on the
same footing as decrees of other courts. There is no justi-
fication for making a distinction between decrees or orders
passed by the High Court in the exercise of their original
civil jurisdiction or orders of the Supreme Court and other
decrees. As a consequence of the foregoing changes,
Sections 19 and 20 will require to be altered in the manner
indicated in paragraph 52 above. We do not, however,
consider it necessary to make any change in the appli-
cation of Sections 14 and 15 to execution applications. The
period of 12 years will, of course, not apply to decrees
granting a perpetual injunction. This has been provided
for in Section 48 C.P.C. This exemption should apply
only in the case of perpetual injunctions. In the case of
mandatory injunctions, we recommend that a period of
limitation of 3 years should be provided.

171, We are of opinion that some effective, nay, even
drastic, provision is necessary to discourage, if not alto-
gether stop the large-scale evasion of the execution of
decrees by judgment-debtors. The decree of a court is
meant to be obeyed and should be obeyed if courts are
to command the necessary respect and confidence of
the public. From the point of view of the decree-holder
there is nothing so distressing as an infructuous execution


Arts, 158
& 398,

Aru, 161,
362 & 173.

66

application and it has been truly said that his troubles
begin only after the decree. The Rankin Committee has
also adverted १0 this, but no steps have so far been taken
to make decrees effective and easily executable. We
consider that the ruost effective way of instilling a healthy
fear in the minds of dishonest judgment-debtors would be
to enable the Court to adjudicate him an insolvent if he
does not pay the decretal amount after notice by the
decree-holder, by specifying a period within which it should.
be paid, on the lines of the Bombay amendment to the
Presidency Towns Insolvency Act.

172, Section 14 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 ‘provides
for the filing of an award in a court and under section 17
of the Act, the court must proceed te pronounce judgment
according to the award, Section 32 bars suits to question
the award. In the result, an award can be enforced only
by filing it in court and obtaining a judgment thereon,
and a suit cannot be filed on it. An award has to be filed
even for the purpose of setting it aside. A provision is.
therefore, required fixing a time within which an arbitrator
should file his award. Section 14(2) of the Arbitration
Act provides that he shall file if into court (a) at the
request of any party or person claiming under him and.
¢b) on an order from the court. Tt has been held by the
various High Courts' that article 178 applies only to an.
application by the party to the court to direct the arbi-
trator to file his award into court. The present position is.
that the arbitrator can file the award even after a party’s
application has been barred and he can do so even after a
suit on the original cause of action has been instituted,
as there is no limitation for his doing so (Gondalal
Motilal v. Mathura Das Ram Prasad and others’). We
consider that there should be a time limit, for the arbi-
trator to file the award and that the period should be 30
days from the last date of service of notice of the making
of the award on any of the parties. The Arbitration Act
may be suitably amended to give effect to this recom-
mendation.

173. Articles 161, 162 and 173 may be grouped together
and a general article for review of judgment may be pro-
vided, fixing a period of 30 days computed from the date of
decree or order sought to be reviewed.

छ Vig LL Cals 69 (Resins Bally. Wh 8 IDR 2
Pate देह Sagadak Coded 8 Re ¥ Meg Raj) en 7
@ ALR. 1951 Nag. 32.


87

174. Articles 160, 163, 168 and 172 provide for setting Arts. 160,
aside orders of dismissal for default. For all these a 2p a
period of 30 days from the date of dismissal may be pro-
vided.

175. Article 164 for setting aside an ex parte decree an, 16 4
may be retained and combined with Article 169 relating & 169.
to the rehearing of an appeal heard ex parte. The term
“duly served” in column 3 has been interpreted to include
substitute service. We consider that it could be unjust
to impute knowledge of the decree to a party when the
party was nat served with summons. The article should
be amended suitably.

176. Articles 165 to 167 deal with applications relating to Ara. 155;
execution matters. The existing period of 30 days may 167.
be retained.

177. The existing provision in Article 170 for leave to
appeal as pauper may be retained.

Art, 170,

178. Article 171 prescribes a period of 60 days from the 7 ws

date of the abatement for setting aside the abatement 177-
and articles 176 and 177 preseribe a period of 90 days
from the date of death for having legal representatives of

a deceased plaintiff or defendant or a deceased appellant

or respondent added. For these cases the period may be
reduced to 40 days. The court will have the power to
excuse the delay in view of the alterations we have pro-
posed in section 5 of the Limitation Act an@ hence there
will be no hardship,

179. Articles 159, 174 and 175 do not, in our opinion, Arts. r59.
require any change and they may be retained, in their 174 end 175.
present form.

180. As we are omitting article 182, article 180 will Art, 186,

apply to all purchasers in execution whether decree-holders
or not. The period should, we think, be reduced to one

year.

181. There should be a residuary article for applica- Art 381.
tions (including petitions) as in the case of suits and we
consider that the period should be the same as at present,
namely, 3 years from the date when the right to apply
accrues.

@uarter XI—Conciusion

182, With a view to give a clear picture of the proposals

formulated by us, we have attached an annexure to the


68

Report, embodying our proposals in the form of an Act.
Tt is, therefore, unnecessary to summarise the proposals
as is usually done at the end of a Report of this nature.
M. C. SETALVAD, <
(Chairman),
M. C. CHAGLA,
K. N. WANCHOO,
G. N. DAS,
P. SATYANARAYANA RAO,
N. 0. SEN GUPTA,*
Vv. K. 1. CHARI,
D. NARSA RAJU,
G. 5. PATHAK,
G. N. JOSHI,
(Members).
K. SRINIVASAN,
DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries.

Bomaar;
The 2ist July, 1956.

VD Sen Gupen hes signed the repert, subject to the Nowe appended below.


NOTE BY DR. N. C. SEN GUPTA.

I regret that I cannot agree with the proposal to alter
the provisions of the Articles 2, 3, 7 to 9. My colleagues
have virtually extended the period in the case of these
suits to 3 years on the basis that they are founded on con-
tract and should come under the general rule regarding
suits on contracts or torts, That may be so. But at the
same time there are, in my opinion, reasons of policy why,
in respect of some of these Articles, the shorter period of
limitation should be fixed.

The reasons for the proposed amendments in respect of
Article 2 are firstly that there shouid be no difference
between the State and private parties in respect of suit
on tort and that a suit for compensation in respect of a
thing purported to be done by an officer under some enact-
ment in force is nothing but a tort for which the Govern-
ment is liable. To the general principle of parity between
the Government and private persons in respect of" limita-
tion, I have no serious objection. But there are important
differences between ordinary torts by private persons and
suits under this Article. There may be suits of this charac-
ter which are purely suits for damages for a particular
‘wrong against a particular person. But most of these cases
would be cases in which an officer of the Government has
been acting or purporting to act under authority of an
enactment and in most of these cases, questions about the
validity of the enactment or of the interpretation of it
upon which the officer is acting would be in question. In
such cases it is by all means necessary that such suits
should be disposed of 35 quickly as possible,—so that if the
decision goes against the action of a particular officer, the
Government may take early steps that further action may
not be taken on the erroneous view of law. Further, it
must be remembered that the Government is made vicari-
ously responsible for the acts of its officers and having re-
gard to the extremely large area of Government activities
and its responsibility for acts of a multitude of officers, it
is necessary that the Courts’ decision about the correctness
or otiterwise of the act of such officers should be made
known to the Government as soon as possible.

Public policy requires’ that acts of Government officials
purported to have been done under the provisions of some
enactments in force should be tested, if necessary, as soon
as possible—in 07067 that public administration may not



qo

be affected by en erroneous course of action based on
wrong application of the law for a long time; and if there
has been an error, it should be rectifled as soon as possibie.

I am afraid that the principle that this makes a diseri~
mination between the Government and a private person
does not provide a correct approach to the problem. The
difference in the provisions lies not in the character of the
person against whom the suit is brought but in the nature
of the claim which justifies a short period.

The injury that can be done by delay is illustrated by the
Inter-State Sales Taxation cases. Before the Special Bench
of the Supreme Court finally decided on the invalidity of
certain State laws, a large amount of money had been re-
covered by Government from traders and the situation, if
all that money had to be returned in suits brought for
compensation was apparently so serious as to call for a
special legisiation by ordinance validating the realisation
already made.

With regard to Article 5, I should have thought that
this matter should await our decision in connection with
the Specific Relief Act whether suits under séction 9 of that
Act should be retained. The basis of the provision of sec-
tion 9 of the Specific Relief Act is that possession shoulr
be protected. If anybody has a better right to possessic,
he must establish his title before recovering possessior. .n
the meantime, the possession should be protected On
similar grounds section 145 of the Criminal Pr dure
Code gives a protection to possession where there is likeli-
hood of a breach of peace. In cases where a strong or wily
man quietly dispossesses a person, section 9 provides &
short remedy for protecting possession, pending any suit
for title that might be brought by the disseisor. It is a
summary decision for the protection of present possession
and there are, in my opinion, strong reasons why this sum-
mary procedure should continue.

It is stated in the report that it means a duplication of
litigation. I should think that this duplication is already
there in many cases which have not’been touched. Far
instance where possession _is claimed in execution of a
decree and the other side objects to the delivery of posses-
sion by claiming a right independent of the judgment-
debtor and an order has been made under Order 21 Rule
87, that is to be summarily decided on the finding whether



7

the objector is in possession on behalf of the judgment-
debtor or not, leaving open a suit ty be instituted there-
after for declaration of title. For that suit a short period
af one year is provided. Ido not see why for similar
reasons the same provisions should not be made in respect
of any summary decision on the basis of possession.

Similarly, under the present Articles which have not been
proposed to be repealed, Articles 11, 11(4) and 13 of the
present Act provide for short limitation in cases where
there has been a summary decision by a court, the princi-
ple seems to be that where a matter bas been once before
the court and the court has given a summary decision, it
is in accordance with public pclicy that the matter should
be finalised without delay.

The idea of the majority is that Article 142 of the pre-
sent Act should be limited to suits on the ground of
possession alone and the limitation for that would be 12
years. If that is so, then a special limitation for a suit an
the ground of prior possession is unnecessary. But where
a person who has lawfully acquired possession of property
is disturbed by another on the ground of his previous pos-
session, the latter would have 12 years within which he
should bring his suit and in the meantime the right of the
Person who has possession will be kept in suspense for the
long period of 12 years. I do not think that there is any
principle of justice or fairness in doing so. If the Articles
are to be as proposed in the draft, it would rather seem not
that suit under section 9 af the Specific Relief Act should
80 but that Article 142 itself should be simply omitted.

N. C. SENGUPTA,


ANNEXURE
The proposals as inserted in the existing Act:
(This is not a draft Bill)

[Additions to the existing Act are shown in italics wher-
ever possible. Corresponding provisions of the exist-
ing Act are given in the margin.]

Part ]—-PRELIMINARY
5००, 2, 1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This

Act may be called the Limitation Act, 1956.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State
of Jammu and Kashmir.

(3) This section and section 26 shall come into force
at once. The rest of the Act shall come into force on

2, Definitions.—-In this Act, unless there is anything

repugnant in the subject or context,—

(1) “applicant” includes—

(a) a petitioner,
(४) any person from or through whom an appli-
cant or petitioner derives his right to apply
ond
(०) any person whose estate is represented by the
applicant or petitioner as executor, admints-
trator or other representative.

(2) “application” includes a petition;

(8) “contract” shall have the same meaning as in the
Indian Contract Act (IX of 1872) and includes
an obligation imposed by law to restore or to
make restitution of any benefit derived by a
person, on tre basis of unjust enrichment;

(4) “defendant” includes—

{a) ‘any person from or through whom a defendant
derives his liability to be sued and

(0) any person whose estate is represented by
the defendant as executor, administrator or
other representative. .

92



73

(5) “foreign country” means any country other than
India, but includes also the State of Jammu and
Kashmir;

(6) “good faith”; nothing shall be deemed to be done
in good faith which is not done with due care and
attention;

(7) “India” means the territory. of India excluding
the State of Jammu & Kashmir;

(8) “Prescribed period” means the period of limitation
prescribed for any suit, appeal or application,
as the case may be, and computed in accordance
with the provisions of this Act;

(9) “plaintiff” includes— ,

(a) any person from or through whom a plaintiff,
derives his right to sue, and,

(b) any person whose estate is represented by the
plaintiff as executor, administrator or other

representative.
(10) “suit” does not include an appeal or an appli-
cation;
(11) “tort” includes all civil wrongs independent of
contract; and

(12) “trustee” does not include a benamidar, a mort-
gagee remaining in possession after the mortgage
has been satisfied, or a person in wrongful posses-
sion without title.

Parr I—Lismrarion or swrrs, APPEALS & APPLICATIONS

3. Bar of Limitation—Subject to the provisions con-
tained in sections 4 to 23 (inclusive), every suit instituted,

apped 1 preferred, and application made, after the pres-
ibed period shall be dismissed, although limitation has

not been set up as a defence.

Explanations—(1) A suit is instituted, in ordinary
cases, when the plaint is presented to the proper officer; in
the case of a pauper, when his application for leave to
sue as a pauper is made; and in the case of a claim
against a company which is being wound up by the Court,
when the claimant first sends in his claim to the official
liquidator.

(2) An application by notice of motion is made when it
is presented to the proper officer.

Sec, 3.



Sec. 6,

74

{3} For the purposes of this Act, eny claim by way of
set-off shall be deemed to be a separate suit and to have
been commenced on the same date as the suit in which the
set-off is pleaded,

(4) For the purposes of this Act, a counter-claim shail
be deemed to be a separate suit and to have been commenc-
ed on the date on which it is made.

4. Where Court is clesed when period expires.--Where
the prescribed period expires on a day when the Court is
closed, the suit, appeal or application imay be instituted,
preferred or made on the day that the Court re-opens.

5. Extension of period in certain cases.—Any appeal or
application other than an application under any of the
provisions of Order XXI of the Code of एक Procedure
(7 of 1908) may be admitted after the prescribed period,
when the appellant or applicant satisfies the court that he
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or mak-
ing the application within such period.

Explanation,—The fact that the appeliant or applicant
was misled by any order, practice or judgment of the
High Court in ascertaining the prescribed period may be
sufficient cause within the meaning of this section,

6. Legal Disability—(i) When a person entitled to
institute a suit or make an application for the execution
of a decree is, at the time from which the prescribed
period is to be reckoned, a minor, or js insane, or is an
idiot, he may institute the suit or make the application
within the same pericd after‘the disability has ceased, as
would otherwise have been allowed from the time speci-
fied therefor in the third column of the schedule.

(2) Where such person is, at the time from which the
prescribed period is to be reckoned, affected by two such
disabilities, or where, before his disability has ceased, he
is affected by another disability, he may institute the suit
or make the application within the same period, after both
disabilities have ceased, as would otherwise have been
allowed from the time so specified.

(3) Where the disability continues up te the death of
such person, his legal representative may institute the
suit or make the application within the same period after
the death as would otherwise have been allowed from the
time so specified.


75

(4) Where the representative referred to in sub-section
(8) is at the date of the death of the person whom he
represents affected by any such disability, the rules con-
tained in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply.

(5) Where a person under disability dies after the dis-
ability ceases but within the period of limitation allowed
to him under this section, his legal representative may
institute a suit or make the application within the same
period after tke death as would otherwise have been
allowed had the person under disability not died.

7. Disability of one of several plaintiffs or applicants —
Where one of several persons jointly entitled to institute
a suit or to make an application for the execution of a
decree is under any such disability, and a discharge can
be given, without the concurrence of such person, time
will run against them all; but; where no such discharge
can be given, time will not run as against any of them
until one of them becomes capable of giving such discharge
without the concurrence of the others or until the disabi-
lity has ceased.

Explanation —(1) This section applies not only to
claims for recovery of money but also to claims for the
enforcement of other rights including rights in immov-
able property;

Explanation—-(2) The manager of a Hindu Joint
Family governed by the Mitakshara law shall be deemed
to be capable of giving a discharge only if he is in manage-
ment of the Joint Family property.

8. Special Exceptions—Nothing in section 6 or in sec-

tion 7 applies to suits to enforce rights of preemption, or

shall be deemed to extend, for more than three years from
the cessation of the disability or the death of the person
affected thereby, the period within which any suit must
be instituted or application made.

9. Continuous Running of Time.—Where once time has
begun to run, no subsequent disability or inability to sue
stops it:

Provided that, where letters of administration to the
estate of a creditor have been granted to his debtor, the
running of the time prescribed for a suit to recover the debt
shall be suspended while the administration continues,

10. Suits against Trustees and their Representatives.—
Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, no suit

Sec. 7.

Sec. 8,

Sec. 9,

Sea. 7७


76

against a person in whom property has become vested in
trust for any specific purpose, or against his legal represen-
tatives or assigns (not being assigns for valuable considera-
tion), for the purpose of following in his or their hands
such property or the proceeds thereof, or for an account of
such property or proceeds, shall be barred by any jength
of time.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this section any pro-
perty comprised in a Hindu, Muhammadan or Buddhist re-
ligious or charitable endowment shall be deemed to be pro-
perty vested in trust for a specific purpose, and the
manager of any such property shall be deemed to be the
trustee thereof.

1

11. Suits on foreign contracts.—(1) Suits instituted in
India on contracts entered into a foreign country shall be
subject to the rules of limitation contained in this Act.

(2) No foreign rules of limitation shall be a defence to
a suit instituted in India on a contract entered into in a
foreign country unless the rule has extinguished the con-
tract and the parties were domiciled in such country dur-
ing the period prescribed by such rule.

Part Il]—Compuration or Pertops or Limitation

12. Exclusion of time in legal proceedings.—(1) In com-
puting the period of limitation prescribed for any suit,
appeal or application, the day from which such period is
to be reckoned shall be excluded.

(2) In computing the period of limitation prescribed for
an appeal the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the
decree, sentence or order appealed from and also of the
judgment on which such decree sentence or order is found-
ed shall be excluded.

(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall also apply to
an application for leave to appeal or for a review of judg-
ment or for revision.

(4 In computing the period of limitation prescribed for
an application to set aside an award, the time requisite for
obtaining a copy of the award shall be excluded.

Explanation.— Any time taken by the Court to prepare
the decree or order before an application for copy thereof
is filed shall not be regarded as time requisite for obtaining
the copy within the meaning of this section.


7

13. Exclusion of time of Proceeding bona fide in Court Sec 13.
without Jurisdiction —(1) In computing the period of limi-
tation prescribed for any suit, the time during which the
plaintiff has been prosecuting with due diligence another
civil proceedings, whether in a Court of first instance or of
appeal or of revision, against the defendant, shall be ex-
<luded, where the proceeding relates to the same matter in
issue and is prosecuted in good faith in a Court which, from
defect of jurisdiction, or other cause of a like nature, is
unable to entertain it.

(2) In computing the period of limitation prescribed for
‘any application, the time during which the applicant has
been prosecuting with due diligence another civil preceed-
ing, whether in a Court of first instance, or of appeal, or of
revision, against the same party for the same relief shall
be excluded, where such proceeding is prosecuted in good
faith in a Court which, from defect of jurisdiction, or other
cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain it.

(3) The Provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in like
‘manner and subject to the same restrictions to a fresh suit
filed in pursuance of an order under the Provisions of Rule
(1)(2) of Order XXII of the Code of Civil Procedure (V of
1908) notwithstanding anything contained in Ruie 2 thereof.

Explanation E—In excluding the time during which a
former suit or application was Pending, the day on which
that suit or application was instituted or made, and the day
on which the proceedings therein ended, shall both be
counted,

Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, a
plaintiff or'an applicant resisting an appeal or revision
Shall be deemed to be Prosecuting a proceeding.

Explanation MI.—For the Purposes of this section mis-
Joinder of parties or of causes of action shall be deemed to
be a cause of a like nature with defect of jurisdiction.

14. Exclusion of time in certain other eases,—(1} In com-
puting the period of limitation prescribed for any suit or
application for the execution of a decree, the institution or
execution of which has been stayed by injunction or order,
the time of the continuance of the injunction or order, the Sec. 15.
day on which it was issued or Made, and the day on which
it was withdrawn, shall be excluded.

(2) In computing the period of limitation prescribed for
any suit, of which notice has been given, or for which the


Seo, 13.

Sec. 17.

यह

previous consent or sanction of the Central or the State
Government is required, in accordance with the require-
ments of any enactment for the time being in force, the
period of such notice or, as the case may be, the time requi-
site far obtaining such consent or sanction shall be
excluded.

Explanation.—The interval of time between the date of
applying for the consent or sanction of the Government
concerned and the date of receipt of the order of suck Gov-
ernment (both days inclusive) shall be deemed to be the
time requisite for obtaining the said consent or sanction.

(8) In computing the period of limitation prescribed for
any suit or application for the extcution of a decree by any
receiver or interim receiver appointed in proceedings for
the adjudication of a person as an insolvent or by any Liquie
dator or provisional liquidator appointed in proceedings
for the winding up Of @ company the period between the
date of institution of such Proceedings and the date of
appointment of such receiver or liquidator. as the case may
be, and, in addition, a period of three months, shall be exr-
cluded.

(4) In computing the period of limitation prescribed for
a suit for possession by a purchaser at a sale in execution of
a decree, the tine during which a proceeding to set aside
the sale has been prosecuted shall be excluded,

(5) In computing the period of limitation prescribed for
any suit, the time during which the defendant has been.
absent from India and from the territories beyond India
under the administration of the Central Government, shall
be excluded.

15. Effect of death on or before the accrual of right to
sue.—(1) Where a person, who would, if he were living,
have a right to institute a suit or make an application, dies.
before the right accrues, or where such right accrues on his
death, the period of limitation shall be computed from the-
time when there is a legal representative of the deceased’
capable of instituting or making such suit or application.

(2) Where a person against whom, if he were living, a
tight to institute a suit or make an application would have
acerued dies before the right accrues or where such right.
accrues on his death the period of limitation shall be com-
puted from the time when there is a legal representative of
the deceased against whom the plaintiff may institute or
make such suit or application.


79

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) and (2) applies to suits
to enforce rights of pre-emption or to suits for the posses-
sion of immovable property or of a hereditary office.

10. Effect of frand or mistake.—(1) Where in the case
of any suit or application for which 6 period of limitation
is prescribed by this Act, either—

) the suit or application is based upon the fraud of
the defendant or his agent or of ery person
through whom he claims or his agent; or

(b} the knowledge of the right or title on which a suit
or application is founded is concealed by the fraud
of any such person as aforesaid; or

(०) the suit er application is for relief from the conses
quences of a mistake; or

(d) where amy document necessary to establish plain-
tiffs or applicant's right has been fraudulently con-
cealed from him;

fa

the period of limitation shall not begin to run until the
plaintiff or applicant has discovered the fraud or the mis-
take, ax the case moy be, or could with reasonable diligence
have discovered it, or in the case of the concealed docu-
ment, when he first had the means of producing it or com-
pelling its production.

Provided that nothing in this section shall enable any
suit to be brought or application to be made to recover, or
enforce any charge against, or set aside any transaction
affecting, any property which—

(1) in the case of fraud, has been purchased for valuable
consideration by ० person who was not @ party to the fraud
and did not at the time of the purchase know or have rea-
‘ton to believe that any fraud had been committed, or

(in in the case of mistak 2, has been purchased for valu-
able consideration, subsequent to the transaction in which
the inistake was made, by a person toho did not know or
have reason to believe the mistake had been made, 07

(iii) in the case of the concealed document, hos been
purchased for valuable consideration by a person who was
ment, and did not at the time of

ot a party to the conceal
the purchase know or have reason te believe such con-

cealment;

‘See. 16.


(2) The Court way extend the period prescribed for an
application for execution of a decree or order, upon such
application presented after the expiry of the said period, if
the judgment-debtor has by fraud or force, prevented the
execution of the decree or order at some time within the
said period,

Provided that such application is made within & period
of one year from the date of discovery of fraud or of the
cessation of force, as the case may be.

17. Effect of acknowledgment in writing.—(1) Where,
before the expiration of the prescribed period for a suit or an
application in respect of any property or right other than
an application for the execution of a decree or order, an
acknowledgment of lability in respect of such property
or right has been made in writing signed by the party
against whom such property or right is claimed, or by
some person through whom he derives title or liability, a
fresh period of limitation shall be computed from the time
when the acknowledgment was so signed.

(2 Where the writing containing the acknowledgment
is undated, oral evidence may be given of the time when it
was signed; but, subject to the provisions of the Indian
Evidence Act, I of 1872, oral: evidence of its contents shall
not be received.

Explanation L—For the purposes of this section an
acknowledgment may be sufficient though it omits to spe-
city the exact nature of the property or right, or avers that
the time for payment, delivery, performance or enjoyment
has not yet come, or is accompanied by a refusal to pay,
deliver, perform or permit to enjoy, or is coupled with a
claim to set-off, or is addressed to a person other than the
person entitled to the property or right,

Explanation IL—For the purposes of this section, “‘sign-
ed” means signed either personally or by an agent duly
authorised in this behalf.

18. Effect of payment on account of debt or of interest
on legacy—(1) Where payment on account of a debt or
of interest on a legacy is made before the expiration of the
prescribed period, by the person liable to pay the debt or
legacy, or by his agent duly authorised in this behatf a
fresh period of limitation shalt be computed from the time
when the payment was made.

Provided that, save in the case of a payment of interest
made before the lst day of January, 1928, an acknowledg-


81

tment of the payment appears in the handwriting of, or in a
writing signed by, the person making the payment.

<3) Where mortgaged land is in the possession of the
mortgagee, the receipt of the rent or produce of such land
shall be deemed to be a payment for the purpose of sub-
section (1).

Explanation—Debt does not include money payable
under a decree or order of Court.

19. Effect of acknowledgment or payment by another
person._-(1) The expression “agent duly authorised in this
behalf,” in sections {7 and 18 shall, in the case of a person
under disahility, include his lawful guardian, committee
or manager, or an agent duly authorised by such guardian,
committee or manager to sign the acknowledgment or make
the payment.

(2) Nothing in the said sections renders one of several
joint contractors, partners, executors or mortgageés charge-
able by reason only of a written acknowledgment signed
or of a payment made by, or by the agent of, any other or
others of them.

(3) For the purposes of the said sections—

(a) An acknowledgment signed, or a payment made,
in respect of any liability, by, or by the duly autho-
Tised agent of, any widow or other limited owner of
property who is governed by the Hindu law, shall
be a valid acknowledgment of payment, as the case
may be, as against a reversioner succeeding to such
liability; and

¢b) Where a liability has been incurred by, or on be-
half of, a Hindu undivided family as such, an
acknowledgment or payment made by, or by the
duly authorised agent of, the manager of the family
for the time being shall be deemed to have been
made on behalf of the whole family.

20, Effect of substituting or adding new plaintiff or
defendant.—(1) Where, after the institution of a suit, a
new plaintiff or defendant is substituted or added, the suit
shall, as regards him, be deemed to have been instituted
when he was so made a party, unless the Court, if satisfied
that the omission to include the said plaintiff or defendant
was due to a mistake made in good faith, orders that the
suit shall, as regards him, be deemed to have been institut-
eg earlier.


See, 23.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a case where
‘ party is added or substituted owing to an assignment or
devolution of any interest during the pendency of a suit or
where a plaintiff is made a defendant or a defendant is made
a plaintiff.

- 21. Continuing breaches and wrongs.—In the case of a
continuing breach of contract and in the case of a continu-
ing wrong independent of contract, a fresh period of limi-
tation begins to run at every moment of the time during
which the breach or the wrong, as the case may be, con-
tinues.

22. Snit for compensation for act not actionable -with-
ont special damage.—In the case of a suit for compensa-
tion for an act which does not give rise to a cause of action
unless some specific injury actually results therefrom, the
period of limitation shall be computed from the time when
the injury results.

23, Computation of time mentioned in instrumests.—
All instruments, shall for the purposes of this Act, be deem-
ed to be made with reference to the Gregorian calendar.

Pant [V—AcQUISITION OF OWNERSHIP BY POSSESSION

24, Extinguishment of right to property——At the deter-
mination of ‘the period hereby limited to any person for
instituting a suit for possession of any property, his right
to such property shall be extinguished.

Parr V—Savincs

25, Savings.—(1) Nothing in this Act—

(a) shall affect section 25 of the Indian Contract Act,
1872 (IX of 1872); and

(8) shal! apply to proceedings under any law for the
time being in force relating to marriage and
divorce. {Acts to be specified in the Bill).

(9) Where any special or local law prescribes for any
suit, appeal or application a period of limitation different
from the prescribed period in this Act, the provisions of
section 3 shall apply, as if such period were prescribed
therefor in this Act, and for the purpose of determining



83

any period of limitation prescribed for any suit, appeal or
application by any special or local law,—the provisions con-
tained in sections 4 to 23 shall apply only in so far as, and
‘to the extent to which, they are not expressly excluded by

such special or local law;

26. [Section 30 of the present Act would have worked
itself out. A new saving provision for the transition may
‘be incorporated as suggested in paragraph 62 of this

Report]
Description of suit, appeal or Period of Time from which period Articles in the
application limitation begins to run. present Act{
coveted
x 2 3 4
FIRST DIVISION : SUITS
Part I
‘Contract aod Tort
‘a. Suits founded on contract or Tiree The date om which the 2, 7109. 39 ४0
on tort. years cause of action aocrses. ‘S0to 84, 86,
$y, 99 to
ea
aod 138
Pan IX
Movable Property
2. To recover specific movable Three The date ich the
property or its valve. years पिन of action aocrasa, 449
. To recover movable property Three Th date f refusal
3 deposited of pawned, fm a years ee? afer 145
depository or pawnee.
. To recover movable property Three ‘When thessle becomes ‘Second
4 or pawned and after- years known to the plainuet Fe «
wards sold by the depository oF
pawnee for valuable
tion.
Pagr TIL
‘Trusts & Trust Property
5. To recover possession of im- Twelve When the transfer be-
ben perty conveyed or years comes known to the 134 Firat Part)
jueathed in plaintiff,
wards transferred by the trus-
tee for valuable consideration.
GiLike suit in respect of movable Three ‘When the tranafer becomes
‘property sold, years koown to the plaintiff. (F rs part)



7. To set aside a transfer of im- ‘Twelve — When the transfer becomes Wea
movable property comprised years. known to the plaintiff.
in a Hindu, Mohammadan or
Buddhist religious or charitable
endowment, made by a mana-

ger thereof for valuable consi- नि
deration.

8. Like suit in respect of movable Three Wien the sale becomes 48-5
property sold. years. known to the plaintiff.

9. By the manager of a Hindu, Twelve The date of death, resig~ 134-B and
Muhammadan or Buddhist re- years. nation or removal, as 134-C
ligious or charitable endow- the case may be. of the
Ment to recover possession of transfer, or the fr
movable or immovable pro- poitement of plainsitf laintiff as
perty comprised in the endow- manager, whic is
ment which has been sold or later.

transferred by a previous mana-
ger for valuable consideration.

Part IV .
Immovable Property
to. By a mortgagor
(०) to redeem or recover posses» Twelve When therighttore-deem 148 & 134

sion of immovable pzoperty years. or to recover possession (Second Party
mortgaged. accrues,
0) 40 recover surplus collections ‘Three When the mortgagor re 105
“received by the mortgagee, years. enters on the mortgaged
after the mortgage has been Property.
satisfied.
11. By a mortgagee
(०) ७ enforce payment of money Twelve When the money sued for 132.
‘Secured by a mortgage or ether- years. becomes duc.
twise charged upon inunovable MS
Property.
(6) for foreclosure Twelve When the money secured. हु a
fe Years. by the mortgage be- स्का
comes due.
(© for possession of immovable Twelve When the mortgagee be- 135 & 146.
property mortgaged. years. comes entitled io pos-
session,
12, For possession of immovable Twelve The date of dispossession x42

property based on possessory years.
Bula, when the Init while

in possession of the property ‘
has’ been dispossessed.

33. (@) For possession of immo- Twelve When the possession of 47, 138 and

vable property or any interest years. the defendant becomes 144°
therein based on title, adverse to the plain-
tiff.

Explanations —For the purposes of this Article
@ The title of a remainder-man ar reversioner (other than a landiord)
or devisee shall be deemed to have accrued only when the estate
fell into his possession. 140
(४) The title of a person entitled to possession on the death of a rt
Hindu or Muhammadan female wath @ drited tterest, or life, 4
estate shall be deemed to have accraed only when the female



85

r

2

3

4

Gi) In the cases specified in Bx ‘planation: @ & (8) above the
possession of the defendant shail be deemed to have become
adoersa only on the respective dates of aecrual of title.

(io) A purchaser at sale in execution of a decree shall be deemed
10 be a representative of the judgment-debtor who was out of
possession at the date of sale.

14. Like suit where the plaintiff Twelve
has become entitled by reason years.

‘of any forfeiture or breach of
condition.

15. By a landlord to recover Twelve
possession from a tenant.

Papr V

Other Claims

16, For the balance due on 8 mu-
acd

L open.
count, where the

the parties.

current sc

re have been

between

17. Bya principal against his agent
or factor for an account .

years,

Three
years.

years.

38, By a principal against his agent Three
for neglect or misconduct.

years.

वि 36, Foran account and a share of ‘Three
the prof its of a part
19.

20, To declare the forgery of
instrument issued or registered.

21, To obtain a declaration that
an alleged adoption is invalid

er never, in fact, too

22. Other suits for deciaration.

23. To cancel or set aside an ins-
tcument or decree or for the re-
scession of @ contract.

24, To set aside a transfer of pro-

perty made by

of a ward,
(a) by the ward who has attained

‘majority.

the guardian

years.

Three
years.

Three
years.

Three
years.

Three
years,

‘Three
years.

When the forfeicure is
incurred or the con-
dition is broken.

When the tenancy is
deteemined.

‘The close of the year in
which the last. tem ad~
mitted ot proved is
entered in the accounts 5
such year to be com-
puted as in the account.

When the account is
“Tee agency demanded
agency
and refused or where 00
such demand is made,
when the agency ter
minates.

‘When the neglect or mis-
conduct becomes known
to the plaintiff.

The date of the dissolution.

‘When the issue or registra~
tion becomes known te
the plaintiff.

‘When the alleged adop-
tion becomes known to
the plantiff.

When wie right to sue
first accrues.

When the facts entitling
the plaintiff 10 have the
instrument or decree
cancelled or set-aside
‘or the contract rescin=
ded first become known
to him.

When the ward attains
majority.

136 & 137

Tax

030

45

8889

106
92
118

93, Tr9 and
129

on, 14

4.


@ by. the ward's legal represen
6) When the ward dies within Three © When ihe ward attain
snazorizy.

tires years from the date
attaining majority.

(४) When the ward dies
altaining majorly.

of

years,

before Three
years.

25. To enforce a right of ee one

0) iption, whether the

is ded on law or genaral
contract,

ugege, of on special

36 arden under Rules 63

103 Order XAT of the Code
of Civil

Procedure

‘under Sec. 23 of the Presidency
Small Ca

uses Courts’

bas

the right which he claims to

property comprised in the
b) To alter or to set aside

decision or order

of a Ci

Court in any proceeding
than a sult, oF any act or,
of an officer Govt. in
‘official’ capacity.

(८) To set aside a sale by a
or Revenue Court or & sale

gnisance.

or
or

B

‘been made 00, establish

the

a8 3

his

Civil

@ person against wham One

year,

whileinsans. years.

a8, For property which the plains Three
‘diff has conveyed.

2g. To make good out of the gene- Three
° ral estate of a docessed trustee years.
the loss occasioned by a breach

of trust.

jo. For a legacy ar fora share of a Twelve
residue

ied by a Tee

years,

tor, or fore ॥ distributive share
of the property of an intestate,
against an xecbtor or adminis=

trator or some other person
legally charged with the diety of
distributing3the estate

When the teard dies,

10

IE,tI-A.

13& 14

3x7 & 1a.



1 2

w

adversely to the plaintiff.
Explanation.—An bereditary office is Berge’ when ed ite thereof
are usually received, or (if there are no its) when the
are usually performed,

duties thereof

3, Fer possession of a hereditary
3 offer

32. Suit during the life of a Hindu Twelve The date of the
or Mubammadan female by a years. alienation,
Hindu or Mubammadan who
if the female died’ at the date
ef instituting the suit would
be entitled to the possession
00, to have an alicnation
such land made by the fe-
male declared to be oid,
Sor wore i
७ Hindu the Twelve When the alienee takes
३ के re Etsichose Yo nex years. possession of the pro-
anide bis father’s alienation of perty.
ancestral property.
force aright tb soared therein. van plaintiff. »
35. By a Hindu for arrears of Tires ‘When the arrears are
maintenance. pears. payable. .
36. By or on bebslf of any local ‘Thirty The date of the
authority for possession of any years. session or discontimus
public street or red or any ance.
PEt thereof | from which it
been dispossessed or
of which it has discontinued
the possession.
4 Ang suit | by or on पक of ‘When the
7 ae or any State 1४०५ का Souls
Govt. except a, fait be the to run wader this
in. exercise against
of original juradicion. Hime enon," *
Past VI
Residuary
का जज of ‘These «When the right te sue
is elso- year, accrues, .
where in this

. SECOND DIVISION: APPEALS.
3 Aopen oe 275४ Cental
Procedure (ए of 1898)
Under Sections (1) and Thee The order
0 pier, Se Ser) ee ona, Te Sate of the
Under Section Se- One The date grt
“) beg i] Section Dot month, #+० ८०० व

2,

324

125

149

120

75 16.1
Ty and 93



2
40. Under the same Code to any Thisty ‘The date of such decree or
days. order or sentence

decree oF
decree or order of any Thirty ‘The date of the decree or

THIRD DIVISION—APPLICATIONS

42. Under the Arbitration Act,
194

$4
z
&
&
ak
5
7
2,
f

(a) fot the filing in couct of an Thi!
of

setting asid dor ‘Thirty ‘The date of service of
© jog gar mined cr TERY “notice of the fing of

1900.

Inder the Code of Civil Pro- Thisty ‘The date of death of
43. Uneet o have the legal wre . plaintis,
sentatives of 2 decease plain~
tiff, appellant, defendant or es the case may be
respondent, made © party.

4
fl
|!

or
failure to costs of
for पट दी or to furaith
security for coms or otherwise
not prosecuted.
aside a decree passed Thirty ‘The date of the decree
46 (Te wie or to reheat an appeal days. or where the summons
decreed or heard ex patte wus not duly served
when the applicant
hhad knowledge of the
decree,
Explanation +—For the 8 of hls article, substituted service
Filey मय OE 90

47+ For feave 0० appear and de~ Ten days When the summons is
‘fend a suit wader summery pro- ‘served.

ie at The ‘of the decree
48. For review of ment by any They date or

. Bor the payment of the amount Thirty Tho date of decree
49 of a decree by instalments, days

forcement Three The the. decree
३०22 है fhe मम गा dapery y pears, ti date of oe ‘fixed jor
Faso nail performance, such date,

i

15०754
150133
15551!

15%,

ion

178

158



22 For the execution Twelve
42) for of any

or order of ai
बाण Court. ”

Provided that an apptication for

Hn execution or £6००%/#+|

a decree granting ८

indunetion thal not be subject
46 any period of lintitation.

‘91. To record an adjustment or
satisfaction of a decree.

52. To set aside a sale in execution
of a decree including any such

seplication by @ judgment

53. For possession by dis-
‘of immovable pro-
Berey and disputing the right
or, pur-
chaser at a sale in execution of
2 decree.

$4: Por possession after
resistance

15. For deli of possess possession
3 hase immovable

Property at & sale in execution
of a decree,

56. For leave to appeal as a pauper

37. To any covert for the exercise of
rs of reensies

of Civil or Criminal Pro-

cedure.
* feof te ppl tothe
17744 fr articles
गे) 333 ! 2, 3 & 134 1X0) of ike

lim for tha tine being in force.

Thicty
days.

Thirty
days,

Thir
days

i

One
Fear,

days,

Thirty
days,

When the decree or order
enforceable

G
where the decree or any
subsequent order di-

rects any pa faite

to be
made at a certain date
or at recurring periods,
qn default in making
the payment or delivery
in respect of whichexe- 182, £83, Sec.
cation is sought takes SC.P.C.
P

When the payment or ad- 0
justment is made

The date of sale 16
The date of dispossession 355
The date of resistance or 167
obstruction,
‘When the sale becomes to
absolute.
‘The date of decree a r
pesled from. 7
The date of the decree or
order or sentence
to be revised.
The date of the 2००: Ne
order or Lae! ” 7



$9. To the Supreme Court for
special leave to appeal.
(a) in a case imvoloing death Thirty The date of the judgment,
sentence, iF OF Sentence.
there leave Si The date he order
raredased by te High oer, CO Mo" Tha dat of 0 “
(ए) in other cases . . Niney The date of fudgment or
60. Other applications for which Three © When the right to apply
Period accrues.

tation is pro~ years.
vided by any-iaw for the time
being in force

Nota—Articles (Hide notes) 2, 5, 175 18, 45,
46,95, 96, 121 and 130.

New >
153
1%

16r


APPENDIX I
‘Erracl OF THs POPOSALS ON THE EXISTING PERIODS OF LIMITATION

Period increased Period retained Period reduced
K Suits
2 (ge days to 3 yours) 10 116"
Ir Ir
6 xI-A it
z I2 129 (6 years to 3 years)
73 120
9 4 122
37 to 115
i 123m 127 |
29 \ (One year to three years) 132 Ig
2 134 tO 144 130 }-(12 years to 3 years}
a E46 ir
a 146 -A 145
33 147 (60 years ६0 12
7 bea 149{60 Fours co 30

४४४४५ ४८

34 pCO we geare to three years)

RASS

47° (Three years to 12 years),
ee

Appeals, Applications, etc.
19 day too days) 152134 hoe days to 39 dan)
151 (20 days to 30 days) 163—170 172.
160 (15 dayn to 30 days) «174 256
161 (15 days to 30 days) 175 me (90 days to 30 daysy
162 (odaysto 30days) ta 03

180 (3 years to 1 pear)
eee
Totat

30 articles 123 articles 22 articles
GCArticies 1, 3, + 5, 77, 78, 45५ 46, 127, 190 have been omitted.)

or


APPENDIX 1
table showing the Articles Sx the Existing Act and the Corresponding

tn the Schedule to the Annexzre of the report,

स्व
‘Articles

provirions, if any,

FE sian ५ Of anny,

im the new proposals

2)

@

@)

w

pcebelahahelelalelalelaialeieleleelsloieisielelelebelaleistelelieleler telet tL TTT tt Ur y

|

TRS BRPRRABARS RE 8३२४२४२३ ६३ ४३

I
2
3,
#
3
6
7
8
>
20
rt
2
a3
14
i
7
38
39
22
21
22
33



i
१
१
न
i

@

(छे

a

Fesyrewan 89३३६६३६६३६॥३४३३६३६२३०४०४३४३४३२३४५३४२५१५३ aR

BE पा हि

| |

&
Mme eR 80 SavvoromnarcauanEagaanange=: & RMON Stee

BERERESSEge

14)
142
143
ig
AOA
a
IO.
उठा «
133.
154
mS.
Ww

agsdereunaes PEECETECES TELE ELE कक उतर Sees


APPENDIX II
Sucerstions In RESrEcT oF oTHER AcTS

I. Contract Act.—(1) The definition of the word ‘Con-
tract’ should be amplified to include ‘quasi contracts’, con-
sistently with the trend of modern opinion in other
countries in fayour of accepting the principle of restitution
of unjust benefit or unjust enrichment as the basis of claim,
(Paragraphs 11 to 12).

(2) The decision of the Madras High Court in Anna-
purnamma v. Akayya, 36 Madras 554 is that one joint cre-
ditor could give a valid discharge so as to bind the other.
The other High Courts have taken a different view. The
latter view should be confirmed 88 the correct view by
suitable amendments to section 38 of the Contract Act.
(Paragraph 27).

Il. Specific Relief Act.—Section 9 of the Act has encour-
aged unnecessary litigation as any decision in a suit under
that provision is not final, whatever be the decision, an-
other regular suit to establish title is always open and is
generally filed. The section should be deleted. (Para-
graph 145). हु

IH, Civil Procedure Code—(1) The provisions relating to
claim petitions and claim suits help only te encourage mul-
tiplicity of proceedings. The same questions as regards
claims and objections are first decided in summary preteed-
ing and the parties are then driven to suits under order 21
rules 63 and 103. It would be better if the claims or objec-
tions at the petition stage are themselves’ treated as suits
and disposed of. (Paragraph 149)

(2) Section 48 of the C.P.C. providing an absolute period
of limitation for execution applications. amay be deleted.as.a
consequence of the provisions therein being taken over to
the Limitation Act. (Paragraph 170),

18) The definition of decree in Section 2(2) should in-
‘clude awards under Section 11 of Land Acquisition Act.
{Paragraph 151).

IV. Insolvency Acts.—The most effective way. of instil-
ling a healthy fear in the minds of dishonest judgment.
debtors would be to provide that if a decree for money
remains unsatisfied for a period of six years it would

भ्र्व


constitute an act of insolvency and the court may, on the
application of the decree holder declare the judgment-
debtor as an insolvent. Such a provision has been made
by the Bombay Amendment to the Presidency Towns
Insolvency Act and a similar provision may be adopted
for the rest of India. (Paragraph 171).

प्‌. Land Acquisition Act.—(1) The award by the Collec-
tor under section 11 should be made enforceable by treat-
ing it as a decree within the meaning of section 2(2) of the
C.P.C. (Paragraph 151).

(2) A time limit, say 6 months, should be fixed within
which the Collector must pay or deposit the compensation
and on application by any person interested, the court may
direct the deposit of the arfiount in court. (Paragraphs
151, 152).

VI. Succession Act.—(1) The provisions in the Legal
Representatives’ Suits Act and the Fatal Acc‘dents Acts re-
lating to the question of survival of the cause of action
should be brought under the Succession Act by amending
section 306 appropriately. (Paragraph 115).

(2) Actions for malicious prosecution should be brought
within the exception to section 306. (Paragraph 115).

VII. Legal Representatives’ Suits Act.—The provision
which prescribes that the actions should be in respect of
a wrong committed within one year before the death should
be deleted having regard to the period of limitation now
proposed, for such actions, viz, three years from the date
of cause of action. (Paragraph 114).

VIM. Arbitration Act—An award can be enforced only
by filing it in court and obtaining a judgment thereon and
a suit cannot be filed on the award. Even to set aside an
award, it is necessary to have it filed first. Provisions such
as those in section 37(2) recognising partial or preliminary
arbitrations would seem to need revision. (Paragraph
172). A time limit of 30 days should also be prescribed for
‘the arbitrator to file the award.

IX, Transfer of property Act.—It is doubtful whether
in view of the definition of “English mortgage’ in the Act,
the mortgagee under this mortgage would be entitled to
Tecover possession. The position should be clarified
(Paragraph 125).

X. Easements Act.—The Act should be extended so as
apply to the whole of India. (Paragraph 54).

(GHG TP HD-PLW~59/2/Law/76-77-500,