LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

THIRTIETH REPORT

(SECTION 5 OF THE CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT, 1956
--TAXATION BY THE STATES OF SALES IN THE
COURSE OF IMPORT)

(In view of the Supreme Court’s decision in K.G. Khosla
cand Co. vs. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes).

FEBRUARY 1967

‘GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW


3.

CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION,
5, Jorbagh, New Delhi—3,
Dated 4th March, 1967.

G. S. Pathak,
Minister of Law,
Government of India,
New Delhi.

My Dear Minister,

IT have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the
Thirtieth Report of the Law Commission on section 5 of the
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956—Taxation by the States of Sales
in the course of Import.

2. The subject was taken up by the Law Commission on
a reference from the Government of India, after the decision
of the Supreme Court in Khosla’s case. Details of the reference
are given in the first six paragraphs of the Report.

3. On receipt of the reference, a study of the subject was
undertaken. Comments of the Ministries of the Government
of India concerned, and of State Governments and High
Courts, on the question referred to the Law Commission, were
invited by a letter. Comments of the public on that question
were also invited by a Press communique. A draft Report
on the subject was prepared, discussing the case-law, the
background of the Act of 1956, the sales-tax system, and other
connected matters.

4. The papers concerning the Second Report of the Com-
mission (Parliamentary legislation relating to Sales Tax),
including the various notes circulated at that time and the
minutes of the relative meetings, were studied. The comments
received from the Ministries of the Government of India, State
Governments, High Courts, interested persons and bodies
(including several commercial bodies) were gone into.


(ii)

5. The materials referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 above
were considered at a meeting of the Commission held from
17th to roth October, 1966. The draft Report was discussed
and approved with certain modifications, but it was decided,
that the conclusion on the specific point referred fo the
Commission may be reached at the next meeting.

6. A revised draft Report was prepared in the light of the
decisions at the above meeting. The revised draft Report was

considered at the meeting of the Commission held from 30th
November to 1st December, 1966.

A note given by Member Shri Datar expressing his views
was also considered at this meeting. The conclusion reached
was, that section 5 should not be amended so as to exclude
from the exemption (conferred by that section) transactions of
the type in issue in Khosla’s case.

The draft Report was again revised in the light of the
decisions taken at this meeting, and prepared for signature.

{The draft Report was not circulated to State Governments
etc. as the matter was urgent. The views of State Govern-
ments and others, received in response to the Commission’s
letter and press communique have. however, received the
Commission’s utmost consideration.]

7. Two Members of the Commission—Mr. K. G. Datar and
Mr. R. P. Mookerjee—have signed the Report subject to
separate dissenting notes.

8. I would like to mention the invaluable help the Commis-
sion received from Mr. P. M. Bakshi, Secretary of the
Commission, at every stage of the preparation, discussion and
finally drawing up of the report.

Yours sincerely,
व. L. KAPUR.


EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATION USED
S. No.=Serial Number in the Law Commission’s file.

ii)


CONTENTS

PARAGRAPH Susysct-MAaTTER
I—3 Genesis of the Report. . . . . . .
4 Transaction to be considered in the Report . . .
$ Question referredtothe Commission 5 wwe
6 Letter of the Government of West Bengal + न .
7 Materials required to be examined. . न . .
8—~16 Khoslas case . . . . . . . .
aq—18 Constitutional Provisions Pre-1950 Position . . .
Cases referred to=~
@ C.P. Act case. . . . . . .

19

2125
26—27
28

29-3०

3t

32

(ii) Bodu Paidanna'scate. 6 wee
(iii) Goveneor General-in-Council Vs Province of Madras

1950 Constitution a soe
United Motors case. . . . . . .
Report of the Taxation Enquiry Commission . . .
Earlier Report of the Law Commission . . . .
Bengal Immunity case. . . . . . .
Constitutional Amendment of 1956 . . . +

Pre-amendment article 286 interpreted-—cases refered to—

@ First Travancore case . . . पु . .
(i) Second Travancore case. . पु . .
(iit) United Motors case. . . . . :
(iv) Bangal Immunity case Soe

Pre-1956 cases—Interstate Trade—Cases referred to—
@ RamNarain 5s,

(i) Mohan Lal Hargovind. =.
vy)

Pace

«

we wow

10
2
3
13

13
18
3
18

3
18


(vi)

PARAGRAPH Supject-Matrer + Pace
33 1956 Amendment . . . . . . . 18
34-35-36 Previous reference tothe Law Commission =... 18
37 Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 . . . पु . 20
38 Developments after 1956 . . . . . . 20
39-47 Pattern of import trade, . . . . . . 2r
4850 Two sets of sales tax laws. . . . . . 23
SI Decisions on amended article 286, and on the Act of

1986 See ee 24

Cases referred to :—

() TatalronCo.  . . : . . . . 24
i) Cement Marketing Co. . . . . . . 24
(Hi) State Trading Corporation . . . . . 24
(iv) SingareniCollieries  . . . . . . 24
52-55 Object of Constitutional provisions—Protection of Foreign
Trade . . . . . . . . . 24

Cases referred to :०-

@ First Travancorecase «© 6 wk, 25

Gi) Bodu Paidanna’s case . . . . . . 25

(iii) Second Tracancore case . . . . . 25
56 Casesdecided before 1956 6 ww 26
5760. Travancore cases-First Travancore Case . : पु . 26
6I—64 Second Travancore case . . . . . . . 28
65 Combined effect of the two Travancore cases. . . 30
66 Pre-1956 cases, regarding inter-State sale—

@) United Motors case. . . . . . Br

Gi) Bengal Immunity Co'scase wwe 31

Git) Ram Narain's case. . न : . . डा
67-68 Bengal Immunity Co's case . * . ‘ . + ar
69-71 Bengal Immunity Co's case. . . . . . 32
qa Cores (००4०6 by the Supreme Court after the amendment of 34


(vii)

PARAGRAPR, ‘SuBrEcT-MATTER PAGE
BHI TatalronCo'scase.t 6 et 34
78 Other cases relied on in Khosla‘s case—
(i) Cement MatrketingCo.. 6 we 36
(ii) Singareni Collieries Co, toe 36
(ii) State Trading Corporation» 5 sss 36
79 Cement Marketing Co's case. , . पर 36
#0 Rohats case distingushed rr 37
8r Test laid down in Cement Marketing Co'scase . 37°
82 State Trading Corporation's case and Singareni Collieries case 38
89-84 Other cases under article 286, decided after 1956... 36
85 Cases of Export sales—
@) Gurviah Naidu. 39
GDKailashNath «6. ee +«» 39
(ili) Mysore Spinning Co.etc. . 39
(iv) Gordhandas Lalji 39
छ) BuK.Wadyor . 6 ow, 39
(vi) Bast India Tobacco Co. ooo. पु पु . 39.
(wii) Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. . . . 39
86 11777 /77 7 कम 39
87 KailashNath'scase =. 6 eee 39
88 Mysore Spinning Co's case . . . . . . 40
&9 Gordhandas Lalji’s case . 40
9° Wadeyar'scase . . वि बा
ot East India Tobacco Co's case . . 41
9210100 = Ben Gorm Nilgirs‘s case « . 42
rorewoa. JV. GokaPscase . ee : 47
103 Cases of sales sought to be brought within exportsales 48
104 Cochin CoalCo'scase 6 ww 48
10$ Burmah Shell case « «० ee «* . 48
106 Endupuri case . . . . . .

49°


(viii)

PARAGRAPH ‘Supyect-Matrer PAGE
107 Caltex case and SignareniCollieriescase . 6. 50
108 Other decisions discussing article 296 . . . . Sr
109 Hussainali’s case नि न su
110 Tobacco ManufacturingCo'scase 5 ww, sr
rr Indian Copper Corporation case . . . . . St
m2 Summaryofposion . . 3 . . +. + 51
YK3+1T4 Notions of integralicy, inextricability, bond and non-diver-

tibility emphasised, - . . 57
15 DecisionsofHighCourts =. ५. 9. “ 37
116-157 Associated Electricals case (Calcutta) . . . . . 57
118-119 Bengal Corporation case (Madras) eo ee 58
120 Common Thread . . . . . . + 60
121124 Whether decision in Khosla‘s case goes beyond previous cases 60
12§—127 Situs of sale . . . . . . . . . 62
128-129 Transactions referred to in the leter of Government of West

Bengal. . . oe : 64
130 ‘Whether change in the law required . . . . 65
131 Policy matters not dealt with . . पु . . 65
132—139 Suggestions received =. . . . . . 66
140—142  Debated in Constituents Assembly . . . . . 72
143 Observations in Bengal Immunity Co's case - oe . 74
144 ‘Taxation Inquiry Commission and foreign trade oe 75
145-147 Export sales-exemption from salestax =. . . 76
148 No recommendation in the past for import sales . 76
149 Law in other countries. . . . . 76
150 Appendices . . . . . . . "7

APPENDICES

Aprennix 1 Certain decisions of High Courts illustrating the application of

theLaw . . 3

Sales tax system in India न . . . on

APPENDIX 2


REPORT ON SECTION at oF THE CENTRAL SALES TAX

1. This reference has been made to the Law Commission Genesis of
in the following circumstances: — le Report,

On January 18, 1966, the Supreme Court, in K. G.
Khosla’s case, laid down the boundaries of the ban under
article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution on the imposition of
sales tax on import sales. It also determined the extent
and meaning of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act’.

As that decision cireumscribes the power of State Gov-
ernments to impose sales tax, the State Government of
West Bengal, by its letter dated June 18, 1966, drew the
attention of the Government of India (Ministry of Finance)
to the consequences of the decision on its revenues derived
from sales tax on certain classes of sales and purchases—
import-export sales and purchases—which, hithertofore, the
State Government had been taking as being outside the
ban of article 286(1)(b).

2. The State Government, requested the Government of
India to loak into the matter and to take steps for amend-
ing the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, so as to exclude such
sales from the purview of section 5 of that Act.

3. The Government of India, Ministry of Finance, after
noting that the Central Sales Tax Act was passed after
taking into account the recommendations of the Law Com-
mission in the Second Report, and that that Report itself
ps based on two decisions of the Supreme Court, request-
ed the Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs), to
refer the matter to the Law Commission for its considera-
tion, in the light of the fact that existing section 5 of the
Central Sales-tax Act embodies the principles recommended
by the Law Commission in its Second Report. The Ministry
of Finance, in particular, raised a query whether the deci-
sion in Khosla’s case went beyond what the Law Commis-
sion in its Second Report intended. (In this connection, it
referred to paragraph 9 of the Second Report). The Min-
istry of Law* has referred the matter to t he Law Commis-
sion for its consideration‘.

That is the genesis of this Report.

1. K.G. Khosla & Go. (Private Ltd.) v. Deputy Commissioner of Commereial
Tax, Madras, AVR. 1966 S.C. 1216; 17 S.T.C. 473.

2. The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956).

3. Minsiry of Law, Departmet of Legal Affairs (Advice F Section), Note
No. Nil, dated the 18th July, 1966, to the Law Commission,

4. For ails of the question referred to the law Commission, see paragraph
53 infra.



2
Transactions 4. The transactions to be considered in the present Re-.
पका port may be gathered from the following passages in the
the Report Note of the Ministry of Law}.

“Now, in K. 6. Khosla’s case (17 S.T.C. 473) whicl-
is a case under section 5(2) of the Central Sales Tax
Act, 1956, the Supreme Court has held that before a
sale could be said to have occassioned the import, it is
Not necessary that the sale should have preceded the
import. The facts in that case were that the assessee-
entered into a contract with the D.G. 5. & 0.. New
Delhi, for the supply of axle box bodies. The goods
were to be manufactured in Belgium according to spe-
cifications and the D.GIS, & D., London, or His repre-
sentative was to inspect the goods at the works of the
manufacturers and issue an inspection certificate. An-
other inspection was provided for at Madras. The
assessee was entitled to be paid 90 per cent. after ins-
pection and delivery of stores to the consignee and the.
balance of 10 per cent. was payable on final acceptance
by the consignee. In the case of deliveries on for,
basis, the assessee was entitled to 90 per cent. payment
after inspection on proof of despatch and the balance
of 10 per cent. after receipt of stores by the consignee
in good condition. The assessee was entirely responsi-
ble for the execution of the contract and for the safe
arrival of the goods at the destination. The contract
also provided that notwithstanding any approval or
acceptance even by an Inspector, the consignee was
entitled to reject the goods if it was found that the
goods were not in conformity with the terms and con-
ditions of the contract in all respects. The manufac-
turer consigned the goods to the assessee in ships under
bills of lading and they were cleared at the Madras
harbour by the assessee’s clearing agents and despatch-
ed for delivery to the Southern Railway in Madras and
Mysore. The question arose, whether the sales by the
assessee to Government Departments were in the
course of import of goods within the territory of India
and as such exempt from taxation under section 5(2).”.

‘The High Court of Madras held that before a sale
can be said to have occasioned the import, it was neces-
sary that the sale should have preceded the import.
All the facts hereinbefore stated “serve to show that
the terms of contract did not visualise a sale in the
sense that there was to be a passing of property in the
goods to the purchaser when the goods were under
manufacture, or after the manufacture had been com-
pleted and the goods were packed ready for export from
Belgium”. All these stipul fated conditions for the com-
pletion of the sale show that there could be such a

. Ministry of Law, Department of Legal Affairs, Advice F Section, note
hr Mdated 18th July, 1966 to the Law’ Commission हे


3

transfer of property in the goods only after certain
incidents had taken place in relation to those goods
after the import of the goods into India. It seems
illogical to conceive of a somewhat contradictory
situation where, even in the absence of these incidents
taking place, it could be deemed that the sale had
taken place at Belgium and that such a sale had occa-
sioned import of the goods’.

“This finding of the High Court was reversed by
the Supreme Court........ हा

“The Government of West Bengal have stated in
their letter of June 18, 1966, that in actual practice many
cases of import of goods into India took place through
the intermediaries of the Indian branch of the foreign
manufacturers. The Indian purchaser places an order
with the Indian branch of the foreign manufacturer for
the supply of goods under a contract with him and the
Indian branch. The goods are shipped from the foreign
country not direct to the Indian purchaser but to the
foreign manufacturers’ branch in this country who
clears the goods and then delivers them to the Indian
purchaser. It is one of the terms of such contract that
the goods can be rejected even after they have arrived
in India if they are not according to the approved spe-
cifications. In the view of the State Government,
therefore, in such cases, there is no sale of goods in the
course of their actual import into India and precisely
in the same facts the High Court of Madras has held
in K. G. Khosla’s case, discussed above, that there can-
not be a sale in the course of import, because property
in the goods passes only after certain incidents have
taken place in relation to the goods after they have
been imported into India. The Supreme Court has,
however, ruled otherwise.”.

“The Government of West Bengal points out that
following this decision of the Supreme Court the
D.G.S. & D. and Indian Railway authorities have been
refusing to pay sales-tax on their purchase of goods and
have been threatening to claim refund of sales-tax so
far paid on earlier purchases. Similar demands are
apprehended from private traders.”.

5. Accordingly, the following question has been referred Question
to us!— teferred to
Commission,

“Since the provisions of section 5 of the Central
Sales Tax Act incorporate verbatim the principles re-
commended by the Law Commission on the basis of
the earlier Supreme Court judgments in Travancore-
Cochin Cases, the Commission is requested to examine
the matter further and consider whether they would

व Ministry of Law, Department of Legal Afi, (Advice F Sesion), Note
No, Nil dated the 18th July, 1: to the Law Commission.



Letter of the
Government
of West
Bengal,

4

“recommend any amendments of the Act, so as to ex-
clude transactiofis of the type hereinbefore discussed
from the purview of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax
Act.”,

6. The issue raised by the Government of West Bengal
can be gathered from its letter’. “Article 286 of the Consti-
tulion of India states, inter alia, that no law of the State
shall impose a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where
such sale or purchase takes place in the course of import of
the goods into India. This provision of the Constitution
prohibits the State Government from levying any sales tax
on direct import of goods from out of India by Indian pur-
chasers. However, in actual practice, in many cases such
import of goods from out of India takes place through the
intermediary of the Indian Branch of the manufacturers of
foreign countries. What actually happens in such cases,
is that the Indian purchaser places an order with the Indian
Branch of the foreign manufacturer for supply of such
goods. There is generally a contract between the Indian
Branch of the foreign manufacturer and Indian purchaser,
laying down the specifications of goods required and the
source of their manufacture, ete. The goods are, however,
shipped from the foreign countries not to the Indian pur-
chaser directly but to the foreign manufacturer’s Branch in
this country. That Branch clears the goods, stores them
and then delivers such goods to the Indian purchaser.
Usually in terms of the contract, the goods can be rejected’
even after they have arrived in India if they are not
according to the approved specifications. In such cases,
therefore, there is no sale of the goods in course of their
actual import into India. The actual sale takes place with
the Indian Branch of the foreign manufacturer and the
Indian purchaser after the import of the goods are:
completed.

“In this view of the matter the State Governments have
been levying State Sales Tax on such sales of imported
goods by Indian Branches of foreign manufacturers to

ndian purchasers. This view of the matter has, however,

been set aside by the Supreme Court of India in the case-
of K. G. Khosla & Co. Private Ltd. v. Deputy Commissioner
of Commercial Taxes, Madras Division (1966 S.T.C.—KVII—
473) in which the learned Judges have been pleased to hold
that the movement of goods from the foreign countries to
India being incidental to the contract and goods being meant
for use by the Indian purchaser, such sale should be held
to have been made in the course of import into the territory
oi India.

1. Government of West a |, Fitiance Department, letter No. 2274-F.T..
dated 18th June, 1 to the Gobéritinent of India, Ministty of
Finance, Department of Revétue:


6

“Following the above decision the Director General of
Supplies and Disposals of the Government of India and the
Indian Railway authorities have been refusing to pay sales
tax on their purchase of such goods and have threatened
to claim refund of sales tax so far paid oh such earlier pur-
chases. The State Government have received representa-
tions from the East India Metal Merchants Association on
this point. It is apprehended that private traders will also
refuse to pay sales tax on their such purchases following
the above-mentioned decision of the Supreme Court.”

प्‌, To answer the reference, it will be expedient to exa-
mine the constitutional provisions relating to taxes on sales
and the history of those provisions, the relevant Parliamen-
tary enactments and the leading cases in which those pro-
visions and enactments have been discussed and interpreted
and their true import determined. But, before going into
those matters, we shall discuss K. G. Khostla’s case, and
what was decided therein.

8. In K. G. Khosla’s case’, the Supreme Court examined
the scope of article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution and of sec-
tion 5(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, and determined
the area of the constitutional ban on the imposition of
sales tax on import-export sales and purchases. It was
held to cover sales in which the movement of goods into
and from the territories of India is the result of a covenant
or incident of the contract of sale.

9. The facts of K. G. Khostla’s case* were these:

K. G. Khosla & Co., the assessee, entered into a contract
with the Director General of Supplies & Disposals, New
Delhi for the supply of “axle-box bodies”. The contract

rovided for the manufacture of boxes in Belgium and the
inspection of the manufactured articles at the works of the
manufacturers by a representative of D.G.1.S.D., London
who was to issue an inspection certificate. A second inspec-
tion by the Deputy Director of Inspectors. Ministry of
W.H. & S., Madras was provided in the contract. He was to
issue inspection notes on receipt of a copy of the inspection
certificate from London after verification ang visual inspec-
tion by him. The contract also provided that goods were
to be manufactured according to specifications by M/s. La
Brugeoises Et Nivelles, Belgium. Khosla & Co. were
entitled to be paid 90 per cent. after inspection and delivery
of the stores to the “consignee” and the balance of 10 per
cent. was payable on final acceptance by the “consignee”.
It appears that “consignee” denoted the buyer or his
nominee. In the case of deliveries on f.o.r. basis, the
assessee was entitled to 90 per cent. payment after inspec-
tion on proof of despatch and balance 10 per cent. after
receipt of the goods by the “consignee” in good condition.

KG Khosla & Co. Por, Lid. Deputy Conmistigner of Commercial
Taxes, Madras, A.LLR, 1966 8.0. 1216; 17 $.T.C. 473.
2. Paragraph 8, supra,

Khosla’:
case,


‘The date of delivery, according to the contract, was “in 8
months ex-your principal's works from the date of
receipt of order and the approved working drawings,
ie. delivery in India by 31st July, 1957, or earlier”. The
assessee was responsible for the execution of the contract
in accordance with terms and conditions as specified in the
tender and the Schedule attached thereto. The “pur-
chaser”, notwithstanding the approval by the inspector,
could reject the stores on arrival if they were found to be
not in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
contract. Further, K. G. Khosla and Co., was responsible
for the safe arrival of the goods at the destination. The
D.G.1S.D., London was to issue pre-inspection delay re-
ports regularly to the D.G.S. & D., New Delhi. He was
also to send copies of the inspection certificates to the
Director of Inspection, Ministry of W.H. & S., Bombay.
Under the bills of lading, the goods were consigned to be
cleared by K. G. Khosla & Co to Madras Harbour. They
were cleared by K. G. Khosia’s clearing agents and
despatched for delivery to the buyers thereafter.

10. The Sales Tax Officer, Madras found that the trans-
action was an intra-State sale and not in the course of
import, because the sale was completed only when goods
were delivered in Madras State and, therefore, it did not
occasion the import. He also relied on the terms of the
conract which gave to the purchaser the right to reject
the goods if they were not in accordance with the terms
and conditions of the contract. On appeal, the Appellate
‘Tribunal held that the property in the goods had not pass-
ed to the buyers while the goods were with che Belgian
manufacturers and that the sale had not occasioned the
imports.

11. The matter was taken to the Madras High Court
in revision. The High Court rejected the contention that
the goods must be deemed to have passed to the buyers
when the goods were approved in the factory of the manu-
facturers. It also rejected the contention that the sale
by the assessee to the Government occasioned import.
In the High Court’s view it was necessary that the sale
should have preceded the import, and as the sale had not
‘taken place in Belgium, there was no question of the sale
occasioning import of the goods.

12. Against this judgment, K. G. Khosla appealed to
the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court held that the
transaction was not liable for payment of sales tax, as it
fell within the prohibition of article 286(1)(b) of the Cons-
titution read with section 5(2) of the Central Sales Tax
Act. In interpreting the words “occasions the movement
-of goods”, the Supreme Court expressed the view that
tthe words used in sections 3(a) and 5(2) of the Central


प्र

‘Sales Tax Act should have the same meaning in the two
sections. and therefore relied on the interpretation of
section 3(a) by Mr. Justice Shah in Tata Iron and Steel
‘Co. Ltd., Bombay vs. S. R. Sarkar’ where it was said: —
“In our view, therefore, within clause (b) of sec-
tion 3 are included sales in which property in the goods
passes during the movement of the goods from one
State to another by transfer of documents of | title
thereto; clause (a) of section 3 covers sales, other than
those included in clause (b), in which the movement
of goods from one State to another is the result of
a covenant or incident of the contract of sale, and
property in the goods passed in either State”.

The Court also relied on the observations of Mr. Justice
Sarkar. as he then was. in State Trading Corporation of
India Ltd., v. State of Mysore,? where it was stated: —

“In Tata Iron and Steel Co. v. &. के, Sarkar, (1961)
1S.C.R. 279. 391, it was held that a sale occasions the
movement of goods from one State to another with-
in section 3(a) of the Central Sales Tax Act. when the
movement “is the result of a covenant or incident of
the contract of sale”.

13. After referring to various judgments which we shall
deal with in the course of our report—it is not, therefcre,
necessary to deal with them at this stage,—the Supreme
Court held, that the High Court was in error in holding
that “before a sale could be said to have occasioned the
import, it is necessary that the sale should “have preced-
ed the import”.

14. The Supreme Court also held, that_the movement
of the axle-box bodies from Belgium into India (Madras)
was the result of the convenant in the contract of sale
and was an incident ef such contract. The Supreme Court,
lastly. observed: *

“It seems to us that it is quite clear from the con-
tract that it was incidental to the contract that the
axlebox bodies would be manufactured in Belgium.
inspected there and imported into India for the consig-
nee, Movement of goods from Belgium to India was
in pursuance of the conditions of the contract between
the assessee and the Director-General of Supplies.
There was no possibility of these goods being divert-
ed by the assessee for any other purpose. Conse-
quently we hold that the sales took place in the course
of import of goods within section 5(2) of the Act, and
are, therefore, exempt from taxation.

1. Tara Iron Steel Co. Ltd. Bombay v. S.R. Sarkar, (1961) t SCR. 379,
R01; A.LR. 1961 S.C. 65, 71, 723 11 S.T.C. 655.

2. State Trading Corporation of India v. State of Mysore, (1963) 3 S.C.R*
792; ALR. 1963 S.C. $48, $49; 14 S.T.C. 188, (1964) 2 S.C.J. 131.

3. Khosla’s case, ALR. 1966 S.C. 1216, 12203 17 S.T.C. 473.

31 MofLaw—2



Constitution
vis~
Toas-Peee
1950 Cons
litation,

8

15, The Supreme Court, thus held ९ transaction to
be one of import sale not liable to payment cf sales tax,
pecause of the ban of article 286(1}(b) which prohibits
the imposition o€ taxes on sales or purchases where the
importation of goods and their movement from one coun-
ary into another is a consequence of the ccntract of sale
or is an incident thereof.

16. The Supreme Court in K. G. Khosla’s case, bas de-
iermined the extent of the ban of article 286(1) (8) as fol-
DMS:

(1) Article 286(1}(b) exempts transactions from
sales tax where the sale occasions the movernent of
goods from or to a foreign country into or from the
territoris of India, the movement itself being the
result of a covenant or an incident of the contract
of sale.

(2) 1६ is an erroneous view of the Jaw to think
that before a sale could occasion the import. the sale
should have preceded it.

(3) The contract itself showed that it was an ine
dent of the contract that axle-box bodies would be (a)
manufactured in Belgium. (9) inspected there, and (९)
imperted for the consignee (the buyer),

(4) Movement of goods from Belgium ६० India was
in pursuance of the conditions of the contract.

(5) There was no possibility the goods being
diverted by K. G. Khosla for any cther purpose or io
any other contract.

(6) As in inter-State sales where preperty in the

goods could pass in either State. ihe property could
pass in either country.

be convenient now to deal with the constitu:
ms relating to the imposition of sales-tax, and

tional prov
their history.

In the Government of India Act, 1935' taxes on sales
were adopted as a suitable form of taxation, and were in-
troduced into the Provincial List (List 11) as Entry 48--
“Taxes on the sale of goods and on advertisement”. There
was 8130 an entry (Entry 45) in the Central List (List 1),
relating to the imposition of Excise on tobacco and other
goods manufactured or produced in India.

18. The incidence of, and competition between, these
two entries came up for interpretation by the Federal Court.
in the matter of the Central Provinces and Berar Sales.

7. The Government of India Act, 1935 (26 Geo. 5 Chap. 2).


g

of Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938,’ and the
Province of Madras v. Boddu Paidana & Sons’. and by the
Privy Council in Governor-General-in-Council v. Province
of Madras’. In the Privy Council case, Lord Simonds ex-
plained the two taxes—Excise and tax on seles—thus :

“The two taxes, the one levied upon a manufac-
turer in respect of his goods and the other upon a
vendor in respect of his sales may..
overlap. The taxes are separate and d
If in fact they overlap, that may be because the exist-
ing authority imposing a duty of excise finds it con-
venient to impose that duty at the moment when the
article leaves ihe faciory or workshop for the first time
upon the occasion of its sale. But that method of col-
lecting the tax is an incident of administration; it is
not of the essence of the duty of excise which is attrac-
ted by the manufacture itself.”.

19. The twa duties. thus clearly demavcated were con-
tinued in the Indian Constitution of 1950. At the cae
time, the Constitution of 1950 imposed a ban on the power
of the States to impose taxes on sales and purchases in the
course of inter-State sales or in the course of export or
import. This was in the interest of the Umon 67 Tnila
and for preventing the States from impinging upor. she
Union field of foreign trade and imposing tax on sales or
purchases in the course of import or export under the guise
of making laws with respect to taxes on sales or purchases
under Entry 54 in the State Lisr as it then ted. As the
taxes on sale were perhaps the only variable. elastic and
flexible tax within the jurisdiction of a State's power of
taxation, and, therefcre. a source of sizeable State revenue,
they were readily put into operation in all the States of
india.

The Constitution of India ef 1950, as originally enacted,
contained two articles—269 and 286—relating to sales ta
and one entry in List IT of the Seventh Schedule—Entry
54-, relating to the power of the States to levy taxes.
Article 269 gave power to the Union to levy and_ collect
taxes which were to be assigned to the States in the man-
ner provided ‘n clause (2) of that article. Article 236 ‘m
posed restrictions on the imposition of taxes on the sale
and purchase of goods.

20. Now. the Suprerne Court, in one judgment‘, held, United
that the State into which goods were sent from another Motors case,

1. In the matter of the Central Provinces and Berar Sules of Motor Spirit &
Labricants Ta.ation Act,1938, (1939) F.C.R. 18: ALR. 1939 F.C. 1,
2. Provit of Madras v. Boddu Paidana & Sons. (1942) 4 F-C.R. 90; ALR,
1942 F.C. 33.
3. Governor-General-in-Council v. Province of Madras, 72 1.4. 913 A.LR.
1945 P.C, 98. (P.C.)

State of Bombay v. United Motors, (1953) S.C.R. 1069, ALR. 1953 S.C.
252;4S.T.C. 133.



Report of
the Taxation
Lnquir
Commission,

10

State, could tax the transaction of sale even though the
sale took place in inter-State trade or commerce, and even
though the person who sent the goods was outside the ter-
ritory of the State, provided the goods were delivered in
the importing State for the Purpose of consumption theie.
One eifect of this decision was, that a dealer Situated in
one State became amenable to the Sales-tax laws of the
various States to which the goods were sent. This ied to
numerous hardships.

21. The matter was considered by the Taxation Enauiry
Commission. Deaiing with Inter-State sales, the Commis-
sion observed, thar the dichotomy adopted by article 286
(as then in force) amounted to a division of the sale of
goods in India into—

(a) sale of goods delivered for consumption in a
Particular State: and

(b) other sales.

This dichotomy was imperfect from the Point of view of
tax administration. The Taxation Enouiry Commission,

therefore. suggested. that all sales of goods should be divid-
ed into—

(a) those in the course of inter-State trade and
commerce, and

(9) those not in the course of inter-State trade and
commerce.

The former should, broadly speaking. be the sphere of
the Union and the latter. the sphere of the States. But
she responsibilities pertaining to the Union zould be
exercised through the State Governments, and the re-
venue in any case be devolved appropriately on them,
This would ensure both co-ordination and adaptation to
changing needs more effectively, than rigid constitutional
Frovisions supplemented by occasional jidicial interpre-
tation’

The Taxation Enquiry Commission, further, suggested*
that the Centre} legislation which would give effect to
this recommendation should also deal with one important
aspect. namely, the definition of the locale cf sales for
the purpose of defining in detail the relative jurisdictions,
first, of the Union and the States, and secondly, of the
States inter se. The Commission stated, that entirely
irrespective of constitutional restrictions and the Central
Government’s powers of levy, it was obviously necessary

1. Report of the Taxation Enquiry Commission, (1953
48-62, paragraphs 8 to 3 22.

2. Taxation Enquiry Commission, (1953-1954), Report, Vol. 3, page 54,
para, 14611).

3. Taxation Enquiry Commission, (1953-54), Report, Vol. 3> pages 58-59,
pata. 20.



ib

that there should be a body of law which defines, with
specific reference to the sales tax, the circumstances in
which the saie becomes taxable by a particular State and
by no other.

The relevani principles could only be formulated after
expert examination, and the Commission recommended
tnat it should be done and the principles adopted in the
Cenirai iegislation. The Commission took care to em-
phasise, that it would not suffice only to define the juris-
diction inter se of individual States, but the Central legis-
lation should also contain the definition in adequate detail
of what the constitutes a sale or purchase in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce.

22. In support of the advantages of Parliamentary
legislation the Taxation Enguiry Commission made
these observations, “We realise, of course, that the legis-
lation itself may have to be modified from time to time
in the light of new circumstances not fully provided for,
or of judicia! imterpretation of the original provisions.
Parliamentary legislation, as distinguished from constitu-
tional provision, will have the obvious advantage that
these modifications can be made as required without un-
due delay or difficulty. It will not, of course. suffice to
define the jurisdiction inter se of individual States. The
other impor:ant aspect of Central legislation would be the
definition in adequate detail of what constitutes a sale
or purchase in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.

In this matter ६00, the embodiment of the principles in an

Jaw can, without undue rigidity, be modified to suit new
facts or unforeseen circumstances. As we have stated, the
Constitution itself would of course lay down the broad
division of tax power between the Union and the States.
The importan: fact would remain that all sales would fall
under one or the other of these categories. The Union,
which under the scheme would, of course, derive no re-
venue from the taxation of inter-State sales or purchases,
would be solely interested, in the legislation which it pro-
motes, in securing, from a practical angle, the maximum
possible co-ordination between different States in regard
to the operation of the inter-State sales tax and the maxi-
mum possible equity in the appointment of the rele-
vant proceeds to the States in which the goods have
been physically delivered and those from which the physi-
cal despatch has taken place. In the actual provisions of
law, it will no doubt avoid the many pitfalls which have
been a feature of the Present constitutional provisions as
they have been interpreted and implemented, and even if
it does not fully succeed in doing so at the SR A ucceed in doing so at the outset, the re the rele-

7. Taxation Enquiry Commission, Report, (1953-54), Vol. 3, pages 7-9,
para, 20,



Earlier 6
Report of

the Law
Commission,

12

vant legislation, as we have emphasised, can be modified
at subsequent stages in conformity with the administra-
ive and othcr requirements as they arise from time to

23. Having, thus, recommended that sales in the course
of inter-State trade or commerce should be regulated by
Central legislation, and that principles for determining
when sales took place in the course of inter-Staie trade or
commerce should be laid down by Parliamentary Icgisla-
tion, the Taxation Enquiry Commission recoramended an
amendmen: of the Constitution for conferring the neces-
sary legislative povers on Parliament.

24. Along with this recommendation, relating १6 inter-
State trade ot commerce, the Taxation Enquiry Commis-
sion recommended an amendment of article 286 so that
Parliament may, by law, formulate principles for deter-
mining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the
course of import or export*.

25. Thus, the Taxation Enquiry Commission's Report
contemplated that the Central legislation should embody
principles for determining when a sale or purchase of good-
takes place (0) outside the State; (ii) in the course of im-
port into, or export outside, the territory of India and
(iii) in the course of inter-State trade and commerce?

26. In pursuance of this recommendation of the Taxa-
tidn Enquiry Commission‘. the Central Government initiat-
ed proposals’ for amendment of the Constitution. The
Central Government also took up examination of the form
and contents of the proposed Central legislation® re-
commended by the Taxation Enquiry Commission. The
question of formulating the principles for determining
when the 591६ of goods takes place—

(i) outside a State;

(ii) in the course of the import of the goods into,
or export of the goods out of, the territory of India:

1. Taxation Enguicy Commission, Report, (19s
paragraph 15) sub-pragraphs-C.

2. The Taxation Enguiry Commission made certain other recommendations:
relating to essential goods and other matters, which are not relevant,

3. Taxation Enquiry Commission, Report, (1053-54). Voi. 3. page 61, pata.
22(5), read with page 56, paragraph 7s-C.

4. Paragraphs 23 to 25, supra.

5. The Constitution (Teath Amendment) Bill, 1956 Gntroduced in the Lok
Sabha on 3rd May, 1956).

6. Paragraphs 21-22, supra.

354), Vol. 3, page 56



13

was referred to the Law Commission by_ the Central
Government in 1956, and the Law Commission guve its
Report on the subject in the same yearl-’.

2%. It may be noted, that so far as foreign trade (sale
constituting import and export_in terms of the country
as a whole) was concerned, the Taxation Enguiry Commis-
sion* regarded the position under the Constiution as in-
terprered छः ne Court (in the ¢ Travan-
core-Cochin ca: satisfactory: it also noted, that hardly
any State had any compiaint akout the particuiar pre-
vision of the Constitution which concerned this 88982.

However, the Taxation Enquiry Commission did suggest
that the Constitution should empower Parliament to de-
termine the principl determining, inter-alia, when
a 59816 takes place ne course of impor! or export.

28. In the meantime, the Supreme Court, in a later Bengal Im-

decisior,’ he'd, that no State could tax a transaction of sale MUNIY case:
of goods which took place in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce. To this extent. it overruled the decision
in the State of Bombey United Motors*, But, then,
this decision led te tem complications. as sales-tax
on inter-State trade had already been realised by various
States, relying on the ion in the State of Bombay v.
United Motors Se far as the temporary complications
were concerned, the matter was resolved by the promul-
gation by the President of an Ordinance’, followed by an
Act of Parliament®. The validity of the Act was upheld
by the Spreme Court’.

29. Because (1) of the difficulty created is regard +o Constitutio-
the interpretation of what were called “inter-State sales” ™ Amend-
and of the applicability of Explanation to Article 286(1) Tye6.°
and. particularly. in view of the decisions of the Supreme हु
Court in State of Bombay y. United Motors Ltd". and in
Bengal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar. (which were

be Taw Commission, (Parliamentary Legislation

1. Second Report of
relating to Sale:

2, See paragraphs 34-36, infra. for details,

3. Report of the Tax:
paragraphs 6 and

. See paragraph 144, infra.

5. Bengal Immunity Co. x. Siste of Bihar, (1955) 2 $.C.R. 663; ALLR. 1955
S.C. 66476 S.T.C. 446.

6, State of Bombay v. United Motors,(1953) S.C.R. 1069; 3.1 1२, 1953 S.C+
25234 S.T.C. 137.

. The Salss-tex Laws Vali tution Ordinance, 1956 (३ of 1956".

ion Act, 1956 (7 of 1956).

Nate of Andhra Pradesh, (1958) S.C.R. 142239

४75 S.C. 468, 479.

10. State of Bombay v. United Motors Ltd., (1953) S.C.R. 10693 ALR. 1953
$.C.2523 4 8-T.C. 133.
«1, Bengal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar, (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603; A.LR. 1955
S.C. 6613 6. S.T.C. 446.

a Enquiry Commission (1953-54). Vol. 3, page 485

न



14

referred to in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of
the Constitution Amendment Bill relating to Article 286)
and what was stated in Ram Narain Sons Ltd., v. Assistant
Commissioner of Sales Tax!, and (2) pursuant to the re-
commendations of the Taxation Enquiry Commission,
amendments were made in both Article 269 and Article
286 by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956,
and an additional Entry 92A—was introduced in the
Union List and Entry 54 in the State List was suitably
amended. In Article 269, sub-clause (8) was added to
clause (1), giving power of taxation of sale or purchase
of goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
By addition of clause (3) of article 269. Parliament was
authorised to formulate principles for determining when
a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce.

In article 286 of the Constitution, the Explanation to
clause (1) was omitted, and new clauses (2) and (3) were
substituted, in place of the two clauses in the old Article
clauses (2) and (3).

30. The relevant articles and entries of the Consti-
tution, both before and after the Amendment, read as
follows :—

ARTICLE 286 OF THE CONSTITUTION BEFORE AND AFTEP

AMENDMENT.
Before 11-9-65 After 11-9-56
286. (1) No law ofa State shall 286. (1) No law of a State shall
Restrictions 3५. Impose, or Restriction 85 Impose, or
to imposition ; 10 imposition +
जब जे the authorise the Of taxon the authorise the
sale or pur- iMposition of, 396 or pur- imposition of
chase of goods. ataxonthe — chase of goods, a taxon the
sale or pur- sale or pur-
chase of goods. chase of
goods.
where such sale or purchase takes where such sale or purchase
place :—~ takes place :—
fa) outside the State 5 or (4) outside the State ;
or
(6) in the course of the (8) in the course of the
import of the goods import of the goods
into, or export of the into, or cxport of
goods out of, the the goods out of,
territory of India. the territory of
India.

Ram Narain Sons Lid.v. Assistant Commissioner, Sales Tax, (1955) 2
D.LLR. 483, 504, ALR. 1955 S.C. १65, 7733 < S.T.C. 627.
2, Explanation to clause (1) was deleted by the Constitution (Sixth
Amendment) Act, 1956.



Explanation :—For the pur-
poses of sub-clause (a), a sale or
purchase shall be deem:-d to have
taken place in the State in which
the goods have actually been deli-
vered as direct result of such sale
or purchase for the purposes of
consumption in that State,
notwithstanding the fact that
under the general law relating to
sale of goods the propre in
the goods has by reason of
such sale or purchase passed
in another State.

(2) Except in so far as Partia-
ment may by law otherwis2 pro-
vide, no law of a State shail im-
956, or oth. i i
of, a tax on the sale or purchase
of any goods where such sale or
purchase takes place in the
course of inter-State trade or
commerce :

Provided that the President
may by order direct that tax
any on the sale or purchase of
goods which was being lawfully
levied by the Government of
any State immediately berore
the commencement of this
Constitution shall notwithstand-
ing that the impo: iticn of such tax
is contrary to the provisions of
this clause, continue to b:
levied until the thirty first day
of March, 1951.

(3) No law made by the
Legislature of a State imposing,
or authorising the imposition of,
a tax on the sale or purchase of
any such have been
declared by Parliament by law to
be essential for the life of the
communtiy shall have effect
unless it has been reserved fer

15

(2) Parliament. may by lac
formulate principles for deter-
mining when a sale or purchase
of goods takes place in any of
the ways mentioned in clause

(1).

(3)? Any law of a State shall,
in so far 38. it imposes,
or authorises the imposition
of, a tax on the sale or
purchase of goods declared
by Parliament by law to be
of special importance in inter-
State trade or commerce, be
subject to stich restrictions

1. Clauses (2) and (3) were substituted by the Constitution (Sixth Amend-

ment) Act, 7956.

2 Clause (3) as substituted by the constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act,
1956. :


16

the President and condittens 1n regard to
the system of lezy, rates
and other incidents of the
tax as Parliament may by
law specify.

the considera’
and has rece: vo

ARTICLE 269 OF THE CONSTYIUTICS BITCFY «th
AMENDMIN1

after 11-9-1956

Byers ges

tothe Hlewing duties

286. *

Taxes levied tax shall be levied Taxes levied taxes shall be
and collected and collected by 2nd sollte’ Yevied and
by the union but Government by the union collected by the
assigned to the eamat put as-igns ‘ollected by the.
Sta I} tothe States. Government of
be assigned to the India but shall
the be assigned to
पड़ States in the
manner provi-
iim clause
»namely :—

de

ka) duties in respect of (a) duties in respect of success+
succession (0 properly ion १७ property other than

other than agricultu- agricultural land ;

sal land 3

(6) esvate duty in respect (6) estate duty in’ respect
prop.rty other of property other then
igriultural a agricultural land ;

the

hand

wl taxes On gocds:

ymin, sods (०) termi

<8 On g

oy phocngers carcied or passengers carricd by
by calway, sea er railway, sca or ai
ar 5

fd) taxes on railway fares (वी takes. ra'ly fans and
and frights 3 freights ;

rthanstamp (6 taxes other than stamp
ities oy eransactionis dhitice ro Wansactions
inst ck exchanges and
future markerts $

the sele or purchase
eWepaper and ला
ments — published

taxes on the sale +
purchase of news!
persard on adverti
ments publi: hed there-
गा.



(2) The met proce
financial year of any
OF TX, ¢ i
proeceds represen
burable te Stat
Part C of th.
shall pot form part
Consolidated Fund छ
but shall be assigned
States within whi: i
or tax is fable
and shail be distributed among
those States in accordance with
such principles of distribucion
as may be formulated by Parlia-
ment by law,

of
India,

VW

(80 taxes on the sale ur purchase
of goods other than ace
papers, where such sale or
purchase takes phic in the
course of Shite Wade

YOO tax.
fer as tho ८ pr
sent preceed:
Mo lerriteites

tof the ©

dance pi

of distribution ax may
formulated by Parkament
by law.

(3) Parliament’ may by law
formulate principles for deter=
mining when a sale or pur-
chase of goods takes place
in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce,

ENTRY 54, STATE LIST BEFORF AND AFTER 1956 AMENDMENJ

Before 1956

54. Taxes on the vale or
purchase of goods other than
Tewspapers.

ENTRY 92-

Before 19९6

92-A.

olfter 1956

Poxes on the sale or pur
ase of {other than
5 107... subject te the

provisions

of Lise 7

ot

» UNION LIST INSERTED BY THE 1986 AMENDMENT

After 1966
New) Taxes on sols or pure
chose of goods ether than news-
papers, where such sale ov pur-
chase takes place in the course
of — inter-State trade or
commerce,



i8

Pre-amend- 31. Article 286, as it stood before the amendment, was
ment-article giscussed in four leading judgments of the Supreme Court;
ae inter two dealing with inter-State trade or commerce, and two
हु with import-export sales and purchases. In the former
category, are the State of Bombay v. United Motors and
Bengal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar®, and in the later
category are the State of Travancore v. Bombay Co., Ltd.,*
(First Travancore case), and the State of Travancore v.
Shanmugha Vilasa Cashewnut Factory! (Second Travan-
core case), These judgments will be discussed a little
later,
Pre-1956 There were alo two other judgments dealing with inter-
cases-Inter- State trade in Ram Narain Sons Ltd., v. Assistant Commis-
State trade. sioner of Sales-Tax® and Mohan Lal Hargovind v. State
of Madhya Pradesh®. But, for the purpose of our discus-
sion, it will not be necesary to deal with them at any great
length. They were both decided after the Bengal Imimu-
nity Co., Case’, and followed it.

1956 33. As stated above®, after these decisions, the constitu-
Amend. tional provisions relating to sales tax were amended in 1956
. by the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution. By that

Amendment, additions and substitutions were made in
articles 269 and 286 and in entries in the Union and State
Lists relating to taxes on the sale or purchase cf goods.

These have already been quoted’.
Previous 34. The Law Commission, on March 23, 1956, was
vou invited” to offer its suggestion as for formulating princip-

ref a
the Law les for determining when a sale of goods takes place’ —

Commission. (i) outside a State;
(ii) in the course of the import of the goods into,
or export of the goods out of, the territory of India;

(iii) in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.

1. 32० of Bombay ९ United Motors 0953) 3.21. 10693 ALR. 1983 S.C
25§234S.T.C. 133.
2. Bengal Immunity Co, v. State of Bihar, (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603; ALR. 195
S.C. 66135 S.T.C. 446. ae 3 °
ऊ State of Travancore:v, Bombay Go. Ltd., (1952) S.C.R. 1112, 1118, 11203
A.LR. 1952 S.C. 3663 3 ere, 434.
4. State of Travancore v. Shanmugha Vilasa Cashewnut Factory, (1954) $.C.R.
53: ALR. 1953 S.C. 3333 4 S.T.C. 205.
5. Ram Narain Sons Ltd. v. Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax. (1955)
S.C.R. 433,504; A.LR. 1955 S.C. 765, 773; 6 S.T.C. 627.
6. Mohan Lal Hargoivind v. State i of Madhya Pradesh, (1955) 2 $.C.R.
509; ALR. 1955 S.C. 787, 788; 6 S.T.C. 687.
7. Bengal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar, (1955), 2 S.C.R. 603; A.LR. 1955
S.C. 66; 6 S.T.C. 446. 5) 3 9
8. Paragraph 29, supra,
9. See the text of articles 286 etc. quoted in paragraph 30, supra.
10, See the letter of the Chairman of the Law Commission forwarding the
Second Report.
in. See paragraph 26, supra.



Ww

35. ‘Ine Law Commission gave its Report on the sub-
ject, after taking into consideration—

(i) the two Travancore-Cochin cases above men-
tioned, in which article 286(1) (b) was discussed and
interpreted; }

(ii) The Report of the Taxation Enquiry Commis-
sion, in which it was stated that the position arising
from the interpretation put by the Supreme Court on
article 286 (1) (b) was “preferctly sasisfactory so far
as foreign trade is concerned”; and

(iii) the views of the Ministry of Finance which
had mentioned that all the States had accepted the in-
terpretation of the Supreme Court and no difficulties
were reported to have arisen as a result of the judg-
ment of that Court.

‘The Law Commission, further, referred to and took in-
cto account the dissenting judgment of Mr. Justice S. R.
‘Das, as the then was, in the Second Travancore Cochin
case*, The view of the Ministry of Commerce and Indus-
try in regard to the last purchase preceding the export was
also taken into consideration.

36. After a careful review of all these different mat-
ters", the Law Commission recommended as follows‘: —

“Under this head, we therefore, recommend the
acceptance of the principles laid down by the Supreme
Court. We would express them in the following
manner: --

A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed
to take place in the course of export of the goods
out of the territory of India, only if the sale or
purchase either occasions such export or is effect-
ed by a transfer of documents of title to the goods
after the goods have have crossed the customs
frontiers of India. A sale or purchase of goods
shall be deemed to take place in the course of
import of the goods into the territory of India,
only if the sale or purchase either occasions such
import or is effected by transfer of documents of
title to the goods before the goods have crossed
the customs frontiers of India.”

व. Second Report of the Law Commission (Parliamentary Legislati
relating to Sales Tax) (July, 1956). as ४

2. State of Travancore v. Shanumugh Vilasa Gashewnut Factor 1
$.0.8 533 A-LR 1953 S.C. 333. (Second Trreancoce casey’? 9°

3. Second Report of the Law Commission, pages 2 and 3, para. 5 to 10.
-4. Second Report of the Law Commissiog, page 3, gara. 10.


20

The Law Commission, in its Report also dealt with
inter-State sales, but, for the present purpose, we need.
not refer to its recommendations on that topic.

Sentral 37. While the matter was under consideration of the

Act, 1956. Law Commission, the amendment to the Constitution had
already been passed. After the submission of the Report
of the Law Commission, the Central Sales-tax Bill, 1956:
was introduced, and duly enacted).

Two provisions in the Act of 1956 are relevant; section
3, which deals with sales or purchase in the course of inter-
State trade and commerce, and section 5, which deals with
sales or purchases taking place in the course of import or
export. These two provisions incorporate the recommen-
dations of the Law Commission?, and are as follows: —

“Section 3. A sale or purchase of gocds shall be
deemed to take place in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce only if the sale or purchase—

(8) occasions the movement of goods from
one State to another; or

(b) is effected by a transfer of documents of
title to the goods during their movement from
one State to another.

Explanation 1.......

Explanation 2... . .. . .. ७...

“5, Section 5. (1) A sale or purchase of goods
shall be deemed to take place in the course of the
export of the goods out of the territory of India only
if the sale or purchase either occasions such export or
is effected by a transfer of the title to the goods after
the goods have crossed the customs frontier of India.

(2) A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed
to take place in the course of the import of the goods
into the territory of India only if the sale or purchase
either occasions such import or is effected by a trans~
fer of documents of title to the goods before the goods
have crossed the customs frontiers of India.”

cee Per 38. This finishes the survey of the constitutional and:
1956. legislative developments on the subject. The developments

after 1956 are mainly in the judicial field, and will be con-
sidered in detail at the appropriate place®

1. The Central Sales-tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956).
2. Paragraph 36, supra.
3. See paragraphs 51 (0 120, infra.


2

39. Before dealing with the question referred to us!, it Pattern of:
would be advantageous to deal with the pattern of import Te, De
trade. Import of most of the commodities is at present con-
trolled. Import policy for items licensable to actual users,
and for items licensable to “established importers”, and
list of items of which the import is canalised through an
agency approved by Government, as well as list of items
not licensable to both actual users and established impor-
ters, can be gathered from what is known as “The Red
Book”,

40. The quantum of Government imports has increased
after independence; Government imports seem to comprise
Defence imports, foodgrains, railway stores, capital goods
and heavy electrical plants for public undertakings, and
other departmental imports’.

41. The Government departments usually send their
indents for imports to the Director General of Supplies and
Disposals of the Ministry of Industry and Supplies, and
that Ministry places the orders with the India Stores
Department, London, or with the India Supply Mission,
Washington. But, sometimes a Ministry of the Government
Places the order directly with the India Stores Depart-
ment, London or with the India Supply Mission‘, Wash-
ington.

42. The question of “established importers"? was con-
sidered by the Import and Export Policy Committee®,
which noted that with the severe import restrictions that
had come about, the established importers had already
ceased to enjoy a commanding position in the licensing
system. The Committee, however, favoured the retention
of the status-quo, because the small actual users had
necessarily to secure their import requirements from the
established importers’.

The figures of established importers ete. were given in
an Appendix to the Report of that Committee’,

1. Paragraphs 4-5, supra.

2. Government of India, Ministry of Commerce, Import Trade Control
Policy (The Red Book), for the year April, 1966 t 7+ Page
10, 96: 142 90 1100 | ye Pril, 1966 to March, 1967. pages

3. Bepin Behari, Imports in a Developing Economy (1965), page 39.
4. Bepin Behari, Imports in a Developing Economy (1965), page 39.
5. Paragraph 39, supra.

6. The Import and Export Policy Committee (Government of Indi:
Ministry of Commerce), Report (1962), page 19, para. 70.0”

7. The Import and Export Policy Committee (Government of Indi
Ministry of Commerce), Report (1962), page 19, para. 70. 0

8. The Import and Export Policy Committee, (Government of India,
Ministry of Commerce), Report (1962), page 109, Appendix H.



22

43. For the present purpose, it is not necessary to dis-
cuss the various kinds of clausest employed in contracts
of sale, such as, Ex works or Ex warehouse or Ex_ store,
for or f.ot., or f.0.b., or cif, fas. ete. Nor does it appear
to be necessary to discuss when the property passes in the
case of the various categories of import sales”.

44, Established importers are persons or firms actually
engaged in the import trade of the articles at least for one
financial year any time during the basic period specified
for the article listed in the Import Trade Central Schedule’.

45. Then there are industrial undertakings which
require raw materials, etc., for their own use. These are
“actual users”. These have to be registered or licensed
under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act,
1951".

It is unnecessary to consider in detail the procedure
which private importers have to comply with (regarding
license, release of foreign exchange and other formalities)
It is sufficient to say, that established importers have a
specific place in the import structure, and even if their
role may in the course of time become insignificant (as is
sometimes stated)®, the problem with which we have to
deal in this Report will for some time remain. Govern-
mental agencies (like the State Trading Corporation),
which import goods may also be faced with the same
situation (taxation of sales).

47. What are known as the “intermediaries” are of two
types—indent houses and managing agents. The work of
indent houses has been thus described’.

“Indent Houses: Indent houses operate both in the
export and import trade and it is an important form
of business in India. Under this system, the indentee,
enters into an arrangement for delivering certain
specified goods to the importer, foreign or Indian, at
a specified price. One special feature of indent is that
the indenting house, on accepting the order, has gen-
erally to purchase the goods at a favourable price so
that it may be able to make a reasonable pro! ff. Until
the indentee is able to secure the goods at the stated
price, he incurs no definite obligation for supplying

1, These will be found discussed in Schimitthoff, The Export Trade
(1962), pages 7 to 37.

3. The matter is discussed in Schimitthoff, The Export Trade, (1962),
pages 66 to 68.

3. See Bepin Behari, Imports in a Developing Economy, (7965), page 39.

4. See Bepin Behari, Imports in a Developing Economy, (1965), page 40.

5. Dr. SK, Verghese, India’s Foreign Trade (Allied Publishers) (1964),
page 48.

6. Dr. S.K. Verghese, India’s Foreign Trade (Allied Publishers) (1964
pages 102-103.


23

“the goods to the importer. 16 it is difficult to obtain
the goods at the stated price, all that the indentee has
to do is to notify the importer asking him to withdraw
the order or raise the prices.

“The main advantage of conducting business on the
basis of an indent is that the exporter is sure of a
buyer on certain conditions. The indentor, on the
other hand, can cancel the order only after bearing
from the indentee that he is unable to execute the
order. For all practical purposes the indentee con-
ducts trade on his own account and not for a commis-
sion. There are special forms which the indentee fills
up and the indentor signs. Apart from definite terms
regarding the price and details of the goods, the indent
form also stipulates conditions regarding shipment,
delivery etc.

“Indent houses play a very important role in
India’s foreign trade. As, many of the indenting firms
have wide foreign contracts, they constitute an in-
tegral link between the Indian and foreign traders.
The indent houses in India spare the shippers the
trouble of contracting a large number of importers.
Moreover they enable Indian importers to obtain their
requirements without elaborate foreign representa-
tions. Indent houses also assist in opening new markets
for Indian goods.

“The bulk of indent business is in the hands of
foreign firms, mainly British. Due to the acute com-
petition among the various indenting firms, indent
orders are accepted at very low rates and many of the
indenting firms are working on very small margins.
The policy of issuing import licences in favour of
actual users has increased the importance of indent
houses in our external trade. As many of the actual
users have neither the experience nor the necessary
foreign contracts to make their purchases from
foreign markets, they increasingly rely on indent
houses, which have wide foreign contracts and long
experience, to obtain their requirements. Under the
import control regulations, actual users are permitted
to buy through indent houses.”

48. We shall now deal with the existing laws relating to
sales-tax!. These laws fall under two categories. The
power to levy a tax on the sale or purchase of goods (other
than newspapers), is vested in the States; but, from this
‘power, are excluded sales and purchase which take place

1. Some of the points made in the paragraphs relating to State Sales-tax have
been suggested by the Report of the mittee on Sales Tax (on
commodities exported from India 1964), Government of India,
Ministry of Commerce, pages 110 and 111, Chapter 3, paragraphs
1 to 4.

31 MofLaw—-3

Two sets of
Sales-tax
laws,


Brief Review
of system of
Sales-tax.

Decision on
Amended

Article 286
and on the
Act of 1956,

Object of
Constitutio-
nal provi-
Sion-protec-
tion of for-
sign trade.

4

in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. Sales or
purchases in the course of inter-State trade are within the
field of the Union. Therefore, there are two kinds of taxes
on the sale or purchase of goods, namely, the State sales-
tax, levied under the sales-tax law of the particular State,
and the Central sales-tax, imposed under the Central Sales
Tax Act, 1956, in respect of sales in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce.

49. Therefore, where an importer imports the goods,
the sale by the foreign vendor to him is not liable to be
taxed. but where he sells the goods to another, then that
sale by him, unless it is regarded as falling under article
286 (1) (b) of the Constitution read with section 5 of the
Central Sales-tax Act, is subject to sales-tax—the State
sales tax or tHe Central sales-tax as the case may be, ie.
depending on whether the sale by the importer is or is not
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. (This is
the general position, unless a specific exemption is granted
under the State or'Central Act).

50. We give, in an Appendix, a brief review of the
system of sales-tax in India’,

51. The amended article 286 and the Central Sales Tax
Act, 1956, have been discussed and interpreted by the
Supreme Court in some decisions, which we shall discuss
presently. Of these, the most important ones are Tate
Iron & Steel Co. v. S. R. Sarkar?: Cement Marketing Co.
of India v. State of Mysore’. State Trading Corporation of
India v. State of Mysore: Singareni Collieries Co, v.
Commissioner of Commercial Tares, Hyderabad,

There are some other decisions also, which also will be
briefly discussed later,

Before we proceed to discuss the cuses, we would like to
deal in brief with the object of the constitutional provi-
sions.

52. The Constitution of India, py means of the various
devices in the legislative, economic and executive fields,
has endeavoured to preserve the unity of India. It has also
demarcated the legislative and taxing powers of the Union
and the States, and has canalised these powers in well
defined channels. One of these provisions deals with the

1. See Appendix 2.

2. Tata Iron & Steel Co. ९.
S.C. 65, 913 72; 11 a

3. Cement Marketing Co. of India ¥. State of Mysore, (1963) 3 5. CR. 7775
ALLR. 1963 S.C. 9803 14 S.TIG. 175,

4 State Trading Corporation of India v, State of Mysore, (1963) 3 S.CR.
7923 ALR, 1963 S.C, 548; 14 S.T\C. 1883 (1963) 2 3.6]. 137:

5. Singareni Collieries Co, v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Hyderabad,
ALR. 1966 8.C. $63; 17 S.T.C. 197.

S. R. Sarkar, (1961) 1 S.C.R, 3793 ALR. 19617
. 655.

A


325

power of the States to impose sales tax, and another—
‘Article 286—lays down the various bans on these powers
so as to prevent the States from trespassing on the ‘ederal
field of international trade.

53. In the State of Travancore-Cochin v. The Bombay
Co, Ltd.,' the Chief Justice, after referring to Boddu Pai-
danna & Sons case, said: —

“Lest similar reasoning should lead to the imposi-
tion of such cumulative burden on the export-import
trade of this country which is of great importance to
the nation’s economy, the Constituent Assembly may
well have thought it necessary to exempt in terms
sales by export and purchases by import from sales.
tax by inserting article 286 (1) (b) 9 the Constitu-
tion.”

54, In the Second Travancore-Cochin case’, the Chief
Justice pointed out*—

“The foreign trade of this country thus already
enjoys immunity from double tax burden and suffers
only one tax, namely, the export or import duty as
the case may be.”.

Mr. Justice Das, as he then was, said’ that the purpose
of the Constitutional provision was to foster foreign trade
and to preserve Union revenues. The Constitution had
imposed a ban on the State Legislature preventing it from
impinging upon the Union field of foreign trade and from
imposing a tax on sales or purchases made in the source
of import or export. Again, he said‘—

“The object of our Constitution apparent from the
distribution of legislative powers and from article
286, is to place our inter-State trade and our foreign
trade beyond the taxing power of the State.”.

55. Again, in the Bengal Immunity case’, Acting Chief
Justice Das, as he then was, pointed out that the dominant
if not the sole purpose of article 286 was to place restric-
tions on the legislative powers of the States, and, with that
end in view, article 286 imposed several bans on the taxing
powers of the States.

1. State of Travancore-Cochin v. The Bombay Co. Lid., (1952) §.C.R. 11125
ALR. 1952 S.C. 366; 3 STC. 434. 952) >

2. Province of Madras v. Bodiu Paidanna Sons. (1942) F.CR. 99 ALR.
1942 F.C. 33.

4: The State of Tranancore- Cochin @ Others v. Shanmugha Vilasa Cashew Nut
“actory an thers. .C.R. 3 ALR. non F
8167,2/ ers. (1954) 533 ALR. 1953 S. 33354

4 (1954) S.C.R. 53, 54-

5 (1984) S.CR. 53, 91.

6. (1954) S.C.R. 53, 105.

7. Bengal Immunity Go. v, State of Bihar. (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603, 6483 AIR.
1955 S.C. 661; 6.8.T.C. 446. 958) 3 64



Cates deci-
ded before
1956,

‘Travancore
cabes-First
Pravaticore
cate,

26
56. The Supreme Court has considered the extent of the
ban under Article 286 in several cases. We shall first dis-
euss the cases decided before the Amendment of 1956.
Of these. the two earlier ones. deai with import and export
sales, and interpret the phrase sales “in the course of”
import and export.

57. The two cases are the State of Travancore-Cochin v.
The Bombay Co. Ltd.t and the State of Travancore-
Cochin v. Shanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory*.

In the former’, the dealings consisted of export sales
of various commodities to foreign buyers on cif. or f.0.b.
terms. The sales-tax authorities levied tax on those sale,
but, on a petition to the High Court under article 226, the
assessment was quashed, and the High Court gave a very
wide meaning to the expression “in the course of”. On
appeal to the Supreme Court, it was held, that whatever
else may or may not fall within article 286 (1) (b) of the
Constitution, sales and purchases which themselves
occasion the export or the import of the goods, as the
case may be, come within the exemption of article 286 (1)
(0). In his judgment, Patanjali C.J. thus defined the ban:

“A sale by export thus involves a series of integ-
rated activities commencing from the agreement of
sale with a foreign buyer and ending with the delivery
ot the goods to a common carrier for transport out of
the country by land or sea. Such a sale cannot be dis-
sociated from the export without which it cannot be
effectuated, and the sale and resultant export form
parts of a single transaction. Of these two integrated
activities which together constitute an export sale,
whichever first occurs can well be regarded as taking
place in the course of the other. Assuming without
deciding that the property in the goods in the present
cases passed to the foreign buyer and the sales were
thus completed within the State before the goods com-
menced their journey as found by the Sales Tax
Authorities, the sales must nevertheless be regarded
as having taken place in the course of the export and
are, therefore, exempt under article 286(1) (७). That
clause, indeed, assumes that the sale had taken place
within the limits of the State and exempts it if it took
Place | in the course of the export of th e@ goods con-
cerned.”.

58. Dealing with the argument that on the above cons-
truction sale “in the course of export” will become
aynonymous with “export” and would make clause (b)
redundant because of article 246(1) read with Entry 3 of

व (1952) S.G.R. 1112.
2. (1954) SCR. 53.
3. (1952) S.C.R. 1112.
4 (1952) S.C.R, 1112, 1118.



27

List I which relates to duties of customs including export
duties, the Chief Justice observed, that in the absence of a
provision like clause (9) prohibiting in terms a levy of
tax on the sale or purchase of goods effected through the
machinery of export and import, both the powers of tax-
ation, though exclusively vested in the Union and the
States, could be exercised in respect of the same sale by
export or purchase by import, the sales tax and the export
duty being regarded as essentially of a different character.

“A similar argument induced the Federal Court
to hold in Province of Madras v. Boddu Paidanna and
Sons,’ that both central excise duty and provincial
sales tax could be validly imposed on the first sale of
groundnut oil and cake by the manufacturer or pro-
ducer as “the two taxes are economically two separate
and distinct imposts”. Lest similar reasoning should
lead to the imposition of such cumulative burden on
the export-import trade of this country which is of
great importance to the nation’s economy, the Cons-
tituent Assembly may well have thought it necessary
to exempt in terms of sales by export and purchases
by import from sales tax by inserting article 286 (1)
(9) in the Constitution.”.

59. The Court? dealt with the argument that no sale or
purchase can be “in the course of” unless the property in
the goods is transferred to the buyer during the actual
movement, e.g., when the shipping documents are
endorsed and delivered within the State by the seller to a
local agent of the foreign buyer after the goods have been
shipped or where such documents are cleared by the
Indian buyer before the arrival of the goods. This view,
it was said, laid undue stress on the etymology of the word
“course”, and formulated a mechanical test, and would
thereby rob the exemption of much of its usefulness. The
sales and purchases which themselves occasion the export
or import of the goods, as the case may be, out of or into
the territory of India, come within the exemption.

60. To summarise, the first Travancore case decided

(a) Sales or purchases which themselves occasion
the export or the import are within the clause “in the
Bet and are, therefore, exempt under article

(b) (i) Sale by export involves a series of integ-
rated _activities commencing from the contract of
sale with a foreign buyer and ending with the delivery
of goods to a common carrier. हु

1. Provine of Madras v. Boddu Paidanna 7 41 ;
we Be Be 3, and Sons. (1942) 4 F.C.R. 90;

2. (1952) S.C.R. 1112, 1129.



28

(ii) Sale and resultant export form part of a single
transaction.

(iti) Of these two activities, whichever happens
first can be regarded as happening in the course of the
other.

(c) Even if the sale is in the State before the com-
mencement of the journey, the sale is, nevertheless, in
the course of export.

(d) It is erroneous to say that sales “in the course
of” mean sales in which property passes during the
actual movement, because, to put it that way would
rob the exemption of its usefulness, i.e. exemption from
a State levy.

Second Tra. 61. In the Second Travancore case? the respondents

vancore case, were dealers in cashewnuts in the State of Travancore-
Cochin. Their business consisted in importing cashewnuts
from abroad and the neighbouring State of Madras in
addition to purchases made in the Jocal market, and, after
processing them, exporting the kernels to other countries,
mainly America. The oil pressed from the shells was
also exported. The respondents claimed exemption under
article 286 (1) (b) in respect of the purchases made after
the coming into operation of the Constitution. This claim
was rejected by the taxing authorities, put the High Court,
in a petition under article 226, quashed the imposition of
the tax. The State appealed to the Supreme Court. The
Supreme Court held by a majority—(the minority gave a
wider interpretation) —that— :

(1) The sales and purchases which themselves
occasion the export or import of the goods out of or
into the territory of India, fali within article 286 (1)
(9) and are exempt from State taxation.

(2) But purchases in the State by the exporter for
the purpose of export, as well as sales by the importer
after the goods have crossed the customs barrier, are
not within the exemption,

(3) Sales in the State by the exporter or importer
by transfer of shipping documents while the goods
are beyond the customs barrier, are within the exemp-

jon.

(4) The word “course” and the expression “in the
course of” not only imply a period of time during
which the movement is in progress, but postulate also
a “connected relation”.

(5) Therefore, the sale in the course of export out
of the country should be understood as meaning a sale
taking place not only during the activities directed to

“यू का State of Travancore-Gochin v. Shanmugha Vilas Cashewnut Factory,
(1954) S.C.R. 533 ALR. 1953 S.C. 333- ener


29

the end of exportation of the goods out of the country,
but also as part of or connected with such activities.

(6) Mr. Justice S. R. Das (as he then was) in
minority judgment included the last purchase by the
exporter and the first sale by the importer to be with-
in the exception.

62. The Chief Justice said‘, that a sale “in the course
of export” means a sale taking place not only during
the activities directed to the end of exportation of the
goods out of the country but also as part of or connect-
‘ed with such activities. The time factor alone was not
determinative.

The phrase “integrated activities”, used in the
previous Travancore 245९१, denoted such a sale, ie.
a sale which occasions the export which cannot be dis-
sociated from the export without which it cannot be
effectuated and wherein the sale and the resultant
export form parts of a single transaction, It is in that
sense that the two activities—the sale and the export—
were said to be integrated. A purchase for the purpose
of export like production or manufacture for export is
only an act preparatory to export and cannot be regard-
ed as an act done in the course of the export of the
goods out of the territory of India.

63. Reference was next made to Export Trade by
Schmittoff, 2nd Edn., page 3, where the author said:

- “From the legal point of view it is essential to dis-
tinguish the contract of sale which has as its object
the exportation of goods from this country from other
contracts of sale relating to the same goods, but not-
being the direct and immediate cause for the ship-
ment of the goods.... When a merchant shipper in the
United Kingdom buys for the purpose of export goods
from a manufacturer in the same country
the contract of sale is a home transaction: but when
he resells these goods to a buyer abroad tha: con-
tract of sale has to be classified as an export transac-
tion.

64. Mr. Justice S. R. Das (as he then was) said that
the constitutional purpose of the provision was २० foster
foreign trade and to preserve Union revenue. The Cons-
titution had imposed a ban on State Legislatures pre-
venting them from impinging upon the Union field of
foreign trade and from imposing a tax on sales ot pure-
hases made in the course of import,—or, export. Accord-
ing to him. the phrase “in the course of” means sales

1. (1954) S.C.R. 54, 62.
2. (1952) S.C.R. 1112.
3. (1954) S.C.R. 53, 91.



Combined
result of the
‘Travancore
cases,

30

which themseives occasion the export and import. He ex-
plained the previous judgment of 1952 (The first Travan-
core case) by saying, that by adopting the principle of
integrated activity the Court had included an agreement.
for sale to or purchase from the foreign merchant as tak-
ing place within the period connoted by that phrase. The
agreement for sale or purchase which occasions the export.
or import is obviously in point of time anterior to the
actua! and physical handing over of the goods to the car-
rier. Nevertheless, such a sale or purchase has been held
to have iaken place “in the course of export” or import,
and therefore exempted from sales-tax. The only point
on which Mr. Justice S. R. Das differed with the majority
was ihat he included the last purchase as an integrated
activity of the export sale and the first sale after the im-
Port as an integrated activity of the import sale. He
pointed out the economie consequences of double taxation,
1.6., of the imposition of sales tax on the export and im-
port sales as eventually hampering foreign trade . The
objeciive of the Constitution was to place inter-State
trade and foreign trade beyond the taxing powers of the
State. Under the article as it then stood, in the case of
inter-State trade power was given to Parliament to lift
the ban, but in the case of foreign trade no such power
Was given.

65. These two judgments, both dealing with export-im-
port, declared the law to be this—

(1)(a) The Constitution had imposed a ban on
the levying of sales-tax on inter-State and import-
export sales, and had made either exempt from 5६1९5
tax by enacting article 286(1).

(b) The ban in the former case could, under the
unamended Article, be lifted by Parliament, but not
in the latter case.

(2) “In the course of’ means sales or purchases
which themselves occasion the export or import.

(3) In the first Travancore case, the Court, by
adopting the principle of integrated activity, had in-
cluded agreement of sale or purchase as being within
the period connoted by the phrase “in the course of”.
even though the agreement of sale is anterior to the
actual handing over to the carrier.

1. (1954) S.C.R. 53, 96.
2. Page 105 in the S.C.R.
3. Paragraphs 57 to 64, supra.


2

(4) Where the sale and resultant export form
varts of a single transaction, such a sale is exempt, as
it has been held to have taken place in the course of
export.

(5) Mr. Justice S. R. Das. in his minority judg-
ment, included the last purchase preceding the ex-
port and the first sale after the import as falling with-
in the phrase “in the course of”. These, according
to the majority view, were without the exemption.

66. The two cases relating to inter-State sales snd the Pre-1956
ban under Article 286 are the State of Bombay vs. The Unit- cases Tegard--
ed Motors (India) Ltd. and others and the Bengal Immu- See oer
nity Co, Ltd. v. The State of Bihar?. In the State of @) United
Bombay v. The United Motors (India) Ltd. and others’, Motors case,.
the constitutionality of the provisions of the Bombay (ii) Bengal
Sales Tax Act of 1952 was under challenge. The Expla- Immunity
nation to clause (1) of article 286 was interpreted, and the Giiy Ram
difficulties arising from its interpretation are discernible Narain case,
from the three opinions given in the majority and minority
judgments in that case. This difficulty of interpretation
was reinforced by the opinion of Venkatarama Ayyar J.
in the Bengal Immunity Co. case. It is also shown by the
judgment in Ram Narain Sons Ltd. v. Assistant Commis-
sioner of Sales Tax’, which was decided after the Bengal
Immunity case’.

67. In the Bengal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar/ Bengal Im--
S. R. Das acting C.J. (as he then was) pointed out the var- munity case
ious bans which the Constitution makers had put in the
Constitution, in regard to different ts of sales or pur-

chases of goods and the various checks on the legislative

powers of the State at “different angles”, In article

286(1)(b), they had considered sales and purchases from

the point of view of foreign trade, and placed a ban on

the States’ taxing poner in order to make such trade free

from interference by the States by imposing sales tax.

1. The State of Bombay v. The United Motors (India). Lid. others, (1953).
S.C.R.'10693 ALR. (1953 S.C. 252; 4 S.T.C. 133.

2. The Bengal Immunity Co, Ltd.v, The State of Bihar, (1955) 3 S.C.R
6933 #.7.1. 1955 S.C. 666; S.T.C. 446.

3. The State Bombay ९. The United Motor (UIndia Lid., Others, (1953)
S.C.R. 1069; A.LR. 1953 S.C. 252; 4 S.T.C. 133.

4. The Bengal Immunty Co. Lid. v. The State of Bihar, (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603»
7903 A.LR. 1955 S.C. 661; 6 S.T.C. 446.

5. Ram Narain Sons Lid. v. Assistant Commissioner of Sales ; Tax, (1955) 2
S.C.R. 483, 504; ALR. 1955 S.C. 765, 773; 6 S.T.C. 627.

6. The Bengal Immunity Co. Lid. v, State of Bihar, (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603
790 ALR. 1955 S.C. 661; 6 S.T.C, 446.


‘Bengal Im-
smunity case,

32

68. After referring to the two Travancore cases, the
Chief Justice said\—

“It should further be remembered that the domi-
nant, if not the sole, purpose of article 286 is to place
restriction on the legislative powers of the States
subject to certain conditions in some cases and with
that end in view article 286 imposes several bans on
the taxing power of the States in relation to sales
or purchases viewed from different aspects. In some
eases the ban is absolute as, for example, with regard
to outside sales covered by clause (1)(a) read with the
Explanation, or with regard to imports and exports
covered by clause (1) (b).”

69. In the Bengal Immunity Company’ case, the Com-
pany was registered as a dealer under Bengal Finance
(Sales Tax) Act. Its products were sold throughout India
and abroad, and were despatched from Calcutta against
orders accepted by the Company in Calcutta. The Company
had no agent or manager in Bihar nor any office or labora-
tory in that State. Notice was issued to the Company under
the Bihar Sales Tax Act, calling upon it to apply for regis-
tration and to submit returns showing its turnover over &
particular period. The Company denied its liability on the
ground, inter alia, that it was a non-resident and ‘that, it
did not carry on any business in Bihar, and that the notice
was ultra vires as the notice was hit by the prohibition
against taxation of inter-State trade or commerce. The
Supreme Court, by a majority, held, that the sales or pur-
chases made by the Company which were sought to be
taxed, aptly took place in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce, and as there was no Parliamentary enactment
providing otherwise, the State Jaw could not tax these sales
or purchases. The Acting Chief Justice observed: —

“The truth is that what is an inter-State sale or
purchase continues to be so irrespective of the State
where the sale is to be located either under the general
law when it is finally determined what the general
law is or by the fiction created by the Explanation. The
situs of a sale or purchase is wholly irrelevant as re-
gards its inter-State character.”

“We find no cogent reason in support of the argu-
ment that a fiction created for certain definitely ex-
pressed purposes, namely, the purposes of clause (1) (a),
can legitimately be used for the entirely foreign and
collateral purpose of destroying the inter-State charac-
ter of the transaction and converting it into an inter-
State sale or purchase. Such metamorphosis appears

1. Bongal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar, (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603, 646; AA.
1955 S.C, 661; 6 S.T.C, ue "० 0955) 6082 6465 ALR.

2, Bengal Immunity Co. v. State of Bihar, (1955) 2 8.C.R. 603, 650; AT.
1955 S.C. 661; 6 S.T.C. an + (1955) 603, 6505 ATR


33

“to us to be beyond the purpose and purview of
clause (1) (a) and the Explanation thereto. When we
apply a fiction all we do is to assume that the situation
created by the fiction is true. Therefore, the same con-
Sequences must flow from the fiction as would have
flown had the facts supposed to be true been the actual
facts from the start. Now, even when the situs of a
sale or purchase is in fact inside a State, with no essen-
tial ingredient taking place outside, nevertheless, if it
takes place in the course of inter-State trade or com-
merce, it will be hit by clause (2). If the sales or pur-
chases are in the course of inter-State trade or com-
merce the stream of inter-State trade or commerce wili
catch up in its vortex all such sales or purchases
which take place in its course wherever the situs of
the sales or purchases may be. All that the Explana-
tion does is to shift the situs from the point A in the
stream to point X also in the stream. It does not lift
the sales or purchases out of the stream in those cases
where they form part of the stream. The shifting of the
situs of a sale or purchase from its actual situs under
the general law to a fictional situs under the Explana-
tion takes the sale or purchase out of the taxing power
of all States other than the State where the situs is
fictionally fixed.”

70. The majority also held that fetters had been placed

on the power of the States to make levy by way of sal fes tax
over—

(a) sales and purchases outside the State;

(b) sales and purchases in the course of import or
export;

(९) except in so far as Parliament may otherwise
provide, sales and purchases in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce; and lastly

(d) essential goods.

71, Venkatarama Ayyar J., in his minority judgment, in

interpreting the words “in the course of inter-State trade”,
said: 12

“A sale could be said to be in the course of inter-
State trade only if two conditions concur: (1) A sale
of goods, and (2) a transport of those goods from one
State to another under the contract of sale. Unless both
these conditions are satisfied, there can be no sale in
the course of inter-State trade.”.

x. The Bengal Immunity Co. v. The State of Bihar, (1955) 2 $.C.R. 603,

2. The decisio in Bndupuri Narasimham v. State of Orissa, (1962) 7 S.C.R,

3u ‘a 319, expressly adopts this apprach ; A.LR. 1961 S.C, 13443 12,
S.T.C. 292.


84

Cases decid- 72. We shall now consider decisions of the Supreme

Soothe “ Court after the constitutional amendment of 1956.
ster the We shall take up the important cases first!, (being cases-

Amendment relied upon in Khosta’s case) and next deal with other
of 1956, cases?

Tata Tron 73. Of the cases decided by the Supreme Court after the

Company’ S amendment of Article 286 which deal with inter-State sales,

ase, the most important is Tata Iron & Steel Co. vs. S. के,
Sarkar’, on which the decision of the Supreme Court in
K. G. Khosla’s case is primarily founded. In the Tata Iron
case, the facts were, that the company had its registered
office in Bombay and a Head Sales Office at Calcutta and
its factory in Jamshedpur in the State of Bihar.

It was registered as a dealer under the Bihar Sales Tax
Act, and also as a dealer in the State of West Bengal. For
the period of assessment, the company submitted its return
of taxable sales to the Commercial Tax Officer at Calcutta,
disclosing its gross taxable turnover in respect of sales lia-
ble to Central sales tax in the State of West Bengal. The
company was directed by the Commercial Tax Officer, Cal-
cutta to submit a statement of sales from Jamshedpur for
the period under assessment, documents relating to which
were transferred in West Bengal and for any other sales
which might have taken place in West Bengal under sec-.
tion 3(b) of the Central Sales Tax Act. The company
denied its liability and the jurisdiction of the Calcutta Sales.
Tax Officer. Its contention was, that all sales from Jam-
shedpur were of the type mentioned in section 3 (a) of the
Central Sales Tax Act, and some of them fell under the
category in section 3(b) of the Act. The Commercial Tax
Officer, under these circumstances, made a “best judgment
assessment”, and called upon. the company to pay about 41
lacs rupees as tax under the Sales Tax Act. The total turn-
over in_respect of inter-State sales, as shown in its return
to the Bihar Taxation authorities, was about 26 crores.
rupees, on which the company had paid 71 lacs rupees and
odd as advance tax under the Sales Tax Act. The lompany
impugned the validity of the order of the Commercial Tax
Officer of Bengal, and that was how the matter came to the
Supreme Court.

74, Mr. Justice Shah, in delivering the majority judg-
ment, said that the effect of the various amendments made
by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act of 1956 was,
to invest Parliament with exclusive authority to enact laws
imposing tax on sales or purchases taking place in the
course of inter-State trade, and that the liability of tax

1, Paragraphs 73 to 82, infra.
2, Paragraphs 83 to 107, infra,

3» Tata fron & Steel Co. v. SR. Sarake, (1961) t $.C.R. 379; ALR.
$0 65,71, 733 ग SEC 28880 0१00 अश ALR. 1962



35

under the Central Sales Tax Act on inter-State sales was
imposed upon all sales effected by any dealer in the course
of inter-State trade or commerce. The liability to pay tax
arises, as the inter-State Sales-tax, though collected by the
State in which the sales take place, is due to the Central
Government and is payable at the rates prescribed in res-
pect of inter-State sales by the State in which it is collected.

75. In the opinion of the majority, the decision in the
two Travancore-Cochin cases had no bearing on the inter-
pretation of section 3, clauses (3) and (b). In those cases,
the expressions “in the course of impcrt and export” and “in
the course of inter-State trade or commerce used in Article
286 fell to be determined. The Constitution did not define
those expressions, and Parliament had, in the Central Sales
Tax Act, sought to define by section 3 when a sale or pur-
chase is said to take place in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce and by section 5 to define when a sale or pur-
chase is said to take place in the course of import or export,
and by section 4 (1) to define when a sale or purchase 0°
goods is said to take place outside a State. In delivering the
majority judgment, Mr. Justice Shah observed!:—

“In interpreting these definition clauses, it would
be inappropriate to requisition in aid the observations
made in ascertaining the true nature and_ incidents
without the assistance of any definition clause of “sale
outside the State” and “sale in the course of import or
export” and “sale in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce” used in Article 286.

“In our view, therefore, within clause (b) of sec-
tion 3 are included sales in which property in the goods
asses during the movement of the goods from one

tate to noth er by transfer of documents of title
thereto: clause (a) of section 3 covers sales, other than
those included in clause (b), in which the movement of
goods from one State to another is the result of a
covenant or incident of the contract of sale, and pro-
perty in the goods passes in either State.”.

76. In his minority judgment, Mr. Justice Sarkar (as he
‘then was) expressed the view. that a sale cannot fal} under
both clause (a) and clause (9) of section 3. For, then, it
would be liable to be taxed twice. Clauses (a) and (b)
were mutually exclusive. Interpreting these two clauses,
Mr. Justice Sarkar said, that clause (a) of section 3 con-
templates a sale where the contract of sale occasions the
movement of the goods sold, and clause (b), a sale where
‘transfer of property in the goods sold is effected by a trans-
fer of documents of title to them. Of course, in the first
‘case, the movement of the goods must be from one State to
another, and in the second, the documents of title must be
transferred during such movement.

&. Tata Iron etc. ५. S.R. Sarkar, (1961) 1 SCR. 379, 393 ALR. 1961 SG
65, 71, 725 11 S.T.C. 655.


36

b 77. To sum up, in the Tata case, the Supreme Court.
eld—

(1) That Parliament having defined the phrase “in.
the course of” in sections 3 and 5 of the Central Sales.
Tax Act, the decision in the twe Travancore cases hat
become inappropriate in interpretation of the phrase
“in the course of” and therefore in regard to the ques-
tion before the Supreme Court.

(2) Sales included in clause (b) of section 3 of the
Sales Tax Act were those where the property in the
goods passed during the movement of the goods from:
ene State to another by transfer of documents of title.

(3) Clause (a) of section 3 of that Act included
sales where movement was a consequence of a covenant
or an incident of the contract of sale.

Other cases 78. Two other decisions dealing with Article 286 which

telied

on were relied upon in K. G. Khosla’s case were also cases of

in Khosie's inter-State sales. They were Cement Marketing Co, of

case,

Cement

India Ltd. v. The State of Mysore, and the State Trading
Co. v. The State of Mysore’. Reference was also made to
Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Commer-
cial Taxes’,

79. In the Cement Marketing Co. of India and another

Marketing V- State of Mysore.) there were two appellants: The Cement.
Co.’s case. Marketing Co. Ltd. and the Associated Cement Co. Ltd.

The former were Sales Managers of the latter, a manufac-
turing concern. which had a dozen factories in different
parts of India. none of which was in the State of Mysore.
The former, ie, the Cement Marketing Co., had its Head
Office at Bombay. and ६ branch office at Bangalore in
Mysore State. and was a registered dealer under the Mysore:
Sales Tax Act. Cement was. at all material times, a con-
trolied article and its sale could be effected only on the
authorisation given to the buyers by a proper Government
officer. This authorisation, mentioning, inter alia, the fac-
tory from where the supply was to be made, had to be pro-
duced before the Cement Marketing Co.. which, in its turn,
instructed its Bombay office to despatch the cement in
accordance with the authorisation to the buyer. None of
these factories was in the State of Mysore. The goods were
received in the State of Myscre by the purchaser. The

1, The Cement Marketing Co. of India Ltd. The State of Mysore, (1963) 3
S.GR.777;A.LR. 1963 S.C. 9803 14 S.T.C. 175.

. The State Trading Corporation of India v. The State of Mysore, (1963)
2 UNESS.CR. 799; ALR. 1963 S.C. 548; 14 3.10. 1883 (1963) 2.
S.CJ. 131. -

3. Singareni Collieries Co. Lid. v. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, A.I.R..
. 1966 S.C. 563; 17 S.T.C. 197.

4. The Cement Marketing Co. of Indiavs State of Mysors, (1963)3 S.C,R.
777 3 AIR 1963 S.C. 9803 14 S.T.C. 175.



37

Sales Tax Officer held the sales to be intra-State sales and..
therefore, liable to sales tax, a view which was upheld ._
the High Court. The Supreme Court, on appeal, held, that
under the sales, the movement of goods was from one State
to another as a result of a covenant or incident of the con-
tract of sale, and the sales were in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce, and consequently exempt from sales
tax. In coming to this conclusion, the Supreme Court refer-
red, inter alia, to section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act,
and to the observations of Shah J. in Tata Iron and Steel Co.
v. State of Bihar,’ which were also quoted in K. G. Khosla’s
case.

“As stated above under the contracts of sale in the pre-
sent case there was transport of goods from outside the
State of Mysore into the State of Mysore and the transac-
tions themselves involved movement of goods across the
border. Thus, if the goods moved under the contract of
sale, it cannot be said that they were intra-State sales, It
was not the volition of the first appellant, to supply to the
purchaser the goods from any of the factories of the second
appellant. The factories were nominated by the Govern-
ment by authorisations which formed the basis of the con-
tract between the buyer and the seller. Applying these
tests to the facts of the present case we are of the opinion
that the sales were in the nature of inter-State sales and
were exempt from sales tax. In these circumstances the
contracts of sale in the present case have been erroneously
considered to be intra-State sales.”

80. The decision in Rohtas Industries Ltd. v. The State Robtas case:
of Bihar’ was distinguished, because there the contract was distingui-
different and it had been held by the Court that the rela- Shed.
tionship which existed between the two companies (Rohtas
Industries and Cement Marketing Co.) was of seller and
buyer, and not of principal and agent’,

81. Thus, the test laid down in the Cement Marketing test taid
case to bring a sale within inter-State sale was— down in
ement

(1) There must be a movement of goods from one Marketing .
State to another; and eal

(2) it must be as a result of a covenant or incident
of the contract of sale.

(3) The factory from which the cement was to be
supplied was nominated by the Government, which

1. Tata Iron and Steel Co. Lid. v. State of Bihar, (1961) 1 S.C.R. 379, 391

2. Rohtas Industries Lid. v. The State of Bihar, ALR. 1963 S.C. 3473 12
S.T.C. 615, 620. .

3. Cement Marketing Company of India Ltd. vs. State f Mysore (1953).
३ S.C.R. 777, 790 ATR 1963 S.C. 980 ; 14 S.T.C. 175.


State
Trading
Corpora-
tion’s

> case and
Singare ni
Collieries

case,

+ Other cases
under articte
286, decided

aafter 1956.

38

term formed the basis of the contract. The factory was
not within the volition of the Cement Marketing
Company.

82. Another case referred to in K. G. Khosla’s case was
State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. v. The State of
Mysore,' and there the decision was dependent upon whe-
ther the sale “occasioned the movement” of cement from a
State other than Mysore into the State of Mysore within
the meaning of section 3 of Central Sales Tax Act. It was
found, that the cement in the disputed State was actually
moved from another State into Mysore. and it was con-
tended that the movement was not a result of a covenant
or an incident of the contract of sale. In that case also,
the sale was under a permit and on the terms contained in
it, and, in the permit, it was provided that the supply had
to be made from one or other of the factories situated out-
side Mysore and, therefore. the contracts were held to have
contained a covenant that the goods would be supplied into
Mysore from a place outside its border. A sale under such
a contract, it was held. clearly fell within the term “inter-
State sale” as defined in section 3(a) of the Central Sales
Tax Act. and, therefore, no sales-tax could be levied by the
State of Mysore on such a sale.

The Supreme Court, in Khosla’s case, lastly referred to
the case of Singareni Collieries, which is dealt with later?.

83. Having dealt with the important cases after 1956,
we shall now deal with other cases decided by the Supreme
Court, after 1956, in which the question of exemption under
article 286 was raised and decided.

84. Out of these. seven are cases of export sales’, one is
a case of import 581९९, two are cases in which the sales were
sought to be crought within export sales*-’, and one,
though an inter-State sale, is a case wherein the question
of import sales was discussed®-",

1. State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. v. The State of Mvsore, (1963) 3
S.C.R. 792; ALR. 1963 S.C. 548; 14 S.T.C. 188; (1963) 2
S.C.J, 131.

. Paragraph 107, infra.

}. Paragraphs 72 to 82, supra.

. The seven Export cases are enumerated below ; paragraph 85, infra,

3.7, Cokal’s case.

. Burmah Shell Case.

. State of Kerala v. Cochin Coal Co.

. Endupuri’s case.

. Some other cases are dealt with in paragraph 107, infra.

छू PA AWRY D



39

85. The seven cases in which the question of exemption Cates of

of export sales was discussed and decided are—
State of Madras v. Gurviah Naidu;)
Kailash Nath v. State of U.P.;?
State of Mysore v. Mysore Spinning and Manufac-
turing Co. Ltd.,;°
Gordhandas Lalji v. B. Bannerjee;*
B. K. Wadeyar v, Daulatram Rameshwar Lal,’
The East India Tobacco Co, vy. State of Andhra
Pradesh, and
Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. v. Sales Tax
Officer, Ernakulam.’

sales.

86. In the State of Madras v. Gurviah Naidu®, it was Gurviah
cheld, that purchases of skins for the purpose of implement- Naidu’s

ing the orders of the foreign buyers were not purchases “in °#%¢

the course of export” within the meaning of article 286(1)
(b), because such purchases did not themselves occasion the
export. The two Travancore cases were followed. S. R.
Das, Actg. C.J. observed, that an assessee who purchases
goods after securing orders is not exempt under article
286(1)(b) from liability to pay sales tax in respect of pur-
chases made by him, because the purchases do not them-
selves occasion the export. Goods were purchased for ex-
port, but that purchase did not occasion the export.

87. Kailash Nath v. State of U.P. was also a case in Kailash

which an exemption in respect of export was claimed. The Nath’s
U.P. Government had issued a noti! fleation under section 4 ०४४८.

of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, exempting sales of cotton cloth
‘or yarn manufactured in U.P. with a view to export such
cloth or yarn outside the territories of India, on the condi-
‘tion that the cloth, etc., is actually exported and proof of
actual export furnished. The assessee sold quantities of
cotton cloth to customers known as indentors: the indentors
1. State of Madras v. Gurviah Naidu, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 158 ; 6 S.T.C. 717.
2. Kailash Nath v. State of U.P., A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 790 ; 8 S.T.C. 358.

3. State of Mysore v. Mysore Spinning @ Manufacturing Co. Lid. A.LR.
4.

s.

1958 S.C. 1002 5 (1958) 9 S.T.C.
| Gordhandas Lalji v. B. Bannerjee, A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 1006; 9 S.T.C. 581.
. B. K. Wadeyar v. Daulat Ram Rameshware Lat, (1961) 1 S.C.R. 924 ;A.1.R°
1961 S.C. 311
'6. The East India Tobacco Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1963) 1 5.0, 7.
404; A.LR. 1962 S.C. 17335 13 S.T.C. 529.
7. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. v. Sales Tax Officer, Ernakulam, (1964)
CR. 706; A.I.R. 1964 (2) S.C. 17555 1755, 17603 15 S.T.C.. 754.
8. State of Madras v. Gurvish Naidu A.LR. 1956 S.C. 158; 6 8.T.C. 717.
‘9. Kailash Nath v. State of U.P., A.LR. 1957 S.C. 790, 791, 793, paras.2 and
11; 8 S.T.C. 35
to. U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 (U.P. Act 15 of 1948).

31 MofLaw—4


8 re
nor
Coes,

Gordhand;
Lalji’s
case,

40

printed the cloth with hand-made apparatus, and exported
them overseas as hand-printed cloth. The modus operandi
was, that the indentor, after receiving the order for sup-
ply of hand-printed cloth from foreign merchants, obtain-
ed an export licence which permitted him to export the
cotton piece-goods to be manufactured by a textile mill.
The mill, after getting the order from the indentor, manu-
factured to cloth intended for export, and delivered it to
the indentor. The indentor paid the excise duty, and re-
moved the goods to his place of business. He, then, printed
the cloth by hand-printing, and exported it. The sales dur-
ing 1953-54 by the assessee were held to be within the noti-
fication. The argument that the commodity manufactured
had changed was rejected! because the cloth exported was
the same. The only thing that varied was the colour, which.
had been changed by printing and processing.

Govinda Menon J., dealing with the nature of the
transaction and its liability to sales tax, said’—

‘The essential pre-requisite is that the sale must.
be made with a view to export’? as the emphasis is on
the word “sale” and its time and purpose and not the
manufacture of the cloth at a particular time for a
particular purpose. Three conditions are necessary to
be fulfilled in order to attract the exemption under the
notification. They are— (1) the cloth must be manu-
factured in U-P., (2) the sale should be on or after Ist
December 1949 with a view to export; and (3) there
should be actual export of such cloth.”

88. In State of Mysore v. Mysore Spinning and Manufac-
facturing Co. Ltd. goods were sold to a licensed exporter
who sold the goods to a foreign purchaser. The first sale
was held not to be “in the course of export”. The licensed
exporter was not the agent of the first seller, the assessee,
and the two sales could not both have occasioned the ex-
port. It was only the second sale which did that, the
assessee not being a party to it. The court held, that for
a sale to be “in the course of export”, it must be the one
which occasions the export, and it must directly concern
the assessee as an exporter.

89. In Gordhandas Lalji v. B. Banerjee,’ the facts found

3
* -were, that the property in goods (tea) purchased by “the

dealer in West Bengal, had passed to Bombay merchants
before the goods were handed over to the common carrier.
Soon after the goods were purchased by the dealer, they

1. The Second Travancore case (Cashewauts) was distinguished on this point,
2. Kailash Nath v. State of U.P., A.1.R. 19$7 §.C. 790, 7935 8 S.T.C. 358.
3. We have employed the distinguishing phrase “with a view to export’.

4- State of Mysore. Mysore Spinning & Manufacturing Co. Ltd., 1959 S.C.R.
379; A.LR. 1958 S.C. 1002; 9 S.T.C, 188. 6 959

5. Gordhandas Lalji v. 3. Banerji; A.LR. 1958 S.C. 1006; 9 S.T.C. 581.



41

were appropriated to the contract by the Bombay parties.
The Calcutta dealer, on advice from the Bombay parties,
applied for and obtained the requisite licenses for export
of the goods, but the licences were all in the name of the
Bombay parties. Thereafter in the usual course of busi-
ness, the Calcutta dealer handed over the goods to the
common carrier—the Master of the Ship in_ this case—
through the shipping agents, the goods being bound down
for export overseas. Thus, the goods were shipped from
Calcutta to outside countries. These transactions were
held not to be within article 286(1)(b), because the property
in the goods had passed to the Bombay parties as soon as
they were appropriated, and the export of the goods outside
Calcutta was not on behalf of the dealer but was by and
on behalf of the Bombay parties. The dealer could not be
entitled to claim the exemption, because the title to the
goods had passed in favour of the Bombay parties long be-
fore the goods were entrusted to the carrier, and there was
No privity between the dealer in Calcutta and the foreign
merchants to whom the goods were ultimately exported.
The Court relied on its previous decision) where it was
held, that all sales that precede the one that occasions the
export are taxable even if the goods are manufactured with
the main intention of export. The decision in Kailash Nath
v. State of U.P.2 was distinguished, as in that case a cer-
tain notification which used the words “with a view to ex-
port” were construed, and the sales made were exempted
because of the notification.

40. In 8. K. Wadeyar v. Daulat Rama Rameshwar Lal,! Wedeyar’s
the sales by the assessees to an Indian purchaser, who had ११०
agreed to sell them to a foreign buyer, “were of f.0.b. con-
tracts under which they” (the assessees) “continued to be
owners” till the goods crossed the customs barrier and
entered the export stream. There were two sales which
resulted in export. The first sale by the assessees was held
to be immune, because the Property J passed to the Indian
purchaser when the goods were in export stream. The

rst sale was so inextricably connected with the export that
it was regarded as a sale in the course of export.

91..In East India Tobacco Co. v. State of Andhra Pra- East India
desh,' a local purchase by a firm doing export business in Todscco
tobacco which preceded the export sale, did not fall within ~” .
article 286(1)(b) though it was made for the purpose of or
with a view to export.

1. State of Mysore v. Mysore Spinning & Manufacturing Co. Ltd., A.1.R.
S.C. 1002; 9 S.T.C. 188. me fac TR: 1958
2. Kailash Nath v. State of U.P. A.LLR. 1957 S.C. 7903 8 S.T.C. 358.
3. BLK. Wadeyar v. Daulat Ram Rameshwer Lal, (1961) 1 S.C.R. 3
‘ALR. 1961 S.C 311. (961) iad

4. Bast India Tobacco Co, v. State of Andbra Pradesh, (1 13.C.R. 3
ALR. 1962 S.C. 17333 13 S.T.C. 529. (1963) 404s


Ben Gorm
Nilgici
Plantation
Co,’8 case,

42

92. A case in which the Supreme Court again demar-
cated the boundaries of the phrase “in the course of export”
in the light of the principles formulated in section 5 of the
Central Sales Tax Act, is Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations Co.,
Coonoor v. Sales Tax Officer! In that case, the facts were
these: The assessees were carrying on the business of
growing and manufacturing tea. They were the sellers,
and the purchasers were the local agents of foreign buyers.
The sales, which were by public auction at Fort Cochin,
and conducted through tea brokers, were effected in accord-
ance with the provisions of the Tea Act, 1953. The Sales
Tax Officer assessed those sales for purposes of the sales tax,
and a petition under article 226 filed against assessment in
the High Court, was dismissed. An appeal against was
taken to the Supreme Court. By a majority, the Supreme
Court held these sales to be liab! te to sales tax. The differ-
ence between the majority and the minority was as regards
the interpretation of facts vis-a-vis the law applicable to
it.

93. Mr. Justice Shah. who delivered tne majority judg-
ment, laid down the principles applicable in such cases as
follows*:——

(1) Before the Constitution Amendment of the 1956,
there was no legislative guidance, but such cases were gov-
erned by the interpretation put on the constitutional pro-
visions in the two Travancore cases.*-+

(2) After the amendment, guidance was provided in sec-
tion 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, which was “legislative
recognition” of what was said by the Supreme Court in the
two Travancore cases.

(3) There is a distinction between a sale “for export”
and a sale “in the course of export”.

(a) “In general where the sale is effected by the
seller, and he is not connected with the export which
actually takes place, it is a sale for export”. As an
example, where a foreign purchaser or his agent pur-
chases goods within India and they or one of them ex-
port or exports the goods from out of India, the sale
would be a sale “for export”, but such a transaction is
not “in the course of export” even though the Indian
seller had the knowledge of intended export.

(b) Where the export is the result of a sale and
the export is inextricably linked up with the sale, so
that the bond cannot be dissociated without a breach

x. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations Co. Coonoor v. Sales Tax Officer, (1964) 7
S.C.R. 7063 A.I.R. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 1656; 15 S.T.C.'753.

2. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations Co. v. Salés Tax Officer, (1964) 7 S.C.R. 706,
या, 712.

3 (1952) S.C.R. 1112 (First Travancore Case).
4. (1954) S.C.R. 53 (Second Travancof case).



43

of the obligation arising by statute, contract or mutual
understanding between the parties arising from the
nature of the transaction, the sale is “in the course of
export”.

(०) Etymologically, “in the course of export” con-
templates an integral relation or bond between the sale

and the export.”?. :

(4) Two types of transactions were given as instances:

(3) Where the goods are purchased by a foreign
buyer himself or his agent purchases goods in India
and exports the goods. Such a sale by the Indian seller
is not within the phrase “in the course of”, even though
the seller has knowledge of the goods being intended
for export;

(b) a transaction under a contract of sale with a
foreign buyer, under which the goods are to be deli-
vered by the seller to the common carrier for trans-
porting them to the purchaser. Such a sale would in-
disputably be one in the course of export’, whether
the contract and delivery to the common carrier are
effected directly or through agents.

(5) No single test can be laid down as decisive for de-
termining the question whether a sale is in the course of
export. Each case must depend on its own facts.

94. In the majority judgment’, it was held that the
knowledge that the goods purchased are intended to be ex-
ported, does not make the sale and export parts of the same
transaction, nor does the sale of the quota with the sale
of the goods lead to that result. There is no statutory ob-
ligation upon the purchase to export the chests of tea pur-
chased by him with the export rights. The export quota
merely enables the purchaser to obtain an export licence,
which the purchaser may or may not obtain. There is
nothing in law or in the contract between the parties, or
even in the nature of the transaction, which prohibits diver-
sion of the goods for internal consumption. The sellers
have no concern with the actual export of the goods. Once
the goods are sold, they have no control over the goods.
There is, therefore, no direct connection between the sale
and export of the goods which would make them parts of
an integrated transaction of sale in the course of export.

95. After referring to various decided cases‘, it was
held, that the sales in that case did not occasion the ex-
port of the goods, even though the assessees knew (i) that

1. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. v. Sales-tax Officer, (1964) 7 8.C.R, 706,
7123; 5.1२, 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 17963 15 S.T.C. 753.

2. Thejudgment describes the sales as one “for export”, but this is
‘apparently a slip for “in the course of export”.

3+ (1964) 7 S.C.R. 706, 713.

4. (1964) 7 S.C.R. 706, 717.



4

the buyers, in offering the bids for chests of tea and the
export quotas, were acting on behalf of their foreign prin-
cipals, and (ii) that the buyers intended to export the
goods. There was between the sale. and the export, no
such bond as woutd justify the inference that the sale and
the export formed parts of a single transaction or that the
sale and export were integrally connected. The assessees
were not concerned with the actual exportation of the
goods, and the sales were intended to be complete with-
out the export, and as such it cannot be said that the said
sales occasioned export. The sales were, therefore, for
export, and not in the course of export.

96. The minority judgment did not lay down any dif-
ferent principles. As we have said above!, the difference
between the two was in the application of the law to the
facts of that case. In the opinion of the minority, there
was but one sale to the foreign buyers which occasioned
the export and which was imp! fermented in accordance with
the terms of the contract by an actual export which is the
sine qua non of “a sale in the course of export”.

97. In the minority judgment’, Mr. Justice Ayyanger
observed as follows :—

“As preliminary to the discussion of the question
involved, we shall put aside certain types of transac-
tions as regards which there is no dispute that they
clearly fall on one side of the line or the other. On
the one side of the line would be the case where a
seller in pursuance of a contract of sale with a foreign
buyer puts the goods sold on board a ship bound for
a foreign destination. Such a sale would be an “export
sale” which would undoubtedly, be within the constitu-
tional protection of article (1)(b). In regard to
this type, however, we would make this observation.
In such a case we consider that it would be immaterial
whether or not with reference to the provisions of the
Sale of Goods Act, read in conjunction with the terms
and stipulations of any particular contract, the pro-
perty in the goods passes to the buyer on the Indian
side of the customs frontier or beyond it. In either
event the sale would have occasioned the export, for
the sale and the export form one continuous series of
transactions, the one leading to the other—not merely
in point of time but integrated by reason of a com-
mon intention which is given effect to. In such a case
it would be seen that there is but one sale—to the

1. Paragraph 92, supra. ~
2. Ben Gorm etc. v. Sales Tax. Officer, (1964) 7 S.C.R. 706, 719, 7205
ALLR. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752s 1755, 16563 15 S.T.C. 753.


a5

foreign buyer “which occasions the export”, and which
is implemented in accordance with the terms of the
contract by an actual export which is the sine qua non
of “a sale in the course of export”,

“A case on the other side of the line would be one
where the sale is effected to a resident purchaser who
effects the export by sale of the goods purchased to a
foreign buyer. Here the first sale to the buyer who
enters into the export sale would not be a “sale in the
course of export”, for it would not be the particular
sale which occasions the export, notwithstanding that
the purchase might have been made with a view ‘o
effect the export sale, or to implement a contract of
sale already entered into with a foreign buyer. That
such a sale is not one “in the course of export” has
been repeatedly held by this Court.!-2-8-4,

“This second type of case involves two sales—one
to a resident purchaser who purchases it with a view
to effect an export and the second, the export sale or
sale in the course of export by the purchaser to a
foreign buyer. The existence of the two sales and the
consequent dissociation between the first sale and the
export causes a hiatus between that sale and the
export and destroys the integrality of the two events
or transactions viz., the sale and the factual export.

“The sales involved in the present appeals are not
of the second type for here there is a single sale direct
to a foreign buyer, the contract being concluded with
and the goods sold delivered to his agent. It is hardly
necessary to add that for purposes relevant to the de-
cision of the question before us there could be no dif-
ference in legal effect between a sale to a foreign buyer
present in India to take delivery of the goods for
transport to his country and a sale to his resident agent
for that purpose. Pausing here, we should mention
that there is no dispute 6, that the persons who bid
at the auction at Fort Cochin and purchased the teas
of the assessees were agents of foreign buyers or (2)
regarding their having made these purchases under
the directions of their foreign principals in order to
despatch the goods to the latter—a contractual obli-
gation that they admittedly fulfilled,

1. State of Tranvancoor-Cochin v. Shaninugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factorys
(1954) S.C.R. 53; ALR. 1953 S.C. 333.

2. State of Madras v. Gurviah Naidu and Co. Lid., ALR. 1956 S.C. 158;
6S.T.C. 717.

3. State of Mysore v. Mysore Spinning etc. Co. Lid. A.LR. 1958 S.C.
1002 ; (1958) 9 S.T.C. 188,

4. Bast India Tobacco Co. v. The State रू Andhra Pradesh, (1963) 1 S.C.R.
404; A.LR. 1962 S.C. 17333 13 S.T.C. 539.



48

“Under the sales here involved, though to foreign
buyers and intended for export, the goods were not
under the terms of the contract of sale placed by the
seller on board the ship in the course of its outward
voyage and that is the only reason why they do not.
conform strictly to the first type of an export sale
which we have described earlier.

“But the question is, do not these sales also “occa-
sion the export” and in that sense sales “in the course
of export”. The test which has been laid down by this.
Court for determining the proximity of the connection
between the sale and the export so as to bring the sale
within the constitutional exemption in article 286(1)
(b) is the integrality of the two events—the sale and
the export.

“The question to be answered is therefore whether
the sales now under consideration do not form part and
parcel of a single integrated transaction with the export
or are they distinct distant and mediate, the sale and
the export being related to each other only in the sense
of one leading to the other or the one succeeding the other
merely in point of time. If the former, the sales are within
article 286(1)({b), but if the connection between the two
is as described later, they are outside the exemption.”

98. The minority was of the opinion, that even where
there is no express term of the contract to export the goods,
if the necessary intention is inferable, the sale would be
in the course of export.

Mr. Justice Ayyangar said?:—

“If we are right, then what is of significance is.
the real and common intention of the two parties to
the transaction—whether they contemplated the goods
purchased: being sold locally, or whether they intend-
ed the goods sold being only exported and not whe-
ther there is such a term in the contract between the
parties.”

99. The conclusion which the minority came to, was-—

“If there ws a contract or understanding between
the buyer and seller by which the latter was to export
the goods bought, it is conceded the sale of the assessee
did occasion the export and in our view on the facts
established, we consider this condition satisfied.”

1. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations v. Sales-tax Oficer, eo) 7 S.C.R. 706, 7213

A.LR. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752 1755, 17963 15 S.T.C. 753.

2. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantions v. Sales-tax Officer, (1964) 7.S.C.R. 706, 7223.
ALR, 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 1756; 15 १8: T. 753.


a7

100. This decision of the Supreme Court shows, that
if the integrated activity is such that the export is a ne-
cessary condition of the contract and there is no likelihood
of diversion, the sale would be in the course of export.
The minority view differed only in this, that it was pre-
pared to extend that principle to a contract in which ex-
port could be taken to be intended and not necessarily
where there was an express provision for the 2xport of
the goods purchased.

101. The case of sale in the course of import is J. V.J.¥. Gokafs
Gokal and Co (Private) Ltd. v. The Assistant Collector of ९२८
Sales-tax (Inspection) and others‘.

In that case, sale of foreign sugar to the Government
by Gokal and Co., was by delivery of documents to the
Government, while the goods were still outside the Cus-
toms barrier, and even the price was received during the
period. This transaction was held to be a contract in which
the sale took place in the course of import into India, and
was therefore exempt from sales-tax under article 236(1)
(b) of the Constitution.

102, The legal position vis-a-vis the import-sale was
summarised thus by Mr. Justice Subba Rao J. (as he then
was)*—

“(1) The course of import of Goods starts at a
point when the goods cross the customs barriers of the
reign coer and ends at a point in the importing
country after the goods cross the customs barrier;

_ (2) the sale which occasions the import is a sale
in the course of import;

(3) a purchase by an importer of goods when they
are on the high seas by payment against shipping do-
cuments is also a purchase in the course of import; and

(4) a sale by an importer of goods, after the pro-
perty in the goods passed to him either after the re-
ceipt of the documents of title against payment or
otherwise, to a third party by a similar process is also
a sale in the course of import.”

In that case the sale was by delivery of shipping do-
cuments, and there was no intention to the contrary proved.

FV. Gokal & Co. (Pr.) Ltd., ४. The Assistant Collect: Sales-i
(Inspection) and others. (1960) 2 SCR. 8523 ATR. 1960 S.C se
2 5Y, 0222 < Co. (Pr.) Lid. v. The Assistant Collector of Sale-tax

and others, 0.8. 852, Ds.
BTR Tor SE oe (1960) 2 $. 859 861 (Subha Reo 1.);.


48

103. The «wo cases where sales were sought to be

Cases of

alee sought broubht within export sale, were—

brought (i) a case of sale of bunker coal to ocean going

export steamers’, and

sales, (1) a case of sale of aviation spirit to international
aeroplanes’.

Cochin 104. In the State of Kerala and others vs. The Cochin
Coal Coal Company Ltd.,? the question decided was, whether
«Company's the sale of bunker coal was in the course of export. Bun.
108० ker coal was stocked at Candle Island in the State of
Madras. It was sold to steamers calling at the port of
Cochin in the State of Travancore-Cochin, and delivered
there. The assessee contended, that no sales-tax could be
levied on these sales, since they were either sales “in the
course of export” or “in the course of inter-State trade”,
and therefore, exempt under article 286(1)(b) or article
286(2) of the Constitution, or under the Government
notification under which sales falling within the Explana-
tion to article 286(1) (9) made during a particular period
were exempted from liability to pay a tax. It was held,
that the delivery was for consumption within the State,
and the sale fell within the Explanation to article 286(1)
(4), and though the sales were in the course of inter-State
trade falling within article 286(2), the tax was validated
by the Sales-tax Validation Act, 1956. It was also held,
that the sales were not made “in the course of export” and
did not fall under article 286(1)(b), and that for article
286(1)(b) to apply, it was not sufficient that the goods
merely moved out of the territory of India, but it was
necessary that the goods should be intended to be trans-
ported to a destination beyond India.

Barmah 105. A similar Roint was raised in Burmah Shell Oil
hell case. Storage and Distributing Co. of India Ltd. vs. The Com-
mercial Tax Officer‘, where the sale was of aviation spirit
to international aeroplanes, and exemption was claimed on
the ground that the sale was in the course of export. But
such‘ sales were held to be excluded from the phrase “in
the course of export”, because there was no destination
into which the aviation spirit could be said to be imported,
the sale being for use on the journey.

के The State of Kerala ¢. The Gachin Coal Go. (1961) 2 SCR 219; ALR.
196r S.C. 408, 410.

2. Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co. of India Lid. vs, The
Commercial Tax Officer, (196) 1 S.C:R. 902; ALR. 1961 S.C.
4153 323, 3243 11 S.T.C. 764.

3. The State of Kerala and others vs. The Cochin Coal Company Lid. (1961)
2 S.C.R.2195;A.LR. 1961 S.C. 408, 410.

4 Busmak Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of India Lid. vs. The
Commercial Tax Officer, (1961) 1 S.C.R. 902, 921, 9235 ALR. 1961
S.C. 315, 323, 2345 11 S.T.C. 7654.


49

Giving the judgment of the Court, Mr. Justice Hidaya-
‘tullah said'—

“From the views here expressed, it follows that
every sale or purchase preceding the export is not
necessarily to be regarded as within the course of
export. It must be inextricably bound up with the
export and a sale or purchase unconnected with the
ultimate export as an integral part thereof is not with-
in the exemption.”

“Tt may thus be taken as settled that sales or pure-
hases for the purpose of export are not protected, un-
less the sales or purchases themselves occasion the
export and are an integral part of it.”

Explaining the meaning of the ward “export”, Mr.
-Justice Hidayatullah said that the test. in the case of
exports, is, that the goods must have a foreign destination
‘where they can be said to be imported.

“If the goods are exported and there is a sale or
purchase in the course of that export, and the sale or
purchase occasions the export to a foreign destination,
exemption is earned...... The crucial fact is the
sending of the goods to a foreign destination where
they would be received as imports. The two notions
‘of export and import, thus, go in pairs.”

“Applying these several tests to the cases on hand,
it is quite plain that aviation spirit loaded on buard
an aircraft for consumption, though taken out of the
country, is not exported since it has no destination
where it can be said to be imported, and so long as it
does not satisfy this test, it cannot be said that the
sale was in the course of export. Further, as has al-
ready been pointed out, the sales can hardly be said
to occasion the export. The seller sells aviation
spirit for the use of the aircraft, and the sale is not
integrally connected with the taking out of aviation
spirit. The sale is not even for the purpose of export,
as explained above. It does not come within the
course of export, which requiries an even deeper re-
lation. The sales, thus, do not come within article
286(1)(b)”.

106. The last case was Endupuri Narasimham v. State Enduputi
of Orissa’. Although it was a case of inter-State sale oe.
under the unamended article 286, Venkatarama Aiyar J.
expressed his opinion on both when a transaction of sale
or purchase is within the phrase “in the course of inter-

State trade or commerce” and when a transaction of sale
1. Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributir Co. of India Ltd. vs. Th

Commercial Tax OfFicer, (1961) 1 S. R. 902, 903; A.LR. 1961

S.C. 315, 323, 3245 11 S.T.C. 764 (Reviews case law), .

2, Badupuri Narasimham vs. State of Orissa, (1962) 1 S.C.R. 3143 A.LR. 1961

S.C. 13443 12 S.T.C. 282. °



50

or purchase is within the phrase ‘in the course of export
or import”. In regard to inter-State sales, the law was
stated—

“that in order that it may be exempt it was essen-
tial that there is transport of goods from one State to
another under the contract. A purchase of goods in-
side the State for a sale outside is not within the
phrase “in the course of” and is, therefore, not cxempt
from sale?”.

And, in regard to import-export sales, Venkatarama
Aiyar J. observed—

Sollee it has been held by this Court that it is
only a sale or purchase with occasions the export or
import of the goods out of or into the territory of
India or a sale in the State by the exporter cv im-
porter by transfer of shipping documents, while the
goods are beyond the customs barrier, that is within
the exemption, and that a sale which precedes suck
export or import or follows it is not exempted, vide
State of Travancore-Cochin vs. Shanmugha Vilas
Cashewnut Factory*.”

Caltex case 107. Reference may also be made to a case decided by

and Sings the Supreme Court in December, 1965* where these
were the facts. Pursuant to a contract betwen the Direc-
tor General of Supplies, Delhi and the assessee for the
supply of petro] to the State Mechanized Farm at Nand-
pur in the State of Jammu and Kashmjr, the officcr-in-
charge of the Nandpur Farm placed indents with the
assessee’s depot at Pathankot in the Punjab State. The
assessee transported petrol from Pathankot to. Nandpur
under the contract of sale. The petrol was kept in the
storage depot of the assessee at Pathankot, and was car-
ried in the assessee’s truck and delivered to the farm at
Nandpur. The price of the petrol so sup plied was paid
to the assessee at Delhi, by the Director General of Sup-
plies. On these facts, the Supreme Court held, that there
was a movement of goods from the State of Punjab to
the State of Jammu and Kashmir under the contract of
sale, and there was completion of sale by the passing of
property to the purchaser. The transactions of sales bet-
ween the parties were “in the course of inter-State trade”.
This was also the finding of the High Court, and it was
not seriously challenged on behalf of the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.

1 Endupuri Narasimham vs. State of Orissa, (1962) 1.8.C.R. 314, ALR.
1961 S.C. 1344; 12 S.T.C. 282. .

2, State of Travancore-Cochinv. Shanmugh a Vilas Cashewnut Factory, (1
S.C.R. 53, A.LR. 1953 S.C. 333 (Second Travancore case). (1984)

3. State of Jammu and Kashmir v, Caltex India Ltd.,(1966), 3 SC.R.149, 1563
17S.T.C. 612 (Issue dated 15th June, 1966) ALR. 3८.
3350 (September issue), on appeal from A.I.R. 1963 ] & K 89.


ar

‘Therefore, under article 286(2) of the Constitution, as
it stood before the amendment, sales-tax could not be im-
posed by the State of Jammu and Kashmir-on the petrol
so supplied by the assessee, under the Jammu and Kashmir
Motor Spirit (Taxation of Sales) Act’.

Thereafter, in a case of 1966°, the test movement of
goods being the result of a covenant or incident of the
contract of sale was adopted, in relation to section 3 of
the Central Sales-tax Act (inter-State Sales).

Other

108. We shall also briefly refer to other cases where decisions
Article 286 was debated and decided. discussing
article 286,

109, The Commissioner of Sales-tax Eastern Division, Huseinali’s

Nagpur v. Huseinali Adamji and Co.’ was not a case of case.

an inter-State sale. But it was held on a proper construc-

tion of the contract, that the property in the goods sent

did not pass to the buyer by mere delivery to the rail-

ways, but passed at Ambernath outside the State of

‘C.P. when the goods were appropriated by the factory

with the assent of the seller within the meaning of sec-

tion 23 of the India Sale of Goods Act, 1930.

110. In Tobacco Manufacturers (India) Ltd. v. The Tobacco
Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar, Patna‘ the sale was an Manufac-
Explanation sale under the Explanation to article 286(1) ‘8 ०४४०.
(a), and, therefore, the case is not relevant for the pur-
poses of our inquiry.

111. In Indian Copper Corporation, Ltd. vs. The State of
Bihar and others‘, the property in the goods sold passed
in the State of Bihar, but delivery was effected outside
the State for consumption also outside the State. It
-was held, that this was an Explanation sale. This was
a case under article 286(1)(a) read with the Explanation.
‘being a pre-amendment sale.

112. To summarise what we have said above : Summary of
(1) Under the Government of India Act of 1935, Position.

which introduced sales tax within the taxing powers

of the Provinces of India, the tax was leviable at

L The Iemma and Kashmir Motor Spiriit (Taxation of Sales) Act, 2005
1948).

2 Signarent Colliéries Co. ९. Commissioner of Commercial Tax Hyderabad, 17
S.T.C. 197; A.LR. 1966 S.C. 563, $70, (April_ 1966 issue), on appeal
from A.I.R. 1962 A.P. 75, $3, para 44 and 12 S.T.C. 765, 777.

३. 788 Commissioner of Siles-tac, Eastern Division Nagpur vs. Husenali
Adamjt &Co., (1959) Supp. 2 S.C.R. 702, 7570० 717; A.LR. 1959
S.C, 887 (regarding appropriation of goods) (section 23, Sale of Goods
Act); 10 S.T.C, 297.

«4. Tobacco Manufacturers (India) Lid. vs. The Conunission Sales-

‘+ पता, Patna, (1961) 2 SCR. 106. er of Sales-tax
-$. Indian Copper Corporation Ltd. vs. The State of Bihar and others,

ऊ 3 इट8 2765 12 STC, 56. tate of: others, (1961)



52

the time of the sale which, for administrative reasons,
was also the point at which Central Excise was levi-
able, though the two taxes were different and merely
overlapped.

The Privy Council held, that the taxes on sales and
duty of excise, though distinct, may be overlapping, be-
cause, for administrative reasons, both were leviable at.
the same point of time when the goods left the factory
upon the occasion of sale. .

(2) The Indian Constitution of 1950 continued the sales:
tax as a tax on sales and purchases—entry 54 of List II
(State List). But, at the same time, to prevent the im-
position of the burden of double taxation, by Aricle 286
ठ the Constitution, a ban was imposed on the powers of”
the States to tax

(i) sales and purchases outside the States,

(ii) sales or purchases in the course of export and’
import of goods out of and into the territories of India,

(iii) sales or. purchases in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce, and

(iv) sale of goods declared by Parliament to be:
of special importance.

There was an Explanation in article 286(1), to deter-
mine the situs of inter-State sales.

(3) This ban was interpreted by the Supreme Court.
to apply to cases where the sale occasioned the movement
of goods or the import or export or the sale took place
during the movement by transfer of shipping documents
or documents of title to the goods. The court also used
the expression “integrated activities’ meaning a sale
(oceasioning the export) which cannot be dissociated from.
the export without which it cannot be effectuated and the
sale and the resultant export form part of a single rans-
action’.

In two other cases‘-5, which related to inter-State trade
or commerce, the expression “in the course” was again:
interpreted. These four cases initially determined the
extent of the ban under article 286 on the taxing powers
1. Governor General-in-Council vs. Province of Madras, 72 1.A. 913 A.1.R:
1945 P.C. 98.
2. State of Travancore v. The Bombay Co. Lid. (1952) S.C.R. 1112, 11185.
11203 A.LR. 1952 S.C. 3665 3 S.T.C. 434 (First Travancore Case).
3. State of Travancore v. Shanmuga Vilas Cashewnut Factory 54) S.C.R.
533 LA.LR. 1953 S.C. 333 (Second Travancore Case).
4. The State of Bombay. vs. United Motors, (1953) S.C.R. 1069; A.LR..
1953 S.C. 25234 S.T.C. 135.
;. The Bengal Immunity Co. vs. The State of Bihar (1955) 2 S.C.R. 6033:
| ATR 955. S.C. 6613 6 S.T.C. 446 ae


53

of the States in regard to taxes on sales and purchases.
in ter-State trade and export-imported sales and purc-
chases. .

These were the basic decisions, although there were
two others'2 following the Bengal Immunity case. The
object of article 286, it was pointed out, was to prevent
the States from trespassing on the federal field of in-
iernational trade, by ensuring immunity from double tax
“burden on foreign trade. This was pointedly stated in the
two Travancore cases above mentioned.

(4) This view of the law was adopted in latter cases
also dealing with exports—State of Madras v. Gurviah
Naidu and Co. (sale and export of hides);

Kailash Nath v. State of U.P.', (which was a case in
which the words of notification “with a view to export”
were interpreted);

. Gordhandas Lalji vs. B. Bannerjee’, (where tea was
exported by the sellers to a Bombay party on behalf of
that party);

State of Mysore v. Mysore Spinning etc. 00.6

8. K. Wadevar v. Daulat Ram Rameshwar Ltd.” (f.0.b.
Contract); .

East India Tobacco Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh’,
(export of Tobacco); and

Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. v. Sales Tax Officer,
Ernakulam’, (sale of tea).

(5) Owing to difficulties of and conflict in interpretation
of the Explanation to article 286(1), and in pursuance of
the recommendation of the Taxation Enquiry Committee!,
article 286 of the Constitution was amended by the Con-
stitution (Sixth Amendment) Act of 1956. The Explana-

1. Ram Narain Sons Lid. ys. Asstt. Commissioner of Sales Tax (1955)
2 3018 483, 504; ADR. 1955 S.C. 769, 773- $8
2, Mohan Lal Hargovind v. State of Madhya Pradesh (1955) 2 S.C.R. $093
ALR. 1955 S.C. 787, 788. 998 se
3. 1३5 of Madras vs. Gurviah Naidu & Co. A.L.R. 1956 S.C.
6 S.T.C. 717. ° 195 18
4. Kailash Nath v. State of U.P., 8.18, 1957 S.C. 790; 8 S.T.C. 358
5 Gordhandas Lalji v. B. Bannerjee, A.LLR. 1958 S.C. 1006; 9 S.T.C’
561.
6, State of Mysore v. Mysore Spinning & Mfg. (०. Ltd., (sales made foF”
purpose of export), A-ILR. 1958 S.C. 1002;
7. B.K.Wadevar v. Daulat Ram Rameshwar Lal, CR.
BK: Wadeosr y. Daul Jamies (1961) 1 S.C.R. 924,
8. Bast India Tobacco Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1 S.C.R. 4045.
A.LR. 1962 S.C, 1733; 13 S.T.C. 529. sho 09691 44s
9. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. vs. Sas Tax Officer, (1964) 7 S.C.R.
706; ALR. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 17563 15 S.T.C. 753 4 ?
to. Taxation Enquiry Committee Report (1953-54), Vol. 3, Page 48.



54

tion to article 286(1) was repealed, clause (2) of article
286 was replaced by a differently worded clause (2), and
clause 268 was amended, the net effect being to give to
Parliament the power to formulate priciples for determin-
ing when the sale or purchase takes place in one of the
modes specified in clause (1) of article 286.

(6) The Government of India sought the advice of the
Law Commission as to legislation for formulating the
principles contemplated in clause (2) of article 286. Thé
Law Commission, by its Second Report, tendered its advice,
which was adopted by the Legislature in verbatim ia the
third and fifth sections of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.

(i) This amendment and the operation of section 3 of
the Central Sales Tax Act was considered by the Supreme
Court case of inter-State sales, first in the Tata Iron &
Steel Co. vs. S. R. Sarkar!, then in Cement Marketing
Company of India v. State of Mysore*, and again in State
“Trading Corporation of India v, State of Mysore’. हु

(a) In Tata’s case, it was held, that by enacting
the Central Sales Aax Act the legislature had indicat-
ed how the expression “in the course of” inter-State
trade or commerce was to be interpreted. It was said
that—

(i) before 1956, there was no legislative guid-
ance and the expression was governed by the in-
terpretation put by the Supreme Court in two
Travancore cases above refered to;

(ii) after 1965, the guidance was provided by
the provisions of the Central Sales Tax Act—to
be precise, section 3 dealing with inter-State
trade or commerce. Those were cases of inter-
State sales.

(iii) Clause (a) of section 3 covers cases where
the movement of goods from one State to another
is the result of a covenant or incident of the con-
tract of sale, irrespective of the State in which
the property passes,

(iv) Clause (9) covers those cases where pro-
perty passes during the movement of goods, from
one State to another.

1. Tata Iron | Steel Co. v. S.R. Sarkar, (1961) 1 S.C.R. 379, 391; A.LR.
1961 S.C. 65, 71,72; 11 S.T.C. 655.

2. Cement Marketing Co. of India v. State of Mysore, (1963) 3 S.C.R. 7773
A.LR. 1963 S.C. 980; 14 $. 195.

3. State Trading Corporation of अर. State of Mysore, ९५६: ) 3 S.C.Rr
392; A.LR. 1963 S.C. $48; 14 S.T.C. 188; (1963) 2 oh 131.



55

Thus, these cases interpreted the phrase “in the course
of” to mean movement of goods in pursuance of a coven-
ant or as an incident of the contract of sale. These ex-
pressions were used in the majority judgment by Mr.
Justice Shah in Tata’s case*.

(8) Then come the cases where the language was ela-
porative and more explanatory. Of these, two are the
Burmah Shell case? and Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Com-
pany’s case.’ These two cases used the expression “inte-
gral connection” between the sale and the export.

(i) In the latter decision‘, a distinction was drawn
between sale “for export” and sale “in the course of
export”. Mr. Justice Shah once again emphasised the
legislative guidance, this time of section 5 of the Cen-
tral Sales Tax Act. “In the course of export” com-
prised those sales in which the export is the result
of the sale and is inextricably linked up with the sale,
which bond cannot be dissociated without a breach
of the obligation under a statute, contract or mutual
understanding between the parties arising from the
nature of the transaction. The concept, therefore, is
that each link follows one from the other and there
is an integral relation between the sale and the ex-
port, and between the seller and the export.

(ii) According to the majority view, which follows
from above, the buyer’s right to export the goods pur-
eased or to divert them for a sale in India is a relevant
consideration.

(iii) The view of the law as laid down by the
minority in Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co, v. Sales
Tax Officer’ was not substantially different.

(iv) In the Burmah Shell case’, Mr. Justice
Hidayatullah emphasised, that for the sale to be exempt,
an integral connection between the sale and the export
was an essential requisite.

The emphasis in these two cases was on the integrality
sof the sale and the export, and, therefore, in the absence of
one or the other, the ban of article 286 is inapplicable.

1. Tata Iron & Steel Co. v. S.R. Sarkar, (1961) 1 S.C.R. 379 3915 A.LR.
1961 S.C. 65,71, 725 17 S.T.C. 655.

2. Burmah Shell Oil Storage Co. v. Commercial Tax Officer, (1961) 1 S.C.R.
902;A.LR. 1961 S.C. 315, 323, 3245 11 S.T.C. 764.

3. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. v. Sales Tax Officer, (1964) 7 S.C.R.
706; A.LR. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 17563 15 S.T.C. 753-

4. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. v. Sales Tax Officer, (1964) 7_S.C.R.
706; A.LR. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 1756; 15 S.T.C. 753.

+5. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. v. Sales Tax Officer, (1964) 7 S.C.R.
706; ALR. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 17563 75 S.T.C. 753.

6. Burmah Shell Storage Co.v. Sales Tax Oficer (1961) 2 S.C.R. 9023
A.LR. 1961 S.C. 315; 323, 3243 11 S.T.V. 764 (Reviews case law).

31 MofLaw—5



56

(9) Next the Supreme Court defined the area of the
constitutional ban of article 286 (1)(b} in K. ८. Khosla’s',
which was a case of import. There again, the Supreme
Court relied on the language of Mr. Justice Shah in Tata’s
case* ie, movement of goods as a result of a convenant
or incident of the contract of sale and the integrality of
the sale and the movement. And the inability to divert
the goods covered by the sale to any other contract or to
any other party was taken as a relevant consideration.

(10) (a) The decided cases show, that the Supreme
Court has all along treated the sale and the movement
whether by way of import or export under a contract of
sale to be determinant of the applicability or the non-
applicability of the ban. The language has varied from
“oecasioning the movement” to “the import or export
being a consequence of a convenant or incident of the
contract of sale.”

(०) The Supreme Court has also held that integrality
of the sale and export or import,—

{i) the movement or export must directly con-
cern the assessee i.e. the seller’;

(ii) or there must be privity between the dealer
and the foreign merchant‘; or

(iii) the seller must be connectéd with the export
and there should be an integral relation or bond
between the sale and the export’:

(iv) or there must be a direct connection between
the sale and export, so that the sale would not be
completed without the export. Only then can a sale
occasion an export®. ४

The minority in Ben Gorm Nilgiri case’ put the matter
thus, (1) Do the sales form part and parcel of a single
transaction with the export; or (2) Are they distinct,
distant and mediate? If they are (1), they are in “in the
course of” (export), and if (2), they are not,

1. K.C. Khosta & Co, Private Lid, v. Deputy Commissioner of Taxes, Madras,
A.LR. 1966 S.C. 12163 17 S.T.C. 473.
2. Tata Iron & Steel Co. v. S.R. Sarkar,(1961) 1 S.C.R. 379; A.LR.
S.C. 65, 71, 725 11 S.T.C. 655. 2९ 3795 1961
3. StateofMysorew Mysore Spinning & Manufacturing Co. Ltd., A.LR.
1958 S.C. 1002; (1958) 9 S.T.C. 188.
4. Gordhandas Laljiv. B. Bannerji, A.ILR. 1958 S.C. 1006; 9 S.T-C. 581.
5. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Planiation v. Sales Tax Officer, (1964), 7 S.C.R. 706;
A.LR. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 17565 15 S.T.C. 753. a
6. See Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. v. Sales Tax Officer, (1964) 7 S.C.R.
706; A.I.R. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 17563 15 S.T.C. 753.
iigiri Plantations v. > (1964) 7 S.T.C. 706; A.LR.
1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 17563 17593 15 S.T.C. 753.



57

In cases like the Burmah Shell’ case, the ban was not
applied, (1) because the spirit was for use en route and
was not integrally connected with the export, and (2)
there was no destination for import.

113. Therefore, the Supreme Court has interpreted the Notions of
expression “in the course of” in terms of an integrated imegrty
activity and the sale occasioning the movement or import bond and
or export as the case may be, or being a consequence of non- |
a convenant or incident of the contract incapable of being divertil lity
diverted to any other contract or party. The language “Phased.
used may have varied, but the words used all point to
the same notion of integrality of the sale and movement
of goods and inextricability of the bond between the sale
and the movement.

114. Further, between the sale and the export or im-
port, there was to be an integral relation or bond, so that
the sale would not be complete without these operations.
To put it differently, sales form part and parcel of a
single transaction with the export or import, as the case
may be, or they are so related to each other, one belong-
ing to the other. पर

Tg the transaction is such that the seller cannot divert
the foods to another contract or to any other party, that
would be a relevant factor indicative of the sale being in
the course of import.

115. In order to obtain a clear picture of the way in pecisions of
which the law as laid down by the Supreme Court has High Courts
been understood and applied, to various combinations of
facts, one can refer to various decisions of the High
Courts’. It is not necessary to discuss all those decisions
in detail here. But a few may be referred to.

116. The facts in a Calcutta case* are almost similar to Associated
those in the case of Khosla. That was a direct decision Electricals
under article 286(1)(6) of the Constitution read with *
section 5(2) of the Centra] Sales Tax Act. The terms of
contract in that case were, that the assessee was to import
and supply electrical] equipment to the Government of
Punjab; that the equipment supplied was to be manu-
factured in England by a specified firm; that, after import,
the equipment would be coordinated by the assessee and
the assessee would be responsible for the transport,
insurance and handling of the material up to the Indian
port of entry and also beyond the port of entry, if so

व. Burmah Shell Oif Storage re Co. ४. Commercial Tax Officer, (1961) 1 S.C.R.
902; ALR. 1961 S.C. 315, 323, 3243 11 S.C.T. 764 (Reviews case law).

2. Some illusteative cases are summarised in Appendix 4.

3 Asociaged Electrical Industries गे Lid. v. Commercial Tax Officer.

N. 7763A-LR. 1 2: 1, patas 4, 12
tp 23 bach 1965 36 238, 239, 241, 9: 4:11,



Be

Bengal
tion’s case
(Madras).

58

required; and that the Government also reserved to itself
the right to inspect the goods during the course of the
manufacture as well as afterwards. The price of the
equipment to be supplied by the firm was detailed per
item as f.0.b. price plus extra for c.i.f. and the Government
was described as the purchaser. The assessee was also to
supply the services of competent Engineers, who would
supervise and be responsible for the erection of the plant,
and for paying for these purposes. As regards the price,
90 per cent of the price was payable (in instalments) on
arrival of the goods at the Indian port of entry, and the
balance was payable “after competion of the acceptance
tests and the commissioning of the plant.”

117. On these facts, the High Court of Calcutta held
the sale to be a sale which had occasioned the movement
by way of import. The High Court observed: —

--+.--t is now settled that a sale will come
within the expression when the movement of the
goods from abroad into the territory of India is
caused by a convenant in the contract between the
seller and the buyer and that it is to be distinguished
from the first sale effected by an importer after he
has imported the goods into the territory of India’.”

It was pointed out, that from the terms of the contract
entered into between the assessee and the purchaser, it
was clear that the import of the materials by the assessee
from the manufacturers in the United Kingdom and the
sale to the purchase were parts of the same transaction,
and that it was because of the contract of the sale bet-

ween the parties that the materials had their movement
from U.K. to India.

118. In this connection, we may also refer to a Madras
case. We quote the facts from the judgment of Rama-
krishnan J.°.

“The terms of the contract indicate that the sel-
ler, Messrs Bengal Corporation Pr. Ltd. Netaji Subhas
Road, Calcutta, had undertaken that the goods would
be manufactured outside India, would conform to the
specifications in the Schedule, that goods, after such
manufacture, would be shi betwen June 1957 and
December 1957 to the Ma ites Port and that_before
shipment the nominee of the buyer namely, D.G.LS.D.,
London, should inspect the goods to satisfy himself
that the materials were in conformity with the speci-
fications. He had also the right to be present during

1. Decisions in the Second Travancore case and Cement Marketing Co.v.
State of Mysore, referted to. .
2, Bengal Corporation Private Ltd. ४, State 18209 2 (1965) 16 3.1.0. 62, 90,

of, (Madras) (Ramakrishnap J.) , 29 September 1964.
(The Madras High Court's ' judgement in Khosla’s case, anced)
August 1963 was not cited.)



the stages of manufacture of the goods outside India,
and the expenses for his inspection would be be paid
by the seller and later on reimbursed by the buyer.
It is, therefore, clear, that the contract had to be
executed, by the Bengal firm, by securing a manu-
facturer in the U.K. to manufacture the goods accord-
ing to the specifications and then get them shipped
to the Madras Port before a specified date. The
buyer—the department of the Government of India—
had nothing to do with the contract betwen the Bengal
firm and the manufacturer in U.K. At the same time,
the manufacturre in U.K. and the shipping from U.K.
after the manufacture, formed essential parts of the
contract betwen the buyer and the seller”.

After nothing the Supreme Court decisions relating to
the word “occasions” in the Central Sales Tax Act (Tata
Tron Case etc.), the High Court observed—

“This meaning of the word “occasions” as use in
section 3(a) will apply also to the same word in sec-
tion 5(2) of the Act. In the present case, it is an
essential part of the contract of sale that the goods
should be manufactured according to the specifications
by a manufacturer outside India and that the goods
had to be inspected by the nominee of the buyer at
all stages of the manufacture to satisfy himself that
even the manufacture was in acordance with the
specifications. It will not suffice if the seller, to
satisfy the contract, buys from the market in India
goods of the specifications in the Schedule. The goods
had necessarily to be manufactured in U.K. Nor
would it satisfy the condition in the contract if the
seller arranged for the manufacture of such goods in
India. If that were to satisfy the requirements of the
contract, there would not be any clause about ins-
pection during the sage of manufacture by -D.G.I.
SD., London, or for shipment ‘after manufacture. It
is, therefore, clear that the buyer proposed, and the
seller accepted that for the execution of the contract
the goods should be manufactured in the United
Kingdom, and shipped from the United Kingdom to
the Madras Port. Such shipment was also an essen-
tial feature of the contract, because, in the event of
non-shipment between June, 1957 and December, 1957,
the buyer was free to place orders for similar
goods elsewhere and claim from the seller damages
for non-fulfilment of the contract. Therefore, this is
a very clear case where the .movement of the- goods
from the U.K. to the Madras Port was the result of
a convenant as well as an incident of the contract of
sale; therefore.the sale was: in:the course of import

; into the territory of India, and is not taxable by the
"Madras State”; .. abs



The materials sold in that case were, as soon as they
were received in the Jetty, to be delivered Ex. jetty to
the Deputy Controler of Stores, Integral Coach Factory,
Madras, and no demurrage incurred at the port upto the
point of landing was to be reimbursed by the consignee.
If the consignee so wished, the steel received was to be
booked by rail, “freight to pay”.

Bengal 119. The judgment of Mr. Justice Ramamurti, on this
Gero point, was even more specifict:—
(Madras). “The learned Government Pleader contended that

this transaction should be split up into two compo-
nent parts; import of the goods by the assessee from
London on his own initiative and then a subsequent
sale in the State of Madras. This contention, in our
opinion, is not corect on facts. There is no evidence
in this case regarding the arrangement entered into
between the assessee and the London manufacturer
and there is no evidence as to when title to the goods
passed from the manufacturer to the assessee. The
assessee may enjoy some credit with the foreign
manfacturer and title to the goods might have passed
in London itself before or at the time of the shipment.
But these are all matters not germane to the issue as
the question is whether the sales tax is leviable on
the transaction of sale entered into between the
assessee and the Government, Even if the property in
the goods passed inside the State after the steamer
arrived, that would not make any difference as the
passing of property inside the State is no longer of
any relevance in determining the true character of a
sale or purchase.

Common 120. To use an expression so explanatory of the

thread. English Criminal Law, throughout the web of the post
Constitution Law in India relating to State taxation of
inter-State and import-export sales and purchases, one
common thread is always to be seen, that such taxes as
impinge on foreign trade or impede the free movement
of goods from one State to another are not within the
State’s powers of taxation.

Whether 121. The next question is, does the decision in
decision in K. G. Khosla’s case* go beyond the two decisions on which
Khosla’s case the Second Report was based? As has been pointed out
goes beyond by Mr. Justice Shah in the Ben Gorm case’, the Legis-
शिवा lature has, in section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, given

1 Bengal Corporation Pr. Ltd. v. Sate ९, Madras (1965) 16 S.T.C. 62,
63; (Madras) (per Ramamurthi J.). 1965) *

2.K.G. Khosla and Co. Private Lud. ४. De} Commissic Te
Madras, A.1.R. 1966 S.C. 1216; 17 she. we of Taxes,

3. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations ¥.. S.T-0. (1964) 7_S.C.R. i» 7105
ALR. 1964 (2) S.C. 1752, 1755, 17563 er, 753- 7०6 TO


61

legislative recognition to the interpretation of the
Supremne Court. The Second Report of the Law Com-
mission had adopted the language used in the cases decid-
ed by the Supreme Court, which was, in verbatim,
adopted by the legislature in the Central Sales Tax Act.

122. The question can be viewed in another way: was
the import in K. 6. Khosla’s case inextricably linked up
with the sale, so that the bond between the sale and the
import could not be dissociated without a breach of the
obligation arising under the contract or the mutual under-
standing between the parties arising from the nature of
the transaction?

The contract, or the dealing between the parties, or
the understanding between them, formed one integral
whole, and were inextricably linked together. If it could
be said that there was an integral bond or relation be-
tween the sale and the import even steymologically the
sale was “in the course of import”. .

123. What are the essential convenants of the contract
in K. G. Khosla’s case? These are!: —

(i) manufacture in Belgium by a named manu-
facturer;

{ii) inspection in Belgium by D.G. 1.5.0., London;

(iii) inspection again by Deputy Director of Ins-
pections on the arrival of the goods in India and after
clearance by K. 6. Khosla;

(iv) delivery of the goods to the consignee (the
Railway), and ‘inspection by the consignee to see
whether the goods are in accordance with the condi-
tions of the contract;

(v) payment of price at various stages to K. G.
Khosla; and 8

_ (vi) right of the consignee (the Railway) to
reject the goods if not in conformity with the terms
and conditions of the contract, irrespecitve of the
Inspector's certificate that they were according to
specifications

Now, all these are integral links of the covenent in the
contract in pursuance of which the goods moved from
Belgium to India, and there was no likelihood of the
goods being diverted by K. 6. Khosla for anv other
‘purpose. . दि

1. Paragraphs 8 to 16, supra.


Situs of tale

62

124. The import was occasioned by, or was in pursuance
of, the convenants in the contract, the various conditions.
and terms in which were the supply of properly fabricated
goods in good condition to the Railway, for whose use
these goods were to be supplied and for whose benefit the
stringency of conditions was introduced in the contract.
This, indeed, was one of the cases in which there was a
direct connection between the sale and the import of
goods, “which would make them parts of an integrated.
transaction of sale in the course of....”! The assessee
“was connected with the actual importation” of the goods,
and the sale was not intended to be complete without the
import and therefore the sale was “in the course of
import”, We have adopted the language of Mr. Justice
Shah in the Ben Gorm Nilgiri case.”

125. Some emphasis is placed in the letter of West
Bengal Government on the situs of the sale. It states,
that in such cases the “actual sale” takes place between
the Indian branch and the Indian purchaser after the
import is complete’.

We may, in this connection, refer to the observations
of Mr. Justice Rutledge in an American case, which,
though relating to inter-State sales, are apposite‘: —

If the only thing necessary to sustain a State tax
bearing upon inter-State commerce were to discover
some local incident which might be regarded as
separate and distinct from “the transportation or
intercourse which is" the commerce itself and then
to lay the tax on the incident, all inter-State commerce
could be subjected to State taxation and without
regard to the substantial economic effects of the tax
upon the commerce. For the situation is difficult to
think of in which some incident of था. inter-State
transaction taking place within a State could not be
segregated by an act of mental gymnastics and made
the fulcrum of the tax. All inter-State commerce
takes place within the confines of the States and
necessarily involves “incidents” occurring within each
State through which it passes or with which it is con-
nected in fact. And there is no known limit to the
human mind’s capacity to carve out from what is an
entire or integral economic process particular phases
or incidents, label them as “separate and distinct” or
“local”, and thus achieve its desired result.’,

1. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations v. Sales tax Officer, (1964) 7 S.C.R. 706, 7129
7133A.1.R. 1964(2) S.C. 1752, 1755. 17563 1§ S.T.C. 753.

2. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations v. Sales-tax Officer, (1964) 7 C.S.R. 706, 712,
7133A.LR. 1964 (2) S.C. 1759, 175$, 77565 15 S.T.C. 753.

3. Paragraph 6, supra.

4. Nippert v, Richmond, (1946) 327 U.S, कि 2424, 9० 1... Ed. 760, 764,
765 (licence tax on perons for sdliciting orders for garments

manufactured by a company outside the State).



63

‘It has not yet been decided that every State tax
bearing upon or affecting commerce becomes valid,
if only some conceivably or conveniently separable
“local incident” may be found and made the focus of
the tax. This is not to say that the Presence of so-
called local incidents in irrelevant. On the contrary
the absence of any connection in fact between the
commerce and the State would be sufficient in itself
for striking down the tax on the process grounds
alone; and even substantial connections, in an
economic sense, have been held inadequate to support
the local tax. But beyond the presence of a sufficient
connection in a due process or “jurisdictional” sense,
whether or not a “local incident” related to or affect.
ing commerce may be made the subject of State
taxation depends upon other considerations of consti-
tutional policy having reference to the substantial
effects, actual or potential, of the particular tax in
suppressing or burdening unduly the commerce......’.

26. In this connection, the observations made by Das,
Ag. C. J. in the Bengal Immunity case!, (though made in

relation to inter-State sales) may be referred to. He
observed :

“The truth is that what is an inter-State sale or
purchase continues to be so irrespective of the State
where the sale is to be located either under the
general law when it is finally determined what the
general law is or by the fiction created by the Ex.
planation. The situs of a sale or purchase is wholly
irrelevant as regards its inter-State character. ..Now,
even when the situs of a sale or purchase is in fact
inside a State, with no essenti मे ingredient taking
place outside, nevertheless, if it takes place in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce, it will be
hit by clause (2). If the sales or purchase are in the
course of inter-State trade‘ or commerce the stream
of inter-State trade or commerce will catch up in its
vortex all such sales or purchases which take place

in its course whatever the situs of the sales or pur-
chases may be.”. .

This aspect of the matter was also dealt with in the
first Travancore case? where it was pointed out, that
article 286(1)(b) “indeed assumes that the sale had taken
place within the limits of the State and exempts it if it
took place in the course of the export of the goods”,

1985 S.C. 661; 6 S.T.C. 446, 481, (Des

1. Bengal Immunity Co. Lid. v. State of Bthar, $98 2 S.C.R. 603; ALR:
‘Acta. C3.)
2. (1952) S.C.R. 1112, 1118. os Be . Ts



“Transactions
steferred to

in the letter

-of the

64

127. Further, it should be pointed out, that what may
be called the “non-local” incidents in Khostla’s case! were
so overwhelming that they more than counterbalanced
the “local incidents’. Chief amongst these were the sti-
pulation that the manufacture shall take place outside
India by a specified firm, and as per prescribed speci-
fications, and that the goods shall be inspected there and
imported for the consignee. Import rings through every
word of the contract. The contract of sale could not have
been carried without import. Conversely, but for the
contract, the import would not have taken place. Inte-
grality of the import and the sale is writ large on the
face of the contract. Such being the facts, a narrower
view would stultify the spirit of the immunity granted by
the constitutional provisions (not to speak of the letter
of those provisions as interpreted by the Courts). It should
be remembered, that what is immune is not an import,
but a sale in the course of import.

128. We now address ourselves to the question whether
the transactions dealt with the letter of the Government
of West Bengal’ should be regarded’ as taxable. The letter
states, that generally there is a contract between the
Indian Branch of the foreign manufacturer and the Indian
purchaser,.laying down the specifications of the goods
required and the source of their manufacture, and that
the goods are shipped toe the foreign manufacturer's
branch, which clears them, stores them’, and then delivers
them to the Indian purchaser. It also states, that usually
there is a provision in the contract for rejection of the
goods (if found not to be in accordance with the contract).
Now, these facts are not identical with those in Khosla’s
case. As was pointed out in the Ben Gorm case‘ no
single test can be laid down for all cases, and each case
must depend on its own facts. Therefore, even if there
is a movement of goods in pursuance of a contract, the
sale would not necessarily fail within the decision in
Khosla’s case, if the “storage” is of such a nature as to
detract from the integrality of the import and the sale.

Therefore, the assumption that such transactions
would necessarily be exempt or fall within the rule laid
down in Khosla’s case, may not be correct. This being
the position, we do not embark on a consideration of the
question whether any amendment is required as to such
transactions.

1. Paragraphs 8 to 16, supra.

2. Paragraph 6, supra.

3. Storage is specifically mentioned in the letter of the West Bengal
Government; paragraph 6 supra.

4. Paragraphs 92 to 190, supra,


129. We would also like to point out, that it does not
follow from Khostla’s case that other transactions involv-
ing no such obligation as was involved in its facts would
necessarily be regarded as immume from taxation. Cases
where orders are placed with the agent or branch of a
foreign producer or manufacturer, for goods of foreign
origin, may or may not contain such an obligation. At
the time of the contract of sale, the goods may be already
in India with some other dealer, or they may be a type
‘of goods which the agent has already in stock, being goods
in which the agent deals usually. In the absence of a
contractual obligation requiring the movement of the
goods and followed by such movement, the sale by the
foreign manufacturer’s agent to the purchaser in India
would be taxable, as it would not be a sale “in the course
of import”, not having occasioned the import,—unless
there are any circumstances of a special character linking
the import with the sale.

130. We have carefully considered the question whe- whether
ther a change in the law is required. Our conclusion is change in
that the propositions emerging from Khosla’s case are the nr
consistent with the two Travancore cases on which the “पा
Second Report of the Law Commission was based, and do
not go beyond the intendment of those decisions, The
Particular situation involved in Khosta’s case was, no
doubt, not in issue at that time, but there is nothing in
those decisions, which is inconsistent with the test of
contractual obligation applied in Khosla’s case. As we
have attempted to show. as early as 1955, the test was
referred to by the Supreme Court!, and it has been applied
and expounded in several decisions under the Act of 1956
as also under article 2867.

As new facts came up, naturally the principles laid
down in earlier decisions had to be elaborated, and their
various aspects and implications made more manifest.
But this is a familiar process. In a matter pertaining to
the Constitution or relating to a status purporting to
formulate principles for applying constitutional pro-
visions, judicial exigencies cannot be avoided,

131. It is, no doubt. true that the object of conferring Police mat-
a power on Parliament to lay down the principles for whe dealt
determining when a sale takes place in the course of “"™
import, etc., was to enable Parliament to deal with deve-
lopments from time to time on the subject3-+.5, It is,

1. See paragraph 71, supra.
2, Pragraphs 75 and 73-82, and 92 to 100, supra.

3 Cf. Taxation Enquiry Commission, Report, (1953-54), Vol. 3, Pages
58-59, pera 20.

4+ See paragraph 2a, supra,

§. See the Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Constitution (Tenth
Amendment) Bill 1956, dated 32th April, 7956.


Suggestions
received.

66

thus, permissible to bring about a suitable modification
of the existing position in such manner as may be legally
appropriate. That, however, is a matter involving several
considerations, legal as well as others. With matters of
policy, we do not profess to deal.

132. We shall now summarise the suggestions received
by us', (Vide paragraph 133 to 138).

133. Many persons and commercial bodies have stated
that there is no need to amend the law as laid down in
Khosla’s case’.

It has been pointed out in one of the suggestions’, that
the exemption (as interpreted in Khosla’s case does not
means a loss of tax, but the liability for tax is transferred
to the other party, if the other party is at all liable to tax.
I€ the Director General of Supplies and Disposals had
imported the goods in his own name, there was no ques-
tion of tax. Khosla and Co. were merely acting as indent
agents, and should not be called upon to pay tax.

In another suggestion sent by a Cotton Association’, it
has been stated, that cotton is an essential commodity
and is being specifically imported into India only against
“mills orders who alone was given import licenses and
hence ought to get the benefit of section 5 as in the course
of import into India”.

In one suggestion it has been emphasised that’ the
import of goods is subject to rigorous control by Govern-
ment; that since devaluation, import has become costlier,
and that in the context of rising industrial production and
maintenance of the same at reasonable levels, it becomes
necessary to import capital goods not available in India
and spare parts for machinery for preventive mainte-
nance, as weil as essential raw materials to keep produc-
tion at reasonable levels. If sales tax were to be charged
on imported goods, it certainly adds to the cost of the end
products and this element can scarcely be ignored in the
context of inflationary tendencies. - ‘

In a suggestion sent by a Textile Mills in Bombay, it
has been stated that any change in the law, to impose tax
on cotton imported by foreign trading agents, will cause
disorder in the whole business sector of cotton import.

1. These suggestions were received in response to the Press Commiunique

- issued’ by’ us inviting views on the question referred to us. Views
of State Governments were also invited by a separate letter.

S. Nos. 21, 29, 36, 44, 46 and 78.

S. No. 21.

$. No. 36.
s.

5. No. 44 (A Chamber of Commerce),
- No. 46 | t

AYEYey


67

In one article’, jt has been emphasised that Khosla’s
case merely follows previous rulings, in Tata Iron Co. etc.,
namely, movement of goods as a result of a convenant or
incident of the contract of sale; that if protection to export
and import trade was needed in 1950, there is even a
greater need today, and that transactions in which move-
ment is not the result of a contract or in which there is
a possibility of diversion, are still taxable.

134. A few suggestions are to the effect that the pro-
Positions laid down in Khosla’s case should be codified?.

One suggestion is to amend section 5(2) of the Central
Sales Tax Act, 1956, as follows’: —

“A& sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to
take place in the course of import of the goods into
the territory of India, if incidental to the contract to
import the goods the sale or purchase occasions such
import or is effected by a transfer of documents of
title to the goods before the goods have crossed the
customs frontiers of India.”.

A Chamber of Commercet has suggested that an
Explanation should be added to section 5, to clarify that
the following types of transactions should be regarded as
sales/purchases having taken place in the course of
import—

(a) supplies of goods to Government Departments,
where the goods are imported on the strength of an
import licence granted to the suppliers on the specific
recommendation of the Government Department con-
cerned, and are handed over by the suppliers to the
Government Department concerned; and

(b) goods imported by suppliers at the request of
holders of Actual Users' licenses and on the strength
of a letter of authority obtained by them in favour
of the suppliers and handed over to license holders
after clearance,

135. Some of the suggestions even 8o further and
‘desire an extension of the exemption not only to situations
covered by Khosla’s case but to others®.

Thus it has been pointed out® that a sale by transfer
of documents of title is not practicable now since import
licenses are usually not transferable and therefore the

1. Anticle by Shri R.V. Patel, in Sales Tax Review 1966 (September)
pages 118 to 121 (Enclosure to $, No. 78).

2. $. Nos. 30 and 43.

“3. S. No. 30 (from an Industrial concern in Bombay).
4. S.No. 43.

15. S. Nos. 28, 37, 52 read with 57, 53.

6, . No. 28.


transfer documents is not recognised by customs autho-
rities. As such goods can be cleared only by the licensee
or his agent and customs duty is paid in his name and
delivery is taken only in his name. If the view that
because the importer (license holder) has control over the
goods until clearance therefore the sale is not in the
course of import is upheld—(a view stated to be taken by
Bombay Sales Tax authorities) then no sale can be said
to have taken place during the course of import. It has,
therefore, been suggested, that section 5(2), in so far as it
relates to “occasioning the import”, should be amplified to
cover forward transactions whereunder the holder of an
import license, before or after ordering out the goods,
enters into a “forward contract” for sale with, say, B, and
B deposits, with the license holder, some security and on
receipts of shipping documents in the Bank, B pays the
amount to the license holder, who pays it in the Bank
and gets the documents released, and then,—

(a) (i) the license holder passed the documents.
to B to pay customs duty and to take delivery, or

(ii) B pays the duty to the license holder, who
takes delivery, and

(b) thereafter the license holder issues his bill to
B for sale of the goods as per terms of the contracts,
and settles the account finally by recovering the
balance of the sale price or by refunding the excess,
as the case may require;

It has been stated, that in the above case, the sale has.
taken place much before the goods are cleared from
customs, and even the sale price is paid by the buyer to
the seller before clearance. Merely because the customs
duty is paid in the seller’s name because he had the
import license, the sale is not recognised by the Sales tax
authorities in Maharashtra as a sale in the course of
import; but if this view is correct. no sale can be said to
have taken place during the course of import. It is also
stated, that practically no sale (of imported goods) can
be made without license, and bona fide transactions of
“forward sale”, where the contract is made in advance,
and the value of the goods is also paid in advance, should
be treated as sales in the course of import.

Another suggestion is', that the first sale after import
should be exempted, and, to compensate the States for loss
of revenue, a customs duty surcharge or similar levy
could be introduced. Individual States may agree to such
amendment if, for instance, revenues collected as part of

1. $. No, 37 (Indo-German Chamber of Commerce).



9

customs in lieu of sales tax are allocated for export pro-
motion schemes. Such an amendment, it is stated, would
be a great advantage, for the following reasons—

(a) Economy in collection would be achieved,
since individual contracts need not be scrutinised.

At present, it is stated, thousands of contract docu-
ments are verified by trade, sales tax authorities and
tribunals etc. to determine taxability.

(b) Revenues would be paid on clearance through
customs.

(c) Undue accumulation of tax on same material
will be avoided, and there will be no dislocation of
normal import trade channels.

At present, it is stated, numerous contracts are arti-
ficially placed to suit sales tax requirements, with corres-
ponding disadvantages to the purchaser and the trade.
The suggestion further, urges, that it is the wording “in
the course of import” which has caused various inter-
pretations, and that these complications are, unfortunately,
not removed by the judgment in Khosla’s case, because
it will be very difficult to find a more precise wording.

In the suggestion of a Millowners Association’, it has
been stated, that there is every need for enlarging the
area of transactions covered not only by section 5(2), but
also by section 5(1). It is stated, that the sub-sections, as
at present worded, do not encompass several other situa-
tions which could be genuinely described as sales or
purchases taking place in the course of import or export
in the true spirit of article 286. A good example of liberal
extension, it is stated, is the exemption for two sales
prior to export under the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959°.
It is also urged. that it is a widely prevalent practice in
the import trade of India to import one’s requirements
through the local agent of the overseas manufacturers:
and the local agents’ presence has obvious advantages
(obtaining quotations quickly and correctly, financing,
helping in clearing, etc.). In essence, it is stated, imports
by local agents for subsequent sale are no different from
direct imports by the Indian customers from the overseas
manufacturers.

हु The suggestions of one Chamber of Commerce’ is, that
if section 5 is amended so as to exclude transactions of
the type in issue in Khosla’s case, then, further compli-
cations would arise in interpretation of the section. lead-

व. $. No, 52, read with S. No. 57.

2. The reference seems to be to section 12, Te :
कि sem to bet Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959

3. S. No. 53.



7

ing to further disputes, proceedings and harassment of
dealers. It states, that the scope of section 5 should be
enlarged so as to apply the section not only to the cases
of the nature specified in Khosla’s case, but also to other
tike transactions, in particular cases in which the licenses
are issued for the import of particular kinds of goods,
whether manufactured or not for a particular purpose.
If the scope of section 5 is so enlarged, then, it is stated,
it would certainly put an end to the uncertainty in the
construction of the section.

136. A few replies! are in favour of restricting the
exemption in a manner which would, in effect. nullify the
decision in Khosla’s case.

One suggestion” is, that section 5 requires substantial
amendment so as to exclude the transactions of the type
in issue in Khosla’s case.

The suggestion of a State Government is, that an
Explanation should be inserted in section 5, to clarify
that, for the purpose of this section, where there takes
place more than one sale in the course of a single move-
ment of goods from a foreign country to India, the exemp-
tion admissible under this section will be confined only
to the first of such sales. The proposed Explanation, it
is stated, may also apply to a sale by transfer of documents
of title.

The suggestion of the Administration of a Union
territory’, is, that a provision should be made, either by
amending section 502) or by inserting an Explanation,
that only sales or purchases, arising from contracts be-
ween a seller exporting the goods from a foreign country
and a person purchasing the goods from such seller or
purchasing the goods by transfer of couments of title to
the goods before the goods have crossed the customs
frontiers of India, shall be deemed to take place in the
course of import.

One State Government’ has suggested, that only cases
where movement (interState or by way of import) is a
direct result of a convenant in the contract of sale, should
be covered. Its letter makes a distinction between move-
ment occasioned by a convenant and movement incidential

Nos. 32, 45, 90, 102.

No. 32.

No. 45.

No. 90.

. No. 99 (A State Government).

yeep
PRDAD


a

to the contract. We quote the amendment suggested by
it in section 5:—

“Amendment of section 5:—In section 5 of the
principal Act, the following Explenation shall be
added at the end, namely,—

“Explanation—Where the movement of goods
is merely incidental to but not a direct result of
a convenant of the contract of sale, it shall not
be deemed to be the movenemt occasioned by
such sale or purchase.”!.

137. Some of the suggestions’ have emphasised “the
need for legalising the collection of tax by dealers before
the decision in Khosla’s case.

Thus, it has been suggested’, that for the tax already
charged by dealer and deposited with Sales Tax Autho-
rities claims should be against the State and not against
dealer. It has been stated, that the tax received by the
dealers from the D.G.S. & D. has already been deposited
by the dealers with the Sales Tax Authorities concerned.
in terms of the State laws. Now, the DGS. & D. are
deducting the amounts of Sales Tax, even in cases where
the supplies were completed before 18th January, 1966,
(date of the judgment in Khosla’s case). It is. therefore,
suggested, that while considering an amendment of section
5. a provision should be made in the Act. if necessary.
that in cases of sales made prior to 18th January, 1966,
for which sales-tax has been already deposited. the sales
tax should not be realised from the parties (dealers), and
any realisation made on that account should be refunded
to them. The trade should not be allowed to suffer.

Another suggestion® is, that an Ordinance to confine
the application of the judgment in Khosla’s case to subse-
‘quent transaction is advisable, in order to save State
‘Governments from refund claims on past transactions.

138. The Finance Ministry® has in its reply to the Law
Commission’s request for comments as to the need for
amendment of section 5, stated, that its views are those
expressed in the papers which led to the reference to the
Law Commission.

1. Similar amendment in section 3 has been suggested, in the same letter.
2. S. No. 55, S. No. 66, 5. No. 29.

3- S. No. 66.

4. 5. No. 55.

5. S. No. 29.

6. S. No. 89.

31 MofLaw—6


Det
the
tue!
bly.

bates in
Consti-
nt Assem-

72

Those papers! raise a query whether the Act of 1956
was intended to cover transactions of the type in issue in
Khosla’s case or the transactions referred te the Govern-
ment of West Bengal’s letter. In those papers emphasis
was laid on paragraph 9 of the earlier Report*, where the
suggestion to exempt the first sale following import was
not accepted.

It is stated, that there is nothing ir. the printed Report of
the Law Commission to suggest that it was the Law Com-
mission’s intention that transactions of the nature des-
cribed in the judgment in Khosla’s case should fall with-
in the scope of “sale in the course of import”. The papers
seek the advice of the Law Ministry as to whether any
amendment to section 5(2) of the Act is called for, if the
judgment in Khosla’s case goes beyond the intention of
Law Commission, and also whether (if the object cannot
be achieved by amending the Act), the Constitution
should be amended for the purpose.

139. We have already stated*, that we do not consider
any change in the law to be necessary. For the purpose of
the present Report, it is not necessary to consider the ques-
tion of codification of the propositions laid down in
Khosla’s case, or enlargement of the existing exemption in
any other manner. We bring those the various suggestions
to the notice of the Government, for such action as may be
considered proper.

140. Before reaching our conclusion on the subject, we
wished to satisfy ourselves whether there was anything in
the debates in the Constituent Assembly which might
throw light. Article 264A of the draft Constitution‘. was
discussed in detail before the Constituent-Assembly on
the 16th October, 1949, A clue to the intent of the Cons-
titution-makers is furnished by the following observations
of Dr. Ambedkar®: —

“Sir, as everyone knows, the sales tax has created
a great deal of difficulty throughout India in the
matier of freedom of trade and commerce. It has been
found that the very many sales taxes which are levied
by the various Provincial Governments either cut into
goods which are the subject matter of imports or ex-
Ports, or cut into what is called inter-State trade or
commerce. It is agreed that this kind of chaos ought

1. Ministry of Finance, Dept. of Revenue & Insurance, U.O. No. 3(3)-
ST/66, dated 2nd July 1966 to Ministy of Law, Deptt. “of
Legal Affairs.

2. Second Report of the Law Commission C@arliamentary legislation

relating to Sales tax), paragraph 9.

- Paragraph 130, supra.

. Article 264A corresponded to present article 286,

- Constituent Assembly Debates 325 to 340.

. CAD, 326.

av hw


73

not to be allowed and that while the Provinces may
be free to levy the sales tax there ought to be some
regulations whereby the sales tax levied by the Pro-
vinces would be confined within the legitimate limits
which are intended to be covered by the sales tax. It
is, therefore, felt that there ought to be some specific
provision laying down certain limitations on the
power of the Provinces to levy sales tax.

“The first thing that I would like to point out to
the House is that there are certain provisions in this
article 264A which are merely reproductions of the
different parts of the Constitution. For instance, in
clause (1) of article 264A as proposed by me, sub-
clause (b) is merely a reproduction of the article con-
tained in the Constitution, the entry in the Legisla-
tive List that taxation of imports and exports shall be
the exclusive province of the Central Government.
Consequently so far as sub-ciause (1) (0) is concern-
ed there cannot be any dispute that this is in any
sense an invasion of the right of the Provinces to levy
a sales tax.

Similarly, sub-clause (2) is merely a reproduc-
tion of Part XA which we recently passed dealing with
provisions regarding inter-State trade and commerce.
Therefore so far as sub-clause (2) is concerned there
is really nothing new in it. It merely says that if any
sales tax is imposed it shall not be in conflict with the
provisions of Part KA.

With regard to sub-clause (3) it has also been
agreed that there are certain commodities which are
so essential for the life of the community throughout
India that they should not be subject to sales tax by
the province in which they are to be found. Therefore
it was felt that if there was any such article which was
essential for the life of the community throughout
India, then it is necessary that, before the province
concerned levies any tax upon such a commodity, the
law made by the province should have the assent of
the President, so that it would be possible for the
President and the Central Government to see that no
hardship is created by the particular levy proposed by
a particular Province.”

One of the Members of the Constituent Assembly?

referring to the provision proposed to the effect that the
State law shall not impose a tax, etc., which takes place
in the course of import of goods into, or export of the
gods out of, the territory of India, made this criticism:—

“Now, this gives a great loop-hole to the business-
man to escape taxation. In all cases of export, there

1. Shri

é iyo Kumar Ghosh, speech in the Constituent Assembly,

9 C.A.D. at page 333.


74

are various transactions before the commodity is
actually exported from the country. But under this
clause, all these transactions—the intermediate trans-
actions which take place—are exempted from _sales-
tax. I could have understood the position if it was
that at the point of export, that is to say, the last
transaction, wherefrom it is actually exported, the
sales-tax will not be realisable at that point. But this
clause as it stands means that all transactions which
take place in the course of sending the goods outside
the territory of India will be exempted from sales-tax.
Now, how can you check the nature of these trans-
actions? A buys a commodity saying that he will ex-

ort it. But he does not export it, but sells to B, and
हर ‘purchases it saying that he will export it, and in this
manner the commodity passes on from cne hand to
other and from one Province to another without pay-
ment of any tax, and it may be that in the end it is not
exported at all. How can you check up this process?
There will be a lot of difficulty and confusion, if this
clause is passed as it stands. So my humble submis-
sion is that here, export and import should be clearly
defined, and we must say that export means the last
transaction and import means the first transaction,
and only at the point of these two transactions com-
modities will be exempted from sales tax, and at no
other point.”

141. His desire for clarification was supported by an-
other member. In his reply to the debate, Dr. Ambedkar
stated, that he knew that some friends did not like the
phraseology “in the course of export”, etc., But he added,
that the Drafting Committee had spent a great deal of
time in order to choose the exact phraseology. The Draft-
ing Committee was satisfied that the phraseology was as
good as could be invented, but he stated that the Commit-
tee would further examine this particular phraseology, in
order to see whether some other phraseology could not | be
substituted, so as to remove the criticism which had been
made against this part of the article.

142. The Drafting Committee did not, however, make
any change after this debate’,

Observations 143. The observations in the Bengal Immunity Case‘

in Bengal *
Immeane#!_may be usefully referred to:

Co.'s case. “It should be noted that these are four separate
and independent restrictions placed upon the legisla-

1, Shri Jagat Narain Lal, 9 C.A.D. 334.
29 CAD. 340.

3. The Report of the Drafting Committee dated ard November, 1049 does
not deal with this point.

4, Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. The State of Bihar, (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603;
ALR. 1955. C.S. 661, 6 3,100. 446, $e (1955) 03;


ce)

tive competency of the States to make a Jaw with
respect to matters enumerated in Entry 54 of List II.
In order to make the ban effective and to leave no
loop-hole the Constitution-makers have considered
the different aspects of sales or purchases of goods
and placed checks on the legislative power of the
States at different angles. Thus, in clause (1) (9) of
Article 286, the question of the situs cf a sale or pur-
chase engaged their attention and they forged a fetter
on the basis of such situs to cure the mischief of mul-
tiple taxation by the States on the basis of the nexus
theory. In clause (1) (9) they considered sales or pur-
chases from the point of view of our foreign trade and
placed a ban on the States’ taxing power in order tu
make our foreign trade free from any interference by
the States by way of a tax impost. In clause (2) they
looked at sales or purchases in their inter-State
character and imposed another ban in the interest of
the freedom of interna] trade. Finally, in clause (3)
the Constitution-makers’ attention was rivetted on
the character and quality of the goods themselves and
they placed a fourth restriction on tne States! power
of imposing tax on sales or purchases of goods de-
elared to be essential for the life of the community.
These several bans may overlap in some cases but in
their respective scope and operation they are separate
and independent. They deal with different phases of
a sale or purchase but, nevertheless, they are distinct
and one has nothing to do with and is not dependent
on the other or others”.

144. It is true that the Taxation Enquiry Commission! Texation
made these observations regarding import and export Enquiry
sales: — Commission

and foreign
“In regard to foreign trade, i.e., sales which cons- tide.
titute import and export in terms of the country as a
whole, the present position under the Constitution may
be regarded as satisfactory. As interpreted by the
Supreme Court, this position is briefly that those sales
and purchases which themselves occasion the export
or import, and those sales in the State which are
effected by the importer by transfer of shipping docu-

ments while the goods are still beyond the customs

frontier are excluded from the sales tax jurisdiction

of the States. Purchases in the State by the exporter

for the purpose of export and sales in the State by the

importer after the goods have crossed the customs
frontier are held to be not within the exemption.

Hardly any State has complained about the particular

provision of the Constitution which concerns this

aspect. We consider the position under the Constitu-

tion to be perfectly satisfactory so far as foreign trade
is concerned.”.

1- Taxation Enquiry Commission Report, (1953-54), Vol. 3, page 48, paray.


76

145, But, again, those observations were not addressed
with reference toa sale which stipulates movement.
Rather, the test of “occasions the movement” was
approved, and that is exactly the test embodied in section
5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.

Export Sales 146. We find, that the Import and Export Policy Com-
exemption mittee! stated, that the expression “in the course of export”
from sales was rather ambiguous. That Committee noted that there
. were suggestions that a liberal view should be taken of
the expression “in the course of import or export”, and
that the Central Sales Tax Act should be suitably amend-
ed. In fact, that Committee recommended that the Cen-
tral Government should assume responsibility for remis-
sion of sales-tax entering into export costs, and that the
Central Government may either “recover the due amount
from the State Government, or make such financial re-
adjustments with the State Governments, as they may
deem appropriate”. Thereafter, a Committee was
appointed by the Government of India to study the inci-
dence of State and Central Sales taxes on commodities
entering the export trade of India, and to indicate the

quantum of relief.

147, The latter Committee made detailed recommenda-
tions for relief in respect of two sales prior to the sale in
the course of export’.

No recom-_ 148. So far as we could ascertain, no such recommenda-

the mst foe tion has been made with reference to imports, apparently

import sales, because the question of promoting imports could hardly
have been taken up in the present economic condition of
the country.

Taw in other 149. Before reaching our conclusions, we mace an

countries. endeavour to study the position in some of the other Fede-
rations,—Australia, U. oA and Canada.—as well 88 in
England. We found that it was not possible to state very
precisely the law on the subject in those countries. We
made a long and detailed study of the constitutional pro-
visions, case law and literature on the subject in those
countries. The exact problem with which we are dealing
has not arisen in the Federations mentioned above in the
form in which it was presented in Khosla’s case, and we
therefore thought it unsafe to draw any conclusions as to
the legal position in those Federations with reference to
the problem dealt with in this Report.

व. Report of the Import and Export Policy Committee, Government of
India, Ministry of Commerce (19$2), pages 36-37, Chapter 4, para-
garaphs 63 to 67 and footnote on page 36.

2. Report of the Committee on Sales-tax {on commodities exported
from India), (1964), Government to India, Ministry of Commerce,
page 8 and 9, Chapter 3, paragraphs 13-14.

3. Report of_the Committee on Sales-tax {on* commodities exported from
ndia), Government of India, Ministry of Commerce (1964), pages 26
to 31, Chapter 5, paragraphs 9 to 19.


ris

ov. Appendix I summarises certain decisions of High Appendices
Courts which iilustrate how the law has been understood
and applied to various combinations of facts. Appendix 2
deals with the sales tax system in India.

1. J. L. KAPUR.
Chairman.

2. K. 5. DATAR!.
3. 5. S. DULAT.
4. T. K. TOPE.
5. RAMA PRASAD MOOKERJEE?.
Members,
P. M. BAKSHI,
Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel.
New Detur,
The Ind February, 1967.

x. Shri Datar has signed the Report subject to the note appended.
2, Shri Mookerjee has signed the Report subject to the nore appenied.


78

APPENDIX 1

CERTAIN DECISIONS OF HIGH COURTS ILLUSTRATING THE
APPLICATION OF THE LAW

(Only a few illustrative case have seen selected. The
collection is not intended to be exhaustive)

Introductory

A few decisions of High Courts which deal with the
subject of inter-State sales and import and export sales
are summarised below, in order to show how the law has
been understood and applied at various times.


79

The test of the time when the property has passed Was Passing of
adopted in some cases.’ proPerty.

In a Madras case’, the assessee obtained from Govern-
ment a licence to import foreign cotton +( to whom a
letter of authority was also issued by the appropriate autho-
rity imported that cotton, cleared the goods from the cus-
toms, railed the goods and sent the Railway Receipt to the
Bank. The assessee took delivery of the Railway receipt
from the bank, on payment of 90 per cent. of the value,
and cleared the goods from railway. The cotton bales were
weighed in the presence of a representative of “G”, and
the final bill adopting the contracted rate was then drawn
up. The sales-tax authorities treated the transaction as pur-
chase of cotton by the assessee from “G”, and included its
purchase value in the taxable turnover of the assessee
under the Madras General Sales-tax Act, 1959.

The question arose whether the sale was in the course of
import. The High Court answered the question in the
negative, on the ground that the import became completed
after ‘G’ took delivery of the consignment and cleared the
goods from the harbour, and the sale was subsequent to the
taking of the delivery and was effected after the goods
were taken out of the customs barrier. The question whe-
ther there was a contractual obligation to import does not,
however, seem to have been considered, and, in fact, the
Supreme Court decisions in Tata Iron & Co., etc., do not
seem to have been cited.

In a Patna case,’ these were the facts. The assessee
having its head office in Calcutta, supplied machineries to
the Damodar Valley Corporation. The assessee contended
that the sales were exempt under article 286(1)(b) of the
Constitution, inasmuch as the machineries were earmarked
by the manufacturers outside India for sale to the Corpora-
tion. On these facts, the court held as follows: —

‘It was submitted by learned counsel for the assessee
that there was privity of contract between the Damodar
Valley Corporation and the manufacturers, and the assessee
was merely an agent for the manufacturers with regard to
the sale of machineries. It is not possible for us to accept
this argument as correct. The contract of agency between
the assessee and the manufacturers has not been produced
before the taxing authorities, and in the absence of the
documents of the contract it is not possible for us to say
whether there was privity of contract between the Damo-
dar Valley Corporation and the manufacturers or not. It

“1. Abdul Wahab v. Government of Madras, A.LR. 1962 Mad. 250, 251,
para 45.

2. Rajeswari Mills Lid. v. State of Madras. (1964) 15 S.T.C.i, 8}
(1964) 2 M.L.J. 84 (Madras).

3. Blackwood Hodge (India) Lid. v. State of Bihar, (1960) 11 S.T.C,
बा (Ramaswami C.J. and Choawdhey J.) (Patna).


80

was also submitted on behalf of the assessee that the
machineries were earmarked by the manufacturers for the
sale to the Damodar Valley Corporation. There is no find-
ing of the Sales Tax Authorities on this question of fact:
but even assuming that the submission of fearned counsel
for the assessee is factually correct, it does not necessarily
follow that the sale of machineries to the Damodar Valley
Corporation was made “in the course of import” within
the meaning of article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution. It has
been pointed out by the Supreme Court in State of Mysore
and another v. Mysore Spinning and Manufacturing Com-
pany Lid. and others, that even if the goods were manu-
factured and marked “for export”, nevertheless the ban on
article 286(1)(b) was not attracted and sales made “for the
purpose of export” are not protected unless they them-
selves “occasion the export”. In other words, all sales that
preceed the one that occasions the export are taxable, even
if the goods are manufactured with the main intention for
export. We reject, therefore, the argument of learned
counsel for the assessee on this point. In our opinion, the
present case is governed by the principle laid down by the
High Court in Mahadeo Ram Bali Ram vs. State of Bihar,*
and in view of the principle laid down in that case we hold
that the provisions of article 286(1)(b) do not apply to this
case and the first question of law referred by the Board of
Revenue to this Court must be answered against the
assessee and in favour of the State of Bihar.’.

The place of passing of property has been emphasised in
certain other decisions. Thus, in one case’, on the ground
that the sale was completed within the State which sought
to tax it before the goods were moved from that State, the
sale was held to be taxable by the State. It was observed
that in the transport of the goods themselves, which was
subsequent to the sale, there was no element of sale, and
such subsequent transport did not entitle the purchaser to
the benefit of article 286(2) of the Constitution (as it stood
before the amendment).

In a Madras‘ case, the assessee, who was carrying on the
business of importing milk-powder, took delivery of the
documents of title on payment of the value to the Bank,
and handed them over to the clearing agent. In the mean-
time. the assessee entered into contracts of sale with buy-
ers. and issued delivery orders to them. On behalf of the
assessee, the clearing agents cleared the goods, received the
full value from the buyers {in whose favour the delivery

1. State of Mysore v. Mysore Spinning and Manufacturing Co. Ltd.
(1988) 9 S.T.C. 188 : A.LR. 1958 S.C. 1002.

2. Madrahadeo Ram Bali Ram v. State of Bihar, (1958) 9 S.T.C. 173 (Patna)

3, India Coffee Board v. State of Madras, A.LR. 1956 Mad. 449, 452,
para 19.

. 1952) Pr. Lid. v. State of Madras, (1960) 11 S.T.C. 723, 726

4. Aree 11 and Ramchandra Iyer (IJ) (Madras HC.)


81

orders had been issued), and delivered the goods to
the buyer. The question arose whether the sales were
exempt from sales-tax as sales “in the course of import”
under article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution, The High Court
emphasised the facts, namely—that out of a fairly large
mass of imported milk-powder, a portion was sold to given
buyers, and that portion had to be appropriated before the
sale could be effected in favour of the given buyer. What
was sold was “an unascertained and unappropriated portion
of a mass of goods yet to arrive in this country”, and, there-
fore. mere issue of delivery orders did not suffice to transfer
title. The appropriation was only at the point of delivery,
and that delivery was effected only after the goods had been.
cleared by the assessee’s clearing agents ie, after the
goods had crossed the customs frontiers. The transaction
fell under section 23(1) of the Sale of Goods Act, where-
under in the case unascertained goods, it was only at the
point of delivery that the property passed and the goods
were ascertained. This was, therefore, a sale after the
import had been completed, and a sale which was within
the State. Hence, it was not exempt under article
286(1)(b).

In some of the decisions, the test adopted was absence privity.
of privity between the foreign buyer and the Indian seller)
or the foreign seller and the Indian buyer, as the case may
फ6.1-7-2-5६.

In a Calcutta ९8४४९,९ it was recognised that if the Govern-
ment, by reason of the Colliery Control Order, 1945, directed
the assessee. who was dealing in coal, to sell coal, to parties
outside India, and if the assessee delivered the goods to
shipping agents as directed by the Government, then that
would be a sale “in the course of export”. On the other
hand, if the assessee was directed to deliver the goods to
the Government, and then the Government was to deliver
the goods to the shipping agents, then the Government
would become the owner and the purchaser, and the sale
would not be a sale “in the course of export”.

The mere intention to export is not sufficient. Thus, it Iatentio: to
was held in a Mysore case. that a purchase which precedes export.
such a sale does not fall under article 286(1)(b), even though
it is made for the purpose of or with a view to export. In
that case. the assessee’s contention was, that the purchase

1. Gandhi Sons v. State of Madras, ATR. 1955 Mad. 722, 725, para. 153
6 S.T.C. 694.

2. Haji Abdul Gaffoor Saih & Co. v. State of Madras, A.LLR. 1958 Mad
314, 376, para. 6; 9 S.T.C. 208.

. State of Madras vy. India Coffee Board, A.LR. 1956 S.C. 631.

4. Mohiudeen Thamby & Co, v. State, A.I.R. 1962 Mad. 323, 325, para 8

5. Sunil Kumar Roy v, Commercial Tax Officer, (1959) 10 $.T.C. 14, 17
(Calcutta).

5. Hind Mercantile Corporation Private Ltd. v. Commissioner of Commercial
Taxes, (1966) 17 S.T.C. 175 (Mysore).



Object of
export not
relevant.

Integrality.

Test of
contractual
obligation
adopted.

82

‘was made py him in the course of export outside India, to
fulfil antecedent contracts with foreign buyers. [The
Supreme Court decisions, in which the aspect of contractual
obligation to export was emphasised (e.g. the BGN. Plan-
tations case}, do not seem to have been cited.]

In one case,-? it was held, that if a dealer in a State, in
order to perform a contract for sale entered into with a
foreign buyer, purchases goods which he subsequently ex-
ports, then the purchase is not in the course of export.

It was recognised in many decisions. that the test is
whether the transaction of sale is an integral part of the
activity of its exporting.’

One comes across several decisions of High Courts,
where the test of contractual obligation to move the goods
was applied. Thus, in Punjab case," where on the facts the
sale was held to be in “course of export”, it was recognised
that even if the contract of sale is entered into between a
foreign buyer on the one hand and the assessee through
its agent on the other hand in India, such a sale would be
in the course of export if it occasions or resuits in, the
export of goods outside India.

In Janki Das’s case, the facts were these. The assessee
was carrying on the business of purchasing cotton in the
State of Punjab. He sent cotton by rail to Bombay, and
the railway receipt taken in favour of “self”, was sent to
his bankers at Bombay. The assessee’s commission agents
obtained the railway receipt after depositing with the bank
75 per cent. of the price by way of security. After taking
delivery of the cotton, the commission agents kept it in
their godown, and when they got an offer of purchase from
a foreign buyer, they obtained the assessee’s consent for
its sale, and then sold it to the foreign buyer on behalf of
the assessee. The commission agents remitted the sale pro-
ceeds to the assessee, after adjusting the security already
given and deducting their commission on the sale. The
assessee was charged godown and other incidental charges
plus the interest on the amount given as security. On
these facts, it was held, that the sale of cotton to the
foreign buyer by the commission agents on behalf of the
assessee was a sale “in the course of export”, and therefore

1. State of Madras v.K.H. Chambers Lid., ALR. 1955 Mad. 314, 321,
para. 15 and 16.

2, See also Govindarajulu v. State of. Madras, AAR. 1953 Mad. 116
(reviews American case).

3. See Mahadev Ram v. State 9 §.T.C. 173; A.1.R. 1959 Pat. 30, para 3-

4. Janki Das v, Excise and Taxtion Officer, 67 Punjab Law Reporter 69, noted
in the Yearly Digest, April, 1965, cols. 764 and 765; 16
S.T.C. 542, 551, $52. Harbans Singh and Jindra Lal JJ.)

5. Janki Das v. Excise and Taxation Officer, 67 Punjab Law Reporter 69,
para,


83

the assessee was entitled to deduct the purchase price of
cotton from the gross turnover under section 5(2)(a)(vi) of
the Punjab General Sales-tax Act,! which authorised deduc-
tion from turnover in respect of “purchase of goods which
are sold... . _..in the course of export out of the terri-
tory of Ind: Applying the test of “occasioning the ex-
port”, the High Court of Punjab held, that even though the
contract of sale was entered into between the foreign
buyer on the one hand and the assessee through its agent
at Bombay etc. on the other hand, such a sale would cer-
tainly be in the course of export, if it occasions, or results
in, the export of goods outside the territory of India.

We may refer to the facts in another Punjab case.” The
assessee in that case was engaged in the export of iron ore
to Japan, but, by reason of control on the commodities, the
export had to be made through the State Trading Corpora-
tion. The State Trading Corporation appointed “S” as its
broker. In the agreement of sale between the assessee and
S. the assessee was specified as the seller, and S was speci-
fied as the buyer. Regarding payment, it was provided that
a certain sum (Rs. 25.000) should be arranged as an advance
to be paid to the seller after signing the contract. and the
balance was paid to the seller “against actual weight of
iron ore loaded by the sellers when iron ore is either
weighed at Kandla Port or by draft weight of the ship at
the time of shipment to the foreign countries as per bargain
by the buyer or by the State Trading Corporation of India”
The account was to be finally settled when the shipment
was made and satisfactory report received from the foreign
buyers, or the State Trading Corporation approved the
material for foreign countries where iron is extracted out
of it. In a letter sent by “S” to the assessee, it was made
clear, that the Government of India was dealing with
foreign countries on Government level in the export of
iron ore; that the State Trading Corporation was the busi-
Ness organisation on Government level, and S were the
brokers who passed on the terms directed by the State
Trading Corporation; that iron ore shall be shipped to
Japan and the assessee was solely responsible “for the
quantity and quality till the material is delivered to
Japanese firm”; that “they test the material for extraction
of iron, before they pass the pay orders”. and that while 5
got the agreed brokers. in fact the assessees were the sell-
ers and the Japanese firms were the buyers through the
State Trading Corporation.

The question that fell to be considered. was, whether
the sale by the assessee was “in the course of export “under
article 286 of the Constitution read with section 5 of the

1. Panjab General Sales Tax Act, 1048 (Punjab Act 46 of 1948).

2. New Rajasthan Minerals Syndicate v. State of Punjab (1965): 16 S.T.C.
$34, 536, 5405.67 Punjab Law Reporter 165 (S.T.C. issue dated
Ist and rsth July, 1965) (D.K. Mahajan J.)


84

Central Sales Tax Act. The High Court of Punjab, after
considering the various decisions, pointed out, that the
assessees were engaged in export, that by reason of control,
the export had to be through the State Trading Corporation,
that at no point of time, the property passed to State Trad-
ing Corporation or S; and that after the goods were reject-
ed either at the port or by the foreign buyers, the loss must
fall on the assessee. The sale was not by the petitioner to
S. It was a sale “in the course of export”, and was there-
fore not taxable. (The court seems to have held that the
sale was by the assessee to Japanese buyers, though there
is no express statement to that effect in the judgment).

The following observaions in another Punjab case! may
be cited :

The sale in the course of export predicates an
inextricable connection or bond betwen the sale the
export, leaving no option to the purchaser of not ex-
porting without committing a breach of the contract
in question. In order to attract the exemption, there
must also in addition be the resultant export. The
sale, in other words must itself occasion export. or
what is the same thing, the export must be raade
under the sale. To occasion export, there must ac-
cordingly exist between the contract of sale and
actual exportation a bond so that each link is insepar-
ably connected with the one immediately preceding
it. The two activities of the sale and the export must
be so integrated as to leave no posibility of a volun-
tary interruption without entailing a breach of the
contract or an obligation arising from the nature of
the transaction. It would thus postulate common in-
tention on the part of the contracting parties to ex-
port the goods which must be actually followed by
export and this, in my view, appears to be essential
in order to constitute a sale in the course of the ex-
port of the gods. There must necessarily come into
existence an obligation to export and there must also
be an actual export pursuant to such obligation. Mere-
jy because a sale has been followed by the export of
the goods sold does not by itself clothe the sale with
the quality of its being in the course of their export.

‘As I understand the argument of the learned
counsel for the petitioner, he wants us to grant ex-
emption to his client merely because goods purchased
have been later exported from Bombay. This, as has
been repeatedly explained by the Supreme Court, is
not enough; not is mere intention to export without
an actual exportation, sufficient to constitute a sale in
the course of export, because a sale by export involves

के Mohan Lal Moti Lal v, Assessing Authority, A.LR. 1965 Punjab
391-394, para 6516 S.T.C. 553, 559 (Punjab). ,


85

a series of integrated activities commencing from the
agreement of sale with a foreign buyer and ending
with the delivery of the goods for the purpose of ex-
port. Such a sale cannot be dissociated from the ex-
port without which it cannot be effectuated because
the sale and resultant export form but parts of a single
transaction. This, as I construe the various Supreme
Court decisions, is the true meaning of the expression
“sale in the course of export”. The decisions of this
Court to which reference has been made do not, in
my opinion, take a different view of law’.

On the facts. however, the Court expressed no consi-
dered opinion, leaving it to the assessment authority.

In a Kerala case’, the principle was accepted (in rela-
tion to inter-State trade), that even where the transaction
is complete in the State, yet. if it has caused the goods to
move, it would be an inter-State sale. In that case. no
final assessment had been made, and, therefore the court
merely directed the Sales Tax Authorities to make 9 fresh
assessment in the light of its decision. The court followed
the decision of the Supreme Court in Tata Iron & Steel
Co., where Shah J. had, delivering the majority judgment,
held, that section 3(a) of the Central Sales Tax Act cover.
ed sales in which the movement of goods from cne State
to another was the contract of sale and property in the
goods passed in either State.

Similarly, in 6 Patna 268९९, it was held that the fact
thai the delivery of the goods took place in India was not
conclusive, and since the goods were actually exported
to Nepal in pursuance of the contract of sale between the
parties, the sale was held to be a sale in the course of ex-
port and, therefore, not taxable.

That a sale cannot be said to be inter-Siate sale unless
there is a movement of goods from one State to another
under the contract of sale was a proposition which was
elaborated in a Gujarat case’. The High Court observed,
“The contract of sale must itself provide as an integral
part of it that the goods shall be transported from one
State to another. If the contract of sale provides for move-
ment of goods from one State to another as a necessary
incident of its performance, the sale would be a sale in
the course of inter-State trade or commerce. In such a
case, it would not be relevant to inquire where the pro-
perty passes. The property may pass within the State

1. Mulji Ratanshi & Co.v. State of Kerala, (1961) 12 5.1, 0. 657,661—
(Kerala), case under section 3(a), Central Sales-tax Act, 1956,

2, Duli Chand v. State of Bihar, A.LR, 1963 Pat. 359, 361, para 3
(Ramaswami C.J. and Unowalia 1.)

3. Bharatkhand Textile Manufacturing Co., Lid. v. State of Gujarat, (1964)
15 S.T.C. 885, 891 (Shetat C.J, and P.N. Bhagwati J)


86

which seeks to tax the sale, but this sale would neverthe-
less be an inter-State sale, and, therefore, beyond the tax-
ing power of the State.” Applying this test to the facts
of the case, the High Court held, that it was not an essential
term of the contract of sale that the goods shall necessarily
cross the border of the State of Bombay and go to another
State. The goods might, under the contract of sale, be
taken delivery of by the buyers at their godowns within
the State of Bombay, and if the buyers so instructed the
assessee, the goods might be despatched to other destina-
tion which again might be within the State or outside the
State. The buyers had thus an option under the contract
of sale either to take actual delivery of the goods at their
godowns within the State of Bombay or to direct the
assessee to despatch the goods to destinations within or
outside Bombay. The contracts of sale were entered into
by the buyers with the assessee irrespective of the fact
whether the buyers had received any previous indents
from upcountry merchants. It was, therefore, impossible
to hold on the facts and circumstances of the case that it
was an integral part of the contracts of sale that the goods
shall necessarily be transported from the State of Bom-
bay to another State or that the movement of the goods
from the State of Bombay to another State was a neces-
sary incident of performance of the contracts of sale.

The principle that a movement of goods across the
State border, if involved under the transaction, may con-
vert it into and inter-State sale, was recognised in a My-
sore case!, where the various decisions of the Supreme
Court were also noted.

In a Bombay case’, the contractual test was applied.
We quote a passage from the judgment, which shows both
the facts of the case and the conclusion. After referring
to the Burmah Shell case, the High Court stated: —

“In the light of these aforesaid principles laid
down by their Lordships the facts of this case will
have to be approached. It cannot be said, and indeed
it has not been urged, that the sale has taken place
while the ship was on high seas. On the other hand,
the contention is that the sale has occasioned export.
Therefore, it will have to be seen whether, on the
material on record, the sale effected by the applicant
is inextricably connected with taking the ship from
the shores of Bombay to Costa Rica as an integral part
thereof . We have already reproduced the terms of
the contract. There was an agreement between the
applicant agreeing to sell the ship and the Costa Rica

1. PM.M.and Minerals v, State of Mysore, A.I.R, 1965 Mysore 240, 243,
241, paragraph 6 and 8,

2. A, Ebrahim & Co. ५५ State of Bombay, (1962) 13 8.T.C. 877, 891, 892
(Tambe and V.S. Desai JJ.)


87

Company purchasing it at a price of Rs. 4,52,547. The
‘contract was to take effect on the Government of India
granting permission to the sale of the ship and to the
transfer of the flag from Indian flag to Costa Rican
flag. Some time before 15th April, 1954, Government
of India had granted permission to both these things.
The transaction of sale was completed while the ship
was in Bombay docks, and the delivery of the ship
was taken up ‘behalf of the purchasers by Messrs
Madhavial & Co., in the Bombay harbour. The ship
thereafter on 15th April, 1954 sailed on the high seas.
These being the facts of this case, in our opinion, it
is not possible to say that the sale itself was so inex-
tricably connected with the export as an integral part
thereof, that the sale itself has occasioned export. On
the other hand, the only inference that can be drawn
from these facts is that the sale preceded the export
and thereafter the applicant ceased to have any con-
nection with the ship. The purchaser under the terms
of the contract had option either to take the ship
abroad or to break it up. In taking the ship abroad,
the purchaser has only exercised his option, and the
sale itself had no connection therewith. It is, how-
ever, the contention of Mr. Ganatra that the contract
of sale provided that granting of permission by the
Government of India to transfer the ship’s flag was a
condition precedent to the validity of the contract.
‘The Government of India has granted the permission,
and, therefore, the necessary consequence is that fore-
ign destination was given to the ship, and the ship
was put in the stream of its export. Had Mr. Ganatra
been able to show us that as a necessary consequence
of the grant of permission by the Government of India
to the transfer of the flag of the ship, it was obliga-
tory on the purchaser to take the ship to Costa Rica,
we might have been persuaded to hold that the sale
was inextricably connected with the export of the
ship and that the sale itself had occasioned export.
To enable Mr. Ganatra to look into this matter. we
adjourned the case and granted Mr. Ganatra two days’
time. Mr. Ganatra has ben unable to show us any
provisions of law or any rules which would have the
force of making it obligatory on the purchaser to take
the ship from the Bombay docks to Casta Rica Port.
The position then is that even though the Government
of India granted permission for the transfer of the
ship’s flag, the purchaser was free to deal in any
manner with the ship as envisaged in the contract.
He could have either taken the ship at his sweet will
as provided in the contract and could even have broken
the ship in the Bombay docks. Taking the ship to
Costa Rica by the purchaser. therefore, cannot in any
manner be connected much 1९55 inextricably be con-
nected with the sale”.

31 MofLaw—7?


Decision
contrary to
test of cone
‘tractual obli-
gation,

88

There are very few decisions which take a position
directly contradictory with the contractual obligation. The
under-mentioned case seems to be one such’. In that case,
import of cotton was made by certain dealers of Bombay
{for selling to the assessee), and the shipping documents
were in the names of the Bombay dealers. The assessee
intimated the Bombay dealers about his requirements, and
then the Bombay dealers placed orders with suppliers in
Africa. The shipments were directed from African ports
to Cochin. In the meantime, the assessee obtained the
necessary transport licence, and the Bombay dealers sent
the shipping documents to their clearing agents at Cochin,
who, after getting the goods cleared through the customs,
despatched the goods to the assessee, and sent the railway
receipts to the Bank of Baroda or other Bank. The
assessee paid the price into the Bank, against delivery of
railway receipts. On these facts, the High Court held. that
the purchases were not purchases “in the course of import”,
but were purchases effected after the import had been
completed. The following observations in the judgment
seems to go against the contractual obligation theory: —

“It is no doubt true the dealer in Bombay ordered’
the cotton from his vendor abroad only to carry out
the importer’s contractual obligations to sell the cotton
so imported to the assessee. The assessee provided the
facilities by arranging for the grant of the import
licence to the dealer in Bombay, even as the assessee
provided further facilities for the transport of the
cotton by rail in this country after the cotton had been
imported and after it had been cleared through the cus-
toms. The relationship between the assessee and the
importer at Bombay was that of buyer and seller, both
being principals, and the sale was only after the import
of the goods, even where the contract to sell preceded’
the onder to the exporter abroad to ship the goods in

ndia.”.

The facts in an earlier Calcutta case* were peculiar. In
that case, an order for the manufacture of wagons was
placed by the Railway Board from New Delhi, and was
accepted by a letter posted in Calcutta by the manufactur-
ing company. Payments were to be made in Calcutta, and
the wagons were to be delivered f.o.r. at the company’s
work siding situated in West Bengal. The wagons were
meant for the Western Railway situated outside the State
of West Bengal, having its headquarters at Ajmer. The
company only delivered the wagons at its work siding (in.

1. Dhanalakshoni Mills Ltd. v. State of Madras, A.1.R. 1961 Mad. 87, 88,
paragraph 4; 11 S.T.C, 306.

2, Indian Standard Wagon Co. v. Commercial Tax Officer, A.1.R. 1960 Cal
25st S.T.C. 47.


89

West Bengal), and claimed deductions in respect of the
price of these wagons. It was held, that as the contract
contemplated that the rolling stock would be moved beyond
the boundaries of the State, the transaction constituted an
inter-State trade. It was also pointed out, that delivery
was made to the common carriers who themselves were
the purchasers. (As, however, the sale was within the
period covered by the Sales-tax Laws Validation Act, 1956,
it was held to be taxable).

In the appeal from the decision, this point was not
challenged’.

In a later case,’ it was stated, that the facts of the earlier
case were peculiar, because the sale was in respect of rail-
way wagons which were admittedly required for purposes
elsewhere. In the later case, it was held, that the mere
fact that the words “for onward despatch to consignee”
were used did not throw any burden on the seller, and did
not convert the sale into an inter-State transaction. The
later decision, however, recognises the principle of
contractual obligation to transport the goods as a test to
be employed under section 27(1)(b), West Bengal Finance
Sales Tax Act, 1941. which exempts from tax a sale or
purchase which “takes place in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce”.

On the other hand, if there is no contractual obligation Subsequent
to export or to transport. then the mere fact that after ‘fansport not
purchase, the assessee transports the goods across the State material,
does not bring the case under section 3(a), Central Sales
Tax Actt.s,

In a decision of the Calcutta High Court in 1963, the
matter has been discussed exhaustively, and it has been
pointed out, that the question whether a sale is to be re-
garded as an inter-State sale is to be determined on an
interpretation of the facts on the point whether the trans-
port was a part of the contract for sale or whether the
transport was made after the completion of the sale inde-
pendently of the contract. “The question is, whether the
transport of the movement ‘under the contract is a part of

1. Paragraphs 25 and 26 in the A.LR.

2 Indian Paria ae भर पता Tax Officer, tt §.T.C, 473
+ ES ORT N be, 265, (Dated किए ० 201 Sake 178
* ease te feist 72778 26%

5+ Government of Andhra Pradesh ५, Ni ८.
egryment of Andina Pradesh v, Nagendrapea 09567 8.T.C. 68
6. Dhiraj Lal ५, Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, ALR

448, 455, pare 24 and 43 (7.8. Makherjea 13 1963 Cal- 442,


Test of
“Linking”

Situs rot
conclusive,

90

its incident, i.e., an inseparable incident or whether it is
de hors or outside the contract.” In the same decision it
was pointed out, that the place where the title passes
cannot by itself alone determine whether the sale is in the
course of inter-State trade or not.

Tn some cases, it has been emphasised that the move-
ment of the goods contemplated must be closely linked
with the sale of goods, and that the exemption is not in-
tended to cover a later movement undertaken “for the bet-
ter enjoyment of the goods” after the title has passed!

In one case, in relation to inter-State trade, it was
emphasised, that the connection between the f.o.7. sale at
a railway station in the State for a destination outside the
State and the movement that followed the delivery to the
common carrier, was so intimate and real that it was occa-
sioned, caused, or brought about by the sale. In that case,
the delivery was to the common carrier for the purpose of
despatch to the purchaser in the other State.? and the sale
was held to be exempt under section 3, Central Sales Tax
Act, 1956,

That the situs of a sale is not conclusive on the question
of exemption from tax on a sale vis-a-vis article 286, has
been noticed in some cases, Reference may, in this connec-
tion, be made to the following observations in an Andhra
Pradesh cese*: —

“That apart, as observed by Das. C. J. in Bengal
Immunity Co, Lid. v, State of Bihar.’ “the situs of a
sale or purchase is wholly irrelevant as regards its
inter-State character". His Lordship added: “Now,
even when the situs of a sale or purchase is in fact
inside a State, with no essential ingredient taking place
outside, nevertheless. if it takes place in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce. it will be hit by clause
(2), If the sales or purchases are in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce the stream of inter-State
trade or commerce will catch up in its vortex all such
sales or purchases which take place in its course wher-
ever the situs of the sales or purchases may be ae
It is true that these remarks are made in the context
of inter-State trade and commerce. But they are
equall’ applicable to export trade.

1. T. Bapputy v. Government ofKerala, ALR, 1962 Kerala 79, 71, Para. 33
12 S.T.C, 722 (Inter-State sales).

2, Mis Sudarshanam Iyengar and Son vs. State of Kerala, A.1.R. 1962, 66,
67, para. 713 S.T.C. 17 (Inter-State sales).

3. Guduthur Thinmappa & Son v, State of Andhra Pradesh (1954) 15
S.T.C, 299, 307 (Andhra).

4. Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. ४. State of Bihar (1955) 6 S.T.C. 446, 481.


91

Finally, reference may’ be made to an Andhra Pradesh खिल
decision; where the following observations occur:— invol

‘We need only refer to a recent decision of the
Supreme Court in Cement Marketing Co. of India (Br.}
Ltd. v. State of Mysore? in the course of which the
entire case law was reviewed and the position was
summed up thus at page 984 of the A.LR.:—

“Thus the tests which have been laid down to
bring a sale within inter-State sales are that the
transaction must involve movement of goods across
the border,? transactions are inter-State in which
aS a mirect resuit of such sales the gooas are actually
delivered for consumption in another State;* a con-
tract of sale must involve transport of goods from
one State to another under the contract of sale>

So the true test is that where under a contract of
sale, there is a transport of goods from outside a State
into the territory of the State, and the contract itself
involves the movement of goods across the border, the
transaction is stamped with the character of an inter-
State sale. Nothing more is necessary. In other words.
where the sale or purchase occasions the transport of
goods from one State to another. the sale or purchase
would be in the course of inter-State trade.

APPENDIX 2

The system of sale-tax has been reviewed in a recent Brief review
Report,* and the relevant passages are quoted below.’-®§ of the sys-
tem of
‘5. Central sales tax is levieq under the provisions “5%

of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. This tax is confin-

ed to sales in the course of inter-State trade. A sale

Or purchase of goods takes place in the course of inter-

State trade” if the sale or purchase occasions the move-

. Tungabhadra Industries v, State of Andina Pradesh, ALR. 1966 A.P.85
para 18 (F.B.) (March 1966 issue).
2. Cement Marketing Co. of India (Pr.) Ltd. v. State of Mysore. A.LR.
1963 S.C, 9805 14 S.T.C. 175.
3. Mohan Lal Hargovind Das v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1955) 2 S.T.C.
5093 1955-56 S.T.C. 687. .
4. Ram Narain & Sons Lid.v. Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax. ATR.
1955 S.C. 765, 7735 6 S.T.C. 627.
5. Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar, A.1.R. 1955 $.C.661.734;
eee of 955 73436
6. Committee on Sales-tax (on Commodities exported from India), (Govern.
ment of India, Ministry of Commerce), Report (19643, Chapel
pages Ii to 33, paragraph 5 to 31. >
7. For a detailed description, see Report of the Taxation Enquiry Commise
sion (1953-54), Vol. 3, pages 141-162. °
8. For a short analysis, see Harvard Law School, ‘Taxation in India (1960),
paras 16/1.1 and 16/3. i


92

ment of goods from one State to another or is effected
by the transfer of documents of title to the goods dur-
ing their movement from one State to the other. The
Central Sales Tax Act has declared certain goods such
as coal, cotton, cotton-yarn, hides and skins, iron and
steel, jute, oil seeds, cotton fabrics, silk fabrics, rayon
or art silk fabrics, woollen fabrics, sugar and tobacco
as goods of special importance in inter-State trade or

commerce.

“On the sales of such “declared” goods the rate of
Central sales tax cannot exceed 2 per cent. On other
goods when the sales are to persons other than the
dealers registered under the Central Sales Tax Act or
to Governments, Central and States, the rate is 10 per
cent, except that wherever the rate of tax under the
local law is higher than 10 per cent. on any goods the
said higher rates apply to the inter-State sale. When
sales are made to dealers registered under the Central
Sales Tax Act and to Government against appropriate
certificates in the prescribed forms, (Forms “ Cc” and
“DP” vide Appendices VI and VII respectively), the rate

is 2 per cent.

“These rates are subject to a general exception that
if a commodity is subject to tax in a State at a rate
lower than 2 per cent, or is exempt from tax, the inter-
State sale of that commodity from that State would be
subjected to tax at that lower rate or would be exempt
from tax, as the case may be, whether such a sale is
made to a registered dealer or not.

“Central Sales Tax is complementary to the sales
tax levied by the State, and administration of the law
is entrusted to the Sales Tax Authorities of the States
who generally exercise the same powers for the pur-
pose of levy, collection and enforcement of the pay-
ment of Central Sales Tax as are available to them
under the Local Sales Tax Act. The proceeds from the
Central Sales Tax become a part of the Consolidated
Fund of the State where the sale takes place. In addi-
tion to the general provisions, the States are empower-
ed under a section of the Central Act to grant exemp-
tion or reduction in the rates of tax in inter-State sales
of goods or classes of goods if it is considered expe-
dient in the public interest to do so. Such a power is
not available with the Central Government under the
present Act.”

5, The State sales taxes are either selective or
general. Sales of certain specific commodities like
motor spirit, foreign liquor, etc, are taxed in some
“tates under separate laws. The remaining goods in
general are governed by the general law of sales tax of


93

each State under which certain specific goods may be
Exempted while in the case of other goods the rates
may be different for different goods. The major part
of the sales tax structure of the States consists of multi-
point, single-point or two-point taxes or a combination
of these.”

“8. Broadly speaking, while multi-point sales tax is
levied in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala, Madras,
Mysore and U.P., the States of Assam, Jammu and
Kashmir Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan
and West Bengal impose a single-point tax. Except
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, the States belonging
to the second group levy tax on the last sale. Maha-
rashtra and Gujarat have a two-point sales tax on the
sales of certain commodities. and on others single-point
tax is levied. There is, however, no clear-cut demar-
cation among the three systems and in every State,
whether levying a single-point, a two-point or a multi-
point tax, higher sales tax at a suitable stage is levied
on certain luxury goods, known as specified goods. Be-
sides, in all States sales tax on “declared goods” is
levied at any one stage which may vary from State to
State and from commodity to commodity in the same
State. Multi-point tax has been combined with single-
point tax in some Of the multi-point States. There are
several other variations also from the general pattern.”

“9. Sales tax rates vary from State to State and
often from commodity to commodity within the same
State. The system of taxation 18 also not uniform in all
the States. The basis of levy is different. the minimum
taxable turnover limit is not uniform and there is
diversity in the coverage and in the schedule of
exempted goods. Among the single point States the
general rate of sales tax varies. It has been fixed at
4 per cent. in Assam, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan
and 5 per cent. in Orissa and West Bengal and 6 per
cent. in Punjab. The minimum rate is } per cent. and
the maximum rate generally 10 per cent, In regard
to foreign liquor the rate is higher still: in seven States
‘it is more than 20 per cent.”

“10. In the States where a multi-cum-single point
tax system is prevalent. ie. in Andhra Pradesh.
Bihar, Kerala, Madras. Mysore and U.P. the general
rate of multi-point tax per cent. except in the case
of Bihar where it is 4 per cent. In same Stotes like
Madras and Mysore a special rate of 1 per cent. is
imposed on the sale of foodgrains, whereas in Andhra
Pradesh a higher rate of 3 per cent. is levied on the
articles of food and drinks sold in hotels. restaurants,
etc. In U.P. unlike other States, there are many
special rates between } per cent. and 3 per cent, depend-



Khosla’s
case Salient
facts.

94

ing upon the nature of commodities. The minimum:
rate of single-point tax in multi-cum-single-point States
fluctuates between } per cent. and 3 per cent.

“11, In all States the liability to pay tax arises only
when the taxable turnover is more than the minimum
fixed for that purpose. This minimum also varies from
State to State. In the majority of the cases it is about
Rs. 10.000 per annum though in some cases it is as low
as Rs. 5.000. Again, although most of these tax systems
contain a list of articles which are exempted from the
tax their number varies from State to State. From the
tax laws prevalent in different States it would seem
that Kerala has the smallest number of exemptions
while Madras has the largest. Both are. incidentally,
multi-point systems. In most of the States the exemp-
tions are confined to essential goods, raw materials,
goods sold to certain institutions like schools, hospitals,
charitable organisations, ete.. goods produced by cot-
tage or village industries. etc.”

NOTE BY MEMBER, SHRI K. GS. DATAR

1. I regret, 1 am unable to agree with the view of the
majority of the Members on the main question whether
Khosla’s case goes beyond and is inconsistent with the
two Travancore cases. I have, therefore, thought it my
duty to place my views on record for whatever they may
be worth.

2. Before considering the scope and effect of the deci-
sion now before us, particularly in the light of the previous
decisions of the Supreme Court bearing on the points
which are involved in it, it would be necessary to state
some of the salient facts on which it was rendered.

3. K. G. Khosla and Co., who was the Appellant before
the Supreme Court and who may be referred to 1 this
note as the assessee. entered into a contract with the
Director-General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi,
for the supply of axle box bodies. Under this contract, the
assessee undertook to get the axle box bodies manufac-
tured according to specifications therein set out, in Bel-
gium by manufacturers named M/s. La Brugeoies Et.
Nivelles Belgium and import them into the territory of
India and thereafter deliver them to the consignee
(Southern Railway, Perambur and Golden Rock Works
and Myscre) as directed by the purchaser,--the Director
General of Supplies and Disposals and as agreed to in the
contract. The assessee was entitled to be paid 90 per cent.
of the price of the goods supplied by him, only after ins-
pection and delivery of the goods to the consignee
(Southern Railway) and the balance of 10 per cent. was
payable to him on final acceptance by the Consignee.


98

4. Clause 17(L) of the Contract provided: —

“The contractor (assessee) is entirely responsible
for the execution of the contract in all respects in
accordance with the terms and conditions as specified
in the A/T (Acceptance of Tender) and the Schedule
annexed thereto. Any approval which the Inspector
may have given in respect of the stores, materials or
other particulars and the work or workmanship in-
volved in the contract (whether with or without test
carried out by the contractor's Inspector) shall not
bind the purchaser (Director-General of Supplies and
Disposals and notwithstanding any approval or
acceptance given by the Inspector it shall be lawful
for the Consignee (Southern Railway) on kehalf of
the purchaser to reject the stores on arrival at the des-
tination (Perambur, Golden Rock Works and Mysore)
if it is found that the stores supplied by the Contractor
are not in conformity with the terms and conditions
of the contract in all respects!,”

5. In pursuance of this contract which, as stated above,
the assessee had entered into with the Director-General
of Supplies and Disposals, the assessee supplied axle box
bodies of the value of Rs. 174029-50 to the Southern Rail-
way at Perambur and Golden Rock Works and of the value
of Rs. 132987 .75 to Southern Railway, Mysore. ‘The Joint
Commercial Tax Officer held that the former sales were
liable to tax under the Madras General Sales Tax Act and
the letter under the Central Sales Tax Act. He rejected
the contention of the assessee that the Sales were in the
course of import. He held that “there was no privity of
contract between the foreign seller (Belgian Manufac-
turers) and the Government, for the goods. The goods
were supplied only as the goods of the seller (assessee)

and intended for them. They were cleared as their own
and delivered after clearance?.”

6. The assessee filed two appeals but the
Assistant Commissioner agreeing with the

Joint Commer-
cial Tax Officer rejected the appeals,

7. The Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal on further appeal
also held that the sale by the A

Director-General of Supplies and
occasioned the imports. The Tribunal

found that “the
“Appellants (Assessee) had enteded int

© contracts for

1. These facts are stated in Paragraph 1 of the judgment of the Supreme
पा,
2. See paragraph 2 of the Supreme Court ipdgment, Assessment Order No-

A27-7/59 dated 30-8-1960 passed by the Joint Commercial Tax Officer:
Harbour Division 1.

Contract
Khosla’s
case,

ins

Judgment of

Sales Tax
Officer.

missed by
Ap

Assistant

Appellate Appeals dis-

Commission-

er.
Judgment

appeal,

ppellants (assessee) to the by the Tri-
Disposals had not unal in the


Judgment_ot
Madras High
Court, in
Khosia’s
case,

96

supply of axle box bodies with the Director-General of
Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi, in order to fulfil these
contracts, they had entered into further contracts with the
manufacturers in Belgium. The goods contracted to be
supplied to the Government Departments were got manu-
factured by the Appellants (Assessee) in Belgium,
imported into India, cleared at Madras Harbour and sup-
plied to the buyers thereafter. There was no privity of
contract between the Belgium manufacturers and the
Government Departments. The Belgian manufacturers
after manufacture, consigned the goods to the Appellants
{Assessee) by ship under bills of lading in which the Con-
signee was the Appellants themselves. The goods were
consigned to the Madras Harbour, cleared by the Appel-
Jants’ own clearing agents and despatched for delivery to
the buyers (Southern Railway) thereafter’.”

8. The Assessee, thereafter filed two revisions before
the High Court at Madras. The High Court also rejected
the contention of the Assessee that the sale by the Assessee
to the Government Department (Director-General of Sup-
plies and Disposals) had occasioned the import. The
High Court prefaced its judgment by setting out the same
facts as had been mentioned by the lower Appellate Tri-
bunal. The High Court stated: —

“The Assessee, M/s. Khosla and Company entered
into a contract with the Director-General of Supplies
and Disposals, New Delhi for the supply of ‘axle box
bodies’. In order to fulfil the contract, the assessee had
to enter into contract with manufacturers in Belgium.
The goods were so got manufactured and imported into
India and cleared at the Madras Harbour and supplied
to certain parties on the instructions of the buyer, the
Director-General of Supplies and Disposals as con-
tained in the contract itself. There was no privity of
contract between the Belgium manufacturers and the
Government Departments who ultimately received
the supplies. The manufacturers consigned the goods
to the Assessee under bills of lading which, after
clearance at the Madras Harbour by the Assessee,
were despatched for delivery to the ultimate con-
sumers indicated by the Director-General?.”

9. Again, in the course of its judgment the High Court
observed: —

“Tt is common ground that on entering into the
contract with the Director-General of Supplies and

_ See paragraphs 1 and 3 of the Supreme Court Judgment. The findings
of the Tribunal contained in the last two sentences are quoted in paragraph
वर्ण the Supreme Court judgment. See para4 of the common order dated
30-11-19 61 inTribunat Appeals Nos. 325 and 326 of 1961.

2, See the judgment of the High Court dated 16-8-1963 in T.C. Nos. 100,

319, 220, and 255 of 1962.

1


97

Disposals the Assessee placed orders for manufacture
with the Belgium company;——. That the goods were
under consignment to the Assessee and that it took
delivery of the goods and arranged for the despatch
by rail or delivery locally to the consignees indicated
in the contract is also clear!,”

10. 1t may not be out of place also to mention here that
the date of the acceptance of the contract which the
assessee had entered into with the Director-General of
Supplies and Disposals for the supply of axle box bodies
in the manner stated above was 24-4-19567. It was there-
after that the Assessee in his turn placed an order on
30-4-1956 with the Belgium Manufacturers for the manu-
facture and the shipment of the axle box bodies which he
had contracted to supply to the Director-General of Sup-
plies and Disposals. This order of the Assessee was
accepted by the Belgium Manufacturers on 11-5-1956 and
the Belgium Manufacturers in due course exported the
manufactured goods to the Madras Harbour in three con-
signments, by three different ships and sent over the ship-
Ping documents, bills of lading etc. to the assessee, be-
tween the months of March and June 1958. They also re-
quested him in their covering letters to make over the
payment of the total amounts involved under the condi-
tions agreed to between them’,

11. These, in brief, are the facts of the case and they
do not appear to have been disputed by either party at any
stage of the proceedings right from’ the time when the
Joint Commercial Tax Officer proposed to levy taxes
under the two Sales Tax Acts upto the stage when the
matter came before the Supreme Court for final hearing.

12. The Supreme Court held that the sale of axle box Supreme
bodies effected by the Assessee in favour of the Director- Court’s
General of Supplies and Disposals had taken place in the fedement
course of import of goods within the meaning of the provi- ca
sions of section 5(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act and was
therefore exempt from taxation in view of article 286 (1)
(b) of the Constitution.

Se,

13, By the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, Constitution
Articles 269 and 286 were amended. In exercise of the Aen 1936.
authority conferred upon the Parliament by the Articles ~~”
so amended, Parliament enacted the Central Sales Tax

1, See the judgment of the High Court dated 16-8-1963 in T.C, Nos. 100,
219, 220 and 255 of 1962,

2. See page 53 of the printed paper book of the Supreme Court. This date is

the date of the Advance Acceptance notified in the Savingram No. SRI

17529-1/1 of the Office of the D.G.S.D, The same was confirmed on 6-9-1956,

3. See the letters sent by the Belgium Manufacturers to the Assessee; printed at

PP. 68 and 71 and the letters sent by the Assessee to the Punjab National
Bank; pp. 65, 69 and 73 of the Supreme Court Paper Book in Khosla's case,


Khosla’s case
Court.

Act (No. 74 of 1956). The Act was enacted as its preamble
recites—

“to formulate principles for determining when a
sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce or outside a State or in the
course of import into or export from India——”.

14. Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the said Act formulated these
principles. Section 5(2) upon which reliance was placed
by the Supreme Court and which is material for our
present purpose, is as under: —

“A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to
take place in tne course of the 1mport of the goods
into the territory of India, only if the sale or purchase
either occasions such import or is effected by a trans-
fer of documents of title to the goods before the goods
have crossed the customs frontiers of India.”

15. The Supreme Court was of the view that it was in
accordance with the principles laid down in this subsee-
tion that it had to determine the question, namely, whether
the sale in the instant case, that is to say, the sale by the
Assessee in favour of the Director-General of Supplies and
Disposals had occasioned the import of the goods into the
territory of India from Belgium. If the sale had occasion-
ed the import, then there was no difficulty in holding that
it had taken place in the course of such import so as to be
exempt from taxation under article 286 (1) (9).

16. In construing this sub-section (2) of section 5, re-
liance was placed upon the interpretation which had been
put by the Supreme Court in one of its previous decisions
(Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd., Bombay vs. SR. Sarkar,
ALR. 1961 S. C. 65) on the analogous provisions contained
in section 3(a) of the Central Sales Tax Act. That sub-
section reads as follows: —

“A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to
take place in the course of inter State trade or com-
merce if the sale or purchase (a) occasions the move-
ment of goods irom one State to another.”

17. In paragraph (9) of its judgment (page 1221), the
Supreme Court observed: —

“Tt seems that the expression ‘orcasions the move-
ment of goods’ occurring in section 3(a) and section
5(2) must have the same meaning. In Tata Iron and
Steel Company Limited, Bombay vs. S. R. Sarkar
(ALR. 1961 S.C. 65), Shah J. speaking for the majo-
tity interpreted section 3 as follows:—

“In our view, therefore, within clause (b) of
section 3 are included sales in which property in
the goods passes during the movement of the
goods from one State to another by transfer of


99

documents of title thereto; clause (a) of section
3 covers sales, other than those included in clause
(9) in which the movement of goods from one
State to another is the result of a covenant or in-
cident of the contract of sale and property in the
goods passes in either State.”

18. Though the wording in the two sub-sections is not
exactly the same, in section 3(a) the wording is “occasions
the movement of goods,” while in section 3(2) it is
“occasions such import”; and indeed it could not be
otherwise in view of the different topics therein dealt
with, there cannot be any doubt that the construction
which the Supreme Court placed upon section 5(2) fol-
owing that which had been placed by Mr. Justice Shah
on section 3(a) in the earlier case referred to above is
correct and wholly consistent with the earlier decisions of
the Supreme Court bearing on the point.

19. Since the Parliament enacted the Central Sales Tax
Act, the Supreme Court had primarily to look to the prin-
ciples therein formulated for determining when a sale
or purchase took place in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce or in the course of import into, or export out
‘of, the territorv of India. Section 3(a) is in pari materia
with section 5(2). The Supreme Court held that as in the
case of section 3(a) so in the case of section 5(2)—the
movement of goods—or more precisely the import of
goods into the territory of India. must be the result of a
covenant or incident of the contract of sale.

20. On the same principles, section 5(1) came ० be
construed in Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations, etc.. vs. Sales
‘Tax Officer [AI.R. 1964 S.C. 1752; (1964) 7 S.C.R. 706].
In paragraph 8 on page 1755 of the judgment, the Supreme
“Court observed:—

“to constitute a sale in the course of export it
may be said there must be an intention on the part of
both the buyer and the seller fo export, there must he
an obligation, and there must be an actual export.
The obligation may arise by reason of statute. contract
between the parties, or from mutual understanding or
agreement between them or even from the nature of
the transaction which links the sale to export ———.
And to occasion export there must exist such a bond
between the contract of sale and the actual exporta-
tion that each link is inextricably connected with the
one immediately preceding it. . Where the ex-
port is the result of sale, the export being inextricably
linked up with the sale so that the bond cannot he
dissociated without a breach of the obligation arising
tween the parties arising from the nature of the trans-
action, the sale is in the course of export.”

Central
Sales Tax
Act, 1956

Ben Gorm
case.


R. (1964
1 Mad. 383
Lakshmi

Mills vs.

State of
Madras,

Ben Gorm
case,

Second

Report of
Ww

Commission.

100

21. It would be seen that in construing sections 3{a)
and 5 in the manner in which they were construed by the
Supreme Court, the Supreme Court had necessarily to
refer to and follow its own earlier decisions in which _ the:
expressoins “in the course of the import of the goods into,
or export of the goods out of, the territory of India”
[(clause (1) (b)] and “in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce”, occurring in Articles 286 as it stood before
the amendment of 1956, had come to be judicially inter-
preted. In fact, what was the law expounded by the
Supreme Court in its previous decisions was codified and
incorporated into sections 3 and 5 of the Central Sales Tax
Act of 1956. In Cement Marketing Co. vs. State of Mysore
[1963 S.C. 980 ALR.: (1963) 3 S.C.R. 777] in paragraph 11
on page 984, the Supreme Court observed: —

“In section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, the
legislature has accepted the principle overning inter-
State sales as laid down in Mohanlal Hargovind’s case,
[(1955) 2 S.C.R. 509. (ALR. 1955 S.C. 786))]”

22. In LL.R. (1964) 1 Madras 383, (Lakshmi Mills vs,
State of Madras), the High Court of Madras observed:

“This statutory provision (section 3) practically
codifies the pre-existing Judge-made law on the sub-
ject.”

23, Again, in Ben Gorm Nilgirt Plantations, etc. vs.
Sales Tax Officer [1964 S.C. 1752 ALR.; (1964) 7 S.C. R.
706] where section 5(1) fell to be considered. the Supreme
Court observed :

“This was legislative recognition of what was said
by this Court in the State uf Travancore-Cochin vs,
Bombay Company Ltd., Alleppey 1952 S.C.R. 112:
(ALR. 1952 S.C. 366) and State of Travancore-Cochin
vs. Shanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory 1954 8.08.
53: (A.LR. 1953 S.C. 333) about the true connotation
of the expression “the course of the export of the goods
out of the territory of India in Article 286(a)(b).”

24. The recommendation of the Law Commission con-
tained in its Second Report also points to the same con-
clusion. Before the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 was en--
acted the Law Commission was invited to offer its sugges-
tions for formulating principles for determining when a
sale or purchase of goods takes place—

{i) outside a State,

(ii) in the course of the import of the goods into,.
or export of the goods out of, the territory of India,

(iii) in the course of inter-State trade or commerce:


wi

In its Report, the Law Commission stated (para. 10.
page 3):—

« We, therefore, recommend the acceptance
of the principles laid down by the Supreme Court (in
the Travancore-Cochin cases, 1952) S.C.R. 1112 and
(1954) S.C.R. 53, see Report page 2, para. 63. We would
express them in the following manner :—

“A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed
to take place in the course of export of the goods
out of the territory of India, only if the sale or
purchase either occasions such export or is effect-
ed by a transfer of documents of title to the goods
after the goods have crossed the customs frontiers
of India.

I am at this stage concerned with the bare fact that the
Law Commission only accepted the principles laid down
in the two Tracancore cases and not with the actual re-
commendations which, as expressed in the Report, seem
to go beyond such principles.

25. It may be noted, that when the Central Sales Tax 1956 Act
Act eame to be enacted, the legislature had before it the tinked up
Report of the Law Commission, and it eventually adopted with the two
in section 5 the same language in which the Law Com- Travancore
mission had expressed its recommendation. Thus the his-°****
tory of this legislative process which proceded the enact-
ment of the Central Sales Tax Act also leaves us in no
doubt that the principles laid down in the earlier decisions
of the Supreme Court were themselves enacted as the
principles for determining when a sale or purchase of
goods takes place in the course of the import of the goods
into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India.

Indeed, I may be permitted to say that sections 3 and 5

of the Central Sales Tax Act, as we see them today, are

in one sense so inextricably linked up with the previous

and authoritative decisions of the Supreme Court, parti-

eularly on the subjects dealt with in those sections, that

it would be difficult correctly to construe them without
knowing and following the guiding principles alredy en-

unciated in those decisions. I am aware that in Tata Iron Tata Iron
and Steel Co. Lid. vs. S. R. Sarkar [A.LR. 1961 S.C. 65: 43° Trem
(1961) 1 S.C.R. 379], the Supreme Court made the follow-

ing observations (paragraph 17 S.LR.):—

‘Cases of this Court viz. State of Travancore-Cochin
vs, Bombay Co. Ltd, Alleppy 1953-3 S.C.R. 1112
(AIR. 1952 S.C. 366) and State of Travancore-Cochin


103

vs. Shanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory 1954 S.C.R.
53: (A.LR. 1953 5. C. 333). have no bearing
on the interpretation of section 3(a) and (b). In those
cases the meaning of the expressions “in the course
of import and export” and “in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce” used in Article 286 fell to
be determined. The Constitution does not define these
expressions, The Parliament has in the Central Sales
Tax Act, 1956 sought to define by section 3 when a
sale or purchase of goods is said to take place in the
inter-State trade or commerce—— and by section
5 when a sale or purchase is said to take place in the
course of import or export. In interpreting these
definition clauses, it would be inappropriate to requi-
sition in aid the observation made in ascertaining the
true nature and incidents without the assistance of
any definition clause of ————“sales in the course of
imports” and “sales in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce” used in Article 286.’.

26. I have already stated? that a different view was ex-
pressed by the Supreme Court in its later decisions on the
relevancy of the earlier decisions in interpreting sections
3 and 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. Besides, in
the case of Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. vs. S.R. Sarkar
the Supreme Court even without the aid of the earlier
decisions came to construe the Provisions of section 3 in
the same way in which the expression “where such sale
or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce” occurring in article 286 (as it stood before
the amendment) had been construed in the earlier deci-
sions. That a fresh mind was brought to bear on the in-
terpretation of section 3 without any reference to earlier
decisions on the subject and yet the same conclusion was
arrived at, only reinforces the correctness and the univer-
sality of the propositions laid down in the previous deci-
sions. Certain expressions were used (e.g. “sales and pur-
chases which themselves occasion the export or import of
the goods. as the case may be”) in the previous decisions
for elucidating when a sale or purchase took place in the
course of export or import or in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce, and i fthe same expressions have now
been used in sections 3 and 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act,
it seems to me that in interpreting these sections, we have
necessarily to go to the earlier decisions and see how the
expressions now codified into the sections were used and
explained in those decisions. In fact. even assuming that
there were no such observations as we find in the cases of
Cement Marketing Co. vs. State of Mysore (ALR. 1963
SC. 980) and Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations vs. Sales Tax
Officer (A.LR. 1964 8.0. 1752) on the relevancy of the
earlier decisions, the Supreme Court could not but have

1. Paragraphs 27 and 23.


103

referred to, and approved of and followed the earlier de-
cisions in interpreting sections 3 and 5 if only because the
expressions used in the sections were the identical expres-
sions used and explained in the earlier decisions. If the
Parliament in the exercise of its power conferred on it by
the Constitution formulated principles for determining
when a sale or purchase of goods took place in the course
of import or export or in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce, it seems to me that the key to interpret the
principles sc formulated is afforded by the priciples al-
teady laid down by the Supreme Court almost in the
same language.

27. In this view, therefore, it would be necessary 0 Previous

study the previous relevant decisions bearing on the sub- decisions-
ject of sale or purchase in the course of import or export Inter-State
as also in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
First, I would consider the group of cases relating to the
sale or purchase in the course of inter-State trade or com-
merce. It is true that they have no direct bearing on
the issue in the present case, which is “whether the sale
by the Assessee in favour of the Director-General of Sup-
plies and Disposals has occasioned import within the mean-
ing of section 5(2).” But since the provisions relating to
sale or purchase in the course of import or export are an-
alogous to those relating to sale or purchase in the course
of inter-State trade or commerce both in the Constitution
and in the Central Sales Tax Act in so far as they are
applicable for our present purpose, a study of this group
of cases would be necessary, and, indeed, illuminating.

28. In Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs. State of Bihar pengat
(ALR. 1955 S.C. 661: (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603), Mr, Justice Immunity
Venkatarama Ayyar (in his dissenting judgment} cbserved @*-
in paragraph 153 at page 734 (A.I-R.) as follows :—

“A sale could be said to be in the course of inter-
State trade only if two conditions concur: —

(1) a sale of goods, and

(2) a transport of those goods from one State
to another under the contract of sale” (emphasis
supplied by me).

“Unless both these conditions are satisfied there
ean be no sale in the course of inter-State trade. Thus.
if X, a merchant in State A, goes to State B, purchases
goods there and transports them into A, there is
undoubtediv a movement of goods in inter-State com-
merce. But that is net under any contract of sale.”

29. In support of these observations, the learned Judge
has quoted a definition from Rottschaefer, a little lower
down on the same page.

31 Law—9


Second
Report Law
Commission

Endupuri
case

Cement
Marketing
Co. and
Singareni
Case.

Bengal
Immunity
Case,

104

‘In—Rottschaefer on Constitutional Law (1939
Ed.) a sale in the course of inter-State commerce is
thus defined:

“The activities of buying and selling constitute
inter-State commerce if the contracts therefor con-
template or necessarily involve the movement of
goods in inter-State commerce”.’

In the Second Report of the Law Commission this is
what is quoted from the same author (9. 4 bottom):—

“The decisive factor that renders making a contract
an act of inter-State commerce is in that it eontem-
plates or necessarily involves the movement of goods in
inter-State commerce, and this test applies whether it
be a contract to buy or one to seil.”

30. The same learned Judge when he delivered the
judgment of the Court in Endupuri Narasimham vs, State
of Orissa [A.LR. 1961 S.C. 1344: (1962) 1 S.C.R. 314], re-
ferred to his observations made in the Bengal Immunity
case and again stated (page 1344): --

“In order that a sale or purchase might be inter-
State it is essential that there must be transport of
goods from one State to another under the contract of
sale or purchase”.

31. These observations were again quoted with approval
in Cement Marketing Company vs. State of Mysore (A.LR.
1963 S.C. 980 at pp. 983 and 984, para 11) which was also a
case of inter-State sale under article 286(2) as it stood be-
fore its amendment. In the recent case reported in ALR.
1966 S.C. 563, Singareni Collieries Co. vs. Commissioner of
Commercial Taxes where the Supreme Court were consi-
dering among other sales also sales for the period Septem-
ber 7, 1955 to September 10, 1956 under which coal had
been actually delivered outside the State of Andhra for
consumption in those States, the Supreme Court observed
in para (20) as follows: —

‘As pointed out by Venkatarama Ayyar J. in the
Bengal Framunity Company’s case [ (1955) 2 S.C.R. 603:
ALR, 1955 S.C. 661].

“A sale could be said to be in_ the course of
inter-State trade only if two conditions concur:
(1) a sale of goods and (2) a transport of those
goods from one State to another under the con-
tract of sale. Unless both these conditions are
satisfied there can be no sale in the course of inter-
State trade.”.

_“In these transactions relating to supply of coal,
which we have assumed are sales,.coal was transported
in pursuance of the allotment orders to other States.


105

We have also assumed for the purpose of this argument
repre a tance with allotment orders resulted in a
contract of sale. The transactions were unquestionably
in the course of inter-State trade.”

32. Thus’ in the cases of inter-State sales which arose Test of con-
before the enactment of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,
the Supreme Court had adopted the same test for deter-
mining when a sale took place in the course of inter-State
trade or commerce, as was later adopted in construing sec-
tion 3(a) of the Act. for the same purpose. The test was
—-as indeed it is under the Act—whether the contract of
sale contained a covenant or whether it is an incident of
such contract and whether as a result of such covenant or
incident there was movement of the goods from one State
to another, Where a dealer in “A” State agrees to sell
goods to another in “B” State and undertakes as part of
that contract to deliver the goods to the purchaser in the
“B” State and the goods are transported from “A” State to
“B” State, whatever be the means of transport—air, road
or rail—, the transaction viewed as a whole is an inter-
State sale or purchase. The movement of goods from one
State to another in a contract of inter-State sale is the
necessary result of the covenant or incident of the contract
as otherwise the contract cannot be fulfilled or performed.

83. It is necessary to emphasise. though it seems to me Contract

obvious, that such a contract of sale must be between the must be
seller and the buyer. Section 4 of the Sale of Goods Act, between 4
1930 says that a contract of sale of goods is a contract seller, an
whereby the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the prO- state Trade
perty in goods to the buyer for a price. It is true that Corporation
in ‘State Trade Corporation of India Ltd. and another vs. case.
The State of Mysore [A.LR, 1963 S.C, 548: (1963) 3 S.C.R.
792] and in Cement Marketing Company of India Ltd. vs.
State of Mysore’ [A.1.R. 1963 S.C. 980: (1963) 3 S.C.R. 777],
the contracts of sale were not directly between the buyers
on the one hand and the sellers on the other. In the first
case, the contract of sale was between the buyer and the
supplier, the Marketing Company. But it was admitted
that the supplier made the sa Tes to the buyers as the agent
of the State Trade Corporation and the Marketing Company
did not deny its liability to be taxed as such agent. In the
course of its judgment the Supreme Court observed (A.LR.
page 550, para. 11) :--

“Since the permits with which we are concerned
provided that the supply “had to be made from one or
other factory situate outside Mysore, the contracts must
be deemed to have contained a covenant that the goods
should be supplied in Mysore from a place situate out-
side is prorders AS Sale under such a contract would

learly be an inter-State sale as defined i; ti
of the Central Sales Tax Act.”. १४ in section 3(a)


Cement
Marketing
case,

Same __ test

contract.

Import”
meaning.

“Export”
meaning,

Empress
Mills vs
Municipal
Committee,

Gokal’s
Case,

106

34. In the second case also. the contract of sale had been
entered into between the buyer and the Cement Marketing
Co. Ltd., who were described as the Sales Managers of the
Associated Cement Co. Ltd. The buyer entered into a con-
tract with the Cement Marketing Co. who sent the autho-
risation and the buyer’s order to the factory named in the
authorisation and the factory then supplied the requisite
goods to the buyer. On a consideration of all the relevant
facts of the case. the Supreme Court held that the Cement
Marketing Co. was only a Sales Manager of the Associated
Cement Co. Ltd. who were the rea! sellers, and observed
{A.LR. page 984, para. 3):—

“It was not the volition of the first appellant
(Cement Marketing Co.) to supply to the purchaser the
goods from any of the factories of the second appellant
(Associated Cement Co.). The factories were nominat-
ed by the Government by authorisation which formed
the basis of the contract between the buyer and the
seller. Applying these tests to the facts of the present
case, we are of the opinion that the sales were in the
nature of inter-State sales and were exempt from sales
tax.”.

35. The same test of contract that has been applied, as
seen above, for determining when a sale or purchase takes
place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, has
been held to apply for determining when sales by export
or purchases by import take place. Before I refer to and
discuss the relevant authorities bearing on these latter
kinds of transactions, it may be necessary to know what
“import” and “export” mean.

36. According to Webster’s International Dictionary, the
word “import” means “to bring in from a foreign or exter-
nal source.......... especially to bring (wares or merchan-
dise) into a place or country from a foreign country in the
transactions of commerce; opposed to export”.

Similarly, “export” according to Webster's International
Dictionary means “to carry away.......... to carry or send
abroad especially to foreign countries as merchandise or
commodities in the way of commerce; the opposite of
import.”

The Oxford Dictionary gives a similar meaning to both
these words (See Empress Mills vs. Municipal Committee,
Wardha, ALR. 958 S.C. 341 at p. 344: (1958) S.C-R. 1102
where these definitions are referred to).

37, In J. V. Gokal & Co. vs, Assistant Collector of Sales
Tax [A.L.R. 1960 S.C. 595: (1960) 2 S.C_R. 852], the Supreme
Court in paragraph 9 of its judgment on page 598, A.LR..
posed the question: “What does the phrase ‘the course of
the import of the goods into the territory of India’ convey?”
and proceeded to explain the phrase as follows:


107

“The crucial words of the phrase are “import” and
“in the course of”. The term “Import” signifies
etymologically “to bring in”. To import goods into
the territory of India therefore, means to bring into the
territory goods from abroad. The word “course” means
“progress from point to point”. The course of import,
therefore, starts from one point and ends at another.
It starts when the goods cross the customs barrier in
a foreign country and ends when they cross the cus-
toms barrier in the importing country. These words
were subject of judicial scrutiny by this Court in State
of Travancore-Cochin vs. Shanmugha Vilas Cashew
Nut Factory [(1954) S.C.R. 53: ALR. 1953 S.C. 333].
Construing these words Patanjali Sastri C.J. observed
at page 62 (S.C.R.) (at page 336 of &.1.8.):--

‘The word “course” etymologically denotes move-
ment from one point to another and the expression “in
the course of” not only implies a period of time during
which the movement is in progress but postulates also
a connected relation,’.

“As regards the limits of the course, the learned
Chief Justice observed at page 68 (of S.C.R.) (page 338
of AILR.):—

“It would seem, therefore, logical to hold that the
course of the export out of. or of the import into, the
territory of India does not commence or terminate
until the goods cross the customs barrier.”

“The course of the import of the goods may be said
to begin when the goods enter their import journey,
ie, when they cross the custems barrier of the foreign
country and end when they cross the customs barrier
of the importing country.”

38. The Supreme Court then considered the question Tata Iron
“When can it be said that a sale takes place in the course ९३४९५
of import journey?” It was observed (A.LR. 1960 S.C. 595,
at page 598, para. 10):—

“This Court in State of Travancore vs. Bombay
Company Ltd. (1952) S.C.R. 1112: (ALR. 1952 8.6.
366), held that a sale which occasioned the export was
a sale that took-place in the course of the export of
the goods. If A, a merchant in India, sells his goods
to a merchant in London, and puts through the trans-
action by transporting the goods by a ship to London,
the said sale which occasioned the export is exempted
under article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution from the
levy of sales tax. The same principle applies to a con-
verse case of goods which occasioned the import of
goods into India.”.


168

Burmah 39, In Burmah Shell Gil Standard Co. vs. Commercial

Shell Case Tax Officer (ALR. 1961 S.C. 311): (1961) 1 S.C.R. 902), the
Supreme Court observed that the test of export is that the
goods must have a foreign destination where they can be
Said to be imported. The crucial fact is the sending of the
goods to a foreign destination where they would be receiv-
ed as imports. The country to which the goods are sent
is said to import them and the words “export” and
“import” are complementary. The two notions of export
and import thus go in pairs.

Kerala 40. Again, in State of Kerala vs. Cochin Coal Co. Ltd.

Cochin Case. [A.LR. 1961 S.C. 408: (1961) 2 S.CR. 219], the Supreme
Court explained what was meant by the expressions “Ex-
port” and “Import” as follows: —

‘The concept of export in Article 286 postulates,
just as the word “import”, the existence of two ter-
minii between which the goods are intended to move
or between which they are intended to be transported,
and not a mere movement of goods out of the country
without any intention of their being landed in specie
in some foreign post.’.

41. The High Court of Madras in Deputy Commissioner
DEPUTY oe of Commercial Taxes vs. Devar and Company [I.LR.
er vs, (1964) 1 Madras 383], made some pertinent observations on
Devar: the expressions of “import” and “export”. On page 387, it
eran was observed: —

‘The course of import or export covers a range of
integrated activities. These activities are similar in
character and cover the same field whether in respect
of export or import. We shall, however, deal with the
course of import as the instant case is concerned with
import; but we have no doubt that the course of ex-
port is precisely of the same pattern as that of import.
One is the reverse of the other. The Supreme Court of
the United States used the expression Export Stream.
We are having in mind the following passage in
Empresa Siderurgica, S.A. vs, Merced (93 L. Ed. 1276,

1280): —

“Tt is the entrance of the articles into the ex-
port stream that marks the start of the process of
exportation. Then there is certainly that the goods
are headed for their destination and will not be
diverted to domestic use. Nothing less will
suffice.”

If we can coin the expression import stream, it
would not be a mere metaphor but it would serve to illus-
trate the true significance of the course of import. A
stream has its starting point and the end and so has_ the
import course. When does the import begin and when does


it end? What is the interval between its commencement
and termination? These are the vital questions the ans-
wer te which would solve the problem before us. The
import taken as a whole from start to finish, or the course
of import to use the language of the Constitution makers
or the Parliamentarian, consists of a bundle of interlinked
and interlaced activities spread over a duration of time, be-
ginning from the goods going through the customs gate of
the exporting country and ending with the crossing of the
customs barricade of the importing country. The import
stream dries up and ceases to flow after the customs depart-
ment of the importing State levies the duty and thereby
declares the eligibility of the goods to be cleared and
mingled with the general mass of goods and merchandise
in the country.’.

42. I shall now deal with the decided cases of export- Usport sales
sales and import-purchases with particular reference to ane Import
the nature of the contracts of sale or purchase which in- 1! °
variably formed the basis of the transactions therein con-
sidered. While considering these decided cases, 1 leave
out of account such sales or purchases in the course of
import or export as are effected by transfer of shipping
documents while the goods are beyond the customs fron-
tiers of India and which after the coming into force of the
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 are covered by the latter parts
of its section 5 (1) and (2). The latter part of section 5 (1)
reads, “or is effected by a transfer of documents of title to
the goods after the goods have crossed the customs fron-
tiers of India”; and the latter part of section 5(2) says,

“or is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the
goods before the goods have crossed the customs frontiers
of India”. The sales or purchases covered by these parts
do not present such difficulty, nor do they arise for our
consideration in the present case. In the present case, we
are only concerned with whether the sale by the assessee
in favour of the Director-General of Supplies and Disposals
occasioned the import of goods from Belgium to In ds.

43. In State of Travancore-Cochin vs. Bombay Co., Ltd. First Travan-
CA.LR. S.C. 366: (1952) S.C.R. 1112], the dealings of the “ore case
Respondents consisted of export sales of certain commc-
dities to foreign buyers. The Respondents claimed exemp-
tion from assessment of sales tax on the ground that such
sales took place in the course of the export of goods out of
the territory of India within the meaning of article 286 (1)

(b). It is necessary to emphasise that the Indian exporters
were themselves the sellers of their commodities to the
buyer overseas. As this case (which is called the I Travan-
core case) forms the bed rock of the entire superstructure
of the law as developed in later cases and as, as we have
noted above, it became the precursor of the Central Sales
Tax Act, it would be necessary to quote here some of the
relevant passages in the judgment of the Srpreme Court.


110

In paragraph (10) on page 367, the learned Chief Justice
observed: —

“We are clearly of the opinion that the sales here
in question which occasioned the export in each case
fall within the scope of the exemption under article
286 (1) (b). Such sales must of necessity be put through
by transporting the goods by rail or ship or both out of
the territory of India, that is to say, by employing the
machinery of export. A sale by export thus involves
a series of integrated activities commencing from the
agreement of sale with a foreign buyer and ending with
the delivery of goods to a common carrier for trans-
port out of the country by land or sea. Such a sale
cannot be dissociated from the export without which
it cannot be effectuated and the sale and the resultant
export form parts of the same transacticn.”.

The final conclusion arrived at by the Supreme Court is
stated in paragraph (14) on page 368:~——

“We accordingly hold that whatever else may or
may not fall within article 286 (1) (9), sales and pur-
chases which themselves occasion the export or the
import of the goods, as the case may be, out of, or into
the territory of, India come within the exemption.”.

44. It is necessary to remember (my repetition may be
pardoned) that the transaction in this case was between
the Indian exporter who was himself the seller on the one
hand. and the buyer in a foreign country on the other. It
is only this kind of transaction which the Supreme Court
described as a sale by export. The nature of such trans-
action and its activities and the utter impossibility of its
being put through without the machinery of export were
described by the Supreme Court in the passage extracted
above, for explaining what the Court meant by a sale by
export and when such transaction of sale by export took
place, These observations were made only in regard to the
particular kind of transaction involved in that case. It is
necessary to emphasise this aspect of the case as these
observations could be expressed almost in the same langu-
age’ and made applicable to other kinds of transactions
which may not be themselves sales by export as explained
in this case but which may eventually and even necessarily
lead to the export of the goods from this country to a
foreign port. It may be noted that in this case, as also in
the Second Travancore case which will be presently

1. See the dissenting judgment of Mr. Justice 5.1९ Das in the II Travancore
Case (A.LR. 1953 SC. 333) where he has used the same language in ex~
pressing his view that the last purchase before export and the first sale
after import also earn the exemption under Art. 236(1\(b) Pages 348, 350.
See also ALR. 1962 S.C. 1733 at 1736 where in paras 9 and 10,
the same observations were reli ied upon for ontaining that the last
purchase before export was pictected,


111

referred to, the Supreme Court was construing and ex-
plaining the words of article 286(1) (b), which may, for
convenience of reference, be set out here: --

“286 (1) No law of a State shall impose or autho-
rise the imposition of a tax on the sale or purchase of
goods where such sale or purchase takes place—

(b) in the course of the import of the goods
into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of
India.”.

45, Which are the transactions of sale and purchase
that take place in the course of import or export? It is sub-
mitted that the Supreme Court carefully considered this
question and laid down that it was only the sales which
occasioned the export and only the purchases which
occasioned the import that came within the exemption of
article 286 (1) (b), as being respectively in the course of
export and import. Be it noted that the Supreme Court
considered only the transactions of sales (and not of pur-
chases) as occasioning the export, and only the trans-

actions of purchases (and not of sales) as oceasioning the
import.

46. Further, an agreement of sale by an Indian expor-
ter with a foreign buyer was regarded as an integrated
activity commencing the process of a sale by export. It
need haraly be stated that it is a necessary incident of
such an agreement of sale (being — what it is—with a
foreign buyer) that the goods agreed to be sold must be
transported by rail or ship or by both out of the territory
of India, only by employing the machinery of export.

47. It is also necessary to bear in mind the scope and
ambit in which the principle of integrated activities
adopted in this case for explaining “in the course of”, will
have its legitimate operation. Within its scope and ambit
an agreement of sale to, and purchase from, a person in a
foreign land are by this decision, held to be included, and
they are therefore regarded as taking place in the course
of export or import, as the case may be, although such
agreement of sale or purchase is obviously in point of time
anterior to the actual and physical handing over of the
goods out of the country or bringing them into the coun-
try. But it is only such agreements of sale or purchase
which though apparently not “in the course of export
or import” are perforce dragged into the export or import
stream, as the case may be. For, the Supreme Court says
that if only the etymological meaning of the word “course”
is stressed. it would merely be formulating 2 mechanical
test which would place too a narrow construction upon
clause (1) (9) in that it would limit its operation only to
sales and purchases effected during the transit of goods

and would, if accepted, rob the exemption much of its
usefulness.


Second
“Travancore
case,

1i2

48. This decision of the Supreme Court which, as we
have seen above, holds that it is only the sales that
oceasion the export, and only the purchases thai occasion
the import that are regarded as taking place in the course
of export or import, as the case may be, for the purpese
of article 286 (1) (b}, was reaffirmed in the II Travancore
case which further considered if any other transactions
could or could not be regarded as having taken place in the
course of import or export, either by occasioning import
or export, or otherwise.

49. The Second Travancore case is State of Travancore-
Cochin vs. Shanmughe Vilas Cashew Nut Factory (ALR.
1953 S.C. 333: (1954) S.C-R. 53). The facts of this case
are that the Respondents were dealers in cashewnuts in
the State of Travancore. Their business consisted in
making purchases of cashewnuts and after converting
them into edible kernels and oil they used to export the
edible kernels and the oil to U.S.A.

50. The purchases of cashewnuts made by the Respon-
dents fell into 3 groups—

(1) Purchases made in the local market;

(2) Purehases from the neighbouring Districts of
the State of Madras;

(3) Purchases by way of imports.

In respect of all these three kinds of purchases the Respon-
dents claimed exemption from the States General Sales
Tax Act under article 286 (1) (bo). Their contention was
that the cashewnuts had been purchased with a view to
exporting their kernels and oil to America. Of course, this
contention assumed, and the majority of the Judges of the
Supreme Court were also prepared to assume for the sake
of argument, that the raw materials (cashew-nuts) pur-
chased in the three ways mentioned above were the same
as the manufactured goods (kernels and oil) exported to
America. On the contentions of the Respondents, the
‘Supreme Court formulated the question for their consider-
ation as follows (page 336, para 9):--

“The only question debated before us was whether
in addition to the export-sale and import-purchase
which were held in the previous decision te be covered
by the exemption under clause (1) (b), ‘he following
two categories of sale or purchase would also fall
within the scope of that exemption: —

(1) The fast purchase of goods made by the
exporter for the purpose of exporting them to im-
plement orders already received from a foreign
buyer or expected to be received subsequently in
the course of business, and* the first sale by the
importer to fulfil orders pursuant to which the


113

goods were imported or orders expected to be
received after the import.

{2) Sales or purchases of goods effected with-
in the State by transfer of oping documents
while the goods are in the course of transit.”.

51. In considering this question the Supreme Court Second
applied the same principle of “integrated activities” as Travancore
had been applied in the first Travancore case and stated 7 7
«AER. page 336, para 10):—

“As regarded the first-mentioned category, we are
of opinion that the transactions are not within the pro-
tection of clause (1) (b) the expression “in the
course of” not only implies a period of time during
which the movement is in progress but postulates also
a connected relation A sale in the course of
import should be understood in the context of clause
(1) (b) as meaning a sale taking place not only during

. the activities directed to the end of exportation out of
the country but also as part of or connected with such
activities The phrase “integrated activities”
was used in the previous decision to denote that “such
a sale” (i.e. a sale which occasions export) cannot be
dissociated from the export without which it cannot
be effectuated and the sale and the resultant export
form parts of a single transaction. It is in that sense
that the two activities—the sales and the export—were
said to be integrated . It is not correct to speak
of a purchase for export as an activity so integrated
with the exportation that the former could be regarded
as done “in the course of” the latter. A purchase for
the purpose of export like production or manufacture
is only an act preparatory to export and cannot, in our
opinion, be regarded as an act done “in the course of
the export of the goods out of the territory of India”
any more than the other two activities (production or
manufacture) can be so regarded.”

“The same reasoning applies to the first sale after
import which is a distinct transaction effected after
the importation of goods into the country has been
completed, and having no integral relation with it.
—— (page 338, end of page 14). We find no warrant
in the language employed (in article 286) to extend
the protection to cover the last purchase before export
or the first sale after import.”

52. In para 16 at page 338, the Supreme Court stated
its conclusions as follows: —

_ (1) Sales by export and purchases by import fall
within the exemption under article 286(1)(b). This
‘was held in the previous decision ¢f Travancore case).


Combined
effect of the
two Traven-~
core case,

“occasioned”
means

purchase and
export-Sale,

Combined
effect of the
‘Travancore
case,

Integrality
fect
meaning of.

114

(2) Purchases in the State by the exporter for the
purpose of export as well as sales in the State by the
importer after the goods have crossed the customs
frontier are not within the exception.

(3) Sales in the State by the exporter or importer
frontier are not within the exemption.

by transfer of shipping documents while the goods are
beyond the customs frontier are within the exemption,
assuming that the State power of taxation extends to
such transaction.

53. Thus, apart from the transactions effected by trans-
fer of shipping documents as mentioned in the third con-
clusion set out above, it is clear from the two ‘T'ravancore
cases that it is only the two kinds of transaction mention-
ed in the first conclusion that come within the exemption
under article 286 (1) (b). These two kinds of transactions
are sales by export (i.e. export-sales), and purchases by
import (ie. import-purchases). They were held in the I
Travancore case that they came within the exemption
because they respectively ‘occasioned the export and the
import. Thus to this category of transactions, the II Tra-
vancore case did not add ‘any further transactions as
occasioning export or import. Therefore it must be taken
as settled by these two Travancore Cases that it is only the
sales of the nature that we had in the first Travancore Case
that occasion the export and only the purchases of similar
nature that occasion the import. In other words, when
the exporter is himself a seller to a foreign buyer, his sale
comes within the exemption as occasioning the export;
likewise, when the importer is himself a purchaser from a
foreign seller, his purchase comes within the exemption
which particular transactions occasion the export or the
as occasioning the import. It is necessary to bear in mind
import (as contradistin guished from the transactions
effected by transfer of shipping documents) because, as
we shall presently see, in the later cases also it is
only these particular transactions ({export-sales and
import-purchases) that have been held to so occasion the
export and import; and because, the word “occasion”
which was used for the first time in the two Travancore
cases has now come to receive statutory recognition by its
being used in sections 3 and 5 of the Central Sales ‘Tax
Act.

54. Further, we have seen that the jirst Travancore case
held the agreement of sale by a seller with a foreign buyer
as commencing the series of integrated activities resulting
in export. This aspect of the case was referred to in the
Second Travancore Case as follows (page 336):—

“The previous decision proceeded on this view
and emphasised the integral relation between the two
of the goods into the territory of India. A few facts relat-
ing to such dealings may be stated here, so that we may


115

{sale and export) where the contract of sale itselt
occasioned the export as the ground for holding that
such a sale was one taking place in the course of

export.

55. The necessity of the existence of such an agreement
‘of sale (or of purchase as in the case of import) was
stressed and explained in the Second Travancore Case,
both in a positive and in a negative way. This is clear
irom the manner in which the Supreme Court dealt with
certain types of dealings of purchases in respect of which
the Respondents claimed exemption under article 286
(1) (b) as having been effected in the course of the import
appreciate the views of the Supreme Court on such deal-
ings and how they disposed of them by invoking the
principle_of privity of contract. Respondents placed orders
with a Bombay party for purchase of cashew-nuts from
Africa. Certain purchases were made from African sellers
by the Bombay party acting only as Agents for the Res-
pondents. In regard to certain of! her dealings, the Bombay
party indented the goods on their own account, and placed
orders for these goods with African sellers. The African
sellers shipped the goods direct to Cochin or Quilon on
C.LF. terms. The shipping documents were made out in
the name of the Bombay party as consignees and were
delivered to them against payment through bankers at
Bombay. The Bombay party cleared the goods through
their own representatives at the port of destination, and
issued separate delivery orders to the respondents for the
respective quantities ordered. Thus, the Borabay party
sold the gocds as principals to the Respondents.

56. On these facts, the Supreme Court observed first, as
regards the purchases made by the Bombay party only as
hers of the Respondents as follows (Para 21, page 339,

“Tt will be seen.that in res; pect of the purchases
(falling under this head), the Bombay party acted
merely as the agents of the respondents, privity being
established between the latter and the African sellers.
‘The purchases are thus purchases which occasioned
the import and therefore come within the exemption.

“As regards (the other kind of purchases), the
Bombay party are the purchasers and they sell the
goods as principals to the respondents at the port of

lestination by issuing separate delivery orders against

payments. No privity being established hetween the
tespondents and the African sellers, the respondents’
purchases on only be described as purchases from
Bombay party of the goods within the State; in other
words, they were local purchases —-—— and do not
come within the exemption.”

Contract,

Privity.

Combin:d
effect.


Gurviah’s
case,

Mysore
Spinning
case,

116

57. Thus, it is clear that the existence of privity of con-
tract between the Indian buyer and the overseas seller,
in the one case, rendered the purchases as purchases in
the course of import, while the absence of it in the other
case rendered the purchases as not in the course of import.
It is obvious, that the Supreme Court by adopting the
principle of privity of contract only stressed the necessity
of the existence of a contrast between the Indian seller or
buyer and the foreign party. The Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary gives the meaning of “privity” as any relation
between two parties recognised by law, e.g. covenant.
Earl Jowitt in his Dictionary of English Law gives the
meaning uf “Privity of Contract” as follows:—

“Privity of contract is the relation between the
immediate parties to a contract as where A agrees
with B to pay him £100.7,

We may now refer to the later decisions of the Supreme
Court in which the two Travancore cases have been
followed. .

58. In State of Madras vs. Gurviah Naidu and Co, Ltd.,
ALR. 1956 S.C. 158, the facts were that a merchant in
Salem secured orders for the supply of untanned hides and
skins from London purchasers, and then in pursuance of
such orders placed with him, he purchased them locally
in order to implement those orders and exported them,
and the question was whether a tex on those purchases:
(made locally) was hit by article 286(1) (b). In holding
that it was not, the Supreme Court observed: —

“Such purchases were, it is true, for the purpose
of export but such purchases did not themselves
occasion the export and consequently did not fall with-
in the exemption of article 286(1) (b) of the Constitu-
tion as held by this Court in (1952) S.C.R, 1112: (A.
LR. 1952 S.C. 366). Nor did such purchases in the
State by the exporter for the purpose of export come
within the ambit of article 286 (1) (b) as held by the
decision of the majority in (1954) S.C.R. 53 (ALR.
1953 S.C. 333).”.

This was clearly a case of the last purchase before export,
which under the 2nd conclusion in the II Travancore case’
did not come within the ambit of article 286(1) (b).

59. The next case which may be reierred to is State of
Mysore vs. Mysore Spinning and Manufacturing Co. and
another Ltd., ALR. 1958 S.C. 1002. Here, the Respondents.
who are Textile Mills at Bangalore carry on business - as.
manufacturers and sellers of textile goods, such as cotton
and yarn. These mills sold to licensed export dealers at
Bombay and other ports who exported the goods to foreign
buyers. The Mills had no direct contract with any foreign
buyer. The licensed exporters at the ports dealt with them


117

(foreign buyers) and the Mills dealt with the exporters.
The procedure in which this business of export was con-
ducted may also be briefly noted. In the first place, the
exporters used to obtain a firm offer from a buyer over-
seas specifying the quality and quantity of cloth or yarn
required by the buyer. Thereafter the exporters would
enquire from the Mills whether they could sell or manu-
facture goods of the quality and quantity required by the
overseas buyer. If the Mills said, “Yes”, the exporter
entered into a firm contract with the foreign purchaser and
thereafter the exporter entered into a contract with the
Mills for the sale of those goods. The contract had to be
marked “for export only”, and the prices fixed had to be
higher than the inland prices. The specifications and the
details of the goods, had also to be entered. Thereafter
the Mills packed the goods and despatched them to the
exporter. The goods had to be marked clearly “for export
only”. Then finally, the exporter took delivery of the goods
and shipped them overseas.

Thus, it was clear that from first to last, the Mills had
no direct contact with the overseas buyer and that the
sales that occasioned the export were not the sales by the
Mills to the exporter. But the Mills contended that, never-
theless, these sales were made in the course of export and
so protected by article 286(1) (b).

60. Mr. Justice Vivian Bose speaking for the Court
observed (page 1005, paras. 19 and 20):—

“There are two sales here and both could not have
occasioned the export, only the second of the two did
that, and the Respondents (Mills) were not parties
to it either directly or through the exporters as their
agents. It follows that the first sale with which alone
the Respondents were associated, did not do that. If it
did not, then it hardly matters, whether the goods
were exported through the instrumentality of the
exporters or not, because according to the decisions of
this Court, all sales that precede the one that occasions
the export are taxable.

“Even if the facts were as stated (i.e. if the goods
had been manufactured with the main intention for
export), as we have already pointed out, this Court
has decided that only the sale that cccasions the ex-
port is exempt and that the sale to the exporter that
preceded it is not, even if it was made “with a view
to” or “for the purpose of export”.

This case, it will be seen, explained the same principle
of the sale occasioning export in a different way by refer-
ence to the number of transactions of sales involved and
leading up to the export. If there were two sales, as there
were in this case, one leading to the other, only the last
sale could be regarded as having occasioned the export. It

Two sales
could not
occasion
export,


118

was also held in this case that even if the goods had been
manufactured (in the present case, by the Mills) with
the main intention of exporting them and with that end
in view had been sold to the exporters in the ports, the
sale by the Mills under these circumstances could still not
be considered as one occasioning the export.

Gordhanda’ ___61. In Gordhandas vs. B. Banerjez (AIR. 1958 S.C.

case, 1006) the existence of privity between the foreign mer-

Privity chant and the Appellant who claimed exemption for his
sale under article 286(1) (b) was regarded as necessary to
render his sale as occasioning export. Here the facts were,
the Appellant Gordhandas sold the goods to the Bombay
party who in their turn exported the goods to foreign mer-
chants. In paragraph 10 (on page 1010) the Supreme
Court observed: —

“As soon as the goods were sold to the Bombay par-
ties the Appellant’s interest in the goods ceased and
whatever happened to the goods subsequently was no
concern of the Appellant. In fact, there is no privity
between the Appellant and the foreign merchants to’
whom the goods were ultimately exported.”.

Gokal’s 62. In J. V. Gokal & Co. vs. Assistant Collector Sales
दिशा Tax (1960) 2 S.C.R. 852: (AIR. 1960 8.2. 595), _ the

wing the to Supreme Court again followed the two Travancore Cases

Travancore and at paragraph 10, (page 598), observed: —

९88८५,

“This Court in State of Travancore-Cochin vs.

Bombay Co. Ltd., held that a sale which occasioned
the export was a sale that took place in the course of
export of goods ............., This Court again in
1954 S.C.R. 53 (A-LR. 1953 S.C. 333) extended the doc-
trine to a case of sale or a purchase of goods effected
within the State by transfer of shipping documents
while the goods were in the course of transit.”. -

Thus, it is only to this extent that the principles laid
down in (the I Travancore case) for determining when a
sale or purchase took place in the course of export or im-
port were regarded as extended by the (Second Tra-
vancore case).

Which | 63. From this and the two T-ataicore cases it is clear
लक 45 which particular transactions would be in the course of
Supreme @XPort and_ which, in the course of import. For con-
Court, are in Venience. IT may enumerate them here:—

the course हि .
of export (1) A sale which occasions export would be in
or import, the course of export.

(2) A purchase which occasions import would
be in the course of import.

(3) A sale or purchase which is effected by trans-
fer of shipping documents while the goods ‘are on
the high seas would be in the course of export. (Such


19

transactions would be very rare but are not incon-
ceivable. See paragraph 13 of the I Travancore case
and paragraph 15 and 49 of the If Travancore case,
ALR).

(4) A sale or purchase, effected by transfer of
shipping documents while the goods are on the high
seas, would be in the course of import. (See paragraph
13 of the I Travancore case and paragraph 15 and 49
of the II Travancore case, A.LR.; and also the facts of
this case ie. J. V. Gokal’s case).

64. From this enumeration, it would be seen that the All tran-
Supreme Court has by its interpretation of article 286 (1) Necnagen
(b) analysed and covered all the transactions of sale or 286 19)
purchase which take place in the course of the import of coveted by
the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory the Supreme
of India. In fact, by not adopting a mechanical test (see Court
paragraph 13 of the I Travancore case, ALR), the Sup- 4ins-
reme Court put a liberal construction upon article 286
(1) (b) by indluding in the category of transactions taking
place in the course of export or import, a sale which
occasions export as taking place in the course of export
and a purchase which occasions import as taking place in
the course of import, though such sale or purchase does
not literally take place in the course of export or import.

65. In Universal Import Agency vs. Chief Controller Universal
of Imports (1961) 1 S.CR. 305 (ALR. 1961) S.C. 41, the Import
Supreme Court again referred to the two Travancore cases शाप
at page 47 (paragraph 19), and observed:-— हे

‘This Court had in the context of article 288 (1)
(b) of the Constitution to consider the connotation of
the words “in the course of export or import” in
State of Travancore Cochin vs. Bombay Co.. Ltd. (I
Travancore case).’

Patanjali Sastri C. J. described the nature of export sale
thus at page 367 (A.LR.):—

“Such sales must of necessity be put through by
transporting the goods by rail or ship or both out cf
the territory of India, that is to say, by employing the
machinery of export. A sale by export thus involves
a series of integrated activities commencing from the
agreement of sale with a foreign buyer and ending
with the delivery of goods to a commen carrier for
transport out of the country by land or sea. Such 4
sale cannot be dissociated from the export without
which it cannot be effectuated, and the sale and re-
sultant export form parts of a single transaction.”.

31 Law--10


120

The same principle has been restated by the learned
Chief Justice in (II Travancore case). The learned Chief
Justice stated at page 336 (A.LR.) thus :--

“The phrase integrated activities was used in the
previous decision to denote that a sale, that is a sale
which occasions the export cannot be dissociated from
the export without which it cannot be effectuated and
the sale and the resultant export from parts of a single
transaction.”

66. I have repeated these passages here, only with a
view to facilitating comparison of these passages with the
statement of law made by the Supreme Court on what
constitutes a purchase by import. An identical language
has been employed in explaining and setting out the con-
notation of import purchase. th para 20 {AIR.), the
Supreme Court observes :-—

~Applying the said principles (i.e. principles laid
down in the two Travancore cases) ६० an import sale,
it may be stated that a purchase by import involves a
series of integrated activities commencing from the
contract of purchase with a foreign firm “(emphasis
supplied by me) and ending with the bringing of goods
into the importing country and that the purchase and
resultant import form parts of the same transaction.”

‘These observations, which are directly applicable in the
present case, make it clear that an import stream can be
started only by an Indian buyer entering into an agree-
ment of purchase with a foreign seller. This is the same
thing as saying that there must be privity between the
Indian buyer and the seller overseas. Let me, however,
proceed with the later cases before I set down all the
principles of law as deduced from the several decisions of
the Supreme Court.

67. Endupuri Narasimham vs. State of Orissa (1962) I
S.C.R. 314: (ALR 1961 S.C, 1344), is a case of intra-State
sales. But the observations made by the Supreme Court
on article 286 (1)(b) are apposite. Indeed, the whole law
on the subject of sale or purchase of goods in the course of
export or import has been succinctly and precisely set out
in these observations. The Supreme Court says (Page
1346, ALR.) :--

“With reference to the analogous provision under
Article 286 (1) (0) prohibiting imposition of tax on the
sale or purchase of goods in the course of import or
export, it has been held by this Court that it is only
a sale or purchase which occasions the export or import
of the goods out of, or into, the territory of India, or
a sale in the State by the exporter or importer by
transfer of shipping documents while the goods are


1a

beyond the customs barrier, that is within the exemp-
tion and that a sale which precedes such export or

import or follows it is not exempt, vide (the two Tra-
vancore cases).”

68. The next case which may be referred to is Fast East India
India Tobacco Co. vs. State of Andhra Pradesh [ (1963) 1 ce.
S.C.R. 404; ATR. 1962 S.C. 1733}. In this case, the Appl-
lants were doing business in the export of tobacco. They,
first entered into contracts with their customers abroad
for sale of tobacco. Thereafter they purchased the requi-
site quantities of goods (tobacco) in the local markets and
then they exported them to their foreign purchasers in
performance of their contracts with them. The purchases
made by the Appellants were sought to be assessed to sales
tax, The Appellants contended that these purchases made
in the focal markets were protected under article 286
{1}(b). On these facts, the Supreme Court observed
Apage 1236, paragraph 9) :—

It may be assumed for the purpose of the present
discussion that the purchases made by the Appellants
on which the tax is sought to be imposed were made
for the purpose of executing specific orders which they
had received from their foreign customers. The
question is whether even so the sales in question took
place in the course of export for the purpose of article
286 (1)(b). In support of their contention that they
-did, the Appellants rely on the following observations
in (I Travancore case):—

“A sale by export thus involves a series of
integrated activities commencing from the agree-
ment of sale with a foreign buyer and ending with
delivery of goods to a common carrier for transport
out of the country land or sea. Such a sale
cannot be dissociated from the export without
which 11 cannot be effectuated and the sale and
the resultant export form parts of a single transac-
tion. Of these two integrated activities, which
together constitute an export sale, whichever first
occurs can well be regarded as taking place in the
course of the other”,

“Now the contention is that the agreement
entered into with the foreign purchasers for sale
of Virginia tobacco, the purchase of the same
Yocally by the Appellants for performing the con-
tract and their subsequent export to the foreign
‘purchasers must al] be held to form one integrated
transaction of sale in the course of export.”

“Now the observations quoted above were
made in refutation of the contention that the
expression “sale in the course of export or import’
sneant only a sale which takes Place while the


Ben Gorm

122

goods are actually in movement, in the course of
export or import, as for example, when shipping
documents are endorséd and delivered when the
goods are in transit. This Court held that it was.
too narrow an interpretation to put on the words
in question and that a sale which actually occa-
sions the export or import would fall within arti-
cle 286 (1)(b). The question whether sales which
precede export are sales in the course of export
within article 286 (1)(b) arose directly for deci-
sion in the II Travancore case.”

69. The Supreme Court also referred to two more cases,
[State of Madras vs. Gurviah Naid:. & Co. Ltd. (ALR.
1956 S.C. 158) and State of Mysore vs. Mysore Spinning &
Manufacturing Co. (A.LR. 1958 S.C. 1002)] with approval
and concluded (page 1337, paragraph 14) :—

“On these authorities the Law must be taken to
be well settled that it is only the sale under which the
export is made (emphasis supplied by me) that is pro-
tected by article 286 (1) (9) and that a purchase which
precedes such a sale does not fall within the purview
though it is made for the purpose of, or with a view
to export.”

70. The last case of the Supreme Court to which I may
refer in this connection is Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations v.
Sales Tax Officer (1964) 7 S.C.R. 706: A.LR, 1964 (2) 8.0.
1752. Before considering the observations made by the
Supreme Court, I would state the facts which arose in the
case. The Appellants—the Assessees—were the manu-
facturers or producers of tea in the State of Kerala. They
sold their manufactured tea by public auction through
their brokers to the agents or intermediaries of foreign
principals. Thus, in effect, the sales were made by the
Appellants themselves in favour of the agents of foreign
buyers and delivery of the goods sold was also given to
such agents. It is only thereafter that the agents them-
selves exported the goods purchased by them to their prin-
cipals a foreign destinations.

71. The question before the Supreme Court was: “Is
the sale by auction to the agent or inter mediary of the
foreign buyer in the course of export within the meaning
of article 286 (1)(b)?” The Supreme Court held that the
Appellants were not concerned with the actual exportation
of the goods and the sales were intended to be complete
without the export and that accordingly the sales were
not in the course of export.

In the course of its judgment, the Supreme Court, first,
stated what constitutes a sale in the course of export and
in expounding the law on this subject it referred to the


123

rst Travancore case ang proceeded (page 1755, paragraph
8):

“A sale in the course of export predicates a con-
nection between the sale and the export, the two acti-
vities being so integrated that the connection between
the two cannot be voluntarily interrupted without a
breach of the contract or the compulsion arising from
the nature of the transactions, In this sense, to con-
stitute a sale in the course of export, it may be said
that there must be an intention on the part of both the
buyer and the seller to export, there must be an obliga-
tion to export, and there must be an actual export,
The obligation may arise by reason of Statute, contract
between the parties, or from mutual understanding or
agreement between them, or even from the nature of
the transaction which links the sale to export:
—--+————-And to occasion export there must
exist such a bond between the contract of 391९ 810 the
actual exportation that each link is inextricably con-
nected with the one immediately preceding it.”

72. It may be noted that the same principles as had Ben Gorm
‘been laid down in the two Travancore cases have been “**
restated and explained in this case. What is, however,
emphasised by the Supreme Court even in this case is a
contract of sale between the seller and the buyer which Link or
must “link the sale to export”, ‘What kind of link or Bond,
bond should there be between the contract of sale and the
export? When do these two activities—contract of sale
and the export—become integrated with one another and
become parts of a single transaction? —The bond between
the contract of sale and the export is an indissoluble bond,
and the two activities must be merged in one another
‘before a completed transaction of sale can arise. Such a
result has been described in the first Travancore case
as a sale which cannot be dissociated from the export, or
as one which cannot be effectuated without the machinery
of export. The sale, in order to be complete must, if
may use the expression, float on the export stream so that
it may finally reach its foreign destination. Mr. Justice
Shah has illustrated the pririciples which he stated earlier,
by reference to certain instances (see page 1756, paragrph
8) with a view to explaining further to what cases they do
not apply. _ First, he considers the facts of the case which
was before him and, puts them in the form of an instance.
“For instance”, says the learned Judge “the foreign pur-
chaser either by himself or through his agent purchases
goods within the territory of India and exports the goods
and even if the seller has the knowledge that the goods
are intended by the purchaser to be exported, such a transac-
tion is not in the course of export, for, the seller does
not export the goods (underlined by me), and it is not his
concern as to how the purchaser deals with the goods.


Direct
Congestion,

1%

Such a transaction without more cannot be Tegarded as
one in the course of export because etymologically “in
the course of export” contemplates an integral relation or
bond between the sale and the export.

73. When the learned Judge observed “such a transac-
tion without more” in the foregoing passage, he had obvi-
ously in his mind the contract or agreement of sale before
him which contained no obligation whatever on the seller
to export the goods. If there had been any such obliga-
tion or covenant requiring the seller to export the goods.
it would have established an integral relation between the
sale and the export. Then the learned Judge takes
another instance presumbaly afforded by the facts of the
I Travancore case. It is “a transaction under a contract
of sale with a foreign buyer under which the goods may
under the contract be delivered by the seller to a common
carrier for transporting them to the purchaser. Such a
sale would indisputably be one for export whether the
contract and delivery to the common carrier are effected
directly or through agents.” Further on. it is observed :--

“Tn general where the sale is effected by the seller
and he is not connected with the export which actually
takes place, it is a sale for export. Where the export
is the result of sale, the export being inextricably
linked up with the sale so that the bond cannot be
dissociated without a breach of the obligation arising
by statute, contract or mutual understanding between
the parties arising from the nature of the transaction,
the sale is in the course of export.”

74. I may also quote the following observations from
the next paragraph (9) :— .

“But there is nothing in the transaction from which
springs a bond between the sale and the intended
export linking them up as parts of the same transaction.

There is nothing in law or in the contract
between the parties, or even in the nature of the tran.
saction which prohibits diversion. (by the purchaser)
of the goods for internal consumption. e sellers
have no concern with the actual export of the goods,
once the goods are sold . They have no controf over
the goods. There is therefore no direct connection
between the sale and export of goods which would
make them parts of an integrated transaction of sale
in the course of export.”

Thus, it would be seen that if there were a direct con-
nection between the sale and the export of Foods, it would
make the sale and export of goods parts of an integrated
transaction of sale in the course of export, Now, such a
direct connection is possible only when the contract of
sale contains a covenant, or when it is an incident of such



15

contract, whereunder the seller is obliged to export the
goods. This is clear from the observations of the Sup-
treme Court which I have quoted earlier. In this case,
it is true that there was both a sale and an export of the
goods sold. But one WAS not connected with the other,
in that the seller himself did not export the goods. The
sale was intended to be complete without export and the
seller was not concerned with the actual exportation of
the goods. What is to be noted in this case is that it was
the purchaser who after purchasing the goods and taking
delivery thereof within the territory of India himself ex-
ported them. But such export is not under a contract of
sale.

75. We have already seen that the provisions regarding Bengal _
inter-State sales are analogous to the provisions dealing Immunity
with export sales. While dealing with inter-State sales “"
Mr. Justice Venkatarama Ayyar (in Bengal Immunity
case) ALR. 1955 S.C. 661 at page 734, first defined as to
what constituted a sale in the course of inter-State trade,
and then, to bring home the principles that he was enuncia-
ting, gave an illustration :—

“If X, a merchant in State A, goes to State 8, pur-
chases goods there and transport them into A, there
is undoubtedly a movement of goods in inter-State
commerce but that is not under the contract of sale.”

In the same way, it may be said that if a foreigner
either by himseli or through his agent comes to India and
purchases goods (as in this case) and exports them to his
own country, there is undoubtedly an expor: of goods,
But that is not under the contract of sale which the Indian
seller had entered into with the foreigner’s Agent.

76. In regard to cases where there were at least two
ales. the Supreme Court observed (page 1756. paragraph
“It may be regarded as therefore settled law that
where there are two sales leading to export the
first under which the goods are procured for sale and
the property in the goods passes within the territory
of India, and the second by the buyer to a foreign party
resulting in export—the first cannot be regarded as a
sale in the course of export, for a sale in the course
of export must be directly and integrally connected
with the export.”

77. I may also refer to a few decisions of the High High Court
Court of Madras bearing on some of the points that arise 0888.
in the present reference,

78. In Gandhi Sons vs, State of Madras (AIR. 1955 Gandhi sons
Madras 722), the facts were that some Bombay merchants cate.
had entered into certain contracts of purchase with the


A. Gaffoor
Sahib’s case,

Dhan
Lakshmi
cage.

26

merchants in Madras who were dealers in pepper. The
Bombay merchants made the purchases either on their
own behalf or on behalf of undisclosed foreign principals.
Between the undisclosed principals and the Madras mer-
chants there was no privity. The Bombay merchants
then exported the goods. The Madras sellers contended,
that their sales to Bombay merchants were in the course
of export. In dealing with this question, the High-Court
observed (page 724, paragraph 15) :—

‘What was characterised by the Supreme Court
{I Travancore case) as an “export sale” was one in
which the assessees (here, the Madras sellers) figured
as exporters, privity having been established between
them and the foreign buyer, either through direct
negotiation or dealing or through the local represen-
tatives of the 187, . ..... ............ Undoubtedly an
export took place here, But in that transaction the
assessces {the Madras sellers) were not the sellers who
exported or whose sales occasioned the export.

A sale will occasion an export or there will be an
export sale as understood by the Supreme Court only
where the sale is to a foreign buyer with whom the
local seller has privity and when as a direct result of
such sale the goods are transported across the frontier.”

79. In A. Geffoor Sahib & Co. vs. Madras State (ALR.
1958 Madras 314), the petitioner was the seller and Rallix
(India) Ltd. were the buyers. No doubt the goods sold by
the petitioner to Rallis (India) Ltd. for export abroad, but
then it was the buyers, Rallis (India) Ltd. that were the
exporters. There was no privity of contract between the
petitioner and the persons to whom the goods were ulti-
mately sold by Rallis (India) Ltd. On these grounds. the
petitioner's sales were held not protected under article
286(1)(b).

80. The facts in Dhan Lakshmi Mills Ltd, vs. State of
Madras (A.LR. 1961 Mad. 87) were similar to those in the
present case (Khosla’s case), if not somewhat more in fav-
our of the assessee. The Dhan Lakshmi Mill at Tirupur
was the assessee in that case. The Mill intimated its re-
quirement to the Bombay dealers, who then placed orders
with suppliers in Africa. The shipments were directed
from African ports to Cochin. In the meantime, the
assessee (the Mill) applied for the import quota, and re-
quested the authorities to issue the licence to the seller at
Bombay. The Bombay dealers sent the shipping docu-
ments to their clearing agents at Cochin. These clearing
agents presented the shipping documents, cleared the goods
through the customs and then despatched the goods to
Tirupur to the Mill and the railway receipts were sent to
the Mill through banks.


abs

On these facts, the High Court observed (page 88, A.LR.
1961 Mad.): —

“It is no doubt true the dealer in Bombay ordered
the Cotton from his Vendor abroad (Africa) only to
carry out the importer’s contractual obligations to sell
the cotton so imported to the assessee (the Mill). The
assessee provided the facilities by arranging for the
grant of import licence to the dealer in Bombay, even
as the assessee provided further facilities for the trans-
port of the cotton by rail in this country after the cot-
ton had been imported and after it had been cleared
through the customs. The relationship between the
assessee and the importer at Bombay was that of a
buyer and seller, both heing principals, and the sale
was only after the import of the goods even where the
‘contract to sell (between the Bombay dealer and the
Mill) preceded the order to the exporter abroad (Afri-
‘can exporter) to ship the goods in India.

It was the seller’s agent at Cochin that cleared the
goods by rail to the assessee and it was that agent that
consigned the goods by rail to the assessee and the
assessee's contractual obligation was normally to pay
for the cotton against delivery of the railway receipt
at Tirupur. We agree with the Tribunal that these
purchases of the imported cotton effected by the
assessee did not fall within the scope of article
286(1)(b) of the Constitution.”.

81. In Mohideen Thumby & Co. vs, State of Madras Mohideen
¥A.LR. 1962 Mad. 323), the law on the export sale was laid Thumby
down as follows :-~ casts

“An export sale is one which is effected between a
seller in the State and a buyer abroad outside the
Indian territory. The foundation of such a sale is the
contract between the two in respect of goods or mer-
chandise forming the subject-matter of the sale. The
contract can be entered into directly between the seller
and the buyer or it can be brought about by their res-
pective agents duly authorised in that behalf. It is
impossible to conceive of an export sale without the
essential element of a privity of contract between the
two contracting parties. The absence of a contract
either in the form of actual agreement signed by the
seller and the buyer or their respective agents, or in
the form of letters between the buyer and the seller
evidencing the term of agreement is definitely fatal to
any claim that any sale transaction by a local dealer
is an export sale hit by the provisions of article
286(1)(b) of the Constitution.”.


Propositions

128

82. From a review of the cases which I have tried to

Summarised. discuss above, it seems to me that the following proposi-

togcation”

tions of law are well established: —

(1) Words “export” and “import” are complemen-
tary. The two notions of export and import go in
pairs. The same principles must apply in determining
when a sale takes place in the course of export or when
a purchase takes place in the course of import.

(2) A sale would be in the course of export only
if it occasions export and a purchase would be in the
course of import only if it occasions import.

(3) When the interpretation of the term “occasion
broughi the principle of integrated activities into play,
a purchase was not regarded as taking place in the
course of export any more than a sale was regarded as
taking place in the course of import. Thus, a purchase
could not occasion export and a sale could not occasion
import. This statement of course does not cover the
field of sales or purchases that take place in the course
of import or export by transfer of shipping documents
before or after the goods have crossed customs fron-
tiers of India. Indeed, apart from such transactions
as are effected by transfer of shipping documents,
Tone of the cases which I have mentioned above has
decided that a purchase occasioned the export and a
sale occasioned the import.

(4) Further, the term “occasion” is used in sections
3 and 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act. Apart from the
historical significance of the use of such word in these
sections, it would be seen that in common usage the
words “cause” and “occasion” are synonymous. “Such
in fact”, says Ballentine “is their ordinary use” (see
Law Dictionary II, page 898). There must. therefore,
be casual connection between the transaction (of sale
or purchase) and the movement of goods from one
State to another or from one country to another.

(5) When can it be said that there would be such
a casual connection? The answer to ‘this question
would be the same, whether you look at the section in
the context of its historical back-ground, that is to say,
in the light of the previous decisions of the Supreme
Court, or construe the section as was done on first
principles in the Tata Iron and Steel case, It is that
the movement must be caused by. or be the result or,
a covenant or incident of the contract of sale between
the parties.

(6) Now, it is obvious, that as in the case of intra-
State sales or inter-State sales, so in the case of sales

- where the goods are intended to be sold to buyers

overseas, such contract of sale must be between the


129

Indian exporter-seller and the foreign-buyer (see the
I Travancore case). The foundation of an export sale
‘is stated to be the contract between an Indian seller
and x buyer abroad. The position is the same in re-
821d to purchases by import where there must be a con-
tract of purchase with a foreign vendor [See (1961)
1. S.C.R. 305, Universal Import Agency vs. Chief Con-
traller of Imports}.

(7) This principle is stated also in terms of “pri-
vity of contract”. It has been held that it is impossible
to conceive of an export sale without the essential ele-
ment of a privity of contract between the two contract- Privity.
ing parties. In the II Travancore case it was decided,
that the absence of a privity of contract between the
African sellers and the Indian buyers was regarded as
fatal to the contentions of the latter that their pure
chases were in the course of import.

(8) It is now settled law that where there are two
sales leading to export, the first under which the goods
are procured for sale and the property in the goods
passes within the territory of India, and the second
by the buyer to a foreign party resulting in export~-
the first cannot be regarded as a sale in the course of
export. On the same principle the first sale after the
purchase by import has been held to be not in the
course of import.

83, With these principles of law in my mind, I would Khosle’scase
approach Khosla’s case and see if they are made applicable discutted
to it. A few facts may be recalled here. The assessee With ref to
{Khosla & Co.) in the first place. entered into a contract of propositions
sale with the Director-General of Supplies and Disposals above stated.
whereunder the assessee undertook to get some axle-box
bodies rnanufactured in Belgium by particular manufactur-
ers named in the contract, and to import them and there-
after deliver them according to the directions of D.G.S.D.
as contained in the contract. What kinds of axle-box hodies
were required by D.G.S.D. had also been specified and set
out in the contract. I would keep these facts in the fore-
front of cther facts as it is this contract and these facts in
particular which have been construed as occasioning the
import of goods from the Belgium manufacturers, The con-
tract had been entered into between the Assessee as the
seller and the D.G.S.D. ‘as the purchaser. It may be noted
that the contract was to end in a completed sale only after
the goods were imported into India and were delivered to
the Consignees as directed by the D.G.S.D. It is only after
acceptance of such delivery that the Assessee was to receive
the price of goods sold by him.

84. Immediately after this contract was entered into by
him, the Assessee with a view to fulfilling the same had to
enter, and in fact did enter, into a contract with the Bel-


130

gium manufacturers and placed orders with them for the
manufacture of the required goods and for importing them
into India. The Belgium manufacturers in due course ex-
ported the goods to the Madras Harbour and sent over the
shippiag documents, bills of lading ete. to the Assessee, and
also asked him to remit the price of the goods as agreed
to between them.

Xhosia’s case 85. When the goods reached the Madras Harbour, they

scussed. were cleared by the Assessee as his own and it was after
taking delivery of the same that he despatched some of
them by rail and the others locally, to the Consignees indi-
cated by the D.G.S.D.

86. It is thus clear that the Assessee entered into a con-
tract with foreign sellers—namely, the Belgium manufac-
turers—for the goods to be imported into India. In this
contract, the Assessee is the purchaser and the Belgium
manufacturers are the foreign sellers. It is this contract
which in the language of the Supreme Court (II Travan-
core case) is a contract of import-purchase or of purchase
by import. It is true that this contract, I may even 585,
was necessitated by the contractual obligation the Assessee
had undertaken in the earlier contract of sale which he had
entered into with the D.G.S.D. It was in pursuance of that
contract that the Assessee had to enter into the later con-
tract with the foreign sellers. It is also true that the
Assessee purchased and imported the goods from Belgium
for the purpose of executing the specific contract of sale
which he had made with the D.G.S.D. But where. as here.
there are two contracts and where the goods were imported
by the Assessee under the contract of purchase with the
foreign sellers, both contracts could not have occasioned
the import; it is only the contract of purchase that did it.
There was privity of contract between the Assessee and
the foreign sellers. It is this contract in compliance
whereof the Belgium manufacturers put the goods into the
export stream which from the point of view of the Assessee,
the purchaser, became the import stream.

‘Khosla’s cate 87. Further, it cannot be disputed, that the Assessee
discussed. cleared the goods at the harbour as his own goods purchased
from the foreign sellers by employing the machinery of

Which import. It was thereafter that the Assessee sold his goods
Which to the D.G.S.D. Indeed, it is the sales effected by him in
चल favour of the D.G.S.D. that are now in question and are
mport, claimed to be protected under article 286(1)(b). Thus, it
may be stated that while the contract of sale between the

D.GS.D. and the Assessee occasioned (if I may use this
expression) the contract of purchase between the Assessee

and the foreign sellers, it was the later contract of pur-

chase that alone occasioned import of goods intu the teri

tory of India. The first contract no doubt eventually led

tothe import, but cannot be regattied as germane for o¢ca-


131

sioning the import within the meaning of section 5(2) of
the Central Sales Tax Act and as explained by the previous
decisions of the Supreme Court. Any covenant or incident
in such contract referring to the movement of goods would
also be not relevant to occasioning the import. The con-
tract that is relevant for the purpose is the contract between:
the Assessee and the Belgium exporter. You cannot con-
ceive of the Assessee importing the goods without the
Belgium manufacturer exporting them from his harbour.
Thus, there must be community of intention between the
exporter who must exercise his volition to export and the
importer who must exercise his volition to import. This
was expressed as intention on the part of both the buyer
and the seller to export in the Ben Gorm Nilgiri case.

88. I think the High Court and the lower taxing autho--
rities in this case referred only to the absence of integrality
between the two events. namely, the first contract of sale
and the import, when they stated that there was no privity
of contract between the foreign seller and the D.G.S.D.

89. Further. the matter may be looked at from another
point of view. What is claimed here is that the sale by
the Assessee in favour of D.G.S.D. occasioned the import,
and therefore is protected under article 286(1}{b). This
claim seems to me to be basically untenable, in view of the
previous decisions of the Supreme Court. The second
Travancore case precisely enumerated which transactions
of sales or purchases could be regarded as taking place in
the course of import or export. ‘ile I am on this point,
TI leave out of account such transactions as are effected by
transfer of shipping documents when the goods are on high
seas. ] am considering only such transactions which were
held to be occasioning export or import, as the case may
be. In other words, we are only concerned with the group
of transactions covered by the first conclusion in the second’
Travancore case. They are sdles by export and purchases
by import. These transactions were explained in the I
Travancore case as sales and purchases themselves occa-
sioning the export or the import of the goods, as the case
may be, out of. or into, the territory of India. This view
has been accepted and no addition has been made to this
group of transactions, in the Jater cases. I may refer here
only to two cases. In Endupuri vs. State of Orissa (1962)
1S.C.R. 314, the Supreme Court observed: —

“ 9.०० has been held by this Court that it is
only a sale or purchase which occasions the export
or import........that is within the exemption.”

90, Again, in East India Tobacco एड, State of Andhra
(1963) 1 S.C.R. 404, it was stated: —

“On these authorities the law must be taken to be
well settled that it is only the sale under which the
export is made that is protected by article 286(1)(b) and’


132

that a purchase which precedes such a sale does not
fall within the purview though it is made for the pur-
pose of, or with a view to export.”
“The same is the position with purchases by import.
df so, the sales by the Assessee to D.G.S.D. cannot be re-
garded as occasioning the import so as to earn the
- exemption.

91. The case may be considered from still another angle.
If the present case involves two contracts, it would come
squarely within the decision which the Supreme Court gave
in the second Travancore case while dealing with the
second type of transactions which the purchasers claimed
to come under article 286(1)(b). The facts in that case so
far as relevant are similar to the present case and bear
repetition here. The Travancore purchasers placed orders
with a Bombay party (who may be compared with the
Assessee in the present case) for purchase of cashew-nuts
from Africa. The Bombay party indented the goods on
their own account and placed orders for these goods with
African sellers. The African sellers shipped the goods to
Cochin on cif. terms. The shipping documents were made
out in the name of the Bombay party as consignees and
delivered to them against payment through Bankers at
“Bombay. The Bombay party cleared the goods through
~their representatives at the port of destination. and issued
separate delivery orders to the purchasers for the respec-
“tive quantities ordered. Thus, the Bombay party sold the
goods as principals to the purchasers. (These facts, it need
hardly be stated, are almost identical with the vresent

-facts). On these facts the Supreme Court observed: —
“The Bombay party are the purchasers and they
sell the goods as principals to the Respondents (Tra-
vancore purchasers) at the port of destination by issu-
ing separate delivery orders against payments. No
privity being established between the Respondents
{Travancore purchasers} and the African sellers, the
Respondents’ purchases can only be described as pur-
ghases, from the Bombay party of the goods within the

ate.

92. Even according to the minority view expressed by
“Mr. Justice 5. R. Das in his dissenting judgment in the
second Travancore case. a sale of the nature which the
present Assessee effected in favour of the D.G.S.D. would
not be saved. While expressing his view that the first
sale by the importers to the dealers, wholesale or retail,
was in the course of import, Mr. Justice S. R. Das made an
- exception in the case of a sale by an importer directly to
a consumer. At page 350 (AIR), the learned Judge
says:—
“If, however, a particular importer himself hap-
pens to be a retail dealer of the goods and sells the


133

goods to the actual consumers..........- then such re-
tail sales may, like local retail sales of similar goods,
be liable to sales tax by the State.”

In the present case, the goods were sold to D.GS.D.
obviously for consumption and the Assessee, the importer
may well be regarded as having entered into a retail deal
of sales.

93. Another point may be discussed. Does the special
nature of the goods in the present case make any difference
and will it render the sale as one in the course of import?
In paragraph 11 of its judgment, the Supreme Court in
Khosta’s case observed: —

“There was no possibility of these goods being
diverted by the Assessee for any other purpose.”

There is no doubt that the goods in the present case
are of special nature and were required only by Southern
Railway. But it is respectfully submitted that nothing can
tur on this circumstance. The previous cases have not
considered this circumstance as a ground in support of the
ease of export or import. Whether the goods were of a
Special nature or not, it was not possible for the Assessee
to commit a breach of his contractual obligations unless he
‘was prepared to render himself liable for such breach. And
if he was prepared to render himself liable for such breach,
it would be possible for him not only to commit a breach
of his contractual obligations in respect of such special
goods as the axle-box bodies in question, but also to divert
the goods to same other railway requiring the same and
probably offering a higher price. Of course, it would not
be prudent for the Assessee to commit such wanton breach
and divert the goods for some Other purpose. He would
not be so foolish as to render himself legally liable for
such breach and expose himself to the risk of having his
import licence or other Government permits forfeited. But
in law, there does not seem to be any impediment which
renders it impossible for the Assessee to divert even such
goods for other purposes.

$4. 1 may in this connection refer 10 some of the previ-
ous cases which involved specified goods only with a view
to explaining that no point was made in them on the special
nature and the undivertibility of the goods.

In State of Mysore vs. Mysore Spinning and Manufac-
taring Co. (5.18. 1958 S.C. 1002), where the question of
export arose, the procedure in which the business of export
was conducted was described. The first step was for the
Bombay exporters to obtain a firm offer from a buyer
overseas specifying the quality and quantity of cloth or
yarn required by the buyer. Then the exporters inquired
from the Mills whether they could sell or manufacture the


Khosia’s
case
discussed.

Divertibility

134

goods of the quality and quantity required by the overseas:
buyer. If the Mills said “yes”, the next step was for the
exporter to enter into a firm contract with the foreign pur-
chaser, and then it was for the exporter to enter into a
contract with the Mills for the sale of those goods. The
contract had to be marked “for export only”, and the prices
fixed had to be higher than the inland prices. The specifi-
cations and details of the goods had also to be entered.
Then the exporter obtained a final licence from the Export
Controller. This licence set out the names of the seller
(Mills) and the exporter. Among other things the goods
had to be marked clearly “for export only”. Then the
Mills informed the exporter about the despatch of the
goods, and finally the exporter took delivery and shipped
them overseas. Yet. the sales by the Mills were held not
to occasion the export, The goods had been manufactured
to order, and the Mills with their contractual obligations
could not have diverted them for any other purpose. Yet,
their inability to so divert the goods was not considered
as in any way causing their sales to take place in the
course of export.

95. In East India Tobacco Co. vs. State of Andhra Pra-
desh (AIR. 1962 S.C. 1733), the assessees first entered into
contracts with their customers abroad for the sale of spe-
cial kind of tobacco called Virginia tobacco, ang thereafter
they made purchases of the requisite quantities of such
tobacco locally and exported them to the foreign purchasers
in performance of their contracts. The purchases of the
assessees in the local market were held not to occasion
export.

96. In a Madras case (Dhan Lakshmi Mills Ltd. vs. State
of Madras, ALR. 1961 Mad. 87), where the facts were simi-
lar to those obtaining in the present case, the Mill intimated
its requirements to the Bombay importers who thereafter
imported the required goods and sold them to the Mill.
The Bombay importers, after having imported the goods
which were in accordance with the requirements of the
Mill. could not have diverted them for any other purpose
without a breach of their contractual obligations with the
Mill. ४९, their sales to the Mill were held as not occasion-
ing the import.

97. There is also another point which seems to arise in
connection with the present discussion. That turns upon
what we mean by the word “diversion”. In paragraph (9)
of the majority judgment of the Supreme Court in Ben
Gorm Niloiri case (ALR. 1964 S.C. 1752, 1756). the word
“diversion” has been used in the following sentence :—

“There is nothing in law or in the contract be-
tween the parties, or even in the nature of the transac-
tion which prohibits diversion.of the goods for internat
consumption.”.


135

This was stated obviously with the object of emphasis-
ing that the purchaser in the auction was not bound to
export the goods for the simple reason that there was no
term in the contract between him and the seller which
obliged him only to export the goods.

98. But the main use of this word (“Divert” or “Diver-
sion”) is to be found in the judgment of the Supreme Court
of U.S.A. where the question as to when the process of
exportation starts, has been dealt with. If the Supreme
Court of U.S.A. evolved the doctrine of original package
for determining how long the imported goods would conti-
nue to be imports and as such enjoy the immunity from
State taxation, it evolved another principle for determining
when the process of exportation commences, and that is
what may be stated as the principle of divertibility. Under
the Constitution of U.S.A. property intended for export from
the United States is not immune to local taxation under
the export clause until it enters the export stream and this
point is not reached until the property is delivered to a
carrier for export or has in fact started on its journey from
the United States. I may refer to one or two decisions of
the Supreme Court in this connection.

99. In Richfield Oil Corporation vs. State Board of
Equalization, 329 U.S. 69 (1946), the question was whether
the Appellant, a producer and seller of oi! in California
had exported the ०] to a purchaser in New Zealand. The
purchaser had furnished the ship to carry the oil to New
Zealand. Delivery of the oil was made into the hold of
the vessel (furnished by the purchaser) from the Appel-
lant’s tanks located at the Dock. Mr. Justice Douglas who
delivered the judgment of the Court observed: -

“That delivery marked the commencement of the
movement of the oil abroad (New Zealand). It is true
as the Supreme Court of California observed that at
the time of delivery, the Vessel was in California
waters and was not bound for its destination until it
started to move from the port. But when the oil was
pumped into the hold of the vessel it passed into the
control (emphasis supplied by me) of a foreign pur-
chaser and there was nothing equivocal in the transac-
tion which created even a probability that the oil
would be diverted to domestic use.”.

100. In Empresa Siderurgica vs. Merced County, 337 US.
154; 93 L.Ed. 1276 (1949), the same learned Judge (Justice
Douglas) again explained when the process of exportation
started:

“Tt is not enough that on the tax date there was a
purpose and plan to export this property. Nor is it
sufficient that in due course that plan was fully exe-
cuted. Part of the plant (machinery that is taxed was

31-Law—l1.

Richfield
Oil Corpo-
ration case.

Empresa
Siderurgica
case.


* Divert’ and
‘diversion’
not appre-
riate in
acribing
course of
import.

136

dismantled but it had not been delivered to any carrier
for export or otherwise started on its journey on the
tax date. It might still have been diverted into the
domestic market. The fact that any such diversion
would entail a breach of contract, that a part of the
plant had already been started on its export journey,
that an export license had been obtained and a letter
of credit had been deposited in this country increases
the expectation on the tax date that exportation of the
entire plant would eventuate. But that prospect, no
matter how bright, does not start the process of expor-
tation. On the tax date the movement to foreign shores
had neither started nor been committed.”.

In another place of the judgment. the learned Judge
observes : —

“Under that test it is not enough that there is an
intent to export or a plan which contemplates ex-
portation or an integrated series of events which will
end with it.............It is the entrance of the export
stream that marks the start of the process of exporta-
tion. Then there is certainty that the goods are head-
ed for their foreign destination and will not be diverted
to domestic use. Nothing less will suffice.”.

101. The Supreme Court has quoted this passage in the
Second Travancore case (A.1.R. 1953 S.C. 333, 337) only to
highlight the fact that a sale which takes place in the
course of export, when the goods are actually on the high
seas and therefore incapable of being diverted to domestic
use attracts the application of article 286(1)(b). On page
338 {A.LR. 1953 S.C. 333, 338), the learned Chief Justice
observes : —

........Where the goods are transported pursuant
to a contract of sale already concluded with a foreign
buyer and the shipping documents have been sent to
him, any further sale of such goods by the Indian seller
is impossible.”.

102. If I export the goods and part with the bills of
lading and other shipping documents, the goods would pass
into the control of the foreign purchaser (as they did in the
Richfield Oil Corporation case veferred to above), it would
not be possible for me to recall them and divert them for
domestic use. It seems to me that the word “divert” or
“diversion” could be used only while describing the expor-
tation of goods. Whatever the value of this principle and
the use of these words in determining and indicating the
commencement of the process of exportation, it would cer-
tainly have no application whatever and these words can-
not appropriately be used in determining and indicating
the end of the course of import. When the goods are im-
ported, they are obviously meant for home consumption.


137

103. Similarly, another point may arise for our consi- Mingling or
deration in the course of the present discussion on the sub- goods feat
ject before us. And that is what is meant by mingling of applied.
imported goods with the general mass of goods and mer-
chandise in our country; and when does such mingling of
goods take place? It seems to me that the mingling of
goods does not mean that the imported goods can be mixed
up with the indigenous goods of the same kind and qua-
lity, for instance, the imported cotton can be mixed up
with the cotton that is grown in our country with the re-
sult that the imported cotton may lose {if at all} its iden-
tity. I do not think this is the meaning of the mingling
of imported goods.

In the Second Travancore case (ALR. page 337 bottom),
the learned Chief Justice observed: —
“Similar difficulties and uncertainties are encoun- mingling.
tered in bringing within the exemption the first sale
after import. How is the exemption to be applied to
the goods imported from abroad after they are mingled
with the other goods and lose their distinctive charac-
ter as imports”?

I think this only means that the imported goods will
cease to be considered as imported goods after they
cross the customs barrier of the importing country and stand
on a par with the indigenous goods for the purpose of taxa-
tion. The observation of Mr. Justice 8. R. Das (in the IT
Travancore case) on this point is also instructive (A.LR.
page 350 of 1953 S.C. 333): —

“It is only after that first sale of the goods by the
importers to the dealers that the goods become parts
of the general mass of property in the State concerned
thereafter subject to the taxing power of that State.”,

104. In Dep uty Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Deputy
Madras vs. Messrs. Calter Lid. (A.LR. 1962 Madras 298; Co minis
11.8. (1962) Madras 585), the High Court of Madras observ- £006 of
ed (A.LR. page 300): -- cal Toe
bee eeees When once the goods have been permit- %.,M/s.
ted to be imported and the import duty on the goods Caltex Led.
has been levied by the customs officers, the course of
import ends whether or not the goods are immediately
cleared for home consumption, or are only kept in the
bonded warehouses..... ... In our opinion, it is not
the factual mingling of the imported goods with the
mass of the goods of the local area that terminates the
course of import. The course of import to our minds
comes to an end when once the goods have passed the
customs frontier in the sense that the customs duty
has been levied on the goods and the importer has
been permitted to clear the goods.”.

It is stated in this case that when and after this event

happens, the goods cease to be part of the import stream


Deputy
Commis-
sioner of
Commer-
cial Taxes

us.
Devar & Co.

‘When
imports
cease to be
imports in
U.S.A.

Doctrine
original
package
Brown es.
Maryland.

Warring ६5.
City of
Mobile

Low vs.
Austin.

and there is then no objection to the goods being brought
into the country presumably in the sense of their being
thereafter regarded as part of the general mass of pro-
perty liable to taxation by a State.

105. Again, in Deputy Commissioner of Commercial
Taxes vs. Devar & Co. [L.L.R. (1964) Madras 363], the same
High Court observed (page 387):—

“The import stream dries up and ceases to flow
after the Customs Department of the importing State
levies the duty and thereby declared the eligibility of
the goods to be cleared and mingled with the general
mass of goods and merchandise in the ecountry.”.

106. For determining under the Constitution of U.S.A.
how long the imported wares remained under the Protec-
tion of Article 1, Section 10, Clause 2) the Supreme Court
enunciated the original package doctrine in the leading case
of Brown vs. Maryland (12 Wheat 419; 6 L. Ed. 678). In
that case, the learned Chief Justice Marshall observed: —

“When the importer has.so acted upon the thing
imported that it has become incorporated and mixed
with the mass of property in the country, it has per-
haps lost its distinctive character as an import and has
become subject to the taxing power of the State; but
while remaining the property of the importer in his
warehouse in the original form or package in which
it was imported, a tax upon it is too plainly a duty on
imports to escape the prohibition of the Constitution.”.

107. In Warring vs. City of Mobile—19 L. Ed. 342 (1868),
it was held: —

“When the importer sells the imported articles or
otherwise mixes they with the general property of the
State of things changes as was said by this Court in the
leading case (Brown vs. Maryland) as the tax then
finds the articles already incorpor. ‘ated with the mass
of the property by the act of importer.”,

108. In Low vs. Austin—20 L. Ed. 517 (1872), it was held
that goods imported from a foreign country upon which
the duties and charges at the customs house had been paid,
were not subject to State taxation while remaining in the
original cases unbroken and unsold, in the hands of the
importer; and that goods imported did not lose their cha-
racter as imports and become incorporated into the mass
of the property of the State until they passed from the con-
trol of the importer or were broken up by him from their
original cases. In this case, it was observed: —

“Indeed, goods imported while they remain in the
hands of the importer in the form and shape in which

“x. Article 1, section 10, clause 2 of the Constitution of USA. says, “No
State shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any imposts or duties
on imports or exports ................ ”



189

they were brought into the country, can in no just
sense be regarded as part of that mass of property in
the State usually taxed for the support of the State
Government.”.

109. In Brown vs. Houston (114 U.S. 622), it was held Brown os.
that as soon as the goods were in the State, they became Houston,
part of the general mass of property and were liable to be
taxed in the same manner as the other property of similar
character. In the course of its judgment, the Supreme
Court observed: —

“Take the city of New York, for example. When
the assessor of taxes goes his round, must he omit from
his list of taxables all goods which have come into the
city from the factories of New England and New Jer-
sey or from the pastures and green fields of the west?
If he must, what will be left for taxation? And how
is he to distinguish between those goods which are
taxable and those which are not? With the exception
of goods imported from foreign countries, still in the
original packages and goods in transit to some other
place, why may he not assess all property alike that
may be found in the city, being there for the purpose
of remaining there till used or sold and constituting
part of the great mass of its commercial capital—pro-
vided always that the assessment be a ge eneral one and
not discriminative between goods of different States?”.

110. In the “Constitution of U.S.A.”, (1952 Ed.) (Senate
Document No. 170 on page 363), we find the following state-
ment of law:—

“A box, case or bale in which separate parcels of
goods have been placed by the foreign seller is regard-
ed as the original package and upon the opening of such
container for the purpose of using separate parcels, or
of exposing them for sale, each parcel loses its charae-
ter as an import and becomes subject to taxation as a
part of the general mass of property in the State.”,

111. Thus, this doctrine of original package laid down Doctrine
that importation was not over so long as the goods were in of original
the original package and hence a State had no power to Package.
tax imports until the original package was broken or there
was one sale while the goods were still in the original
package. The imports would be clothed with a tax immu-
nity only until the happening of one or the other of these
two events regarded as sufficient to alter the character of
the imports as imports and make then assimilated with the
general mass of property.

112. But this doctrine of original package has no place Doctrine of
in our country. (See the II Travancore case and State of original
Bombay vs. F. N. Balsara, A.LR. 1951 S.C. 318). Out package does
Supreme Court has adopted a simpler test for determining pot apely to
when the course of import comes to end. I have already ie


Khosla’s case
inconsistent
with previous
decisions.

140

shown! by reference to the decisions of the Supreme Court
and of the High Court of Madras that the course of the
import of the goods would end when the goods cross the
customs barrier of the importing country.

113. I am not, however, here so much directly concerned
with the difference that exists on this subject between the
American law and ours, as with the result that ipso facto
follows on the goods ceasing to be imports. Whether the
goods cease to be imports on their packages being broken
up as under the Constitution of U.S.A., or on their crossing
of the customs frontier as under our Constitution, the result
is the same. As soon as the goods imported lose their cha-
racter as imports, in one or the other way they become
mingled with the general mass of our property in a State
and subject to State taxation.

114. For the reasons stated in the foregoing paragraphs,
I am of the opinion that the present decision in Khosla’s
case is not consistent with the previous decisions of the
Supreme Court, which I have discussed above. In particu-
lar, the decision goes beyond the decisions of the Supreme
Court in the two Travancore cases and is likely to create
uncertainty in the law. What, then, is the remedy that 1
can suggest? Before legislation can be thought of, what I
think might be a proper step in the first instance is for the
Government to approach the Supreme Court and persuade
it to reconsider the present decision in some other matter
where the same questions may again come up before it for
decision. I have no doubt such matters may soon come
up, if not they are already pending, before the Supreme
Court. I have made this somewhat qualified suggestion,
and also with some hesitation, for the reason which I am
presently explaining in the following paragraphs: —

115. If the Legislature while enacting section 5 of the
Central Sales Tax Act only accepted the principles of law
which were laid down by the Supreme Court in the two
Travancore cases and which were recommended by the
Law Commission in its Second Report, in my opinion, the
section should not be what it is today. At present the sec-
tion reads “..... if the sale or purchase...... occasions
such export. .” and “if the sale or purchase occasions
such import...... ”. If only the Travancore cases were to
be followed and accepted, it would be only the sale occa-
fioning the export and only the purchase occasioning the
import.

116. It may be noted that the decision of the Supreme
Court in Khosla’s case does not seem to go upon the present
wording of section 5. The Supreme Court did not state that
because the present section mentioned both “sale” or “pur-
chase” as occasioning the import the legislature did con-

1. See paragraphs 37, 104 and 106,



1

template a sale (as well as a purchase) as occasioning the Khosla’s case
import and that if so, the sale fo the nature entered into by with previchs
the assessees (Khosla & Co.) with D.G.S.D. must be regard- decisions—
ed as occasioning the import as otherwise the word “sale” remedy.
in this context would be wholly redundant. It does not

appear that it was this reasoning that the Supreme Court

adopted in the present case, At any rate, there ig no such

clear indication in the judgment although I cannot posi-

tively say that this was not at the back of the minds of the

learned Judges who constituted the Bench. The Supreme

Court held that it was quite clear from the contract (of

sale between the assessee and D.G.S.D.) that it was inci-

dental to the contract that the goods would be manufac-

tured in Belgium and imported into India for the consignee
(Southern Railway) and that movement of goods from

Belgium to India was in pursuance of the conditions of the

contract between the assessee and the D.G.S.D. It is not,
however, unlikely that the Supreme Court may, if per-

suaded to reconsider the present decision ag suggested

above, be inclined to go upon the wording of the section

as much as a purchase occasions import. It isin such
eventuality that Legislature may step in and amend the

section so that it may be in conformity with the principles

laid down in the two Travancore cases and indeed in all

the later cases except the one now wnder reference, It is

only with a view to obtaining clarification as to the

grounds for the decision that I have suggested that the
Supreme Court be again approached for reconsidering the

matter,

117. If. however, it is considered that the wording of Amendment
the section as it stands today was very much present in renvedy.
the minds of the learned Judges and necessari ly formed

the basis of their judgment in Khosla’s case, then there

would be no need to approach the Supreme Court for such
reconsideration. The only remedy would, then he to effect

an amendment of the section in the manner indicated

above,

K. G. DATAR.
Law Commission,

Dt. 31-12-1966.

NOTE OF DISSENT BY SHRI RAMA PRASAD
MOOKERJEE

After anxious and mature consideration I have arrived
at the conclusion that the decision in Khosla’s case does
not, strictly speaking, either follow or is consistent with
the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in the two
Travancore Cases (1952) S.C.R. 1112 and (1954) S.C.R. 53)
—-principles which had been accepted by all concerned
and were intended to be incorporated in the Central Sales

‘ax .


142

I cannot, therefore, agree with the majority view on
the principal question as to whether Khosla’s case goes
beyond and is inconsistent with lhe two Travancore cases.

It will, however, not be necessary for me to enter into
a detailed discussion as I am in general agreement with
the reason assigned by Shri K. G. Datar in his exhaustive
Note of Dissent.

The Taxation Enquiry Commission had recommended
that Parliament should have power to tax inter-State
transactions and that it should be empowered by law to
determine the principles when a sale or purphase of goods
took place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce
and also when a sale or purchase took place in the course
of import into or export out of the territory of India or
outside a particular State.

In pursuance thereof the Constitution (Tenth Amend-
ment) Bill was introduced in Parliament. When that Bill
was pending the Law Commission had been invited to
offer its suggestions for formulating principles as afore-
said.

For the formulation of the principles to determine
when a sale or purchase takes place in the course of im-
port or export, the Law Commission felt no difficulty.

The Supreme Court had before this considered in the
two Travancore Cases (1952) 3, 6. R. 1112 and (1954)
8. ९. R. (53)—article 286 (1) (9) of the Constitution as it
then stood. The Taxation Enquiry Commission had
observed that the interpretation so given by the Supreme
Court was “perfectly satisfactory so far as foreign trade
is concerned”. The Law Commission also accepted the
principles so laid down by the Supreme Court.

The Law Commission also considered how far such
principles should be applicable in the case of inter-State
Sales or Purchases and of Sales or Purchases outside a

tate.

The Law Commission, thereafter, enunciated the prin-
ciples based on the Supreme Court decisions in the two
Travancore Cases.

It should be here noticed that the draft of the pro-
posed Parliamentary Legislation hed neither been placed
before nor considered by the Law Commission, Further,
the Law Commission made it clear in the Report that “the
principles enunciated by us in the foregoing paragraphs
do not purport to be a draft of the sections of the pro-
posed Bill”,

1. Certain points relating to the Bill were forwarded to the
Law Commission on 8th October. 1956 and were considered by the
Commission on 20th October i956. But they did not concern
import sales—P.M.B.


143

In spite of such observations the language used in the
Commission’s Report was copied verbatim in the subse
quent Bill.

The Legislature while enacting section 5 of the Central
Sales Tax Act purports to accept, as recommended by the
Law Commission, the principles of law as enunciated by
the Supreme Court in the said two Travancore Cases, The
language of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act should
not be, as observed by Sri Datar, what it is.

In order to put the intention beyond doubt the section
should be amended. As observed by Sri Datar—

“The section should not be what it is today. At
present the section reads “........ if the sale or pur-
chase...... occasions such export......” and “if the
sale or purchase occasions such impor -”. If only
the Travancore cases were to be followed and accept-
ed, it would be only the sale ovcasioning the export
and only the purchase occasioning the import.”.

My view is that immediate steps should be taken to
introduce the amendment. It is not necessary for “the
Government to approach the Supreme Court and persuade
it to reconsider the present decision in some other matter
where the same questions may again come up before it for

lecision”,

RAMA PRASAD MOOKERJEE.

GMGIPND—31 Law—24-5-68—1,800