LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

THIRTY-SECOND REPORT

SECTION 9 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL

PROCEDURE, 1898—Appointment of Sessions

Judges, Additional Sessions Judges and Assistant
Sessions Judges.

May, 1967

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA: MINISTRY OF LAW


Chairman,

LAW COMMISSION,

5, Jorbagh, New Delhi-3.
May 29, 1967.

Shri P. Govinda Menon,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My Dear MINISTER,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Thirty-
Second Report of the Law Commission on section 9 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898—Appointment of Sessions Judges,
Additional Sessions Judges and Assistant Sessions Judges.

2. The Law Commission took up the subject for a con-
sideration on receipt of the suggestion of the High Court of
Mysore, which was forwarded to the Commission by the Ministry
of Home Affairs. As explained in the Report, the Commission
decided to submit a separate Report on the subject, in view of
its urgency.

3. As the matter was urgent, a draft amendment of section
9, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 was prepared, which was
circulated to State Governments, High Courts, Administrations
of Union Territories and Courts of Judicial Commissioners
for comments (along with the suggestion of the Mysore High
Court and a copy of the Supreme Court’s judgment in State of
Assam v. Runga Muhammad, which was referred to in the sug-
gestion). Thereafter, a draft Report on the subject was prepared,
examining the provisions of articles 233 to 237 of the Constitu-
tion as interpreted in various judicial decisions, and their impact
on section 9 (and other sections) of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898, relating to the appointment, etc., of Sessions Judges
(and other presiding officers of criminal courts), and incorporating
a study of the provisions in various Acts or statutory orders as
to the creation of courts and appointment of presiding officers
in several States, A detailed study of the provisions applicable
to Union territories also became necessary, in view of the fact
that section 9 of the Code applies to Union territories also.


wi)

4, As usual, a Press Communique was also issued, inviting
persons and bodies interested in the subject to send their vicws
to the commission,

5. The draft Report was discussed at the cighry-tourth
meeting of ihe Commission on the 28th and 29th March, 1967,
and approved tentatively. The draft amendment to section ¢
propused in the Report was also tentatively approved, subject
to such modifications as might result from a consideration of
the comments of Stare Governments, etc., on the draft azaend-
meat.

6 Comments of State Governments, High Courts,
Administrations of Union territories and Courts of Juducial
Commissioners on the draft amendment were considered et the
eighty-fifth meeting of the Commission on the 24th and 28th
Aprif, 1967. After some discusston the Commission was cf the
opinion thar no further changes or modifications were necessary
in the draft tentatively approved at the previous meeting. It
was, in particular, decided that the power ta determine the initial
posting of a Session Judge to a particular Sessions Division must
also vest in the High Court (as proposed in the draft Report).
The draft Report was finally approved, and it was decided that
a gist of the comments received so far be included in the Report.

7. Accordingly, the draft Rerprt wes revised, end the
Report was signed at the cighty-aixth meeting of the Commi:sicr.
on 20th May, 1967. (Certain further comments received before
that meeting had been circulated to Members, and no changes
were considered necessary in the Report).

8. 1 wish once again to acknowledge with gratitude the
help we received from Mr. ए, M. Bakshi, our Secretary, whose
researches in the subject and whose hard-work in placiug all
the material with a draft hel ped the Commission to arrive at
its final decisions and giving a final shape 10 the Report.

Yours sincerely,

1.1. KAPUR.


(iii)
EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATION
. No,

Serial No. in Law Commission’s File on the subject.


(v)

CONTENTS

PAaraGRarH Supject-MAtTrer Pace
1 Genesis of the Report and question considered in the Report . I
2 Why the subject taken up separately . न . . . 2
३. Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 « . 2
4 Case-law on section 9 . . . . . . 2
S$ Articles of the Constitution « . . . . . . 2
6—21 Case-law on Articles 233 to 235 - . . . . ‘ 3
22 Article 236 of the Constitution . पु पु . . 10
23 Case-law on article 237 of the Constitution , . . . 11
24 © Asticle 233A of the Constitution पु . पु पु न Ir

75 Teeter O98 bod the की inthe Gonatnalan Changes
needed in section 9 . . : . . न न 12]
26 Various modes of assignment by control considered =. . 12
27 Prem Nath’scase ys ee +« -+«- -+ - 14
28—30 Changes required in section9 =. ss + ee is
31 Punjab and Bombay Amendments . न . . . 17
32 Section 40, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 . . 17
33 Recommendation in the Fourteenth Report . - + : 18
34-36 Position in Union territories . . . . . . 1B
37—49 Comments received on the draft amendments considered पु 20

50 Other sections of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898—
whether amendment needed. . . . + . 23
53 Provisions in Civil Courts Acts . . . . . . 24

52 Appendices . . . . . soe . .



(vi)

APPENDICES
APPENDIX, Supyect-MATTER
APPENDIX 1 . . Draft Amendment.
APPENDIX 2 . . . + Notes on Clauses.
APPENDIX 3 +. « Seetion 9, Code of Criminat
‘Procedure, as amended by
Bombay Act 23 of 1951.
APPENDIX 4 पु oe . Amendments to sections 9 to
12 and 17—Cade of’ Criminal
Procedure, 1898
Punjab Act 25 of 1964.
APPENDIX 5 - . . Important cases under articles
233 to 237 of the Constitu-
tion.
APPENDIX 6 ate . Important cases under
9, Code of Criminal ?rocedure,
1898.
APPENDIX 7 Extracts from the Bengal,
Civil Courts Act, 1887.
APPENDIX 8 Extract from the Bhopal,
(Courts) Act, 1950,
’
APPENDIX 9 Extracts from ythe Dadra

APPENDIX 10

APPENDIX IT

APPENDIX 12

APPENDIX 13

APPENDIX 14

APPENDIX 15

APPENDIX 16

Nagar Havel ‘Act,

of 1961).

Extracts from the Dadra, ete.
(Civil Courts, etc.) Regulation
1963 (8 of 1963).

. . . . Extracts from the Delhi High
Court Act, 1966 (26 of 1966).

«+ Extracts from the Goa, Daman
and Div (Judicial Commis-

sioners’ Court)

1963 (10 of 1963).

+ +. Extracts from the Goa,
Judicial Commissioners’ Court
(Declaration as High Court)
Act, 1964 (16 of 1364).

Extracts from the
Pradesh Courts Order, 1948.

(Courts) Act,
1955).

Extracts from the Pirndicherry

(Administration)
(49 of 1962).

Extracts from the


APPENDIX

SuByEctT-MartER

APPENDIX 17

APPENDIX 18

APPENDIX 19

APPENDIX 20

APPENDIX 21

Extracts from the Punjab Courts
Act, 1918. ila:

Extracts from the Punjab Re-~
organisation Act, 1966 (31 of
1966).

Extract from the States Re-
organisation Act, 1956 (37 of
1956).

Extracts from the Tripura Courts:
Order, 1950.

Statement of Objects and Rea-
sons to the Constitution
(Twenty-third , Amendment)
Bill, 1966.



REPORT ON SECTION 8, CODE OF CRIMINAL
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1898

1. The circumstances in which this Report came to he Genesis oi

prepared may be briefly stated. In connection with the Ps Report
revision of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, which is const ‘ered Sp
under the consideration of the Law Commission, the the Report.
Ministry of Home Affairs' forwarded to the Law Commis-
sion the suggestion made by the Hi, igh Court of Mysore far
amending section 9 of the Code. © suggestion may be
briefly summarised. Under section 9{1) af the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898, the State Government has te
establish a Court of Session for every sessions division, and
ta appoint a judge of such Court. This provision, it is
stated in the suggestion, conficts with article 288 of the
Constitution under which the appointment of Sessions
Judges mast be made in consultation with the High Court,
Difficulty, (it is stated}, in the matter arises im regard
to the transfer of Sessions Judges from one division to
another. As held by the Supreme Court’, the power of
transferring District Judges (which ineludes Sessions
Judges} is vested exclusively in the High Court. Hi, there~
fore, the District Judge who is also a Sessions Judge is
transferred by the High Court from one district (6 another
district which ordinarily coincides with a sessions division,
the said District Judge would not be a Sessions Judge for
‘that district unless he is so appointed by the State Govern-
ment under section 9{1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1698, The reason is, that the powers of a Sessions Judge
are derived by virtue of appointment by the State Govern-
ment under section 9(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1298, and extend only to the sessions division to which he
“was appointed by the State Government. He does not
carry bis powers wherever he is transferred. The anomaly
arising out af this situation because of the conflict between
section ${1} of the Cade and the constitutional provisions
-contained in article 235 can (it has been stated), be solved
hy suitably amending section 9(1) of the Code.

The High Court has, therefore, suggested that section
9(1) of the Code may be amended so as to empower the
High Court to appoint a Sessions Judge toa Court of
Session,

It is this suggestion which is being considered in this
Report.

1. Home Ministry O.M. No. r9f7x/86-Jud). 12, dated grst January,
ior, forwarding a summary of the suggestion of the High Court of.
iyeore,

2. State of Assam पर. Ranga Mubommad (aist September 1966), Civ si
Appeal No. 1367 of 1966 (Supreme Conrt), है eP


2

Why the 2, As the matter appeared to require urgent considera-

Subject taken tion, it was decided to take it up separately from the gene-

7 उप % ral revision of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 189€.

eeaion 9 of 3. We shall first discuss the provision in the Code of
ol Pa

Criminat = Criminal Procedure.

Procedure,

1898. Section 9 of the Criminal Procedure Code deals with the

following matters: —
(1) Establishment of a Court of Session’,

(2) Appointment of a Judge of such Court?, (later
referred to as the Sessions Judges)

(3) Place of sitting of the Court of Session",

(4) Appointment of Additional Sessions Judges and
Assistant Sessions Judges’,

(5) Appointment of a Sessions Judge to be the
Additional Sessions Judge of another division, ard the
place where he may sit for the purpose®,

(6) Continuance of existing Courts of Session®.

Caselaw on . 4 Some of the important decisions under section 9 of

section 9. the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 have been studied by
पड.7 The need for formal appointment of a Sessions Judge
under section $(1) is discussed at length in a Bombay case’,
which came before the High Court at three stages.

Articles of 5. The articles of the Constitution relevant to the subject
the Consti- may be referred to—

tution.
Articles 233—237 of the Constitution deal with Subordi-
nate Courts. Article 233(1) runs as follows: —

Appoinrment “233, (1) Appointments of persons to be, and the
J ds Destriet posting ang promotion of, district judges in any State
Bes. shall be made by the Governor of the State in consulta-

tion with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in
relation to such State.”.

Section 9(1), earlier half.
Section-.9(1), latter half.

Section 9(2).

. Section 9(3).

. Section 9(4).

Section 9(5).

For a list of important decisions under section 9, see Appendix

vayee pon

6.
8. Queen Empress v. Mangal Tek Chand “(1883) .L.R. ro Bom. 258,
262, 273, 282, 283.


3

_ Article 233(2) is not relevant for our purpose, as it deals
with the eligibility for appointment as a district judge of a
person not already in the service of the Union or the State.

Article 233A, inserted by a recent amendment!, seeks to
validate’ appointments, postings, promotions and transfers
made in the past in the posts of District Judges without
complying with articles 233 and 235.

Article 234 deals with the recruitment of persons other
than district judges to the judicial service, and is not direct-
ly relevant for the present purpose.

Article 235, which deals with the “control over subordi-
nate courts”, is the most important article for our purpose,
and will be discussed in detail later*.

Article 236, is an intepretation clause, applicable to the
groups of articles (233 to 237) with which we are concerned,
and defines the expression “district judge” as including,
inter alia, a chief presidency magistrate, an additional chief
presidency magistrate, sessions judge, additional sessions
judge and assistant sessions judge.

Article 237 deals with the applicability of the provisions
of the Chapter to certain classes of magistrates, on a pub-
lic notification being issued under the article by the
Governor.

6. Some important decisions on articles 283 to 237 may Casc-law on
be referred to. Under article 233(1), it has been held by stticles 233
the Supreme Court that consultation with the High Court, '° 735
in the appointment, posting and promotion of district judges
is mandatory, and appointments made in pursuance of rules
which empower the Government to appoint a person as
district judge in consultation with a person or authorit:
other than the High Court would not be in accordance with
article 233(1). The following observations made in the
judgment are important :—

“The constitutional mandate is clear. The exercise
of the power of appointment by the Governor is con-
ditioned by his consultation with the High Court, that
is to say, he can only appoint a person to the post of
a_ district judge in consultation with the High Court.
The object of consultation is apparent. The High Court
is expected to know better than the Governor in regard
to the suitability or otherwise of a person, belonging
either to the “judicial service” or to the Bar, to .be:
appointed as a district judge. Therefore, a duty is

1, The Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966 (22nd
December, 1966).
2, See paragraph 24, infra for the text of article 233A.
3. See paragraph 9 हट seq., infra.
4, Chandra Mohan vy. State of U.P., A.B. 1966 S.C. 1987, 1999.
ragraph 7 (December Issue of the A.T



4

enjoined on the Governor to make the appointment
in consultation with a body which is the apprepriate
authority to give advice to him. This mandate can be
disobeyed by the Governor in two ways, namely, (i) by
not consulting the High Court at all, and {ii) by con-
sulting the High Court and also other persons. In one
case he directly infringes the mandate of the Constiiu-
tion and in the other he indirectly does so, for his mind
may be influenced by other persons not entitled to
advise him, That this constitutional mandate has both
a negative and positive significance is made clear by
the other provisions of the Constitution. Wherever the
Constitution intended to provide more than one consul-
tant, it has said so". Wherever the Constitution provid-
ed for consultation of a single body or individual it, said
so*. Article 124(2) goes further and makes a distinction
between persons who may be consulted. Those rrovi-
sions indicate that the duty to consult is so integrated
with the exercise of the power that the power can be
exercised only in consultation with the person or pet-
sons designated therein. To state it differently, if A
is empowered to appoint B in consultation with C, he
will not be exercising the power in the manner pres-
cribed if he appoints B in consultation with C and
D.".

In the same case, article 233(2) was also considered, but
that is not relevant for the present purpose.

7. In the State of Assam v. Ranga Muhommads, the
Supreme Court held that in article 233, the word “posting”
means not “to station someone at a place” but “to assign
someone to a post” i.e, a position or a job, especially one
to which a person is appointed. It was held in that case,
that “transfer” operates at a stage beyond appointment and
promotion, and “posting” is not intended to mean transfer.
Under article 233, the Governor is concerned only with the
appointment, promotion and posting to the cadre of district
judges, but not with the transfer of district judges already
appointed or promted and posted to the cadre. The latter is
obviously a matter of “control” of district judges, which is
vested in the High Court under article 235,

These two decisions are referred to in the Statement of
Objects and Reasons to the Bill*-" which became the Con-
stitution (Twentieth) Amendment Act, 1966, whereby arti-
cle 233A was inserted in the Constitution.

1, See article 124(2) and 217(2).

2 See article 222. M,

3. State of Assam v. Ranga Muhammad (21st September, 1966), Civit
Appeal No. 1367 of 1966. (S.C), G vr ३ 2966) ८

hin 4. Statement of कि शक and Reasons to the Constitution (Twenty-

third Amendment) Bill, 1966 (Lok Sabha Bill No. 89 of 1966), dated 20th
November, 1966, introduced on 25th November, 1966.

5. Appendix 21.


5

8. Article 234 provides that the appointment of
persons other an district judges to the judi-
eial service of a State will be made by
the Governor of the State in accordance with
the rules made by him in that behalf after consultation with
the State Public Service Commission and with the High
Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State. The
case-law under this article need not be discussed, for the
present purpose’.

9. We now proceed to article 235 which is the most
important one. The manifold implications of article 235°
have been brought out in a number of recent decisions of
the Supreme Court. The opening part of article 235 vests.
in the High Court “control over district courts and courts.
subordinate thereto”. This “control” is stated in the arti-
cle to include the posting and promotion of, and the grant
of leave to, persons belonging to the judicial service of a
eae and holding any post inferior to the post of district
judge.

The opening part of the article—“The control over dis-
trict courts...... shall be vested in the High Court...... ”
has assumed an important significance, under the case-law
pertaining to this article.

In a case which related to disciplinary jurisdiction over
district judges, the Supreme Court held?, that “control”
must include disciplinary jurisdiction. It also pointed out,
that article 235 goes a little further than sections 254 to 256
of the Government of India Act, 1935, which Act was silent
about the control over the district judges and the subordi-
nate judicial services, and under which the independence
of the subordinate judiciary and of the district judges was
assured to a certain extent, but not fully. The following
observations in the judgment of the Supreme Court are
apposite: —

“When the Constitution was being drafted the
advance made by the 1935 Act was unfortunately lost
sight of. The Draft Constitution made no mention of
the special provisions, not even similar to those made
by the Government of India Act, 1935, in respect of
the Subordinate Judiciary. If that had remained, the
Judicial Services would have come under Part XIV
dealing with the services in India. An amendment.
fortunately, was accepted and led to the inclusion of
articles 233 to 237. These articles were not placed in

1, For a list of important cases under articles 233 to 237, see
Appendix 5. .

2, State of West Bengal v. Nripendra Nath Bagehi, (1966) 1 S.CR. 771,.
784. (1966 July) 2 S.C.J. 59; 66.


6

the Chapter on Services but immediately after the pro-
visions in regard to the High Courts. The articles went
a little further than the corresponding sections of the
Government of India Act. They vested the “control”
of the District Courts and the Courts subordinate
thereto in the High Courts and the main question is
what is meant by the word “control”. The High Court
hes held that the word “control” means not only a
general superintendence of the working of the Courts
but includes disciplinary contro! of the presiding judges,
that is to say, the District Judge and Judges subordinate
tohim. It is this conclusion which is challenged before
us on various grounds.”.

10. In Chandra Mohan v. State of U.P.', it was stated,
that the makers of the Constitution realised that “it is the
subordinate judiciary in India who are brought most closely
into contact with the people, and it is no less important, per-
haps indeed even more important, that their independence
should be placed beyond question as in the case of the supe-
rior judges”. The Supreme Court stated, that presumably
to secure the independence of the judiciary from the execu-
tive, the Constitution introduced a group of articles in
Chapter VI of Part VI under the heading “Subordinate
Courts”.

Il. In State of Assam v. Ranga Muhammad*, the trans-
fer ot one District and Sessions Judge from Jorhat to Gau-
hati and the appointment and posting of another District
and Sessions Judge at Jorhat was questioned by the neti-
tioner Ranga Muhammad. on the ground that the High
Court alone could make the transfer, and, in any event.
the High Court had to be consulted, and was not corisulted
before making the orders. The High Court of Assam held.
that there had been no consultation in both the. cases, and.
therefore, the transfers were irregular for that reason
Holding, however, that none of the Judges could be said to
occupy wrongly the office of District and Sessions Judge,
the High Court declined the writ of quo warranto.

12. The State Government (after obtaining a certificate
under article 132 of the Constitution) appealed to the
Supreme Court, and sought the reversal of the opinion of
the High Court on the interpretation of articles 283 and
235. Its main contention was, that the High Court was in
fact consulted. and, alternatively. that the power to trans-
fer district judges lay with the State Government and not
with the High Court. (The State Government also asked

1. Chandra Mohan ४. State of U.P.s A.1LR. 1966 8.C. 1987, 1993, para-
graph 14.

2. State of Assam v. Ranga Muhammad (21st September, 1966), (Civil
Appeal No. 1987 of 1966), (S.C).


7

for the expunction of certain remarks made by one of the
Judges of the High Court of Assam, but that part of the
controversy is not relevant for our purpose.)

13. The Supreme Court formulated the questions for
‘consideration thus:

“Three questions arise and they are:—

(a) who is to order transfer of a District Judge
—the State Government or the High Court;

(b) is the provision regarding consultation in
Articles 233 and 235 mandatory or directory and
if the former, whether the High Court was not in
fact consulted; and

(c) should the remarks of Mr. Justice Dutta
about the State Government be expunged?”.

14. As regards the first question, the Supreme Court
stated, that the answer depended on the true comstruction
of articles 233 and 235 of the Constitution. It observed,
‘The question we have posed resolves itself into a question
of a very different but somewhat limited form, namely,
whether the power to transfer District Judges is included
in the “control” exercisable by the High Court over District
Judges under article 235, or in the power of “appointment
of persons to be and the posting and promotion of, district
judges” which is to be exercised by the Governor under arti-
cle 233, albeit in consultation with the High Court. If the
sense of the matter be the former, then the High Court and
if the latter, the Governor, would possess that power. The
right approach is, therefore, to enquire what is meant by
“posting” and whether the term does not mean the initial
posting of a District Judge on appointment or promotion
to a vacancy in the cadre, permanent or temporary. If this
be the meaning, as the High Court holds, then the transfer
of District Judges already appointed or promoted and posted
in the cadre must necessarily be outside the power of the
Governor and fall to be made by the High Court as part
of the contro] vested in it by article 235,’.

15. The Supreme Court then referred to the judgment
in State of West Bengal v. Nripendranath Bagchi}, where
it was pointed out, that the articles in question were in-
tended to make the High Court the sole custodian of con-
trol over the judiciary except in so far as exclusive juris-
diction was conferred upon the Governor in regard to the

1. State of West Bengal v. Nripendranath Bagchi, (1966) 1 S.C.R. 7715
(1966) 2 S.C]. 59.


8

appointment and posting and promotion of District Judges.
Therefore unless the transfer of a District Judge can be
said to be a “posting” of a District Judge, the High Court
must cbviously enjoy the exclusive power.

16. The Supreme Court then stated, that the word “to
post” may dencte either (2) to station someone at ६ place,
or (b) to assign someone to a post, 1.8. a position or a job,
especially one to which a person is appointed. The State
Government applied the first meaning, and the High Court
the second. According to the Supreme Court, in article
233, the werd “posting” clearly bore the second meaning,
because it occurred in association with the words “appoin:-
ment” and “promotion” and took its colour from them.
“These words indicate the stage when a person first gets
a position or job and “posting” by association means the
assigment of an appointee or promotee to a position in
the cadre of district judge...... Tf “posting” was intend-
ed to mean transfer, the draftsman would have hardly
chosen to place it between “appointment” and “promotion”
and could have easily used the word “transfer” itself.”,

17. After pointing out that the High Court was in the
day ६७ day control of the courts and was better suited 10
make transfers than a Minister, the Supreme Court ob-
served as follows: —

“The High Court was thus right in its conclusion
that the powers of the Governor cease after he has
appointed or promoted a person to be a district judge
and assigned him to a post in cadre. Thereafter,
transfer of incumbents is a matter within the control
of District Courts including the control of persons
presiding there as explained in the cited case?.”

18. This finishes the first questicn® dealt with by the
Supreme Court. As regards the second question, the
Supreme Court held, “As the High Court is the authority
to make transfers, there was no question of consultation
on this account. The State Government was not the autho-
rity to order the transfers.” The Supreme Court added,
however, that there was need for consultation before one
of the persons appointed as a District and Sessions Judge
was “promoted” and “posted” as a district judge. The
consultation was mandatory, as had been laid down quite
definitely in Chandra Mohan’s case®, and there had been
no consultation in fact.

2. The cited case was State of West Bengal v. N,N, Bagchi, (1966).
1 SCR er Coe OT 7 oneal eget (1966)

2. Paragraph 13, supra.
3. Chandra Mohan v. State of U.P. AAR. 1966 S.C. 1987.


9

19. The inter-relationship of articles 233 and 309 to Case-law on
311 has been the subject-matter of instructive discussion कक कक 2
before the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court has held}, (०9-3774
that the control which is vested in the High Court (under
article 235)” is a complete control subject only to the
power of the Governor in the matter of appointment (in-
cluding dismissal and removal) and posting and promo-
tion of District Judges”. .

20, As regards the inter-relationship of articles 233 and Inter-rela-
235, the Supreme Court has stated the position in these खाक ast
words’. ancl 235.

“Articles 233 and 235 make a mention of two dis-
tinct powers. The first is power of appointment of
persons, their postings and promotion and the other
is power of control. In the case of the District Judges,
appointments of persons to be and posting and pro-
motion are to be made by the Governor but the con-
trol over the District Judge is of the High Court. We
are not impressed by the argument that the term
used is “district court” because the rest of the article
clearly indicates that the word “court” is used com-
pendiously to denote not only the court proper but
also the presiding Judge. The latter part of article
235 talks of the man who holds the office. In the case
of the judicial service subordinate ta the District
Judge the appointment has to be made hy the Gover-
nor in accordance with the rules to be framed after
consultation with the State Public Service Commis-
sion and the High Court but the power of posting,
promotion and grant of leave and the control of the
courts are vested in the High Court. What is vested
includes disciplinary jurisdiction. Control is useless
if it is not accompanied by disciplinary powers. It
is not to be expected that the High Court would run
ta the Government or the Governor in every case of
indiscipline however small and which may not even
require the punishment of dismissal or removal.

These articles go to show that by vesting “control”

in the High Court the independence of the subordi-

nate judiciary was in view. This was partly achieved
in the Government of India Act, 1935 but it was given
effect to fully by the drafters of the present Constitu-
tion. This construction is also in accord with the

Directive Principles in article 50 of the Constitution

which reads :—

“50. The State shall take steps to separate the
judiciary from the executive in the public services
of the State”.’.

1. State of West Bengal v. N. N. Bagchi, (1966) 1 8.C.R. 771, 790.

2. Stare of West Bengal v. N. N. Bagchi, (1966) 1 S.C.R. 771, 786, 7875
1966) 2 S.C.J. 59, 67.


Article 236.

10

21. To illustrate and elaborate the amplitude of the
expression “control” in article 235, we might also usefully
refer to certain broad conclusions drawn by the Calcutta
High Court, ina judgment which was affirmed by the
Supreme Court!—

(1) The Constitution yests in express language in
the High Court “the control aver District Courts”, ete.

Adequate meaning, due regard and appropriate
effect should be given to this new constitutional pro-
vision.

(2) The control does not take away the right of
appeal of any person under the law regulating the
conditions of service nor does it authorise the High
court to deal with him otherwise than in accordance
with the conditions of his service prescribed under
such law.

(3) The words “including......inferior to the post
of District Judge” in article 233 mean, that posting,
promotion and leaye are only illusirative of the types
of “control” mentioned in the article, and are not ex-
haustive. The word “control” in article 285 “means
all residuary controls except those which are already
expressly provided for in the two preceding articles
233 and 234.”,

(4) The expression “contral over District Courts”
must necessarily include control over District Judges,
they being the presiding officers of the District Courts.

(5) In addition to this control, the High Court
has “superintendence over all Courts”, etc. under
article 227, and this superintendence also imports
control, as there can be no superintendence without
control,

“Article 227 also includes power of control in the
High Court in respect of its Subordinate Courts includ-
ing control by disciplinary proceedings and actian.”.

22. Article 236 constitutes a dictionary for the interpre-
tation of articles 233 to 235 and 237. For the present pur-
pose, its importance lies in this, that it includes Sessions
Judges, Additional Sessions Judges, Assistant Sessions
Judges, Chief Presidency Magistrates and Additional Chief

1, Nrivendra Nath v. Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal, A.LR.
1961, Cal. 10 7, 8, paragraphs 21 00 25, affirmed in State of West Bengal v.
Nripendra Nath Bagchi, (1966) 1 S.C.R. 7713 (1966) 2 8.0... 59.


11

Presidency Magistrates within the expression “District
Judges.” It may be added, that some of these are dealt
with by section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

23, Article 237 is an enabling provision, under which the
Governor can implement the separation of judiciary from
the executive in relation to the magistracy of the States.
The effect of this article was discussed in Chandra Mohan’s
case’, where the following observations occur:—

“Article 237 enables the Governor ta implement the
separation of the judiciary from the executive. Under
this article, the Governor may notify that articles 233,
234, 235 and 236 of the Constitution will apply to Magis-
trates subject to certain modifications or exceptions; for
instance, if the Governor so notifies, the said Magis-
trates will become members of the judicial service, they
will have to be appointed in the manner prescribed
in article 234, they will be under the control of the
High Court under article 235 and they can be appointed
as District Judges by the Governor under article 233(1).
To state it differently, they will then be integrated in
the judicial service which is one of the sources of re-
cruitment to the post of District Judges. Indeed, arti-
cle 237 emphasises the fact that till such an integration
is brought about, the Magistrates are outside the scope
of the said provisions. The said view accords with the
constitutional theme of independent judiciary and the
contrary view accepts a retrograde step.”,

2. Article 223A, which was introduced as a result of
the decisions in Chandra Mohan v. State of U.P.* and State
of Assam v. Ranga Muhammad’, by the Constitution
(Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966*, seeks to validate
appointments, postings and transfers of certain persons as
district judges made in the past.

Article 233A runs as follows: —

“233A. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or
order of any court,—

(a) G) no appointment of any person already
in the judicial service of a State or of any person

1. Chandra Mohan v. State of U.P. A.L.R. 1966 5,0, 1987, 1994, pata
graph 19. (December issue).

2. Sec the Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Constitution (Twenty-
third Amendment) Bill, 1966 (Lok Sabha Bill 89 of 1966).

3. See paragraphs 6 to 21, supra.

4. The Constitution (Twenty-third Amendment) Bill, 1966 was intro-

duced in the Lok Sabha on 2sth November, 1966 and became law on re-
ceiving the President's assent On 22nd December, 1966.

Caselaw on
article 237.

Artele 233A.

Validation of
ap ointments
of and judge-
ments; ete.

delivered by
certain dis-
trict judges.


12

who has been for not less than seven years an advo-
cate or a pleader, to be a district judge in that
State, and

(ii) no posting, promotion or transfer of any
such person as a district judge,

made at any time before the commencement of the
Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, other-
wise than in accordance with the provisions of article
283 or article 235 shall be deemed to be egal or void
or ever to have become illegal or void by reason only
of the fact that such appointment, posting, promotion
or transfer was not made in accordance with the said
provisions;

(9) no jurisdiction exercised, no judgment,
deeree, sentence or order passed or made, and no
other act or proceeding done or taken, before the
commencement of the Constitution (Twentieth
Amendment) Act, 1966 by or before, any person
appointed, posted, promoted or transferred as a dis-
trict judge in any State otherwise than in aecord-
ance with the provisions of article 233 or article
235 shall be deemed to be illegal or invalid or ever
to have become illegal or invalid by reason only of
the fact that such appointment, posting, promo-
tion or transfer was not made in accordance with
the said provisions.”

Inter-rela- 25. We now address ourselves to the specific prablem
शक, gf which we have to consider, namely, the effect of articles
the Cade. of 283 et seq, of the Constitution on section 9 of the Code of
Criminst’ = Criminal Procedure. The expression “appoint a judite of
Procedure, such court” in section 9{t) does not scem to connote an
{898 and the sppointment to a cadre, but seems to connote assignment
Constitution. to a particular Court. In view af articles 283 ९६ seq. as
Changes. interpreted by the Supreme Court, a distinction has to be
needed in = made between appointment to the cadre and assigninent
section 9... ६0 g Court!, The former is a matter falling with the region
of articles 233-284 of the Constitution {and rules made
thereunder). The latter seems to fall under “control”
within article 235. We have, therefore, to examine whe-
ther section 90, which gives the power to the State Gov-
ernment, should be altered. Other sub-sections of section
9 also have to be examined, from this point of view.

Various mo- 26. Before making such a detailed examination, we
des of asst should Like to dispose of a possible preliminary query that
a Y might be raised. The decision in State of Assam v. Ranga

control =
sidered, oon Muhammad, it may be argued, relates only to transfers,

1, Paragraphs 7 and 11 to 15, supra, and paragraphs 26-27, infra.
2. The State of Assant v. Range Muhammad (21st September, 1966)—
Civit Appeal No. 1367 of 1986 (3,0.).


13

while there are many other modes of assigning a Ses-
sions Judge to a particular court. Therefore, (it may be
contended), the amendment should be confined to transfers
and should not cover initial assignment of a Sessions Judge.

Now, it is true that the decision in State of Assam v.
Ranga Muhammad related to transfers; but the reasoning
on which the Supreme Court’s decision is based must, we
think, apply to all the various modes of assignment of a
Sessions Judge to a Sessions Court, for example—(i) assign-
ment to a Sessions Court of a person appointed for the first
time in the cadre, (ii) assignment to a Sessions Court on
transfer from another Sessions division, (iii) assignment
to a Sessions Court an promotion, and (iv) appointment as
Additional Sessions Judge under section 9(4).

Following passages from the Supreme Couri’s judgment*
may be referred to in this connection:

‘In its ordinary dictionary meaning the word “to
post” may denote cither (a) to station someone at a
place, or (b) to assign someone to a post, १-९., a position
or a job, especially one to which a person is appointed.
See Webster's New World Dictionary (1962), The dis-
pute in this case has arisen because the State Gavern-
ment applies the first of the two meanings and the High
Court the second. In article 233 the word “posting”
clearly bears the second meaning. This word occurs im
assOciation with the words “appointment” and “promo-
tion” and takes its colour from them, These words
indicate the stage when a person first gets q position
or job and “posting” by association means the assign-
ment of an appointee or promotee to a position in the
cadre of district judges.’,

“The High Court was thus right in its conclusion
that the powers of the Governor ccase after he has
appointed or promoted a person to be q district judge
and assigned him to a post in cadre. Thereafter, trans-
fer of incumbents is a matter within the control of Dis-
trict Courts including the control of persons presiding
there as explained in the cited case.”.

We may, in this connection, refer to another passage in
the judgment.

“Tt “posting” was intended to mean “transfer”, the
draftsman would have hardly chosen to place it be-
tween “appointment” and “promotion” and could have

1. State of Assam v. Ranga Muhammad, Civil Appeal No. 1367 and
1368 of 1966, decided 21-9-66 appeal (from Assam High Court judgment
dated 19% April, 1966 in Civil Rules 171-236 of 1965).


Prem Nath’s
Case,

14

easily used the word “transfer” itself. It follows,
therefore, that under article 233, the Governor is only
concerned with the appointment, promotion and post-
ing to the cadre of district judges but not with the trans-
fer of district judges already appointed or promoted
and posted to the cadre. The latter is obviously a mat-
ter of control of district judges which.is vested in the
High Court. This meaning of the word “posting” is
made all the more clear when one reads the provisions
of articles 234 and 235. By the first of these Articles
the question of appointment is considered separately
but by the second of these articles posting and pramo-
tion of persons belonging to the judicial service of the
State and holding any post inferior to the post of a
district judge is also vested in the High Court. The
word “post” used twice in the article clearly means the
position or job and not the station or place and “post-
ing” must obviously mean the assignment to a position
or job and not placing in-charge of a station or Court.
The association of words in article 235 is much clearer,
but as the word “posting” in the earlier article deals
with the same subject matter, it was most certainly
used in the same sense and this conclusion is thus quite
apparent.’.

27, We had the opportunity of considering a judgrnent
of the Supreme Court which was pronounced after we
undertook the preparation of this Report. In that case’,
the appeal, by certificate, raised two questions. namely,
(1) whether the Rajasthan Higher Judicial Service Rules,
1955 were ultra vires article 233 of the Constitution. and,
therefore, the selections made by the Selection Comm‘ttee
appointed thereunder and appointments made on the basis
of such selections were invalid, and, (2) if so, whether the
appointments were validated by the Constitution
(Twenticth Amendment) Act, 1966.

The appointments in question were to the posts of Civil
and Additional Sessions Judges. By a notification dated
2nd June, 1950, the Government of Rajasthan appointed.
{with effect from July 1. 1950), Civil Judges by virtue
their office to be Additional Sessions Judges to exercise
juris tion in the Courts of session mentioned in column 2
of the notification. The point (so far as is relevant to the
present subject), which the Supreme Court had to consider
was, whether, when a person is appointed both as a Civil
Judge and as an Additional Sessions Judge, the appcint-
ment falls under article 233. The Supreme Court answered
the question jn the affirmative, and the points made in the
judgment may be thus summarised.

1. Prem Nath v. State of Rajasthan, Civil Appeal No. 93 of 1966, de-
sided 5th March, 1967 (Supreme Court).


15

(1) When a Civil Judge is also appointed an Addi-
tional Sessions Judge or when a person is appointed
both as a Civil Judge and as an Additional Sessions
Judge, the appointment to the post of Additional Ses-
sions Judge is under section 9, Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, Such a Civil Judge exercises the powers of an
Additional Sessions Judge, not because he is a Civil,
Judge, but because he is appointed as an Additional
Sessions Judge under section 9 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898.

(2) From the fact that, when such an appointment
is made, the appointee exercises both the powers of a
Civil Judge and those of an Additional Sessions Judge,
it does not follow that he is not an Additional Sessions
Judge or that he is (only) a Civil Judge.

(3) Since the post of an Additional Sessions Judge
falls under the definition of a “District Judge” under
article 236(a}, it will be article 233 of the Constitution
that would apply, and not article 234.

(३) Since the appointments in question were made
in contravention of article 233, and were, therefore,
illegal, they must be held to have been validated by
the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966.

To put it more briefly, in so far as a Civil Judge is also
appointed as an Additional Sessions Judge, the appoint-
ment must comply with article 233.

28. In the light of the above discussion'!, we now pro- Chanzes re-

ceed to consider the detailed changes required in section aured 9 गम
9. Coming, first, to section 9(1), we find that it doals with .
two matters, namely, (i) establishment of a Court of
Session, and (ii) appvintment of a Judge of such Court.
We are concerned only with the second. The appointment
of a Judge of such Court. We are concerned only with
the second. The appointment is to be made by the State
Government under section 9(1}). But. under article 235
ot the Constitution, as interpreted by the Supreme एप,
this “appointment”, ie. an assingment to a particular
Court, is entirely within the “control” of the High Court,
Now, the difficulty (as stated in the suggestion? which is
under consideration) is. that the power of a Session Judge
is derived by virtue of the appointment under section 9,
and extends only to the Sessions division to which he is
appointed. He does not carry his power wherever he is
transferred. To put it more coneretely, while the latter
half of section 9(1) is now of no effect, there is tio valid
provision to take its place,

1, Paragraphs 25 to 27, supra.
2. Paragraphs 6 to 21, supra, and paragraph 25 supra.
3. Paragraph 1, supra.


16

29, The following observations ia 2 Medvas caset
would seer la sugpoct the apprehension expressed
abowst: ~~

“We may mention in passing an argumert of the
ieatDed public Prosecuter based On certain devisions
of civil cases that although My, Nainar was na longer
the Sessions Judge of Chittor he was st a Sessions
sdudge 3g certain powers on account of holding
that of dice; but we find ne ground for thinking that #
Session Judgo who has teased ts be the Sessicris Judge
af one division and has not become the Sessions Judge
of another has any power: as x Session Judge simpli-
titey; be has jurisdiction to exeocise the powers of a
Sessions Judge only by virtue of his appointment to
e particular Session division”.

For the putposes of the present Report, we shall assume
that the mere ivenster of a Sessions Jud, ge by the High
Court by virtue of ts power under article 235 may not
have the effect of clothing him with the robe of the
Sessions Judge in the Court of Session for the division to
whith be is transierred. In other wards, we seal assumc.
that the scheme of the Constitution has to he worsed out
in detail and translateg in section 8. 2a that it forms part
of the enacted lew of the land On this assumption, the
lative part of section 1६11 showtd, abvicushy, be modified
by substituting tha “High Court” fer the “State Govern-
ment’.

30. We now proceed to consider section 2(2) and the
sucercding sub-sections, Section (2) desis with the place
of the sitting af the Court of Session, The eari
leaves the power with the State Gorernament. ds also
iz aa aszect af “cantrat’, and should he vested in the
Migh Court

Section 9(3} deals with the ampoimtraent of Additional
Sessions Judges and Assistant Sessions Judges to 8 Court
af Session, etd the cower given to the State Government
39% new be vested in the High Court, ss it is a part of
“control, on the analogy of the power under section 9110२,

3

Section 04) prowides that 2 Session Judge of one
Session division may be eppainted by the State Govern-
mest to be also an Additional Sessions Judge of another
division, ated in such a case be may sit for the disposal of
vases ay such place, ote, the State Government may
direct, Thus, it deals with two matters, nameby, firse,

a. Sere Porm: AW Khon, 3.0K. yog7 Mad. 3655 8.0, i997 Mad. 298,
292) paregrapb 16.

2. Baragragh 28, supe.
3. Porastaphe २5 to 27, cupra,


VW

“appointing” a Sessions Judge of one sessions division as
an Additional Sessions Judge of another division, and
secondly, his place of sitting. The first is analogous to
the assignment of a Judge to a particular Court, and, thus,
_is a part of “control”, The second also seems to fall under
“control”. But these powers must now be vested in the
High Court,

Section 905) deals with the continuation of all Courts
of Session, and need not be disturbed.

31. In the States in which separation has been intro- मिल and
duced by legislation, certain amendments have been made onde eat
to section 9. By way of example, we may refer to section
9 as amended by the Bombay Separation of Judicial and
Executive Functions Act, 1951", and section 9 as amended
by the Punjab Separation of Judicial and Executive
Functions Act, 1964'-*,

These amendments were made before the judgments
of the Supreme Court interpreting article 233 et seg. were
pronounced, Nevertheless, they seem to have anticipated
some, though not all, of the changes which we are recom-
mending’. In a way, they reflect the tendency in which
the law has been developing. They illustrate (to borrow
the language of the Supreme Court®, used in another
context), the policy which has moved determinedly in
this direction.

32. Before taking a decision regarding the change Section 40,
which we recommend’, we considered the provisions of Cod ee
section 40 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. The dure, 1898.
position under that section’ is, that (subject to certain
qualifications}, a person holding an office in the service of
the Government, who has been invested with any powers
under this Code, throughout any local area”, carries these
powers with him on his being “appointed to an equal or
higher office of the same nature, within a like local area
under the same State Government”. The language of the
section is not applicable to Sessions Judges, and the
section is, in practice, understood as confined to Magis-
trates. The relationship of section 4 with section 12 will
be well understood from the observations which Mr. Justice
Plowden made in his judgment in

. Bombay Act 23 of 1951.

- See Appendix 3.

|. Punjah Act 25 af t964.

See Appendix 4.

. Appendix 1.

. State of West Bengal v. Nripendva Nath Bagchi, (1966) 1 S.C.R. 711
7903 (1966) 2 S.C.J. 59, 69.

7. Appendix 1.

8. Section 4०, Code of Criminal Proceudure, 1898.

Auawnn


18
Bishashar Nati ७, Empress*

“Under section 12 of the Cade of Criminal Pro
cedure, 1832, the appointment of Magistrate....rests
with the local Government, which may appoint such
persons as it thinks fit to be Magistrates of the first,
second or third class in any District. The local area
of the jurisdiction of a Magistrate so appointed may
extend to the whole District, but does not, by faree at
that section extend beyond it. A Magistrate appoinied
under section 12 may, however, be competent to
exercise magisterial functions in a District, otner than
that in which he is a Magistrate, by appointment under
section J2, without being eppointed to be a Magis-
trate in that District. This is brought about by section
40 operating upon officers of Government, who, being
invested with magisterial powers under the Code, are
transfetred from the District to an offce in ancther
District, In this case, such officer is competent to
exercise magisterial functions in the latter District, not
by sppcintment to ke Magistrate in that District. but
by virtue of his holding some office in that District.
When therefore, the question ic whether a particular
person is campetent to exercise the powers of a
Magistrate of any class described in section 12 at a
particular moment ef time in a particular District, the
answer cannot be in the affirmative unless <ither
first he has been appointed by the Local Government
under section 12 to be a Magistrate in such Disirict
and such appointment is still in force, or secandly he
holds in that Distriet, ar the time when he assumes
to act as Magistrate, some office in the service af
Government on which section 40 can operate”.

Secomanen 33. Certain recommendations regarding the amendment

eon DP’ of articles 234 and 235 (which also seem to involve an

Report, amendmen: of article 233} were made in a previous Repert
of the Law Commission, If and when these amendments
are made, the entire control over the judiciary will be
transferred ta the High Court.

Foaition io a4. We shall now consider g matter of detail reizting

aries, to Union territories. Articles 233 ef seg. of the Consti-
tution appear in a Part* which dees not apply to Union
territeries. The expression “High Court”, as defined in
the Code of Criminal Procedure*, would, however, caver

1. Bitheshar Nath v. Empress, (1884) Pun. Re No. वह Cr.. pages 20,
22, 23 (D.B.) (per Plowden }.>

2. Lew Commission of India, Fourteenth Reperr (Reform of Judicial
Administration), Vol. 1, pages 217-220, paragraphs 111 to 119, particularly
paragraphs 103 and 159,

3. Seu Heading of Pare VI of the Constituson—"The States,
4. Section 4(1G), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.



19

the highest court of criminal appeal for an area, even if
it is not a “High Court” as defined in article 366(14) of the
Constitution. We had, therefore, to consider the question.
whether the amendments which we propose! in section 9
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 should be so framed
as to confine them to “High Courts” proper, or to leave
them to be governed by the definition of “High Court” in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

35. The Courts of highest criminal appeal, in most of
the Union teritories, fall under one of the following cate-
gories:—

I 2

(2) A full-fledged High Court. [Ar- Example—Dethi?
ticle 241(1), earlier half} (Its jurisdiction can be extended

to Himachal Pradesh also).
(2) A common High Court for States
and a Union tercitory. Example—The High Court of Punjab
[Article 23160) ] and Haryana, in relation to Chandi-
gach?

(3)_High Court of a neighbouring
State [Article 230(1)] Examples—() The High Court of
Caleta, in relatina'to the Andee
man and Nicobar Istands.*

Gi) The High Cowt of Kerala in
relation to the Laccadive etc. Is-
lands.?

(ii) The High Court of Madras,
in relation to Pondicherry."

tv) The High Court et Bombay, in
relation to Dadra and Nagar Ha-
vel.”

(4) Courts of Judicial Commissioners Fxample—The Courts of Judicial
[Article 241(1), latter half). Commissioners for Goa,® Mani-
pur*, Tripura.!°

1. Appendix 1.

1A, See the Delhi High Court Act, 1966 (26 of 1966); Appendix rr.

2, See sections 17, 19 and Schedule, the Delhi High Court Act, 1966
(26 of 1966), Appendix 11

3. Sections 29 and 30, Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966);
Appendix 18,

4. See section 4{1)(i), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and the Cal-
cutta High Court (Extension of Jurisdiction) Act, 1953 “41 of 1953),
section 2.

5. Sce section 60, States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (a7 of 1956); Appen-
dix 19.

6. See the Pondicherry Administration Act, 1962 (49 of 1962). sections
9 and 10 Appendix 16.

7. See section 11, Dadra & Nagar Haveli Act, 1961 (35 of 1961); Ap:
pendix 9.

8-9-r0; These are constituted under relevant enaciments or stacutory
orders; see Appendices 12, 13, 15 and 20.


Comments
received on
the draft am-
endmere con-
sidered.

(5) Others. ns « Mow obsolete,?

36. Now, Courts of Judicial Commissioners, though.
declared to be “High Courts” for certain purpcses*--*
ara not “High Courts" for the purposes of articles 233 to
237 of the Constitution, as Union territories are not
governed by those articles’,

We do not, however, think, that this diflerence between
the position ef a High Court and that of a Court af Judi-
cial Commissioner should stand in the way of ae plying
the proposed amendment® in section 9 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure to Union territories aiso.

87. We had circulated the draft amendment prepared
by us? to State Governments, High Courts, Adminisira.
tions of Union terituries and courts of Judicial Commis-
sicners for comments. Along with the draft amendment,
we had circulated the suggestion of the Mysore High
Court which forms the background of this reportS end a
eopy of the judgment in State of Assam ७. Runga Muham-
mad’. Comments received fram State Governments, High
Courts, ete. on the draft amendment so cireulated may
be grouped under three categories, namely, those in favour
of the draft amendment, these opposed ta it, and those
favouring it with some modification or addition.

38. Mast of the comments ate in favour of the proposed
amendment. Thus, it has been stated“, that the preposed

1. For an example of another Court which was “High Court” under
the Code of Criminal Procedure, see Amcar Ali v. Deaghar Muntzitality
व 1. है. 6 Par. 83; ALR. 1926 Pat. 449, referring 10 section af HMb. Sanrad
Parganas Justice Regulation 5 of 1893.

3. The Judicial Commissioner's Courts (Deckratien as High Courts?
Act, 1950 (15 of 19500.

3. The Goa, ete. (Judicial Cammissioners* Court) Declaration as High
Court Act, 1964 (16 of 19843; Appendix 13.

4. Scc atso the Union Territayies Act, 1963 (20 of 1963), section 2(1{e}
22, २72४१), 33, etc.

8. Paragraph 34 supra.
6 Appendix 1.

9. The draft amendment cinculated was the same as that im
Appendix [.

8, See paragraph 1, supra.
9. 506 paragraphs 7 and 11, supra.

व0, S.No, 20 (a Stace Government),


21

amendment will certainly bring the law in conformity with
the view expressed in the State of Assam v. Runga
Muhammad, that section 9(1) may be suitably amended
as suggested'*; that the amendments proposed are in order
and the (court approves the same"; that the proposed
amendment is in conformity with the suggestion made by
the High Court itself'; that the amendment of section 9
is in the right direction®; that for the purpose of removing
any doubt or anomaly, the proposed amendment to sec-
tion 9 may be made*, that the High Court agrees with
the proposed amendment of section 9 ‘or the purpose
which the Law Commission has in view’, that the pro-
posed amendment is welcome, since the district judges
and other subordinate judges are subordinate to ‘he High
Courts and Courts of Judicial Commissioners, and they
must have fair knowledge about the qualities and stan-
dard of these officers’; that the Stale Government has no
objection to the preposed amendment": that the State
Government is in favour of it!

39. One comment received from the Administration of
a Union territory"! states, that article 235 does not apply to
Union territories, and that the Courts of the Judicial
Commissioners have not been declared High Courts for
the purposes of the said article, and therefore the Ad-
ministration of the Union territory is not directly enncerned
with the proposed amendment, but in principle it has no
objection to it.

40 We now come to comments opvosing the draft
amendment. It has been stated'? that it is not understood
what connection there is between the decision of the
Supreme Court in the State of Aysam v. Ranga Muhammad
and the amendment of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and
that the proposed amendment has far-reaching conse-
quences and it is not considered advisable to effect the
amendment just now, particularly in view of the fact that
section 9 of the Criminal Procedure Code has presented
no difficulty in regard to the administration of criminal
justice under the Code during the past.

41. Some replies say that they have no comments to
offer1¢_

7-२२ 8. No. 21 (a High Court).

$. No. 22 (a High Court).

§..No. 23 (High Court of Mysore).

3. No. 24 (Court of a Judicial Commissioner).
8. No. 26 fa High Court).

$. No. 27 (a High Court),

S.No. 28 (Court of a Judicial Commissioner).
S.No. 41 (a State Government),

10, 8. No. 45 (a State Government).

11. $, No. 30 (Administration of a Union territory).
12. §. No. 37 (a High Court),

13. 9. No. 29 (a High Court)

14. S. No. 43 (a State Government).

PRA EY


22

42. Orie High Court! has no comments to offer, but has
sent a note of one of its Judges‘ where it has been stated
that the reasons which have necessitated amendment of
section 9 also necessitate amendment of section 18 in
relation to the power of appoitment of Chief Presidency
Magistrates and Additional Chief Presidency Magistrates.

43. We now come to comments which seem to approve
of the proposed amendment with some modification or
addition. Thus, one comment*, while remaining silent
about the main amendment in section 9(1), states that
since the plate of sitting of the district court is fixed by
the State Government in consultation with the High
Ccurt onder the Civil Courts Act of the State, ad since
the District Judge is also the Sessions Judge. to avoid
anomaly it is necessary to empower the State Government
to fix the place or places of sitting of a Court of Session.

We have already referred to the comment‘ indicating
the need for amendment of section 18.

44, Another comment states", that in the draft of
section 9 as proposed to be amended, it should be made
clear that the first appointment of District and Sessions
Judge need not be made, by the High Court, but by the
State Government in consultation with the High Court.
Accordingly, that comment has suggested the addition of
an Explanation to proposed section 9(1) and section 9(3)
as follows: —

‘Explanation—The word “appoint” shall not be
taken to include first appointment to the post.’,

45, A State Government’, while agreeing that section
9(1) conflicts with the decision in the State of Assam v.
Ranga Muhammad inasmuch as it empowers the State
Government to appoint a Judge of a particular Court of
Session, and therefore stating that the amendments to
section 9(1) and section 9(3) are in order, objects to the
amendment proposed is section 9(2). It is stated, that the
decision in State of Assam vy. Ranga Muhammad does not
suggest that the power of the State Government to decide
at what place or places a Court of Session should sit.

1. 3.No. 44 (a High Court Judge).

2. Enclosure ta §. No. 44.

3. S.No. 36 (a State Government)

4. Paragraph 42, supra,

5. 5. No. 39 (Administration of a Union Territory).

6. S.No. 42 (a State Government),


23

should be transferred to the High Court. The comment
adds, that the State Government can be expected to know
which place would be suitable having regard to the public
convenience; financial implications also may be involved,
as suitable buildings have to be found or constructed for
a court, Therefore, the amendment to section 9(2) and
to the latter part of section 9(4) is not considered as
necessary by that Government, and it is of the opinion
that the power of deciding the place should continue with
the State Government and need not be transferred to the
High Court as proposed.

46. Some of the points made in the comments which
approve of the amendment proposed may be dealt with.
As regards the place of sitting’, in our opinion, that is as
much a part of “control” within article 235 as the power
of appointing judges to a particular Court of Session, and
must accordingly be transferred to the High Court.
Financial, administrative and other considerations would
be taken into account by the High Court also, and, in any
ease, in view of the provisions of article 235, it will not
be permissible to keep this power with the State Govern-
ment.

47. As regards the point ‘* that amendments may be

required in section 18, we have elsewhere dealt with the
amendments required in the other provisions” of the Code.

48. As regards the difficulty’ that the place of sitting
of the Court of District Judge is (under the local Civil
Courts Act) fixed by the State Government, we should
draw attention to the discussion wherein we have not
ruled out an amendment of the Civil Courts Act‘.

49. As regards initial posting’, that power also must
now vest in the High Court®.

50. Besides section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
there may be other provisions in the Code which may
require amendment in the light of the meaning of the
expression “control” as interpreted by the Supreme Court.

1. Paragraph 40, supra and paragraph 45, supra.
1a, Paragraphs 42 and 43, supra,

2, Paragraph 50, infra.

3. Paragraph 43, supra.

4. Paragraph 51, infra.

$. Paragraph 44, supra.

6. See paragraphs 26 and 27, supra.

Other — sec
tions of the
Code of Cri-
minal Proce-
dure, 1898—
whether am-
endment

needed.


Provision in
Civ Courts
Acts,

Appendices.

24

The provisions dealing with the following matters may
have to be considered in this context—

{i} Chief Presidency Magistrates and Additional
Chief Presidency Magistrates'; (ii) Presidency Magis-
trates™ ; (iii) subordination of Presidency Magistrates’;
(iv) other Magistrates, where a notification under
article 237 of the Constitution is isued*; (ए) confer-
ment of enhanced powers on Judicial Magistrates,
where a notification under artiele 237 issued’; (vi}
conterment of ordinary powers on Judicial Magistrates,
where a notification under article 287 is issued®; (vii)
language of the courts®; (viii) place of sitting’.

The above list is illustrative only. Most of these are,
hewever, matters of local detail, in respect of which the
position varies from State to State*. The rest—like place
of sitting ar language—are not urgent. We do not, there-
fore, in this Repurt, propose to deal with them.

SL There are provisions in the Civil Courts Act
applicable to cach State (or part thereof) relating to the
appointment of district judges, ole’. The matter, however,
falls within the State List, and ayeropriate action will
have to be take by the States,

53. In order to give a econerete picture of our recorn-
mendations, we have, in Appendix 1, out them in the form
of a draft amendment ta the Code of Criminal Proeedure,
1898,

Appendix 2 contains Notes on Clauses, elucidating the
dratt Amendment in Appendix 1.

१. Section 1811) and 18(4), Cade of Criminal Procedure, s898.

ra, Section व) and r8(2} and 183) Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898.

|

Section 21(2), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

3. Seotion 72 10 17, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1398.

4. Section 39, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

5. Sections 36, 37 and 39 to 41, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

6. See section 553 and sections 356(3), 357 and 36600) end 3678),
Code of Criminal Proceduze, 1898,

7. Cf. Thadat Ali v. State, ALR. 1956 All. 443.

8. See also sections 178 and s41, Code of Criminal Procedure.
1898.

y, For example, provisions relating te Magistrates,
to. For examples, see Appendices 7 and 17.


25

The other Appendices contain certain materials which
are useful for a study of the subject under consideration.

1, 7, L. KAPUR—Chairman.

2. K. G. DATAR, 1
3. 5, 5. DULAT, Members.
4. T, हू. TOPE, |
5. RAMA PRASAD MOOKERJEE. J

P. M. BAKSHI,
Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel,

New Deut,
The 20th May, 1967.


APPENDIX 1

PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO THE CoDE oF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE,

(This is a tentative draft only).

Draft amendment!

For section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
substitute the following section, namely :—

Existing section 9

Proposed section 9

‘9, Court of Sesion —@ The State
Government shall establish a Court
of Session for every sessions divi-
sion, and appoint a judge of such
Court.

Cf.
s. 90), latter part.

(2) The State Government may, by
general or special order in the
Official Gazette, direct at what
place or places the Court of Session
shall ordinarily hold its sittings but
if, in any particular case, the Cot
of Session is of opinion that it will
tend to the general convenience of
the parties and witnesses to hold
its sitting at any other place in the
sessions division, it may, with the
consent of the prosecution and the
accused, sit at that place for the
disposal of the case of the examina-
tion of any witness or witnesses
therein,

9, Court of Session-—(1) The State
Government, shall establish a court
of Session for every sessions divi-

(WA) The High Court shall appoint
x judge of such Court.

(2) The High Court may, by general
‘or special order in the Official
Gazette, direct at what place or
places the Court of Session shall
ordinarily hold its sittings; but if,
in any particular case, the Court of
Session is of opinion that it will
tend to the general convenience of
the parties and witnesses to hold
its sitting at any other place in the
sessions division, it may, with the
consent of the prosecution and the
accused, sit at that place for the
disposal of the case or the examina
tion of any witness or witnesses
therein.

t. The draft proceeds on the assumption that

“posting”

‘appointment” and

and “promotion” in article 233 of the Constitution are confined

to appointment to the cadre, and do not cover what may be called allotment
or assignment to a particular area or Court.

26


27

Existing section 9

Proposed section. 9

43) The State Government may also
‘appoint Additional Sessions Judges
and Assistant Sessions Judges to
exercise jurisdiction in one or more
such Courts.

(4) A Sessions Judge of one sessions
division may be appointed by the
State Government to also an
Additional Sessions Judge of थार
other division, and in such case he
may sit for the disposal of cases at
such place or places in either divi-
sion as the State Government may
direct.

{s) All Courts of Session existing
when this le comes into force
shall be deemed to have been estab-
lished under this Act.”

(3) The High Court may_ also
‘appoint Additional Sessions Judges
and Assistant Sessions Judges to
exercise jurisdiction in one or more

such courts,

(4) A Sessions Judge of one Sessions
‘division may be appoiated by the
High Court to be also an
Additional Sessions Judge of an-
other division, and in such case, he
May sit for the disposal of cases at
such place or places in either divi-

sion as the High Court may direct.

(3) AM Courts of Session existing
when this Code comes into force
shall be deemed to have been estab-
lished under this Act.”

APPENDIX 2

Notes on clauses

Section 9

The important changes have been already explained!

It may be added, that the draft goes further than the
Bombay and Punjab Amendments*-*, inasmuci as, in
respect of all the powers under the section, it is now
proposed to substitute the High Court, (except in respect

of the creation of a Court of

Session).

APPENDIX 3

Extract of secteen 9, Code of
amended by Bombay Act

Criminal Procedure, 1898 as
23 of 1951.

Bxisting section 9

Bombay amendment

“9. Court of Session.—(1) The State
‘Government shall establish a Court
of Session for every sessions divi-
sion, and appoint a judge of such
Court.

“9, Court of Session (1) The State
Government shall establish a Court
of Session for every sessions divi-
sion and in consultation with the
High Court appoint 2 judge of
such Court,

1. See body of the Report, paragraphs 28 to 30.

2. Appendix 3.
3. Appendix 4.


Existing section 9

Bombay amendment

(०) The State Government may, by
general or special order in the
Official Gazette, direct at what
place or places the Court of
Session shall ordinarily hold its
sittings, but if, in any particular
case, the Court of Session is of
opinion that it will tend to the
general convenience of the parties
and witnesses to hold its sitting at
any other place in the sessions
division, it may, with the consent
of the Prosecution and the accused,
sit at that place for the disposal of
the case or the examination of any
witness or witnesses therein,

(3) The State Government may also
appoint Additional Sessions Judges
and Assistant Sessions Judges to
exercise jurisdiction in one or mote
such Courts.

(4) 3 Sessions Judge of one sessions
‘division may be appointed by the
State Government to be also an
Additional Sessions Judge of an-
other division, and in such case he
may sit for the disposal of cases at
such place or placts in either divi-
sion as the State Government may
direct.

(5) All Courts of Session existing

Code comes into force

shall be deemed to have becn es-
tablished under this Act.’

(3) The State Government may also
in consultation with the High
Court appoint Additional Sessions
Judges and Assistant Sessions Jud~
ges to exercise jurisdiction in“ one
or more such Courts.

(4) A Sessious Judge of onc sessions
division may in consultation with
the High Court be appointed by
the State Government to be also
an Additional Sessions Judge of
another division, and in such case
he may sit for the disposal of
cases at such place or places in
either division as the State Govern-
ment may direct.”

APPENDIX 4

Amendments to sections 9 to 12 and 17—Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 made by Punjab Act 25 of 1964

“4, In section 9—

(@) in sub-section (1), after the words “sessions

division, and”,

the words

“im consultation with the

High Court” shali be inserted;

(ii) in sub-section
Government”,

(2).
the words

after the words “State
“in consultation with the

High Court” shall be inserted;

(iii) in sub-section (3), after the words “may also”,
the words “in consultation with the High Court” shall

be inserted; and


29
(iv) in sub-section (4), after the words “State
Government”, occurring twice, the words “in consul-
tation with the High Court” shall be inserted.

5. In section 10—

(i) in sub-si (1), for the words “a Magistrate”,
the words “an Executive Magistrate’ shall be substi-
tuted; and after that sub-section as so amended, the
following sub-scction shal! be inserted namely

“(LA) In every district the High Court shall
invest a Judicial i ‘rate of the first class with
the pow: a Chicf Judicial Magi«
this Code or any ether law for the
force.”;

trate under
fime being in

(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “any Magis-
trate of the first class to be an Additional District Magis-
trate”, the words “any Executive Magistrate of the first
class to be an Additional District Magistrate shall be
substituted; and

(iii) the margina] heeding shall be substituted,
namely :—

“District Magistrate and Chief Judicial Magis-
trate”.

6. For section 12, the following shall be substituted,
namely: —

“12. (1) The State Government may appoint such
persons as it thinks fit besides the District Magistrates
to be Exccutive Magi of the first or second cla:
in any district, and the State Government or the
District Magistrate, subject to the control of the State
Government, may, from time to time, define local arcas
within which thoy may respectively be invested under
this Code.

(2) The High Court may confer on any person
who is a member of the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial
Branch) the powers of any class of a Judicial Magis-
trate in any district; and the High Court or the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, subject to contro] of the High
Court, may. from time to time, define local areas with-
in which he may exercise all or any of the powers
‘with which he may be invested under this Code.

(3) The State Government, in consultation with
the High Court may. for such period not exceeding
six months from the commencement of the Punjab

Executive _
and Judicial
Mag'strates.


Subordine-

30

Separation of Judicial and Executive Functions Act,
1964 as it may think fit, appoint as many persons,
who are members of the Punjab Civil Service (Exe-
cutive Branch), as may be considered necessary to be
Judicial Magistrates in any district; and the State
Government, in consultation with the High Court,
may define local areas within which such persons may
exercise all or any of the powers with which they
may, respectively, be invested under this Code.

(4) Except as otherwise provided by such defi-
nition, the jurisdiction and powers of such persons
shall extend throughout such district.

(5) The power of appointmet of Judicial Magis-
trates under sub-sections (2) and (8) shall, on the
issue of a public notification under article 237 of the
Constitution of India, be exercised subject to the
terms of the said notification.”.

iL. For section 17, the following section shall be substi-

tion of Assis- tuted, namely :—

tant Sessions
Judges. Judi-
cial Magis-
trates = and
Benches to
‘Sessioas

Judge and

"17, (1) All Judicial Magistrates appointed under
sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 12 and section 14
and all Benches constituted under section 15, shall,
subject to the control of the Sessions Judge be
subordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and he
may, from time to time, make rules or give special
orders consistent with this Code as to the distribution
of business among such Magistrates and Benches.

(2) All Chief Judicial Magistrates shall be subd-
ordinate to the Sessions Judge.

(3) All Assistant Sessions Judges shall be  sub-
ordinate to the Sessions Judge in whose Court they
exercise jurisdiction, and he may, from time to time,
make rules consistent with this Code as to the distri-
bution of business among such Assistant Sessions
Judges.

(4) The Sessions Judge may also, when he himself
is unavoidably absent or incapable of acting, make
provision for the disposal of any urgent application by
an Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, by the
Chief Judicial Magistrate, and such Judge or Magis-
trate shall have jurisdiction to deal with any such
application.”.


31
APPENDIX 5

Important cases under articles 233 to 237 of the
Constitution

Supreme Court
Mohd, Ghouse v. Andhra State,
(1957) S.C.R. 414; A.LR. 1957 S.C. 246.

(Suspension of Subordinate Judge by the High Court—
the matter need not be referred to the Tribunal constituted
under Andhra Civil Service Rules, 1953).

Rameshwar v. State,
(1961) 2 S.C.R. 874; A.LR. 1961 S.C. 816.

(Article 233(2)—Eligibility of Advocate—Period of prac-
tice in Punjab High Court).

High Court v. Amal Kumar,

ALR. 1962 8.0, 1704, 1708.

(Article 235—Promotion from Munsif to Subordinate
Judge).

Panduranagrao v. Andhra. Pradesh,

(1963) 1 S.C.R. 707; A.LR. 1963 S.C. 268, 271.

(Validity of rules made under article 234).

State of Mysore v. K. N, Chandrasekhara,

A.LR, 1965 5.0. 532.
(Decided 31 July, 1964, on appeal from A.I.R. 1963 Mysore
292 and other decisions).

(Article 234 and Mysore Munsifs Recruitment Rules 1958—
High Court, while finding the list vitiated, directed inclu-
sion of petitioners therein—Order was held by the Supreme
Court not to be authorised by article 226).

State of West Bengal v. Nripendra Nath Bagchi,
(Decided on 10th September 1965)

(1966) 1 S.C.R. 771, 786.

(Disciplinary powers over District Judges)
(Traces history of articles 233 to 237 also)

(On appeal from Nripendra v. Chief Seeretary,
ALR. 1961 Cal. 1).


32

Chandra Mohan v. State of U.P.
(decided on 8th August, 1966)
ALR, 1966 S.C. 1987, 1990, 1993.
(paragraphs 7 and 15) (December issue).
(On appeal from 1966 A.L.J. 599).
State of Assam v. Ranga Muhammad,
(decided on 21st September, 1966).
Note reported in full. For summary, see (1967 Feb) S.CJ,
Notes of recent cases, page 14, and (1967 January) 69 Bom.
L.R. page 9, Note 6.
Hicu Courrs
Mohammad Ghouse v. State of A.P.,
ALR, 1955 Andhra 65, 68, patagraphs 7-0,
(Subba Rao C. J. and Satyanarayana Raju J.)

(There was an appeal to the Supreme Court on certain
points). See—

Mohammad Ghouse v. State of A.P,,
(1957) S.C_R. 414; A.-LR. 1957 S.C. 246.
(Articles 227 and 309 also discussed)

Later stage of the same case—Mohammad Ghouse v. State,
A.LR. 1959 Andhra 497, 500, 503, paragraph 4 and 6.

(High Court was held competent to hold inquiry
against Assistant Sessions Judge—Articles 227 and 235
discussed)

Mohammad Ilyas v. State of Maharashtra,
ALR, 1965 Bom. 156, 161 to 163.

(Articles 233 and 235—-Disciplinary jurisdiction over Assist-
ant Judge and Additional Sessions Judge—aArticles 310 and
311 also considered).

Nripendra Nath v. State of W.B,,
ALR. 1961 Cal. 1.

(affirmed on appeal by the Supreme Court, State of W.B. v.
Nripendia Nath) :


33
In re Palaniswamy,
LLR. 1957 Mad. 597, ALR. 1957 Mad. 351, 352, 353, para-
graph 4.

(Article 233—ex-officio appointment of District Magistrate
(by designation) as Assistant Sessions Judge, after consult-
ing the High Court—~held valid.).

N. Devasahayam v. State,

11.8. 1958 Mad, 158;

ALR. 198 Mad. 53, 60, 62. paragraphs 22 and 33.

{Articles 224 and 237—Integration of Civil and Criminal
judiciary-—valid).

Desava v. State of Mysore,

LL. 1955 Mysore 597;

ALR. 1956 Mysore 20, 25, paragraph 14,

(Article 234—Promotion of subordinate judiciary—-“Ap-
poiatment” includes appointment for promotion).

KN, Chandra Sekhare v. State of Mysore,

ALB. 1963 Mysore 292.

(€or decision on appeal see State of Mysore v. K. N. Chan-
dra Sekhara). ALR. 1965 S.C. 532.

(Article 234—Rules under article 234—consultation with
Public Service Commission—Nature of Governor's power).

Vv. हू, Kulkarni v. State of Mysore,
ALR. 1963 Mysore 303.

{Article 234, Rulers under—rules made without consulta-
tion—void) .

8. Ranga Rao v. State of Mysore,

A.LR. 1959 Mysore 199, 200, paragraph 0.

(६, 5. Hegde J.).

(Article 287—On issue of a notification under article 237
Judicial Magistrates are brought in line with other mem-
bers of the Judicial service, and the High Court has the

power to post not merely members of the Judicial service,
put also Magistrates in the district),

M. 1 Nadaf v. State,
ALR. 1967 Mad. 77 (January Issue).
(Article 234).


34

Anandilal Verma v. State,
11.8, (1966) 16 Rajasthan 326.
(Article 235 and disciplinary jurisdiction).

APPENDIX 6
Important Cases under section 9, Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1898.
Q.E. v. Mangal Takchand,

(1885) LL.R. 10 Bom. 258, 263, 278, 282, 283 {(Need for for~
mal appointment under section 9(1}-—Resident of Aden not
a Judge of the Court of Session in the absence of an ap-
pointment as a Sessions Judge.]

Lakshman v. Emp. LL.R. 55 Bom. 576; A.LR. 1931 Bom.
318, 319, 321 (S.B.) [Section 9(2) Code of Crimina! Proce-
dure, 1898—State Government’s order under—whether High
Court can transfer the case under section 526].

Supdt. and Legal Remembrancer v. lijabuliah,

IL. 58 Cal. 117; ALR. 1931 Cal. 190, 191.
[४ there is only one Court of Session वा. cach

Sessions Division sitting at different places and manned by
a number of Judges”.

In re Shaik Silar, ALR. 1941 Mad. 681 (Lakshman Rao J.).
(Predecessors of a Subordinate Judge were appointed As-
sistant Sessions Judge, Kistna, by name. Their successor
Subordinate Judge was not appointed as Assistant Sessions
Judge, by name or designation. Trial by him of a Sessions
case held illegal).

In re Petan Ali Khon, LILR. 1947 Mad. 365; ALR. 1947
Mad. 248, 255. (Successor Sessions Judge cannot pronounce
judgment written by predecessor). .

In re Palaniswamy,
LL.R. 1957 Mad. 597;
A.LR. 1957 Mad, 351, 352, paragraphs 2 and 3 (D.B.}.

(District Magistrates appointed ex-officio Assistant Sessions
Judges—held, appointment is valid).

Kamleshwar v. Dharam Deo,

IL.R. 36 Pat. 995;
ALR. 1957 Pat. 375, 377, 378, paragraphs 7, 8, 16 and 18.

Nawab Khambakhan v. Emp.,
ALR, 1943 Sind 39, 45 (FB).


35

[Section 9 does not require a formal publication. The noti-
fication does not confer the power. Section 9 confers the
necessary powers. Government notification merely declares
or records the acts of Government.]

APPENDIX 7

Extracts of sections 6(1) and 9, Bengal, Agra and Assam
Civil Courts Act, 1887 ( Central Act 12 of 1887)

“36. (1) Whenever the office of District Judge or Subordi- vacancies
nate Judge is vacant by reason of the death, resignation or among Dist-
removal of the Judge or other cause, or whenever an in- Fic OF ub
crease in the number of District or Subordinate Judges has Judges,
been made under the provisions of section 4, the State Gov-
ernment or, as the case may be, the High Court! may fill
up the vacancy or appoint Additional District Judges
or Subordinate Judges.

9. Subject to the superintendence of the High Court, Administra-
the District Judge shall have administrative control over all 15, Centre
the Civil Courts under this Act, within the local limits of १ *
his jurisdiction.”

APPENDIX 8

Extract of section 15, Bhopal and Vindhya Pradesh (Courts)
Act, 1950 (Central Act 41 of 1950).

(Assented to on 10 May 1950) (As adapted)

“15. (1) For the purposes of this Chapter the State Gov- Civil District
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, divide and District
Bhopal and Vindhya Pradesh into civil districts and may /"“8**
alter the limits’ or the number of such districts and may
determine the headquarters of each such district.

(2) The State Government shall, after consultation with
the High Court, appoint as many persons as it thinks neces-
sary to be District Judges and shall post one such person
to each district as District Judge of that district:

Provided that the same person may, if the State Gov-
ernment thinks fit, be appointed to be the District Judge
of two or more districts.”.

1. Before the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1937, the wording in sec-
tion 6(1) was “the local Government may fill up, etc,” See India Code, Vol.
3, Part 3, poge 73.


36

APPENDIX 9

Extracts of sections 10 and 11, of the Dadra and Nagar
Haveli Act, 1961 (35 of 1961).
Power to ex-

tend enact. 20. The Central Government may, by notification in

ments 10 the Official Gazctte, extend with such restrictions or modi-

Dadra and fications as it thinks fit, to Dadra and Nagar Haveli any

Nagar. enactment which is in force in a State at the date of the
avelie notification,

Extension of 11, As from such date as the Central Government may,

the jurisdic- by notification in the Official Gazette. specify the jurisdic-
a of Bom- tion of the High Court at Bombay shall extend to Dadra
Court to Da- 2nd Nagar Haveli.”.

draand Na-
gar Haveli.

APPENDIX 10

Extracts of sections 2, 3 and 5, Dadra and Nagar Haveli
(Civil Court and Miscellaneous Provisions) Regulations,

1963 (8 of 1963).
Clesses of “2. (1) On and from the commencement of this Regu-
courts. lation, in addition to the courts established under any
other law for the time being in force, there shall be in
the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli (which
shall be a district for the purposes of this Regu_ation) —

(a) a court of the District Judge; and
(b) a court of the Civil Judge.

(2) The District Judge and the Civil Judge shall be
appointed by the Central Government after consultation
with the High Court at Bombay (hereinafter referred to
as the High Court).

Situation of , 3. The place at which any court under this Regulation

courts. shall be held may be fixed and may from time to time be
altered by the Administrator of Dadra and Nagar Haveli.

Jurisdiction 5. (1) The court of the District Judge shal! be the
‘of courts of principal civil court of oviginal jurisdiction in the district
the District within the meaning of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

jasee aa (2) The jurisdiction of the court of the District Judge
Judge. and the court of the Civil Judge shall extend to all original

suits and proceedings of a civil nature.

(3) The court of the Civil Judge shall be subordinate
to the court of the District Judge and subject to the
general superintendence and control of the High Court,
the court of the District Judge shall have general control
over the court of the Civil Judge and its establishment,
and the District Judge may give such directions with res-
pect to matters not provided for by law as he may think
necessary.”.


37
APPENDIX il

Extracts from the Delhi High Court Act, 1966 (26 of 1966),
sections 3, 17, 19.

“3. (1) As from such date as the Central Government High Court.
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there
shall be a High Court for the Union territory of Delbi
(hereinafter referred to as the High Court of Delhi).

(2) The principal seat of the High Court of DeJhi shall
be at Delhi or at such other place as the President may,
by notified order, appoint.

हि) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(2), the Judge and Division Courts of the High Court of
Delhi may sit at such other place or places other than its
principal seat as the Chief Justice may, with the approval
of the President, appoint.
t Extension of

17. (1) As from such date as the Central Governmen: Extension
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint (here- (५ MPS
inafter referred to as the prescribed date), the jurisdic- igh Court
tion of the High Court of Delhi shall extend to the Union of Delhi.

territory of Himachal Pradesh.

(2) As from the prescribed date the Court of the Judi-
cial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh shall cease to
function and is hereby abolished:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall pre-
judice or affect the continued operation of any notice
served, injunction issued, direction given, or proceedings
taken before the prescribed date by the Court of the
Judicial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh abolished by
this sub-section.

(3) The High Court of Delhi shall have, in respect of
the territories for the time being included in the Union
territory of Himachal Pradesh —

(8) all such original, appellate and other juris-
diction as under the law in force immediately belore
the prescribed date, is exereisable in respect, of the
said territories by the Court of the Judicial Commis-
sioner for Himachal Pradesh; and also

(b) ordinary original civil jurisdiction in every
suit, the value of which exceeds twenty-five thousand
rupees, notwithstanding anything contained in any Jaw
for the time being in force.

(4) All proceedings pending in the Court of the Judicial
Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh before the prescribed
date shall stand transnferred to the High Court of Delhi.


Givil and Cri-
tainal juris-
diction of the

Superinten-
dence and
control of
Subordinate
Court and
tribunals.

38

६79) Any order made before the prescribed date by the
Court referred to in sub-section (4) shall for all purposes
have effect not only as an order of that Court but also as
an order of the High Court of Dethi.

(6) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that the provisions of sections 6 to 11 and 13 shall, with
the necessary modifications, apply to the Hig th Court of
Delhi in the exercise of jurisdiction conferred upon it by
this section,

(7) All proceedings pending immediately beZore the
prescribed date in any subordinate court in the Union
territory of Himachal Pradesh in or in relation to any
such civil suit as is referred to in clause (9) or sub-section
(3) shall on that date stand transferred to the High Court
of Delhi which shall proceed to try, hear and determine
the matter as if it had been pending therein.”

APPENDIX 12

Extracts of sections 8(1), 11 and 17(2) Goa, Daman and
Diu (Judicial Commissioner's Court) Regulation, 1963
(10 of 1963).

8 (1) The Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall be
the highest civil and criminal court of appeal and revision
in Goa, Daman and Diu and shall have all such jurisdic-
tion as under the law in force immediately before the
commencement of this Regulation was exercisable in res-
pect of that territory by the Tribunal de Relacae.

11. (1) The general superintendence and control over
all courts and tribunals in Goa, Daman and Diu shail vest
in, and all such courts and tribunals shall be subordinate
to the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.

(2) In exercise of the powers of superintendence and
control vested in it, but without prejudice to the genera-
Kity of such powers, the Court of the Judicial Commis-
sioner may do any of the following things, that is to say—

(a) call for returns;

(०) direct the transfer of any suit or appeal from
any subordinate court to any other court of equal or
superior jurisdiction;

(०) make rules and issue general directions and
prescribe forms for regulating the practice and pro-
cedure of subordinate courts;

(d) prescribe forms in which books, entries and
accounts shall be kept by the officers of any such
court.


39

17. (2) The Administrator may, in consultation with the
Judicial Commissioner, make rules relating to the recruit-
ment and condition of service of persons to be appointed
as Judges of the subordinate courts.

APPENDIX 13

Extracts from the Goa, etc, Judicial Commissioner’s Court
(Declaration as High Court) Act, 1964 (16 of 1964)
sections 3 and 6.

“3. The Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the Declaration
Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu (hereinafter of Goa, Da-
referred to as the Judicial Commissioner’s Court) is here- gaan and bial
by declared to be a High Court for the purposes of articles Commis-
132, 133 and 134. sioner Court

as

Count for
certain
purposes.

6. The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI of the Exceptions
-onstitution shall in their application to the Judicial एंकर ३३०

Commissioner’s Court have effect subject to the following which
exceptions and modifications, namely: — Brovisions of
ter

(a) the provisions of articles 216, 217, 218, 220, 221, Part_VI of
222, 223, 224, 224A, 225, 230 and 231 shall not apply; ihe Constitu
_ the Judicial
(b) references. baa J vd)
(i) in article 219, in the proviso to clause (3) sione?’s
of article 227 and in article 229, to the Governo: rn
shall be construed as references to the adminis-
trator of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and
Diu;
(ii) in articles 219 and 229 to the State (except
in the expression “the State Public Service Com-
mission”) shall be construed as references to the
Union territory of Goa, Daman and: Diu;

(c) the reference to the State Public Service
Commission in the proviso to clause (1) of article 229
shall be construed as a reference to the Union Public
Service Commission.”.

APPENDIX 14
Extracts from the Himachal Pradesh Courts Order, 1948
(10th August, 1948) (Preamble, and paragraphs 3, 4,
8, 10, 16, 17 and 18).
No. 270-I.B., dated the 10th August, 1948.—

Wuereas the Central Government has full and exclu
sive authority, jurisdiction and powers for and in relation
to the governance of Himachal Pradesh;


40

AND WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate anc. amend
the law relating to Courts in Himachal Pradesh;

Now, THERGroRE, in exercise of the powers conferred
by sections 3 and 4 of the Extra-Provincial Jurisdiction
Act, 1947 (47 of 1947), and of all other powers enaoling it
in this behalf, the Central Government is pleased ६9 make
the following Orders :—

Sanblishs 3. On and from the commencement of this Order,

Brent of the there shall be established for Himachal Pradesh a Court

Judicia} to be known as the Court of the Judicial Commissioner

Commis- for Himachal Pradesh whieh shall consist of the J:idicial

Stoner. Commissioner and the Additional Judicial) Commissioner,
if any?,

Appointment 4. (1) The Judicial Commissioner and the Additional
ef Judicial Judicial Commissioner, if any. shall be appointed by the
Commis: Central Government and shall hold office at the pleasure
Additional of the Central Government.

souer, (2) No person shall be appointed as the Judicial Com-
nissioner or the Additional Judicial Commissioner who
is not qualified to be appointed as a_ Judge of a High
Court under sub-section (8) of section 220 of the Govern-
ment of India Act, 1935, or who is not, immediately before
the commencement of this Order, the Chief Judge of 2
State comprising Himachal Pradesh,

8. Save as otherwise provided by this Order or any
other law for the time being in force, the Court of the
Judicial] Commisisoner shall be the highest civil and
criminal court of appeal and revision for Himachal Pradesh,

10. (1) The general superintendence and control cover
ail Courts in Himachal Predesh shall vest in, and all such
Courts shall be subordinate fo, the Court of the Judicial
Commissionex?.

(2) In exercise of the power af superintendence and
control vested in it, but without prejudice to the genera-
119 of such power, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner
may do any of the following things, that is to say,—

(a) call for returns;

1. Under sections 17-19 and Schedule to the Delhi High Court Act (6
of 1966) from the prescribed date by the Court of Judicial Commissioner
is to be abolished,

पथ gpetions 17-19 snd, Schedute of the Delbi High Court Act,
1966 (26 of 1966) references to Judicial Commissioner are from the pres
crited date to be considered as refereaces to the Bligh Court and refererce
40 Chief Commissioner as reference to Commissioner.


a

(b) direct the transfer of any suit or appeal frora
any Subordinate Court to any other Court of equal or
superior jurisdiction;

(ce) make rules and issue general directions and
prescribe forms for regulating the practice and pre-
cedure of Subordinate Courts;

(d) prescribe forms in which books, entries and
accounts shall be kept by the officers of any छाए
Court.

16. (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the Chief Civil
Commissioner may, by notification in the Oficial Gazette, dismiss and
divide Himschal Pradesh into civil districts and may alter Juiges,
the limits or the number of these districts and may deter-
mine the headquarters of each such district.

(2) The Chief Commissioner shall, after consultation
with the Judicial Commissioner, appoint as many persons
as he thinks necessary to be District Judges and shall post
one such person to each district as District Judge of that
district:

Provided that the same person may, if the Chief Com-
missioner thinks fit, be appointed to be the District Judge
of two or more districts.

17. (1) When the business pending before the Court of Additional
a District Judge requires the aid of an Aditional Judge District
or Judges for its speedy disposal, the Chief Commissioner 1४०,
may, after consultation with the Judicial Commissioner,
appaint such Additional District Judges as may be
necessary.

(2) An Additional District Judge so appointed shail
discharge any of the functions of a Distriet Judge which
the District Judge may assign to him, and in the discharg>
of his functions he shall exercise the same powers as th?
District Judge.

18. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, after consul- Subordiaete
tation with the Judicial Commissioner, fix the number of Jude
Subordinate Judges to be appointed and, .if there is a
vacancy in that number, may subject to the rules, if any,
made under sub-paragraph (2), appoint such person as is
nominated by the Judicial Commissioner to the vacancy.

(2) The Chief Commissioner may, after consultation
with the Judicial Cormmissioner, make rules as to the

qualifications of persons to be appointed Subordinate
Judges.


42

(3) A Subordinate Judge may -be suspended. from office
by the Judicial Commissioner subject..to .the,,cofirmation
ot the Chief Commissioner and may be temoyed from
office by the Chief Commissioner on the repor: of the
Judicial .Commissioner. पु

APPENDIX 15

Extracts from sections 3, 4, 8, 1000, 170, 180} 19, 27
Manipur (Courts) Act, 1955 (38 of 1955). ;

Establish- “3. There shall be established for the State of Manipur
_ enviol ihe ‘court tobe'known as the Court of: the Judicial Com-
“Judicial: — Missioner ‘for Manipur which shall consist of the Judicial

Commisy Conimissioner and the Additional: Judicial Conimissioner,

sioner, if any. है

Appeirament 4. (1) The Judicial! Comraisisoner and the Additional
Som Judicial Commissioner, if any, shall be appoited -by, and
ner and shall. hold office during the pleasure of. .the..Presicent.
Additional .

judicial. 1 (2) A. pergon:shall not be appointed .as Judicial’ Com-
Commis-  ynissioner or Additional Judicial Coramissioner uniess he
sionex. ig qualified to be appointed as a Judge of a High. Court

under clause. (2) of article 217 of the Coystitution or un-
less he was. immediatciy before the commencement of
this Act, the Judicial Commissioner. of, Manipur.

Civil and cri~ 8. Save as otherwise provided by this Act or any other
Rind ae law. for the time. being in force, the Court -of the Judicial
Cou of th, Commissioner shall, with reference to-any civil, or criminal
Judiciat proceeding under any law: fer the.time being in force in
Commis- ihe State of Manipur. be the highest cowt .of. appeal,
stoner. revision or reference. हु

Superinten— 10.01) The general superintendence and control ‘of all
cence | and courts in the State of Manipur shall, vest in, and all such
subordinace COUrtS shall be subordinate to, the Court of the Judicial
courts, Commissioner. , poy Lal, .
Civil district’ 17: (2) The Chief Commissioner shall, ‘after onsul-
and district tation with the Judicial Commissioner, appoint as many
indges- persons as he thinks necessary to be district judges and
shall post one of these persons to cach district as district
judge of that district:

Provided that the same person may, if the Chie( Com-
_ missioner thinks. fit,.be appointed to be district judge. of

two or ,more districts. पं
Additional “18. (1) When' thé’ busifess pending before ‘the ccurt of
ie a district judge requires the aid of an additional district
idees. Judge for its speedy: dispobal, ‘the Chief | Corimissioner
may, after consultation with the Judicial -Commissioner,
»-aphpoitit such number of additional district judges as.may

be necessary.



43

19. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, after consul- Subordinate
tation with the Judicial Commissioner, fix the number of judges, and
subordinate judges and munsifs to be appointed and if
there is a vacancy in that number may, subject to the
rules, if any, made under sub-section (2), appoint such
person as is nominated by the Judicial Commissioner to
the vacancy. :

(2) The Chief Commisioner may, after consultation
with the Judicial Commissioner, make rules as to the
qualifications of persons to be appointed as subordinate
judges and munsifs.

27. Subject to the general superintendence and control Administra:
of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner, the district of courts.
judge shall have administrative control over all the civil
courts under this Chapter within the local limits of his
jurisdiction.”.

APPENDIX 16

Extracts of sections 9 and 10, Pondicherry (Administration)
Act, 1962 (49 of 1962)

9. As from the 6th day of November 1962, the jurisdic- Extension of

tion of the High Court shall extend to Pondicherry. the iuriedic-
.. ras High
. Court to

Pondicherry.

10. (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the Jurisdiction
provisions of section 9, the High Court shall have, in of Migh
respect of Pondnicherry, all such jurisdiction as under the .
law in force immediately before the appointed day was
exercisable in respect of the former French Establishments
by the Cour de Cassation, the Cour Superieur d’ Arbitrage
and the Counseil d’ Etat of France:

Provided that while determining appeals from decisions
of courts and tribunals in Pondicherry, the High Court
shall, as far as may be, follow the same procedure and
have the same power to pass any judgment, decree or
order thereon, as it follows and has while determining
appeals from decisions of courts in the State of Madras.

(2) All appeals and other proceedings from or in res-
pect of any judgment, decree or order of any court or
tribunal in the former French .Establishments pending
immediately before the appointed day before the Cour de
Cassation or the Cour Superieur d’ Arbitrage or the Coun-
seil तो Etat of France and all original proceedings in
relation to those Establishments pending immediately
before the appointed day before the Counseil d’ Etat shall,
by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to the High Court
and shall be disposed of by the High Court in the exercise


Disiict Jud-
ges.

Additions!
Judges.

Place of sitt-
ing of Court,

Common
High Court
for Punjab,
Haryana and
Chandigarh.

45

of jurisdiction conferred on it by this Act, as if such
appeals and other proceedings had been filed before the
High Court.

Explanation.—All appeals and other proceedings filed
before the appointed day but not transmitted to the Cour
de Cassation or the Cour Superieur d’ Arbitrage or the
Counseil d’ Etat shall be deemed to be appeals or proceed-
ings, as the case may be, pending before that Court for the
purposes of this sub-section.”,

APPENDIX 17

Extracts of sections 20, 21, 31, Punjab Courts Act, 1918
{Punjab Act 6 of 1918).

“20. The State Government! shali appoint as many
persons as it thinks necessary to be District Judges, and
shall post one such person to each district as District
Judge of that district:

Provided that the same person may, if the State Gov-
ernment thinks fit, be appointed to be District Judge of
two or more districts.

21. (1) When the business pending before any District
Judge requires the aid of an Additional Judge or Judges
for its speedy diposal, the State Government may appoint
such Additional Judges as may be necessary.

(2) An Additional Judge so appointed shall discharge
any of the functions of a District Judge which the District
Judge may assign to him, and in the discharge of those
functions he shall exercise the same powers as the District
Judge.

31. (1) The High Court may fix the place or places at
which any Court under this Part is to be held.

(2) The place or places so fixed may be beyond the
local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court.

(3) Except as may be otherwise provided by any order
under this section, a Court under this Part may be held
at any place within the local limits of its jurisdiction.”.

APPENDIX 18

Exiracts of sections 29 and 41 of the Punjab Reorgani-
sation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966)

“29. (1) On and from the appointed day,—

{a) there shall be a common High Court for the
States of Punjab and Haryana and for the Union

1. व its application to Delhi,h# Central Government ii substituted
for “Stare Government” in section 29. See Notification No. 189/30 dated
3० May, 5959 (under section 7 Delhi Laws Act, 1918). Schedule,


45

territory of Chandigarh to be called the High Court
of Punjab and Haryana (hereinafter referced to as
the common High Court):

(a) the Judges of the High Court of Punjab
holding office immediately before that day shall, un-
less they have elected ctherwise, become on that day
the Judges of the common High Court.

(2) The expenditure in respect of salaries and allow-
ances of the Judges of the common High Court shali be
allocated amongst the States of Punjab and Harrana and.
the Union in such proportion as the President may, by
order, determine.

41. Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to Savings.
the common High Court of any provisions af the Consti-
tution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any pro-
vision that may be made on or after the appointed day
with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or
other authority having power to make such provision.”,

APPENDIX 19

Extract of section 69 of the States’ Reorganisation Act
1956 (87 of 1956).

“0. (1) As trom the appointed day the jurisdiction of Extension of
the High Court for the State of Kerala (referred to in this कि
Act as the High Court of Kerala) shall extend to the fer of pro-
Union territory of the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindiyi ceedings to
Islands. Kerala High

(2) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court at
Madras shall, as from the appointed day, have no jurisdic-
tion in respect of the said Union territory or in respect of
any territory transferred from the State of Madras to the
State of Kerala.

APPENDIX 20

Extracts of Preamble to and paragraphs 8. 10, 16(2), 1701),
18, 25 and 26 of the Tripura Courts Order, 1950 (14th
January, 1959),

THE TRIPURA (COURTS) ORDER, 1950.
No! 3-J, dated the Ith January, 1950.—
Wuerxas the Central Government has full and exclu.

sive authority, jurisdiction and powers for and in relation
to the governance of Tripura;

AND WHERras it is expedient to consolidate and amend
the law relating to Courts in Tripura;

1, Published in the Gazette of India, extraordinary, 1950, P. 45.


46

Now, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred
by sections 3 ard 4 of the Extra-Provincial Jurisdiction
Act, 1947 (47 of 1947), and of all other powers enabling
it in this behalf, the Central Government is pleased to
make the following order:—

8. Save as otherwise provided by this Order or any
other law for the time being in force, the Court of the
Judicial Commissioner shall be the highest civil and crimi-
nal court of appeal and revision for Tripura.

(1) The general superintendence and control over all
Courts in Tripura shall vest in, and all such Courts shall
be subordinate to, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.

(2) In exercise of the powers of superintendence and
control vested in it, but without prejudice to the generality
of such power, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner
may do any of the following things, that is to say,—

(a) call for returns;

(b) direct the transfer of any suit or appeal from
any Subordinate Court to ‘any other Court of equal
or superior jurisdiction;

(c) make rules and issue general directions and
prescribe forms for regulating the practice and pro-
cedure of Subordinate Courts;

(d) prescribe forms in which books, entries and
accounts shall be kept by the officers of any such
Court.

16. (2) The Chief Commissioner shall, after consulta-
tion with the Judicial Commissioner, appoint as many
persons as he thinks necessary to be District Judges and
shall post one such person to each district as District
Judge of the district:

Provided that the same person may, if the Chief Com-
missioner thinks fit, be appointed to be the District Judge
of two or more districts.

17. (1) When the business pending before the Court
of a District Judge requires the aid of an Additional Judge
or Judges for its speedy disposal, the Chief Commissioner
may, after consultation with the Judicial Commissioner,
appoint such Additional District Judges as may be
necessary.

18. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, after consul-
tation with the Judicial Commissioner, fix the number of
Subordinate Judges and Munsifs to be appointed and if
there is a vacancy in the numiber, may, subject to the


a

rules, if any, made under sub-paragraph (2), appoint stg
person as is nominated by the Judicial Commissioner te
the vacancy.

(2) The Chief Commissioner may, after consultation
with the Judicial Commissioner, make rules as to the
qualifications of persons to be appionted Subordinate
Judges and Munsifs.

(3) A Subordinate Judge or Munsif or Registrar may
be suspended from office by the Judicial Commissioner
subject to the confirmation of the Chief Commissioner
and may be removed from office by the Chief Commis-
sioner on the report of the Judicial Commissioner.

25. (1) The Chief Commissioner may fix the place or
places at which any Court constituted under this Chapter
is to be held.

(2) The place or places so fixed may be beyond the
local Limits of the jurisdiction of the Court.

(9) Save as otherwise provided by an order under this
paragraph, a Court constituted under this Order may be
held at any place within the local limits of its jurisdic-
tion.

26, Subject to the general superintendence and control
of the Judicial Commissioner, the District Judge shall
have control over all the Civil Courts within the local
limits of his jurisdiction.

APPENDIX 21

Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Constitution
(Twenty-third Amendment) Bill, 1966 (Introduced in
Lok Sabha on 25th November, 1966).

“Appointments of district judges in Uttar Pradesh and
a few other States have been rendered invalid and illegal
by a recent judgment of the Supreme Court on the ground
that such appointments were not made in accordance with
the provisions of article 233 of the Constitution. In an-
other judgment, the Supreme Court has held that the
power of posting of a district judge under article 233 does
not include the power of transfer of such judge from one
station to another and the power of transfer ofa district
judge is vested in the High Court under article235 of the
Constitution. As a result of these judgments, a serious


48

situation hag arisen. becauss dovbt has been. thrawn on the
validity of the judgments, decrees, orders and sentences
passed or made by these district judges and a number of
writ petitions and other cases have already been filed
challenging their validity. The fulictioning of the district
courts in Uttar Pradesh has practically come to a stand
still It is, therefore, urgently necessary to validate the
judgments, decrees, orders and sentences passed or made
heretofore by all such district judges in those States and
also to validate the appointments, postings, promotions and
transfers of such district judges barring those few who were
not eligible for appointment under article 233.

2. The Bil} seeks to give effect to the above proposals.
Y. B. CHAVAN”.
New DELHI;
The 20th November, 1966.

Nore: The Bil] was intreduced on 25th November, 1966
and om Teceiping assent on 22nd December, 1966
became law as the Constitution (Twentieth Amend-

ment) Act, 1966,

GMGIPND~TS Wing 57 Mof Law