CONFIDENTIAL

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT

INDIAN REGISTRATION ACT, 1908

SEPTEMBER 1967

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW


CHAIRMAN,

Shri P. Govinda Menon, Law Commission,
Minister of Law, 5, Jor Bagh, New Delhi—3.
New Delhi. December 15, 1967.

My Dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 34th
Report of the Law Commission on the Indian Registration
Act, 1908.

2. The circumstances in which the subject was taken up for
consideration are stated in the first few paragraphs of the
Report.

After the subject was taken up, a draft Report was prepared.

3. The draft Report was discussed at the following meetings
of the Commission :—
(i) 82nd meeting of the Commission on the 1st and 2nd
February, 1967;

(ii) 83rd meeting of the Commission on 22nd ‘0 25th
February, 1967;

(iti} 84th meeting of the Commission on 30th ard 31st
March, 1967;

(iv) 85th meeting of the Commission on 24th to 28th
April, 1967; and

(v) 86th meeting of the Commission on the 15th May,
1967.

The draft Report was revised in the light of the decisions
taken at these meetings.

4. The comments of the State Governments, High Courts
and other interested persons and bodies on the earlier Report
(6th Report) had been forwarded to us by the Ministry of Law,
and have been considered by us while preparing this Report.
This Report has not, therefore, been circulated to State
Governments etc. for comments. A Press Communique
inviting views of the public on the subject was also considered
unnecessary for the same reason.


Gi)

5. It may not be out of place to mention here, that
preparation of this Report has involved strenuous labour,
having regard to the fact that material in the case-law_ was
studied afresh, and the views of State Governments, High
Courts, Officers of the Registration Department, and other
interested persons and bodies, raised numerous points, a large
number o: hich were new.

6. I would again like to express my appreciation and also
that of the Commission for the work done by our Secretary
Mr. P. M. Bakshi in making available the material for the
report and in preparing the report.

Yours sincerely,
4. L. KAPUR.


EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATION USED

Mulla (1963) Mulla, The Indian Registration Act (1963).

(iii)


REPORT ON THE INDIAN REGISTRATION ACT, 1908

CONTENTS

S upygct-MaTTER . Pace

Genesis of the Report eee ee 1
‘Scope of the Report . . . . . . . I
‘Comments ‘considered eee . see r
Exemption for Government Bee r
Short title . . . . . . . . . . 1
2

Clause t@) 2 © © © © © © «© © 6
Clause 2 (1) “addition” . . . . . . , . 2
Clause 2 (2) 2 6 5 6 6 8 eee
Clause 2) 2 6 6 eee  + »
Clause2(5) . 8 6 8 eee  + _- »+
Clouse 2 (6). - oe . . . . . . .
Clause 2(7) « . . . . . . . .
(@ Standing timber. ww ke + +
(Prot and Jue we
(०) Machinery . . . . पु . . .
(clause 2 (8)--
“टीका of छातं ?! . . . . . . cs
Clause 2 (9)--

“Lease” 6 ee -+- .. - कक + «+ 10

Clause 2 (10)—

PaiMinor™ 2. + + «+ - + + 1"

Claus: 2

« Movable property I. . . . . sods
{Omitted in 6th Report) | हक.



Gi)
Supyect-MaTTER . पक
Clauge २ (1)--
“Prescribed”? (New) . . . . . . . . . 2
Clause 2 (12)—~
“Representative” =. . . . . . . . . 12
Clause 2०५

New points . न 1 15

Clause 3 (1)(a)—
Instruments requiting registration under any law for their validity 15
Clause 3 (1#0-
Non-testamentary instruments generally . . . . . 16
Clause 3 (1) (४--

Leases . . . . पु . पु > . . 17
Clause 3 (70(4)--

Assignments of decrees . . . . . . . 18
Clause 3 (1—

Explanations 9३ ७३ - . . - «- -+ 18

Omission of section 17 (t)(c) . . . . . . . 18
Glause 3 (1)—

‘New points + * पु पु . पु . . 19
Clause 3 (2) (a) पु . . . . . . . पु Ig
Clause 3 (2)(6) « . . . . . . . . . 19
Clause 3 Xe} -

Point regarding receipts extinguishing mortgage . . . 20
Clause 3 (2) (4)--

Exemption for counterpart of a lease . . . . . 22
Clause 3 (2X2) and clause 3 (४) %ऋए। (if) . ~ oe वि 26
Clause आ(3)(1)--

ecree,Yplaint, etc.,"of fwhich copies are to be sent under new

clausezq2 : . . . न . . . . 27



vi

SupyecT-MATTER
Clause 3 3)-
Adoption 5 ee et
Deeds of adoptions 3s ws et
Clause 3——
(New points)—

Wills . . . . . . . . . .
Clause 4. . . . . . . . . .
Clause 5--

Documents in other languages . . . +

Clauses 5 to 7
Suggested standard form to be signed by the executant
(190६८ 6—
Point for photostat copies
Clause 7 (1)--
Clause 7 (2) and (3)——
Description of property . .
Clause 7 (4)--

Copies of maps to accompany documents
Clause 8 (1)

‘Time for presenting documents
Clause 8 (2)

Period of wills =. .
Clause 9--

Documents executed byiseveral persons in different times
Clause 10--

Fine for delay in presentation oo
Clause 71--

Documents executed outside India
Clause 12 (1)

Place of presentation

Pave

28

at
32

33

33
34

34

36

37

38

38


‘SuByjeCT-MATTER

Other points—
Verbal changes 6 see et
Condusion 2 eee
Effect of proposed change... ee
Anysis 6) set

Clause 12 (2)—

Place of presentation of will or authority to adopt.

Clause 12 (3)—
Residual Provision for place of registration =.

Clause 12 (4)--

Definition of “notice” contd. 8. ५७“ +
Clause 13 न . . . . पु . .
Clause 14 rs
‘Clause 15 (०) @) . . . . . . .
Clause 156) -. -+ + +#+ 5«- : .
Clause 15 (6) + : . woo oo.
Clause 16 . . . . .
Clause 16 (709 न पु . न . . .
‘Clause 16 (2) and (3) . . . . दि ५
Clause 16 (4)... + « . . . . पु .
Clause 17 . . पर * . . . .
Clause 18 (1) se ee
Proviso + . : . . . . .
Clause 18 (2) and (3) es
Clause 18 (की
Return of documents for non-appearance oo.
Clause 19(b) - पु . . . . . .
Clause 19 (०) - . . न . . . .
Clause 19—

New point . . . .

Pace

soe 48
न 49
so 49
so 49
so 5
. ड्0

. . Sr
नि 36
. 38
soe 58
hoe 59
: 60

पु 60
an 61
Loe 61
toe 61
- or
soe 6x
soe 61
coe 62
soe 62
. 8 64
woe 64
soe 64

nnn


G

Supyect-MaTTer Pace
Clause 20 (1) (a) and (4) Gi) Cee ee 64
Reading over document and proof of Fattestation . . . 61
Clause 20 (2) Be 9३95३ +5+ 5४३ 68
Registration on admission of execution . . . . न 68
Clause 20 (3) . . पु पु . . . . . 69
Clause 21(1)— ». «० « 5 «- *«- - +* «+ 69
Prozedure on denial of execution . . . . . . 69
Clause 21 (2) . . : . . . . : . 72
Clause 22 (1) . . . . . . . . » yz
Clause 22(2) . . . . . . . . . 72
Clause 22(3) . . . . पु . . . . 73
Clause 22(4) . . . . . . . न न 73
Clause 22(5) . न . . . . + 73
Clause 22(6)(6) ee + +- +- 4. - 3
Clauses 21 and 22 . . . . . . . . 74

(Omission or alteration of
sections 71 to 76).

Clause 23 . . . . . . . . . . 74
Clause 24 . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Clause 25. . . . . . . . पु . पु mS
Clause 26 « . . roe . . * . cd 76
Clauses 27-28 . . . न . . . . . + 7
Clause 297)...» + + +- +. - - -+ -: 7
Clause 29(2) . . . . . . . - + . q
‘Clause 30 . . . . . . . . . . 7
Clause 32 - . . पु न . पु . . . . 7
Cluse33 6 | | «६ |. . 6६ : 7
Clauses 34-35 - 8 + +#+ +#+ 78
Clauses 36090) nd Pe 78
Clause 36—

8

New point - . . . - . . . . .



|

SuBjEct-MATTER Pace
Clause 37 . . . . 7
Clause 38 . . पु . . . . . . 79
Clauses 39 and 40. . . न . . . . 19
Clause 4४४. - न . . . . . . . . er
Clause 4r(2). पु oo es 81
Clanse 42--

New point. . पु पु . . . . . . 82
Clause 447). . . . . . . . . . 82
Clause 42(1) and security bonds rr 86
Clause 4२2). . . . . . . . . . 86
Clause 42(3) « . . . . . . . . . Nd
Clause 42(4)

(New) . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Clause 42--

New point ~ . > + . . - + . . ६8
Clause 43 . . न . . ’ . + . . 88
Clause 44(00.. « - . . . . . . . + 89
Clause 44(2) + . . . . . . . . . 92
Clause 45 ee ee ee ee roo. 90
Ciguse 46 . . . . . . . . . : a
Clause 46—

New point . . . . . . . . . . or
Clause 47(1) « . . . . : . पु OL
Clause 47(2) « soe oe + oT
Clause 48

Mew. 2. oe + - निज gt
Clause 483). . . . . . . . + . 93
Clause 400) 6 eee . 93
Clause 4902). . . न . . + . . . 93

. . . न . . 93

Clause 3०... + « -



(xi)

SupyeCT-MATTER Pace

Clause s1{1). . . . पु . . . . . 93
Clause §1(2). . . : . . . . पु . 93
Clauses §2 to 54 . * . . प्‌ . . . . 93
Clause 55 . . न . . पु पु . . . 93
Clause 56 : पु पु पु मु . पु पु पु पु 94
Clause 57 9४ 9, ,. . «. + « . -: 94
Clause 58 Ce - - «- «- - - 94
Clause 59 . . . . . . . . . . 94
Clause 60 + . . . . . . . . . 94
Clause 61 . . . . + . . . पु . 94
Clauses 62, 65 6 ee et 96
Clause 64 . . पु . . . पु . : . 96
Clause 65(1) « . . . . . . . . . 96
Clause 65(2) + . . . . . . . . . o7
Clause 65(3) + . . . . . . न पु . oT
Clause 65(4) - + . . . : . . - + 97
Clause 66 a - - - - 97
Clause 67 9 5३ +»+- +- +»- - -  - 98
Clause 68 . . . . . . . . न . 98
Clause 69 + . . . . . . . . . 99
Clause 70--

Tee int regarding

1 of document

writers . न . . . . . . + . 9
Clause 7०० + पु . . . . . . . . 100
Clause 77 . . . . . . . . . . १५००
‘Clause 73 . . oe . . पु + ry 100
Clause 73 . see oe . . soe 100
Clause 74 . . . . . . . . . - Tor
Clause 75 . . . . . ‘ . . . + ror

Clause 760). « . . . . . . . . . ror
Clause 76(2) ()and(h) 6 wee पु पु . 102



(xii)

Susyect-MATTER AGE

Clause 76(2)(h)—

New point . . . . . : . . ‘ . Wz
Clause 76(2)@) . . . . . . . . . . Lye
Clause 76(2)—

Other points . . . . न . . . . ग्ए्ड
Clause 76(2)--

New point regarding

document writers. . पु मु पु पु . . 102
Clause 77—
Exemption for Government पु . + . - 102
Clause 78 . . . . . . . . . 103
Omitted Sections . . . . पु + . . . 103.
Omitted section 17(1X{c) « . . पं . . . . 103,
Omitted section 172) - . : . पु . . . 104
Omitted section 72X08) 2 . - +- - +- - - व०5
Omitted section 238 . . + पु . . . पु . 10S
Omitted section jo. . . . . . . . . 106
Omitted sections 72 and 7 . . . प्‌ . . 106
Me hiPmedat 1 9 9 9 9. ७. 09७11 7०6
Suggested new provisions . . . : . . ना प्प्ण
नि न जम to7
Registration of documents

opposed to public policy =. =. wwe 107
Copying by photography . . . . : . पु . 108.
Transfer of proceedings . 9... ee 108
Remission of fees. . . पु पु पु पं . . 108
Registration by Panchayats . . . . . . . 108
Later suggestions~— .

@ Section 302) yt.

Gi) Section 2(1)—definition.
of “addition? ५५ te



(xii)

SupjectT-MATTER PAGE
(मर) Section 34—and foreigners . . . . . . ११९६
(४०) Section 67A(New) . . . . . . . ११९
Recommended changes - . . . . . . . 114.
14

Appendix . . . . . . . . . . .

Draft amendments to the
existing Act . . . . . . रु . . . us



Report on the Indian Registration Act, 1908

1. The circumstances leading to the Prep aration of this Genesis of
Report may be briefly stated. ‘The Law Commission haci पंप Report
submitted to the Government of India a Report? on the

Indian Registration Act, 1908. The Government of Indis.
circulated that Report for comments to State Governments,

High Courts and other interested persons and bodies.

As the comments received by the Government of India
revealed disagreement with the recommendations made on
the earlier Report on several points, the matter was referred
to this Commission again, for giving its opinion in the light
of those comments. That is the genesis of this Report,

2. In our consideration of the subject we had to carry Scope of
our study beyond and behind the Sixth Report, as, without the Report
such study, it was not possible to appreciate many of the
points which we had to consider. Moreover, several of the
comments raised points on which the Sixth Report had not
suggested changes. It was for this reason that we had to
make a de novo examination of the Act. We have, how-
ever, been cautious in suggesting armendments of a radical
nature, except where we felt that the matters were im-
portant enough to justify their being raised by us.

As a matter of form,’ however, we have related our dis-
cussion to the clauses in the Bill appended to the Sixth
Report. This appeared to be a convenient course, as the
“comments” were grouped clause-wise, and we have fol-
lowed that course in this Report, except in the later ए07-
tions’ of this Report where it was impracticable to do so.

3. We now proceed to examine in detail, clause by clause, Comments
the comments received’ on the earlier Report, and to in- considered
dicate our recommendation thereon.

A suggestion has been made for exempting the Govern-
ment trom the operation of the Act. This will be considered
later* ment

A suggestion has been made that the title of the Act Short tide
should be changed to the “Registration of Documents” Act.
We do not aceept the suggestion. It is true, that the object

1, Sixth Report (Registration Act). (July, 1957).

2. Portions dealing with omitted sections, suggested new provisions
and later suggestions.

3. The clauses referred to are the clauses of the Bill appended to the
Sixth Report.

4. See discussion under clause 77.

2—109 M of Law.


Elaase 1(2)

Clause 2(1
eon”

Clause 2(2)

2

of the Act is registration of documents; see the preamble,
long title and headin; ng to Part IN. (before section 17). Re-
gistration under the is different from “registration”
under the Societies Registration Act, the Partnership Act,
the Companies Act, etc. However, we do not see any need
for any such purely verbal change.

Existing section 1(2), proviso, empowers the State Gov-
ernment to exclude any districts or tracts of country from
the operation of the Act. This was proposed to be Teteted
in the Sixth Report. The reason given for the deletion of
this proviso in the earlier Report®, was:—

“We are of the opinion that there is no reason why
State Government should be given the power to ex-
clude any areas from the operation of the Act.”

The comments received, however, press for its reten-
tion. It would appear, (from these comments) that in
backward tracts, or in far-flung, snowbound areas, people
may not be able to understand the effect of non-registra-
tion, or may sometimes find it impossible to come for re-
gistration in the harvest season. The proviso would be
necessary to avoid hardship in such cases.

There is some force in this objection, and we recommend
that the existing proviso should be retained’,

(a) Definition of “addition” proposed in the Sixth Re-
port may be accepted‘, so far as the change regarding
married women is concerned*.

(b) Omission of “rank and title”? was recommended in
the earlier Report*, in view of the changed constitutional
set up. But, as foreigners may also have occasion to get
documents registered, we think that this change need not
be made.

(No comments have been received on the definition of
“addition” as proposed in the Sixth Report).

The earlier Report had proposed a new definition
“affect immovable property”. A suggestion has been made
to add the word “intends” in the proposed definition in

1, Any recommendations for making minor changes are subject to the
view expressed in this Report as to whether the Act shauld be re-enacted
or not.

2, Sixth Report, page 8, paragraph 20.

3. Seo Sukriti Bala v. Hemant Kumar, ALR. 1957 Assam 153, pagraraph
6, as to the proviso.

4. Sixth Report, page 9.

5. See section 2(r), as proposed ta be amended.
6. Sixth Report, page 9.

7. Sixth Report, page 49.


3

clause 2(2). If the suggestion is accepted, the proposed de-
fmition would read—

“A document is deemed to affect immovable pro-
perty, if it intends, purports or operates to create,
etc...... ”,

The reason given for the suggestion is', that semi-illite-
rate document-writers in the villages draft documents very
badly, (so that the intention of the party is not reflected in
the document). In such a case, the word “purports” may
not be adequate and the addition of the word “intends”
would ensure that the intentions of the parties are taken
into account. This argument cannot be accepted. The pro-
posed definition is merely a formal one; the earlier Report?
explained that the object of the definition was to avoid re-
peating in every section the long clause “which purport or
operate...... an

Further, what was the intention of a particular person
at a particular time is not always easy to determine. An
elaborate enquiry into what was or was not the intention
of the parties may prove a source of delay and uncertainty.
It is true, that courts have often to decide questions of in-
tention. But, when the very validity of a document de-
pends on such uncertain factors, it would not be wise to
adopt that test. It must be noted, that the registration of a
document is for all times, and where, for example, the exe-
cutant is dead, it will be fairly difficult to determine, after
his death, what was his intention. What is recorded in the
document can be interpreted; what is not recorded there
create a difficult problem of interpretation for the courts.

We do not think that the proposed definition of the ex-
pression “affect immovable property” is required. 11 will be
more appropriate to retain the describing words in existing
sections 17 (1) (७9), 18(a), ete. The definition need not,
therefore, be added.

The definition of “book” in section 2(2) is, at present,
inclusive only. Clause 2(3)—definition of “book”—proposes
the addition” of the words “means any of the register books
to be kept by this Act and”. This was proposed to be added
to make the definition more explicit‘, Regarding these
added words, a comment has been received that they might
limit the scope of the definition to stich register books as are
prescribed by the Act itself, and might thus leave out those
prescribed by the State Government under the Act. It has,
therefore, been suggested that after the words “by the Act”,
the words “or under this Act” may be added. As there is
a general power to make rules under clause 76(1) (which
takes the place of existing section 69), therefore, if the

1. Sixth Report page 73.

2. Sixth Report, page 73.

3. Sixth Report, page 40, clause 2(3).

4. As explained in Sixth Report, page 73.

Clause २(३)


Clause 2(5)

Clause 2(6)

4

change proposed by the Sixth Report is to be made, it
would appear to be safer to accept the suggestion rnade in
the comment also.

We, however, think that it is not necessary to carry out
the proposed change, because the expression “register
book” is not used in the body of the main section! dealing
with register books. The change may be dropped.

Clause 2(5), corresponding to existing section 2(5),
defined “endorsement”. A suggestion has been made, that
the definition should cover an entry in writing made by
the registering officer on a sealed cover deposited under the
Act, as the registering authority has to make an endorse-
ment on covers intended for deposit also. (This is not a
comment on any change proposed by the Sixth Report, but
a suggestion on the existing Act). We may refer, in this
connection, to existing section 42, clause 43(1) in the Sixth
Report—under which a will can be deposited with the Re-
gistrar. Under existing section 43—clause 44 in the Sixth
Report—the Registrar has to note, on the sealed cover con-
taining the will, certain particulars) H the suggested
change is made, it would be useful for the purpose of all
those sections where the word “endorsement” is used. For
example, an incorrect “endorsement” is punishable under
one of the provisions’; the proposed change will be useful
for that provision. The suggestion should, therefore, be
accepted.*

Clause 2(6)—definition of “execution” (new) defines it
as “the act of voluntarily signing a document having under-
stood the contents thereof”. The object behind adding the
definition, as explained in the earlier Report’, was to make
it clear that execution imports not merely signature, but
signature after understanding the contents. Now one com-
ment states, that the definition is not necessary, while an-
other comment is to the effect that the definition is wide
and would leave the doors open for litigation. Ordinarily,
it is said, execution would mean “duly executed”, ie,
signed, sealed and delivered by the executant,

The definition is important for the sections dealing with
presentation of documents for registration—for example,
section 32(a) and (c) and, more particularly, sections 34(3)
and 35 dealing with proof of execution. For the present
purpose. sealing and delivery have not much relevance.
Hence the non-mention of those requirements may not cause
much difficulty. What is sought to be stressed is,—mere
proof of admission of signature should not amount to

1, Existing section 51.

2. Existing section हि.

3. See section 2(5), as proposed to be amended.
4

. Sixth Report, page 73.


execution," and therefore, the proposed definition, has the
beneficial object of preventing fraud? However, a smali
drafting change may be suggested, and the definition may
be re-worded as follows: —

“execution”, in relation tea qa document presented
for registration, means execution by a person who has
understood the contents thereof*.

Regarding clause 2(7)—definition of “immovable pro-~ Chanse 27)
perty”—corresponding to existing section 2(6), several points
have been made, and it will be convenient to deal them one
by one with reference to the topics to which they relate.
These are as follows: —

(a) Standing timber—Under the existing section, Standing
standing timber, growing crops and grass are excluded timber
from “immovable property”. Under the proposed pro-
vision, they are to be excluded “whether immet diate
severance is intended or not”. The reason for this pro-
posed clarification, as explained in the earlier Report‘,
is, that there is a conflict of decisions as to whether
standing timber, when it is not intended 10 be severed
immediately, should be treated as movable or immov-
able property. The Commission was of the view, that
for the purposes of the Registration Act, standing tim-
ber should not be regarded as immovable property,
whether it is to be severed immediately or not.

While the proposed amendment has been accepted
in the comments received from some quarters, other
comments have raised a number of objections thereto.
One comment is, that “standing timber” is always to be
cut and never allowed to stand, and therefore, the pro-
posed addition is not necessary. To this, one may reply,
that in view of the conflict of decisions, some clarifica-
tion is desirable. Another comment is, that a period
of three months from the date of sale may be fixed for
removal of the timber to constitute it as standing tim-
ber. It is argued, that if there is no restriction regard-
ing the period during which the timber is allowed to
stand, it will be more in the nature of lease (and should
be regarded as “immovable property”). This can be
answered by pointing out, that it would not be practi-
cable to impose any such hard and fast limit. Yet
another suggestion is, that standing timber should not be
classified as movable property by way of an unqualified

व. ef. the discussion in Mulla, (1963), page 148, 13th Une and page 149.
2, See also the review of case-law in Kiskny v. Maroti, (1963), 65 Bom.
L.R. 578, 582, 584,—holding that “execution” in section 35 connotes
knowledge of contents,
3. To be carried out only if the whole Act is re-enacted.

4. Sixth Report, page 9, paragraph 21(B), text corresponding to foot-
notes 1 and 2,


6

exception; it should be classified as movable and immov-
able according to permanency and continued growth for
a period, stability of the tree, prejudice to the soil, ete.
This, however, does not appear to be a workable course,
and would encumber the definition with complicated
criteria.

It has, further, been suggested, that the new words
“whether immediate severance is intended or not”
should not be read with the words “standing timber”
(but only with growing crops or grass). Standing tim-
ber (according to the suggestion) should be treated as
movable property only if immediate severance is in-
tended. It may, however, be noted, that after the sub-
mission of the earlier Report, the question of standing
timber has come up for consideration before the
Supreme Court.! (The case related to the Madhya
Pradesh Abolition of Proprietory, etc., Act, 1950, but
the court had to discuss the interpretation of the words
“immovable property” in relation to standing timber).
The Supreme Court stressed the aspect of susienance
by the soil, The Court pointed out that trees were
immovable property, because they are attached to or
rooted in the earth; but standing timber was not immov-
able property. It was intended to be used as timber.
The Supreme Court further observed’:

‘(29) Now, what is the difference between standing
timber and a tree? It is clear that there must be a dis-
tinction because the Transfer of Property Act draws one
in the definitions of “immovable property” and “.attach-
ed to the earth”; and it seems to me that the distinction
must lie in the difference between a tree and timber.
Tt is to be noted that the exclusion is only of “standing
timber” and not of “timber trees”.

* ey * *

‘Therefore, “standing timber” must be a tres that
is in a state fit for these purposes and, further a tree
that is meant to be converted into timber so shortly
that it can already be looked upon as timber for all
practical purposes even though it is stil) standin. If
not, it is still a tree because, unlike timber, it wi!’ con-
tinue to draw sustenance from the soil.

*(31) Now, of course, a tree will continue to draw
sustenance from the soil so long as it continues to stand
and live; and that physical fact of life cannot be altered
by giving it another name and calling it “standing
timber”. But the amount of nourishment it takes, if it
is felled at a reasonably early date, is so negligible that

71. Shantabai v, State of Bombay, (1959) S.C.R. 263; A.LR. 1948 S.C,
532, 5373 paragraph 33.
>. Paragraphs 29 to 31 in A.LR.



7

at can be ignoreu ror all practical purposes and tnough,
theoretically, there is no distinction between one class
of tree and another, if the drawing of nourishment from
the soil is the basis of the rule, as I hold it to be, the
Jaw is grounded, not so much on logical abstraction as
on sound and practical commonsense, It grew empiri-
cally from instance to instance and decision to decision
until a recognisable and working pattern emerged; and
here, this is the shape it has taken.’.

The Court cited with approval the view expressed
in Mulla’s Transfer of Property Act, (4th edition pages
16and 21) that “ifthe transfer includes the right to fell
the trees for a term of years, so that the transferee
derives a benefit from further growth, the transfer is
treated as one of immovable property”. The court fur-
ther added. “Before a tree cowd be regarded as a stand-
ing timber, it must be in such a state that, if cut, it
could be used as timber; and when in that state, it
must be cut reasonably early. The rule is probably
grounded on generations of experience in forestry and
commerce, and this part of the law might have grown
out of that. The tree might otherwise deteriorate, and
its continuance in a forest after it has passed its prime
might spoil the forest and eventually the timber market.
But however that may be, the legal basis for the rule
is, that trees that are not cut continue to draw nourish-
metit from the soil, and that the benefit of this goes to
the grantee”.

The change proposed in the earlier Report is not,
therefore, necessary now, and can be dropped.t-?

(b) Fruit and Juice —The earlier Report proposed Fruit ud
to exclude, from “immovable property”, “fruit upon and Mice
juice in trees whether in existence or to grow in
future”. The reason given was* that in accordance with
prevailing judicial opinion, it should be made clear that
fruits upon and juice in trees should not be considered
as immovable property whether they exist at the date
of the contract or are to grow in future. It may be
noted‘, that even now, fruits upon and juice jn trees are
excluded from “immovable property”, because of their
inclusion in the expression “immovable property” in
existing section 2(9}, Thus, the only change is the addi-
tion of the words “whether in existence or to grow in
future.”,

__ Now, a comment has been made that a deed confer-
ving right in respect of fruit upon and juice in trees to

1, See also Baijnath v. Ramadhan, A.LR, 1963 All, 214(F B).

3. Mulla (1963), deals with the matter at pages 6-7.

3. Sixth Report, page 9, paragraph 21(B).

4+ cf. Sixth Report, page 74, top, note relating to draft section 2(7).


Machinery

8

grow in future would automatically create a right in the
Yand itself, as the land would provide further nucriment
for their growth. Hence the added words, it is sug-
gested, should be deleted. In reply to this, it may be
pointed out, that it has been specifically held! that
fruits to grow in future are also movable property. It
has also been held? that a lease of trees granted to em-
power the lessee to take the juice of the tree is mova-
bie property.

While it is true that the fruits derive sustenance
from the land, they have to be ultimately detached from
the Iand in all cases. Hence the proposed clarification
is useful*

It has also been stated, that the words “grown in
future” would not be appropriate for juice, because
juice does not “grow”. But we found that it was not
easy to devise a happier expression, and, therefore, no.
change in the wording proposed in the Sixth Report on.
this point is necessary.

Regarding fruits, the earlier Report? cited an
Allahabad decision’.

As pointed out in the Allahabad case, the earlier
eases were decided wnder the old Act. Therefore,
strictly speaking, there is no conflict of decision. How-
ever, the change proposed in the Sixth Report is a good
clarification. The clarification regarding fruit as well
as juice should, however, be added in the definition of
“movable property?”.

(९०0 Machinery—The Commission had proposed in
the earlier Report that “machinery” be excluded from
the gecinition of “iramovable property”, in these
words: —

“machinery embodied in or attached to the
earth when dealt with apart from the land”,

It was explained in the earlier Report’, that hard-
ship is caused where machinery embodied in or attach-
ed to the earth is sold without the land and is treated
as immovable property. The purchaser has to pay stamp

1. Raja Devi v. Muhammad Yakub, I.L.R. 47 All 738; AJR, 1925 Al~

41s (Mango crops).

2. Janoo v. Hucha, (Bengal), (1868) t2W.R, 366; cited in Mulla, (1953),

page 16.

3. Mulla, (1963), deals with the subject at page 16.

4. Sixth Report, page 9.

§. Raja Devi x. Vakub, LL.R. 47 All. 738; ALR. 1925 All. art
6. See section २9); a proposed to be amended.

7. Sixth Report, page 9, paragraph 21(B).


duty on the machinery as well as on the land, to get.
the document registered. To avoid this hardship, this.
clarificatioh was proposed. Now, divergent comments
have been received on this change. On the one hand,
it has been suggested, that the proposal to treat such.
machinery as movable property will give chances to
people to evade stamp duty and registration fee, by
deliberately executing separate documents for land and
for machinery, even though the machinery is embodied.
in the earth, etc. On the other hand, it has been sug-
gested in some comments, that the words “when dealt.
with apart from land”, should be deleted, thus making.
all machinery movable property, even if sold with the
land, There does not appear to be much force in the
first objection. If machinery is dealt with separately,
it should, on principle, be treated as movable property.
In fact, even now the degree and object of annexation
is an element to be taken into account! Thig is also-
fairly clear from the words “permanently fastened,.
ete”, .

We may, by way of example, refer to the case of a
fiour mill. It can change hands and be removed, while,
as has been pointed out?, a house cannot be removed.
without demolition. The degree and object of annex-
ation are the tests usually applied, If the machinery is
dealt with separately, it stands to reason that it should
be regarded as movable’, This disposes of the second
point also. No change in the proposed provision is re-
commended, The proposed change be accepted.

(d) Other points —A suggestion has been made
that stock-in-trade or share may be excluded from
“immovable property’. No such clarification is neces-
sary’.

It may be added that the re-arrangement of items
of “immovable property”, and the omission of “mov-
able property”, proposed in the earlier Report, does not
appear to be necessary. The definition of movable pro-
perty may better be retained in view of its affirmative
value,

The difinition of “India” was retained in the Sixth Clause 208)
Report. But our view is, that the definition should be —Ezisting

tv 15, ie iti i isi section 2
omitted’. The definition is derogatory to the provisions of (6A)-Defini
ton of

1. Mulla, (1963), page 6, text corresponding to footnotes (h), (i), (j). “India”

2. of. Khan Chand v. Nur Muhammad, A.1.R. 1966 Lah. 242.

3. This aspect was not discussed in Mohammad Ibrahim v. N.O.F.T.C.,
A.LR. 1944 Mad 492.

4. See also discussion relating to clause 3, and relating to omitted section
27(2060.

5» See section 2(6A), as proposed to be omitted,



10

the Constitution. The expression “India’’, occurring else-
where in the Act, will, in our opinion, be construed in
accordance with the extant clause. The fear that, if the de-
finition is omitted, the definition in the General Clauses Act
will apply, is not well-founded, It is also our view, that the
expression “India” occurring in the various sections need
not be replaced by “territories to which this Act extends”.

The existing definition of “lease” in section 2(7) says,
that it includes a counterpart, kebuliyet, an undertaking
to cultivate or occupy, and an agreement to lease; instead of
this, a new definition has been proposed 1n the earlier Re-
port—clause 2(9)—as follows: —

Clause 2(9)

“le:

‘ ‘Jease” has the same meaning as in the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882, and includes a counterpart’,

The differences between the existing and the definition
proposed in the Sixth Report may be anzlysed as follows: —

(i) The existing definition is merely an inclusive
one, while the proposed definition adopts the definition
in the Transfer of Property Act.

This has not provoked any comment. The
expression “lease” in the Registration Act has
been held to bear much the same meaning as
in the Transfer of Property Act’, and that was also
the reason for making the change*. We are not how-
ever in favour of this change particularly if the whole
Act is not to be re-enacted.

(ii) The existing definiticn expressly includes an
agreement to lease. The Sixth Report proposed its
omission, because, as explained in the earlier Report’
this had been interpreted by the Privy Council‘ as con-
fined to an agreement to lease which creates « present
and immediate interest in the land i.e. one which effects
an actual demise and operates as a lease. That being
the position, it was considered unnecessary to retain the
expression in the definition. This change also has not
provoked any comment, and we may, further, note that
after the Sixth Report was submitted, the Supreme
Court’ has also reaffirmed the view expressed by the
Privy Council.

(iii) The existing definition includes not only a
counterpart, but also a Kabuliyat, an undertaling to
cultivate or occupy and an agreement to lease. The

1, Mulla, (1963), page 8.
2. Sixth Report, page 10, paragraph 21(c).
3. Sixth Report, page 10, paragraph 21(c)
e cf Hemanta Kumari’s case (1919), 46 LA. 240; J.L.R. 47 Cal. 485.
8. Trivenibai v. Lilabai, (1959) S.C.R. 833; A.LR. 1989 S.C, 620 (also
states the meaning of “Counterpart”, See page 624i the ATR.)


iL

definition proposed in the earlier Report includes only
“counterpart”. A comment has becn received to the
effect that “counterpart” should not be included, be-~
cause the “counterpart” which is to be executed by the
tenant in favour of the lessor does not involve any trans-
fer of property. While this may be theoretically
correct, one must also take into account the practical
aspect, namely, that often landlords are in the habit of
letting out immovable property merely on documents
signed by the lessee alone. Ip areas to which or cases
in which the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 applies,
this cannot happen, because section 107 of that Act (as
amended in 1929) provides, that where a lease is made
by registered instrument, the instrument must be exe-
cuted by both the lessor and the lessee. But in other
cases the document merely signed by the lessee can
still be met with. It is, therefore, advisable to retain
the inclusive part dealing with “counterpart”.

An express provision was proposed! in the earlier
Report to the effect, that the “counterpart” need not be
registered, where the lease corresponding thereto has
been registered’.

The existing words referring to “Kabuliyat”, and “under-
taking to cultivate or occupy’, were omitied in the draft
proposed in the Sixth Report*. These transactions might,
at first sight, appear to be covere? by “counterpart”. But
this is not strictly true’. It is safer to mention them speci-
fically, because these documents—namely, (i) a Kabuliyat
or a rent deed in which a person assents in writing to pay
rent in respect of the land rented to him, and (ii) an under-
taking to cultivate or occupy—have figured often before
the Courts®, These should, therefore, be retained, in the
absence of an express inclusive provision, a lease does not
inelude a Kabuliyat*.

The result of the above discussion is, that the only point
on which we recommend a change in existing section 2(7)
is omission of agreement to lease’.

Clause 2(10), following existing section 2(8), defines Clause +117)
“minor” as a person who, according to the personal lew to ~~ N8e
which he is subject, has not attained majority. A suggestion

1. Sixth Report, page 43, clause 3(2)(d), and reasons at page 18, para-
graph 42.

2. See discussion regarding clause 3(2)(d).
3. The earlier Report gives no specific reasons for this omis-

sion.

4. See discussion relating to counterpart.

5. See Mulla, (1963), page 10.

6, See Ruitomji, Registration Act, (1939), page 17, footnote 2.

7. Ses amendment proposed to section 2(7)


Clause 2--
‘movable
पक | aa

ited in

Report)
Clause 2(11)
~" Prescri-
bed” (New)

Clause 2(12)
‘Repre-
sentative”

2

has been made, that there need not be any reference to
personal law, and that for the purposes of this Act, mino-
rity may be defined as in Indian Majority Act. Now, the
significance of the definition would become apparent if we
consider, by way of example, one provision wherein the
expression “minor” occurs. Thus, under existing sectin:.
35(3)(b)—clause 21(2)(iii)—if a person by whom the docu-
ment is executed, appears to be a minor, etc., registration
has to be refused. Will anything be gained by referring to
the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875)? That Act does
not contain the whole law of majority. In the first place,
it does not affect the capacity of any person to act in respect
of marriage, dower, divorce, adoption and certain religious
matters (section 2). In the second place, even as regards
other matters, it applies only to persons domiciled in India
(section 3, second para). Documents which come for regis-
tration may relate to matters excluded from the Majority
Act, or may have been executed by persons not domiciled
in India. Therefore, the substitution of a reference to the
Majority Act may not improve matters. Hence we do not
suggest any change.

The definition of “movable property” should be retained,
though omitted in the Sixth Report’, Certain edditions
may be made therein, as already recommended*.

The definition of “prescribed”, added by the Sixth
Report, may, if the word “prescribed” is used in the subs-
tantive’ sections, be added‘

Existing section 2(1) defines a “representative” a3 includ-
ing the guardian of a minor and the committee or other
legal curator of a lunatic or idiot. Proposed clause 2(12)
of the earlier Report redrafts the definition by making it
more elaborate in the case of a minar, It is defined as
including, in the case of a minor, his guardian, or in his
absence, any near relation of the minor, or if the minor is
an adopted son, any near relation in the adoptive or natural
family, or, if the minor is a widow, any near relaticn in the
family of the father or husband, being in each cose a relation
not having any interest adverse to that of the minor.

The reason for this change was thus explained in the
earlier Report’. A will or authority for adoption can be
presented for registration after the death of the testator or
the donor of the authority. Difficulties, however, arise when

1. See discussion under clause 2(7) above.

2. See discussion under clause 2(7) above.

3. This change is thus conditional to the use of the expression
“prescribed”.

4. See section 2(9A), as proposed to be inserted.

5. Sixth Report, page 10, paragraph 21(d).


13

the donor of the authority is a minor and thus incapable
of presenting the deed of authority to adopt. Similarly,
the widow of the donor might be a minor. In the case of
a minor adopted son, it had been held that the natural
father could validly present the document for registration.
Since the improper presentation of a document was a radi-
eal defect rendering the document void, the Report had
enlarged the scope of the present definition to get over this
difficulty. (The recommendation was subject to the dissent-
ing note of Dr. Sen Gupta.)

Now, this change has provoked numerous comments,
and the points raised in the various comments can be con-
veniently classified and collected as follows: —

(a) The use of the expression “near relation” has
been strongly criticised as vague and elastic. It has
heen suggested, that either the degree of nearness of
relationship should be specified, or a list of relations in
the order of preference should be given. Courts, it is
argued, might find it difficult to determine who is a
ner relation and who is not.

(b) Secondly, it has been pointed out, that the
wirening of the definition will involve a scrambling over
the properties of such minors. To permit any near
relative to represent a minor would take away the safe-
guards of the rights of a minor. The proposed change,
it has been also said, is fraught with grave consequences
and may be abused by designing relatives and would
jecpardise the interests of minors. The retention of
the existing provision, has, therefore, been pressed for.

(c) Several comments have expressed agreement
with the dissenting note of Dr. Sen Gupta’. His view
was, that to allow representation to any relation was
going too far. Practically, any relation may core for-
ward and present the document, although the minor
concerned is living with another relation who looks
alter all his affairs, Presentation of a document was
a responsible act which bound the minor. If at all any
amendment was necessary, it would, in his opinion, be
enough to add to the definition a clause saying that
where a minor has no legal guardian, any person who
may, in the circumstances, be regarded as a ce-fucto
guurdian may present a document for registration, The
majority report*, had rejected this suggestion because
(i) the Muslim Law did not recognise a de facto guar-
dian, and (ii) as regards the Hindu law, the nature of
the acts of management from which a guardianship
could be inferred had not been laid down clearly, and,
further, section 11 of the Hindu Minority and Guardian-
hip Act, 1956 had now provided that such a guardian

. Sixth Report, page 97.
2. Sixth Report, page 11, top.


M4

would not be entitled to deal with the minor's pro-
perty. But, in Dr. Sen Gupta’s opinion, this legal posi-
tion need not come in the way of the suggestion
regarding de facto guardian. The absence of a power to
dispose of a property should not, he stated, affect the
right of a guardian to present a document for regis-
tration if that was expressly provided in this Act.
That would be a special provision overriding the
general law.

(३) A small group of comments seems to be in
favour of the proposed change, and in fact, even exten-
sion of the proposed change to lunatics and idiots has
been suggested. One comment suggests that it should
apply to cases of failure to act by the guardian also.
Another comment suggests an  alternative—-namely,
that the Registration authority may, after preliminary
inquiry, record a capable and desirable person as a
person competent to present the document,

In view of these comments, the choices now before
us are

(i) maintaining the change proposed ir the 6th
Report;

or
(ii) retaining the existing section;
or

(iii) extending the change proposed ५० luna-
tics and idiots;

or

{iv) adopting a substituted provision, for
authorising a de facto guardian to present the
document, as suggested by Dr. Sen Gupta.

The first course has to be abandoned, as there has
been very strong opposition to the change proposed.
There seems to be some force in the reasoning behind
the comments. The need for defining a “near” relation
would appear to be imperative. And, even after such
definition, the possibility of abuse cannot be ruled out
The third course should be rejected, on the same
reasoning, The fourth course,—substitution of a de
facto guardian,—is attractive. But, in practice, it may
also lead to controversies as to who is a de facto
guardian. Having regard to the fact that authorities
to adopt will now be very rare after the passing of the
Hindu Adoptions, ete. Act, 1956——Section 8 et seg-—
there would net be any strong necessity for a clari-
fication on the subject. Therefore, the best course
would be to retain the existing section.


15

{If any change, however, is to be made, then, just
as the case of absence of the guardian is proposed to
be covered, the case of failure to act by the guardians
should also be covered, because, as the section stands
now, if the guardian omits to act for his own reasons,
the case is left uncovered. In fact, the cases of the
guardian not being in existence or being absent or
refusing to act or for any cause being unable or unfit
to act, should all be provided for. In such cases, the
permission of the “court” ag defined in section ACBY
read with section 4(4) of the Guardians and Wards Act,
1890, should suffice for acting as guardian for the
limited purpose of presentation for registration and
other functions under the Act-—for example, under
existing section 77, We are making this suggestion as
an alternative, if the section is to be altered in any
manner. |

Some new points regarding the definition clause have Cliuse2~

been made in the comments. Thus, a suggestion has been New points
made that the words “instrument” and “document” should
be defined. There does not, however, appear te be any
strong necessity for defining these expressions. Ordi-
narily, “document” and “instrument’’ are inter-changeable’,
Not many controversies seem to have arisen on these
expressions, except that there is some conflict of decisions
about, letters". A decree, it has been held, is not an instru-
ment”.

Even as regards letters, the more recent cases’ appear
to regard “letters” as falling within “instruments” if they
contain the terms of the agreement,

A definition of “instrument” does not, therefore, appear
to be needed.

Existing section 17(1) provides for the compulsory regis- Clause 3(1)
tration of instruments of gifts of immovable property. The (80 Instru-
earlier Report proposed a wider provision in its place. to Mir fs re
the effect, that instruments which under any law require Registration
registration for giving validity to the transaction effected under any
thereby should be registered. The reason for this change® /a¥, for lidi
was, that it was proposed to substitute a clause which was +! validity
wider in scope to include all documents which are required
by the substantive law to be registered for giving validity
to the transaction. Comments have been received to the
effect, that the words “for giving validity to the transaction
effected thereby” would lead to a good deal of controversy

1, See Foharmal v, Tej Ram, (1893) LL.R. 17, Bom. 235, 267.

2. See Mulla, (1963), page 30.

3.Kalawati. v. Shri Krishna, ALR. 1944 Oudh, 49, 53 (F.B.).

4. See Fagannadhan ¥. Official Assignee, A.LR. 1931 Mad. 124,
127, 128.

5. of. Sixth Report, page 12 paragraph 25, and page 74.


16

and vagueness. It has also been suggested, that the words
“required to be registered” will serve the purpose. We
considered this question at some length. The proposed
extension of existing section 17(1) to transactions required
to be registered under (any other) law, is, in ovr opinion,
not necessary. Where registration is required under a
statute other than the Registration Act itself, the conse-
quences of non-registration will depend on the terms of the
statute. As regards trusts, see the undermentioned cases,
where these observations occur:—

“Section 8, Trust Act, provides its own sanction
for non-registration, viz., invalidity?-"”.

The proposed change may, therefore, be dropped.

Another comment received is to the cffect that the
following proviso should be added to clause 3 (1) (a)*:—

“Provided that where a transaction con be validly
effected orally or by mere delivery Of possession of
property, instruments recording the terms of such
transaction shall not be required to be registered”,

The suggestion seems to have been made in view of the
fact, that very often courts have to deal with cases on
which the transaction has been already effected and the
document merely records it. There is, however, no defect
in the law on this point, and the difficulties that have been
experienced can be attributed to the problem of applying
the provision’, No change is recommended, as to this
point!

Ona? Clause 3(1)(b), corresponds to existing section 17(1)(b),
testamentary and deals with non-testamentary instruments affecting
instruments immovable property of the value of ene hundred rupees
generally and upwards. The minimum limit of one hundred rupees
has been retained, as in the existing section. Comments
have been received to the effect, that in the present con-

जा]. “Govind Ram v. Madan Gopal, 721-A 76, A.LR. 1945 PC. 66,74
2 As to Wakfs, see Mulla, Mahamedan Law, (1961), page 165,
paragraph 187.

3. As to registration required under sections 54, 59, 107 and 123 of the
‘Transfer of Property Act 1882, see Mulla, Registration Act, (1963), pages
172-173, and section 49 of the Registration Act as it now stands.

4. See also article by Mr. V.B. Raju (as he then was) “Amendments to
Registration Act”, ALR. 1958 Journal 68, 69.

3. See for example, Mulla, (1963),
@ page 34, “Declare”,
Gi) page 49 Acknowledgement,
(i) pages 4०, 42. (Mortgage by deposit of litle deeds).
i “Recitals”.
a 3s, कया,
6. See also Raw Rattan v. Parmanand 1.1२, 1946 Lah. 633 AIR.
ToI6 B.C. St.


17

text of high prices this limit is ridiculously low, and to
give practical relief it should be raised to five hundred
rupees. (One comment suggests its raising to two hundred
rupees).

The existing provision was considered in the earlier
Report!, where (though there is no specific discussion as
to increase of the limit), the view expressed was, that the
time may come for removing the exemption in respect of
instruments where the value is below one hundred rupees.
If the exemption is removed, it would mean that even for
a transaction of smaller value there should be documents
requiring both stamp duty and registration fees. It was,
however, observed, that this could not be effected without
amending the Transfer of Property Act, under which a
sale or mortgage does not require even a writing if the
value is under one hundred rupees. Since the question
whether the limit should be removed from the Act was
one of policy and required careful consideration, the pro-
vision in the Registration Act, it was stated, “may be
retained for the present”,

In this position, a change in the existing limit need not
be considered for the present.

Another suggestion is, that transactions relating to
immovable property like partition, release, sale, etc. for
less than one hundred rupees, should be effected only by
registered documents, This also cannot be considered for
the present, for the reasons given above.

Clause 3({1)(b)—substitute the words “affect immovable
property”. This change has to be dropped’.

Follewing existing section 17({i}(d), clause 3(1)€c) Clause 3(1)
reguires registration of leases from year to year, ete., sub- (©) leases
ject to the existing proviso whereunder the State Govern-
ment can grant exemption from the operation of _ this
clause in any district, ete. where the per:od of the lease
does not exceed 5 years and the annual rent does not exceed
Rs, 50. One comment suggests that the limit of Rs. 50 may
be replaced by Rs. 100. Another comment suggests that,
to avoid disputes regarding genuineness or otherwise of
agricultural leases, compulsory registration of such leases
should be provided’ for.

Though these points were not specifically considered in
the earlier Report, the trend of that Report? was, that the
proviso was an enabling provision for the benefit of agri-
culturists, and should be retained to obviate the necessity
of getting such leases registered. The commented pro-
visions in the Transfer of Property Act, sections 107 and

1, Sixth Report, pages 11, 12, paragraph 26.

2. See above, discussion retating to clause 2(2).

3. Sixth Report, page 14, paragraph 31
3—109 M of Law.


@)~A
ments
decrecs

Glass 30) .
of

Clause 3(1)
—Explane-
tions

Omission of
section,
IH ENC)

18

117, were also considered. Moreover, a drasti¢ provision re-
quiring all agricultural leases to be registered would mean
that even such leases from month to month or for a year or
less than a year should also be registered,—which would be
an extreme position to take. Hence no change is suggested
on this point,

We do not also think it neecssary to increase the limit
of Rs. 50 in section 17(1), proviso.

Departing from existing section 17(1)(e), clause
3(1)(d) provides that assignment of “executable decrees or
orders” need not be registered. A few comments have been
received to the effect, that the existing provision should
be retained. Now, the reason for this Sh ange, as stated in
the earlier Report', was, that, in the case of executable
decrees or or ders, the transferee has, under Order 21,
rule 16, Civil Procedure Code, to satisfy the court about
the assignment; the further requirement of registration
was, therefore, unnecessary, as, even if the assignment is
registered, the court has to inquire into its validity. We
feel, however, that every case of assignment may not go to
court, and even if it goes to court, registration of the assign-
ment may supply good evidence. The proposed change
should, therefore, be dropped.

Clause 3(1) Explanations.—The First. Explanation to
clause 3(1) is new.? It may create difficulties, and should
be dropped. Existing section 17(1)(c) was proposed’ to be
omitted.

Clause 3(1)—Omission of existing section 17 (11 {c).—
Existing section 17 (1) (c) has been omitted in the 6th Re-
port’. Its omission was linked up with the proposed exten-
sion of the Transfer of Property Act to whole of India.
Extension of the Transfer of Property Act may, however,
take long time. The omitted provision should, therefore,
be restored.

The Sixth Report, as an alternative, suggested a redraft
of section 17(1) (c), to make it clear that it does not apply
to receipts in respect of transactions already registered.
This is also not necessary, as there is no real conflict of
decisions’.

Existing section 17 (1) (०) may, therefore, be restored,
as it is.

1, Sixth Report, page 15, paragraph 32.
a Sixth Report, page 74, bottom, Sze Mulla (1963), page 37 for
ict.

3. Sixth Report, page 13, paragraph 29-30.
4. Sixth Report, page 14, paragraph 30.

5. See Chamron Saku v. Stephen, A.LR. 1947 Pat. 300, 30, 302, para-
graphs 8-9 (Reviews case-law).


19

A suggestion has been made that a deed, lists of parti- Clause 3 (1)
tion relsing to immovable property should be registered. New points
This cannot be accepted. It is true, that in practice ques-
tions very often arise whether a document is a deed of
partition or whether it merely recites a partition already
orally effected. The distinction between an acknowledg-
ment of partition on the one hand and an instrument of
partition on the other hand, is well known, and though
there may be difficulty in applying the principles, yet the
principles are well-established. If the document is the
sole evidence of the partition, it is registrable; otherwise it
is not?

It is true that previously there was some conflict of
decisions on the point whether an unregistered instrument
of partition could be used to prove that the parties ceased
to be joint. The matter is now settled by a Supreme Court
decision, answering the question in the affirmative.t

A few points regarding partition have been already dis-
cussed?

Clause 3(2) (a)—Regarding clause 3(2) (a) which fol-
lows existing section 17(2) (iti), a suggestion has been re- Clause3(2a)
ceived to the effect that “debenture” and “debenture stock”
appeared to be different from each other and therefore,
“debenture stock” should be added in the definition of the
word “debenture”.

This appears to he unnecessary. Debenture stock is of
the same nature’ as ordinary debentures, except that ins-
tead of each bond securing a definite amount, the whole
sum secured is treated as a single stock, and a certificate
is issued to each holder declaring the holder to be entitled
to a definite part of the stock,’

The verbal changes, however, made by Sixth Report are
not necessary, and may be dropped,

Clause 3(2)(6)—The verbal changes? made by Sixth
Report are not necessary, and may be dropped. Glamsea(2)(b)

1, See the Privy Council case of Bageshwari Charan v. Jagarnath Kuart
$9 LA. 1303 ALR. 1932 P.C. 55, 66; 1L.R. Il Pat. 272, adverting to the
distinction between a mere recital of fact and something, which itself creates
a title, This was a decision on the word “Declared”.

2. See also Mulla, (1963), pages 34-35.

3. See, for example, the decisions collected in Panchapages vy. Kalvan
Sundaram, से... 1957 Madras 472, 477 ta 481, ray h 74 et. seq.
also Mulla, (1963), Page 49. NO PRABESDE ख था Sedo Sees

4. Nant Bai* y. Gita Bai (1959) S.C.R. 479; A.T.R. 1958 S.C. 706.

5. See discussion under clause 3(7)(4).

6, Murray v. Berring, (1908) W.N. 1535 (1908) 2 Ch. 493.

7. For details see Jowitt, Dictionary of English law, (1959), Vol. 15
Page 580. .

8. Sixth Report, page 17, paragraph 37.


Claus
Sree?

20

Under existing section 17(2}(xi), any endorsement
on a mortgage-deed acknowledging the payment of

ea hing the whole or any part of the mortgage-money, and

mortgage.

any other receipt for payment of money due under a mort-
gage, when the receipt does not Burport to extinguish the
meee ge, is exempt from compulsory registration. Pro-

clause 3(2) &) omits the words “when the reevip [21
does not purport to extinguish the mortgage”. The result
of this change would be, that even a receipt extinguishing
a mortgage—cr rather, “purporting” to do so—would be
exempt from compulsory registration. The reason for this
change, as explained in the earlier Report’, was, that a
mortgagee may while receiving the last payment due on
the mortgage or any sum lesser than the mortgage of debt,
issue a receipt acknowledging the discharge of the debt in
fuli by such receipt. “There is no reason why the receipt
should become compulsorily registrable merely because it
also states the fact that by the payment recited therein
in the debt is finally extinguished”. A person having
notice of the registered mortgage (it was stated) would
naturally inquire whether it is extinguished or not. More-
over, it is not the receipt which discharges the security, but
the fact of the discharge of the debt. Hence it was consi-
dered unnecessary to require registration of receipts in
such cases,

This change has provoked the comment, that there-
under, if a property is once mortgaged it would continue
to be shown as mortgaged even after it is extinguished by
acknowledgment of receipt on the deed, and the sugges-
tion has been made that the existing provision should be
retained without change. So far as the reasoni on
which this particular comment is based is concerne ode it
may be pointed out that even now, in the absence of 8 re-
ceipt which purports to extinguish the mortgage, the pos-
sibility of the property continuing to be shown as mort-
gaged would be there.

The matter, however, is not so simple as it seems, and
it seems desirable to state the history of the section and
the interpretation placed on it by courts. As explained by
Mulls’, this provision was inserted for the first time in
Act of 1877 by the Amending Act 7 of 1886, and the objects
of the amendment was negative, namely, to supersede the
decisions to the effect that a mere receipt for payment of
money under a mortgage reuired registration even though
it did not extinguish the mortgage’s interest in the mort-
gaged property®. Thus, the main purpose of the amend-
ment of 1866 was to remove such receipts from corapulsory
registration.

1. Sixth Report, page 18, paragraph 47.

2. Mulla, (1963), Pages 96-97.
3. Jawan Ali v. Basa Mal. (1886) LL.R. 9 Alt. 108, 114 (F.B.)


a1

However, in the actual working of the provision, consi-
derable case-law has arisen, which shows the difficulties
felt in its application’.

Three classes of receipts have come up for consideration
before the courts.

(i) A receipt, bare and simple, without any reference
to extinction of the mortgage, This does not at present,
require registration, and the proposed clause preservs that
position. This is what may be called a “bare receipt’.

Gi) A document in which a usufructary mortgagee
recites that his claim has been discharged out of the
usufruct and returns possession to the mortgagor. This
also does not require registration’, as it is only a recital
of a completed transaction.

(iii) A receipt which on the face of it acknowledges the
payment of the amount on account of extinction of the
mortgage. This at present requires registration, but under
the proposed provision, it will not.

The first kind of case presents no difficulty’.

As regards the second class of cases, registration should.
not be complusory, and it is mainly this kind of cases which
was referred to in the earlier Report®,

So far as the third class is concerned, registration is
at present compulsory under section 17(1)(c)*.

The real test is the extinction of the mortgage, and this
test is embodied in apparently clear words in the existig
section. But, in view of the confusing case-law that has
gathered’ round the existing provision it is desirable to ree
emphasise this test, and, with such re-emphasis, retention
of the existing provision would not be contrary to the recom-
mendation made in the body of the earlier Report.

Two other points arise, though they have not been
considered in the ealier Report. The first is about extinc-
tion of-a part of the mortgage. Such a receipt should be
compulsorily registrable; but there is same conflict of case
Jaw’ on the point, a clarification is desirable. The second

1, cf. Mulla (1963), pages 97, 100,

2. ef. Mulla, (1963), page 97.

3. ef. the case in Mulla (2963) page 99, sootnote “(८)”,

4. cf. Veshayyar’ v. Venkayasubhayya, (1881) LL.R. 3 Madras 53

56. .
5. Sixth Report, page 18, paragraph 41, 7th line in the paragraph.

6. See discussion in Totaram v. Harish Chandra, AIR. 1: Nagpu
402, 405. (Vivian Bose J.). 937 Negp

7, See, particularly, Mulla (7963), page 98.
8. Mulls, (1963), page 70०


Clause 3(2)
(d)—Exem-
ption for
counterpart
of a lease.

22

point is , whether the words “when the receipt does not
purport”, etc., are to be read with “any endorsement” also,
‘There is some conflict on this point also and the opinion ex-
pressed by Mulla, that the last words of the clause apply
also to an endorsement, appears to be correct and should
be codified.

We recommend’ that in the light of the above discus-
sion, the existing section be suitably re-drafted.

Clause 3(2) (d) proposes a provision ia the effect, that
where a lease is registered, its counterpart is exerapt from
registration. This was proposed for reasons* which may be
thus summarised. In areas to which the Transfer of Pro-
yerty Act does not apply, a lease may have a counterpart.
If the lease is registered, there is no reason why the counter-
part should also be registered. The proposed adoption’
of the definition of “lease” from section 105 of the Transfer
of Property Act would not (it was stated) make any diffe-
rence, because the Report did not propose extension of the
procedure of executing a lease (as contained in section 107
of the Transfer of Property Act) to all leases.

This recommendation was subject to the dissenting
note of Dr. Sen Gupta’. Since some comments have ex-
pressed agreement with his views, we shall first discuss
his points. His objection was, that since the definition
of “lease” in the Transfer of Property Act had been adopted,
and since, under that Act, a lease must be executed
by both parties, there cannot be a countezpart to
such a lease, though there may be a duplicate copy, and
the proposed clause should be dropped. In his view, by the
force of the definition of “lease” as proposed in the Sixth
Report the definition in the Transfer of Property Act must
be deemed to be incorporated in the Registration Act, and
the fact that the Transfer of Property Act does rot apply
would be absolutely immaterial.

Now, the existing Act (or the proposed Bill) (in he Sixth
Report) does not anywhere say that a lease must be execut-
ed in a particular manner. The nature of the document to
be regarded as a lease is the only topic on which a borrow-
ing is made from the Transfer of Property Act. Ii a docu-
ment falls within “lease” as known to the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act, (i.¢., briefly, a transfer of a right to enjoy immov-
able property for a certain time or for perpetuity in con-
sideration of price, money, etc., or other thing of value),

1. Mulla, (1963); page 98.

2. See amendment proposed to section 17(2)(x2).
3. of. Sixth Report, pages 18-19, paragraph 42.
4. See clause 2(9), in the Sixth Report.
5. Sixth Report, pages 95-96.


23

then it becomes registrable. The further provision in sec-
tion 107 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

(i) certain leases can be made only by registered
instruments;

(ii) other leases can be made by registered instru-
ments or by oral agreement and delivery of possession;

Gii) where a lease is made by a registered instru-
ment, the instrument or, (if more instruments, than
one, each instrument) should be executed by the
lesscr and the lessee—does not become extended to all
areas to which the Registration Act applies.

Therefore, in other areas, it is still possible fo enter into
a lease by virtue of an instrument not signed by both par-
ties. If, in such a case, the lease has been registered, the
counterpart should not require reyistration, [t must also
be noted, that the definition of “lease” as proposed includes
a counterpart’, and, therefore, in the absence of an exempt-
ing provision, counterparts would require registration.
Hence, theoretically the change proposed in the Sixth
Report is not objectionable,

There are, however, some practical consideration, to be
borne in mind. It would seem, that “counterpart” means a
duplicate’. Strictly speaking, the counterparts are two
pieces of one entire parchment or paper on which the con-
tract is engrossed in duplicate, and the two parts together
constitute a contract by deed. But, in common parlance,
the document signed by the grantor is called the original,
and that signed by the party accepting the estate, is called
the counterpart. Now, it is true, that in the case of a lease
governed by the Transfer of Property Act, both the parties
have to sign the lease, so that, the need for a counterpart
does not arise. However, in cases not governed by the Trans-
fer of Property Act, it is possible to have counterparts of
leases,

The distinction between a “counterpart”, on the one
hand, and a mere undertaking by the lessee, on the other
hand, would seem to lie in this—that, ina “counterpart”
the text is the same as in the original, while in the
“undertaking”, the text signed by the grantee or lessee
will be different from the text signed by the grantor or
lessor, being expressed in a form appropriate to convenants
meant for signature by the lessee.

Theoretically, therefore, the proposal in the Sixth
Report cannet be objected to. It is, however, not possible

I. See clause 2{g).
2, See the extracts from Stroud and Jowett, infra,



24

to anticipate what practical complications the new exemp-
tion might create. It should also be noted, that the exact
meaning of the expression “counierpart” may not be
easily ascertainable’, and there is a likelihood that the
proposed exemption may be construed as exempting many
other documents which are not counterparts,

Stroud? gives the following definition of “counterpart”—

“(2) The counterparts, or counterpanes, of an in-
denture, are the two pieces of one entire parchraent (or
paper) on which the contract between the parties is
engrossed in duplicate, the piece sealed by one party
being delivered to the other. The two parts put, or con-
sidered as put, together constitute the contract by
deed. In common parlance, however, the counterpart
or counterpane, sealed by the party from whom the
estate, &c., moves, is called the original and the coun-
terpart or counterpane, sealed by the party accepting
the estate &c., is called the counterpart. When both
counterparts, or counterpanes, are sealed and deliver-
ed by each party (which of late years has bean fre-
quently done) they are commonly spoken of as “dupli-
eate originals” (2M. & G. 516, ४8.०.) .

“(3) In the schedules to the Stamp Acts of 1870
(33 and 34 Vic. ९, 97) and 1891 (54 & 55 Vic. ¢. 39)
“duplicate or counterpart” of an instrument is used
88 distinguished from the “originals”.”

Mulla’ in his commentary on the Stamp Act, gives this

definition of “counterpart”—

“Counterpart—The counterparts of an indenture
are the two pieces of one parchment on which the deed
i8 engrossed in duplicate. The piece executed by one
party being delivered to the other so that each may
possess an example of the deed. The two pieces to-
gether constitute the deed but generally the part exe-
cuted by the party who is the obligor, grantor, cr from
whom the estate moves is called the original and the
other the counterpart. Under section 4, however, the
parties may determine for themselves which is the
original and which the counterpart or duplicate.

“The counterpart is as efficacious as the original but
a counterpart stamped under this article would not
be admitted in evi dence unless it were endorsed under
section 16 or unless the original were produced to show
that it was duly stamped.”.

1. See discussion above.
2. Stroud, Judicial Dictionary (1952), Vol. 1, page 295.
3. Mulla, Stamp Act, (1950), page 199.


25
Jowitt states'—

“Counterpart, the corresponding part or duplicate;
the key of a cipher. When the several parts of a deed
(as is almost invariably the case with the lease) are
interchangeably executed by the several parties, that
part or copy which is executed by the grantor is
usually called the original, and the rest are counter-
parts. If a lease and counterpart differ, the ordinary
rule is that the lease prevails, but the rule may be
departed from if the mistake is clearly in the lease*.
The lessee cannot without agreement be made to pay
the costs of the counterpart”,

Under section 2(16) (b) of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899,
a lease includes a Kabuliyat, etc., but not a counterpart
of a lease. A counterpart is chargeable under article 25,
of the Indian Stamp Act, 18996,

It may be noted by the way, that the practice of only
One person (i.e. the tenant) executing a document, or the
landlord executing a document and the tenant also exe-
cuting a Kabuliyat, is not a rare one, as would appear
from the numerous cases relating to rent deeds’.

Incidentally, if a change is made in the definition of
“lease”, if will be necessary to make a consequential
change here, so as to exempt documents besides counter-
parts ic, Kabuliyat, ete.

Another comment received is to the effect that since
“lease” as defined includes counterpart, registration of a
lease will require registration of the counterpart also,
and, therefore, the provision exempting a counterpart is
inconsistent with the definition of lease, This may be
answered by pointing out, that it is for this very reason—
namely, to avoid double registration—that the exemption
is introduced.

A point has further been made, that in areas where the
Transfer of Property Act is not im (0९९, it is necessary
that each counterpart should be registered, so as to provide
information about leases in those areas, This overlooks
the fact that the exemption is operative only where the
lease has itself been registered. If the lease has been

registered, it would itself provide, the necessary
information.

व, Jowitt, Dictionary of English Law, (1959), Vol. 1, page $13.

2. Burchell v, Clark, (1876) 2C.P.D. 88; Matthews v, Smallwood
(1970) 1 Ch, 777.

3. Re Negus, (1895) 1 Ch. 73.

4- See Mulla & Pratt, Indian Stamp Act (1963), page 266.

5. See Mulla, Transfer of Property Act, (1966), page 658, under “Rent
notes", and page 675 under “By both the lessor and the leassee””.

6. See discussion relating to clause 2(9)


Clause 3(2)
(७) and ‘

Clause 367)
Explanation
Gi)

28

A new point has been made in one of the comments,
suggesting the compulsory registration of documents re-
ferred to in existing section 17(2} (v} and existing section
17(2), Explanation, in certain cases, At present, a docu-
ment which merely creates a right to obtain another
document affecting immovable property is not to be re-
gistered, and in particular, a document purporting or
operating to effect a contract for the sale of immovable
property does not require registration merely because it
recites payment of earnest money or purchase-money,
etc. Now, it is stated in one of the comments that trans-
actions in the nature of agreements to sell, re-sell and re-
purchase are entered into in the following circurrstances.
Ax ante-dated agreement (it is stated) is used to avoid
stamp duty on sales, by—

(i) first having a sale deed drawn up for a nomi-
nal amount;

{ii) then executing an unregistered agreement to
re-purchase or sell; and

Gili) then executing a final release of the agree-
ment to repurchase fora substantial consideration.
The rea) consideration for the transaction (it is stated)
is the sum total of the consideration expressed in the
various deeds (sale and release) but payment of
stamp duty is evaded by stamping the fina’ docu~
ment as a “release” and by making use of the snregis-
tered document asa ground for the release. Such
documents should, it is said, be made (compulsorily)
registrable so that three beneficial vesults would
ensue: —

(a) frauds on the public, who may enter inte

a contract for the purchase of property in respect

of which an agreement ६0 sell already exists, may

be prevented;

(b) suits for specific relief would be brought
down;

(९) the revenue will benefit.

These benefits, it is stated, will more than compensate
for the additional expenditure to the registering public. It
has, therefore, been suggested, that clause 3 (2) {e) and
clause 3), Explanation Gi), may accordingly be delet-
ed.

The earlier Report! did consider the matter, briefly. It
proposed no change, because the view taken was that
there was no need to have two registered documents in
receipt of the same transaction. The matter, however,

1. Sixth Report, page 17, paragraph 34.


27

bears closer examination at length, and the following
points should be noted:—

(@ As would appear from the history of the provi-
sion!, the object of the present provision is to save a
person from having to register two deeds in relation
to the same subject matter. This was the reason for
the general provision in existing section 17 (2) (v).

But, since doubts arose as regards agreements to
sell immovable property in view cf decisions holding
that such agreement created an interest in land and
would not fall within the genera] exemption, a
specific provision exempting contracts for the sale of
immovable property was made, which is existing sec-
tion 17(2), Explanation.

(ii) Since an agreement to sell merely gives a
right to obtain another document relating to immov-
able property, creates no interest and cannot be en-
forced against a person who has no notice thereof’,
the question of a fraud on the public has no import-
ance for legal purposes.

(iii) Moreover, the malpractice in question can-
not justify an extreme provision removing the gen-
eral exemption. Such a course would cause unneces-
sary hardship.

(iv) It is a moot point whether the last mention-
ed release of the rights flowing under the agreement
for repurchase does not itself require registration.

(v) In any case, the question of fraud on the
Stamp Act cannot be conclusive in a consideration of
the Registration Law.

{vi) We are not concerned here, it may be noted,
with the question that very often arises, namely,
whether a sale coupled with agreement to re-purchase
can constitute a mortgage’.

For these reasons, no change in the law is recom-
mended on this point.

Existing section 17(2)(vi) to 17(2)(xa), exempt from Clause 32)
registration decrees or orders of court (except in certain (Decree,
cases), grants of immovable property made by the Gov- aes ”
ernment, instruments of partition and other orders passed copies are
by certain public servants. The Sixth Report proposed to 02 be sent
replace this provision by a general exemption in clause under new
3(2) (80, and that general exemption, referred to any ~ aa
decree, etc., instrument, etc., certificate, ete, of which
copies are required to be sent to the Registering officer

1, See Mulla, (1963), pages 74-75-
2, See sections 4o and 54, Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
3. This is discussed in Mulla, (1963), pages 38-40.


28

under the clause corresponding to existing section 89
(clause 42). This change was linked up with the proposal

to expand the scope of existing section 89, by the inclu-

sion therein of a number of other documents. For the pre-

sent Purpose, it is not necessary to examine them im
letail',

The only comment received on clause 3(2)(f) relates to
decrees and orders. It suggests the addition of the words
“except a decree or order expressed to be made on a com-
promise and comprising immovable property other than
that which is the subject-matter of the suit or proceeding”
after “decree or order” in this clause. The words proposed
to be added in the comments are the same as those
contained in existing section 17(2)(vi). This point was
specifically discussed in the earlier Report’, and that Re-
port took the view that since section 17(1)(b) and (c)
teters only to non-testamentary instruments and since a
decree or order is not said to be a non-testamentary ins-
trument, section 17(2) (vi) was a “somewhat curious pro-
vision”,

Further, the Report took the view that it was unneces-
sary to insist that a decree or order of a court relating to
immovable praperty outside the suit should be registered.
It was sufficient if a copy of the decree or order is sent to
the Sub-Registrar under clause 42 corresponding to existing
section 89.

It has been suggested that existing section 17(2)(vi)
dealing with such compromise decrees should not be
deleted’. It is argued that this deletion will increase work
in Registration offices, and also that unscrupulous persons
will cheat the Government by starting a suit comorising
small property and then by obtaining a compromise decree
covering property of a greater value.

All these points will be discussed later‘.

Tt has also been suggested, that since registration of
plaints and Schedules of property is nowhere provided for,
they need not be exempted specifically. But we do not
think that there is any harm if they are mentioned, if the
scheme of clause 42 is maintained.

Clanse 3(3)— _ Clause 3(3), following existing section 1709), provides
Adoption’ that authorities to adopt a son, not conferred by a will and

1. As to the reasons for this change, see the Sixth Report, page 7, (Dis-
cussion, relating to section 89), page 37 (paragraph ror), pages 17 and 18,
(paragraphs 39-40), and regarding section 17(2), pages 75 and 80.

2. Sixth Report, page 17, paragraph 39.

3. The history of the provision is discussed in Mulla, 1963)
pages 83, 85.

4. See comments under clause 42(1).

5. To ०६ considered under clause 42(1).


29

executed after the first day of January, 1872. shall also be
registered. The retention of this provision had been a mat-
ter of some controversy when the earlier Report was pre-
pared, and Dr, Sen Gupta had given a dissenting note on
this point!. Some of the comments have expressed agree-
ment with the views of Dr. Sen Gupta. A few other points
have also been made.

We shall first take up Dr. Sen Gupta’s dissenting note.
His point of view was, that under section 8 of the Hindu
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, a widow does no:
need the authority of anybody else to adopt. Hence the
provision in section 17(3) of Registration Act should be
deleted. The view taken by the majority of the Members
of the Law Commission* was, that the position did not
appear to be clear having regard to the language of that
Act, and, therefore, it was advisable to retain the provi-
sion. But Dr. Sen Gupta thought that the provisions of the
Act were quite clear. Now, section § of the Hindu Adop-
tion, ete., Act authorises any female Hindu (subject to
the provisions of the section) to take a son or daughter in
adoption. Section 6 enumerates the requisites of a valid
adoption, which may be summarised as—

(i) capacity and right to take in adoption;

ii) capacity to give in adoption,

(iii) capacity to be taken in adoption; and

(iv) compliance with other conditions laid down ir.
the Chapter.

These requisites are dealt with in sections 7 to 11. We
are not concerned at present with capacity to take and give
in adoption or to be taken in adoption. (Sections 7, 8 and
10). That leaves only section 11 (other conditions). Section.
11 does not require the authority of anybody else. In fact,
under section 12 of the Act, a person is adopted not as the
ehild of both the parents, but as the child of each parent
or of either of the parents. Section 4 expressly abrogates
the texts or rules of Hindu Law on matters for which pro-
vision is made in the Act. We went into this matter at
80776 length. We share the doubts expressed in the Sixth
Report, and think that the Sixth Report rightly adopted
a cautious approach in the matter.

The points on which we felt doubts were two, namely—

(1) Whether the Hindu Adoptions, etc., Act abro-
gates the rules of Hindu Law under which the hus-
band’s authority to adopt is required in the case of an
adoption by a widow (except in a few States). This
doubt was expressed in the Sixth Revort also.

1. Sixth Report, page 96, bottom and page 97.
2. See Sixth Report, page 19, paragrunh +1


Clause 3(3)
Deeds #e
adoption

30

(ii) Whether the sections in the Hindu Adoption,.
etc., Act about the effect of adoption by a widcw (sec-
tions 12 and 14) make the adopted person the scn of the
widow’s husband also, If not, then it is possible to
argue that the concept of adoption by the widow with
the husband’s authority—under which the adopted son
becomes the son not only of the widow but also of the
deceased—still survives.

Omission of an “authority to adopt” from the Registra-
tion Act may create problems in view of these doubtful
points, and it is advisable to retain the existing provisions,
which, in any case, is harmless.

Authorities to adopt may, therefore, be retained.

Under Hindu Law, a Hindu widow cannot adopt to her-
self!, though the position is different under French law in
respect of a widow domiciled in French India’.

Mulla’s view* is, that under the Hindu Adoption Act
the adoptee (in effect) becomes the son or daughter not only
of the widow but of her deceased husband as छह, The
same view has been taken in two recent decisions**

A suggestion has been made in one of the comments
that since section 10(1) of the 1956 Act allows both a son
and a daughter to be adopted, the word “son” in clause 3(3)
of the Bill should be omitted. In effect, this amounts to the
addition of “daughter” to clause 3(8). As regards this
suggestion, we should point out, that Hindu Law (as amend-
ed by statute) dees not contemplate the adoption of a
daughter (except in the case of Naikins, etc., in Madras).
Clause 3(3) is intended only for Hindu Law as unamended
py statute, and the suggested addition need not, therefore,

e made.

Where an adoption should be made compulsorily regis-
trable was a point which had keen considered in the ear-
lier Report’, But the view taken, was, that unless the
substantive law was altered by providing that registered
instrument shall be required to effect an adoption, such a
provision could not be appropriately enacted in the Regis-
tration Act. It was also noted, that section 16 of the Hindu

1. See caselaw cited in Mulla, Hindu law, (1966), page 479.

2. cf. Natraja Pillai v. C.S. Subbaraya Chettiar, A.1.R. 1950 P.C. 34.

3- Mulla, Hindu Law, (1966), pages 921 and 935.

4. Ankesh Narain पर. Jana Bai, (1965) 67 Bom. Law Reporter 864, 867
(K. K. Desai, and Palekar JJ.).

5. Subash Misir v. Thagai Misir, 81.1. 1967 All. 144, 148, 150, para-
graphs 6 and 7 (S. N. Singh J.)

6. Mulla, Hindu Law, (1966). page $00, paragraph 480 (1) and page 5०45
Paragraph 487.

7. Sixth Report, page 19, paragraph 46.


si

Adoption, ete., Act, 1956 did not go so far, and merely creat-
ed a presumption of a valid adoption where the adoption
was evidenced by a registered deed. The Report* did give
out a hint that “another step forward” could be taken to
provide that an adoption shall be made only by a registered
document. Since this hint has not so far been taken by the
Legislature the comments received to the effect that adop-
tions should be made only under registered documents do
not justify a change in the previous proposals. (These
comments are based on the fact that the 1956 Act does not
provide any ceremonies for adoption, and the comments do
possess some force. But, for the reasons given above, a
change in the law is not proposed?.)

Registration of wills is not at present, compulsory under Clause 3(3)
section 17, but is optional under section [8(e). Clause 3 3५ sey panes?
also follows the existing law in this respect by not requir-
ing registration of wills. A comment has, however, been
received to the effect, that it should be made compulsory,
to facilitate the administration of the Estate Duty Act, 1953,
apart from ensuring the genuineness of the will and so re-
ducing the number of suits for disputed succession. This
suggestion cannot be accepted. Efficient administration of
the Estate Duty Act is not a matter germane to the scope
of the Registration Act. If that logic has to be adopted,
there may be many other documents connected with other
laws whose registration should be recommended. As Te-
gards genuineness of the will, sufficient formalities have

en laid down, in the Succession Act in the form of attes-
tation ete. Moreover, by its very nature a will is a docu-
ment, which—

(i) may be executed in urgent circumstance:
‘ (ii) may be modified frequently; and

(ii) may contain many matters which the cxecut-
ant may like to keep secret.

To make its registration compulsory would be to cause
inconvenience and hardship to the executant. Further,
there may not be one but several beneficiaries who are
concerned; they may not be aware that they are mentioned
in the will, and cannot, therefore, take any steps to insist
on its registration at the time of execution. If their vights
are to be affected because the will is not resistered for no
fault of their own, the position would become rather
unsatisfactory.

1. Sixth Report, page 20, paragraph 46.
6 2, The existing law is stared in Mulla, (1963), Page 19, patagraph

3. of. Mulla, (1963), pages 34 and 106.


Clause 4

Clause s—
Documents
in other
languages

32

Clause 4 deals with optional registration’. The existing
section—section 18(f)—specifically enumerates certain docu-
ments which may be registered, and then puts a residuary
item for other documents. The clause in the Sixth Report
omits the specific enumeration. In our opinion, this saving
of matter is not worthwhile. Existing section may be
retained,

Clause 5, following existing section 19, provides that if
the document presented for registration be in a language
which the Registering Officer does not understand and
which is not commonly used in the district, he shall “re-
fuse to register” the document unless if is accompanied by
a true translation into a language commonly used in the
district and also by a true copy. The following points have
been made in the comments received on this clause: —

(i) The expression “shall refuse to register” should
be clarified—whether it means “returned”, “refused
from registration” or “referred to the Registrar”;

(ii) The proper thing should be to refuse to “accept
the document for registration” rather than refuse “to
register” the document?;

(5) Regarding the expression “language which the
Registering Officer does not understand”, it has been
stated, that the linguistic capabilities of registering
officers differ, and therefore, “English or a language
not commonly used in the district” would be better.
(All Registering Officers, it is said, are expected to
know English).

So far as the first two points are concerned, the ques-
tion is whether there is any difference between “refusal to
register” and “refuse to accept for registration”. Sections
19, 20(1), 21(4), 22(2), 23 main paragraph, 25(1), 26 last line,
35(3) last Hine, 58(2), 7160), 71(2), 73 to 77 are some
of the existing provisions containing the various expres-
sions used regarding refusal. More particularly, one may
contrast existing section 20(1), relating to interlineation,
with existing section 35(3), last line, relating to denial of
execution. The former has been treated in the Act as a
ground for refusal to accept, while the latter has been treat-
ed as a ground for refusal to register.

But it is not certain that the two expressions necessarily
entail different consequences (with reference to the appli-
cability of sections 72, 76 and 77 to the sections containing

1. See Sixth Report, page 20, paragraph 47, and page 75.

2, of. existing section 20, whereunder, if a document contains inter-
{ineations etc. not initiailed, etc., the Registering Officer may “refuse to accept
for registration” the document.


33.

these expressions). Hence, it is not necessary to change
the expression “refuse to register” into “refuse to accept
for registration”.

It may be stated that the only High Court which makes
a distinction in this respect is the Bombay High Court, and
its decisions do not also appear to be uniform’-*.

As regards point No. (iii), its acceptance would mean
narrowing down of the facilities for registration’. If, for
example, in Uttar Pradesh, a document is presented for
registration in Bengali, and the Registering officer is a
Bengali or otherwise knows the language, then under ex-
isting section 19, he need not refuse to register it, but
under the change proposed by the comment, he would be
bound to refuse its registration. The existing provision
need not be disturbed, as it has not caused any difficulty.

Under clauses 5 to 7, a suggestion has been made to the Causes 5to
effect that along with the document to be registered. the 7--Suggested
executant should fill up and sign a standard form of ques- andard
tionnaire, stating whether he has understood the document Sened by
and whether he has voluntarily executed the document thi: execu-
mentioning what is the consideration for the document, and tam
whether the possession has been transferred and so on.

This, however, appears to be a matter which can if consi-
dered desirable be better dealt with by administrative ins-
tructions to the Sub-Registrars to satisfy themselves about
the various salient points. To introduce a statutory provi-
sion requiring the enclosure of a formal document contain-
ing answers to such questions would mean the addition of
one more formality which, in practice, is likely to remain
a formality only. Since the filling up of such questionnaire
would not dispense with the other provisions of the Act re-
garding inquiry as to execution, it would not serve a very
usefuj purpose. No change need, therefore, be made.

Clause 6 deals with the documents containing interlinea- ‘Clause 6—
tions, blanks, etc., and follows existing section 20. A sug: Points for
gestion has been made that a provision should be made for photostar
preserving photostat copies of all documents which are “Fi€s
registered. Such a provision has been made by the Bom-
bay Amendment Act of 1930, which authorises the copying
of documents by means of photostat®, Consequential change
has becn made by Bombay in section 69 by adding clause
(ggg) ( See Bombay Act 35 of 1958), whereunder, a power is

1. See Mulla, (1963), pages 256, 262, 112 and 107.
2. See Kisan Laman v. Dalsukh Mohammad, A.T.R. 1939 Bom. 254,
285 (Reviews cases).
3. For the Madras view, seem
@Krishnaswami v. Nalla Gounder, ALR. 1945 Mad. 309, 310, (€-
versed on atather ground in Nulla Gounder v. Krishnaswant A/1.R.
1945 Mad. 46s.
(i) Gangadara v, Sambasiva, A.I,R. 1918 Mad. 1082.
4. Contrast Mulla, (1963), page 107.
5. See Mulla, (1963), pages 246 to 249.
4-109 M of Law.


Clause 7(1)

Clause 7(2)
< (3)--

description
of property

51]

given to make rules regulating the procedure for transmit-
ting documents for being photographed, etc., etc. This will
be considered at the end?.

Clause 7(1) corresponds to existing section 21(1), and
needs no comments,

Existing section 21(2) and (3) deals with the manner in
which houses and lands should be described ina document
relating to them. Clause 7(2) and (3) proposed certain
changes therein, for the reasons given in the earlier Re-
port’. Since there are several minute points of difference
between the existing section and the proposed clause, and
since numerous points have been made in the comments
received on the clause, it appears to be convenient to dis-
cuss the existing section, the changes proposed by the
earlier Report, the points made in the comments and the
action whieh we recommend thereon, in the form of a
chart, as given below.

_ _ CHART
Existing Change made by cartier Comments Recommendation
section Report reccived on on comments

earlier Report
z 2 3 4

@) Housesin (i) Houses and lands in (i) Some com- General : The
towns to Municipal areas to be ments suggest provision should
bedescrib- described by area, boun- that names, be neither too
edonnor- daries, municipal town  tetritorial divi- elaborate nor
thorother survey number, municipal sions, and di- too sketchy. If
side of the door number (if any) and mensions shau- it is too elabo-
street to street or road they Jd be added. rate there may
which they abut (if anyj—see clause Some com- be mistakes lea-

front, and 7(2) (Sixth Report, page ments statethat ding to contro-
by ‘their 75, bottom, says that no change is  versits®. Ifit is
existing this has been redrafted needed in ex- too sketchy,
and form-. to make it more expli- isting provisions. there may be
¢roccu- cit). (Thus occupancy uncertainty
pancies, is onntted, areas and about identity:

of the property.
A via media
in the form of

and’by | _ boundaries
their num- and (in ad

bers (ifthe ses) lands are covered,

houses are if situated in municip: the Bombay

numbered) _ lities). Amendment! of

—section 21 1958 18 recom-

@) menéed’. Un-
der taat amend-

ment, in city
surveyed areas,
the cadastral
number is to be
mentoned.

1. See discussion under “Suggested new provisions’.
2. Sixth Report, page 75 and page 20, paragraph 48,
3. of. Mulla, (1963), page 110,

4. See Mulla, (1963), page 107.

5. See section 21, as proposed to be amended.


2

Gi) Orher
houses (3.2,
houses not
in towns)
and Saris,
to be des-
eribed by
their names
Gi any?
and a5 be~
ing in the
territoriat

which they
are आप
atc and by
mets.

perficiad

contents,

the road
and otber
properties
on which
they about,
thelr एड"

practicable.
by refers
efice (a
Govern-

ment map

Git Stave
joverni-
ment may,

by rule,
require
that hous~
es (ot be~
ing houses
in towns)
and lands,
‘be descri-
bed, ifor
the purpo~
es OF sec~
sion 23) by
referetice
(9 Govern.
ACN Map
or survey—
section 22
(The
object of
such arule

(i) [5 other play how
sés and lands to be des-
ertbed by area, boundaries,
survey number or pai~
mmaish or other like sumi-
ber, if any alsa and
swhere practicable, by re-
ference to Government
Map of survey emctatse
7) (Thus name, terri
torial division, occupa-
cits and road ets. are
omitted and area znd
bouridaries addad as well
ae survey Number),

GY Section 2२15 is ता:
ied. (1 Repart, page

6 103; says that ३६ is
unnecessary in view of
the changes proposed to
section 22).

Gi} Existing pro-
Visions, it would
appear, have

no diffi.
एज, and may
he retained.

Gis Some com-
sents SURECSt
that names and
tetritoris! divi-
sions be added.
One comment

says that mo

Section 22{7)
should bee
tained. Adap-
Son of Bombay
Act [Gy below?!
will meet the
abject behind
thecomment re-
ceived also,

(i One cow- ६श
ment states that
che only change
Recessasy is ६७
amend sectian
2200, Le thas,
किक STs,

2) the words
“not being houw-
seg In towns"
be omitred ;

(oy after “Gove-
emment map”.
add, “org Go~
vernmenc ot

other?



Clause H4)—>

would be
to make
such des-
ctiption
mandatory 2
It will be
an excep~
tion to (rv)
below.

(iv) Save as (iv) Failure to comply (iv) One com- (iv) Bombay Am~
provided with clause 7(2)(3) does ment suggests, endment Act
by ruje not disentitle registra~ that no change 1958, may be
under sec- tion, if description suffi- should be made adopted®. “The

tion 22(3) cient, etce.—-clause 7(4), on this point. obligation to
—See (tit) proviso, (Sixth Report, give the sratu-
above page 76, top, is silent tory description
failure to about reasons for this will, then, be
comply pasticular change, that mandatory—(a)
with sec- is to say, why the saving in Cicy Surveyed
tion 21(2}, tegarding rule was am- Areas and
(3) not to ited. But section 22(2) (8) in cases Where
disentitle was omitted, and that aruls is made as
thedocu- seems 19 be the reason. per (if) above,

ment to ‘The result of the change

registra- proposed in Sixth Re-
tion, if port is, for rural houses
description and lands, the existing
of the pro-  miandatury’ provision 10
perty is mention” Government
sufficient, — map or surve! Y Cwhen ४०
toidentify directed by the rule), is
the pro- omitted).

perty sec-

tien 22(2).

Clause 7(4), following existing section 21(4), provides
that a non-testamentary document containing a map or
plan of any property comprised therein shall not be accept-
ed for registration unless accompanied by a true copy of
the map or plan etc. An amendment has been suggest-
ed’ in one comment to the effect, that a document regis-
trable in Book 3 containing a map, plan or other diagram
should be accompained by a copy of such map plan or
diagram for being filed in the Registration Of . Now,
Book 3, which is maintained® under existing section 51(1),
is a “Register of wills and authorities to adopt’. Cases
of maps, plans, or other diagrams referred to in such docu-
ments May not be many, and there is no need to make
the suggested change. [If this change is made, a similar

x, Hor examples of such rules, see Mulla, (5963), pages 286, 296.
2, See Mulla, (1963), page 116.

3. See section 22(2), as proposed te be amended.

4. Suggestion of a State Government,

3. See existing section 5101).


37

change should be mude in relation to instruments to be
entered in Book 4.6. practicatly all other documents
not required to be registered!, being in either case docu-
ments which do not relate to immovable property. Con-
sequential changes will then be necessary in the clause”
corresponding to exiting section 61]. It may be pointed
out, that his will cover maps, plans or other diagrams even
if they relate ta movable property.

Under existing section 23, a document other than a will
must be presented for registration within four months
irom the date of its execution. Clause 8(1) reduces this
pe.iod from four months to one month (except for cases in
the proviso relating to presentation of copy of a decree
or order), The reasons for this change were thus stated
in the Sixth Report*:—

“We consider that the period...........should be
reduced to one month. This would reduce the oppor-
tunity to bring ante-dated deeds into existence. It
is also desirable that registration should be prompt.
No serious hardship is likely to be caused, as there
is a power to excuse delay (section 25) and we are
recommending a reduction in the amount of the fine”.

This change has, however provoked various comments,
which can be classified as fotlows:—

(i) One sct of comments presses for the retention
of the existing limit of four months. Reduetion, it
is stated, will work considerable hardship, as one
month's time is too short. Difficulties peculiar to hilly
areas have also been emphasised in some of the com-
ments.

(ii) Another set of commenis suggests that the
reduction should be to the extent of {wo months. It
is aiso stated, that agriculturists (who are concerned
with manv transfers) require time to collect ihe amount
of consideration.

(iii) Still another set of comments suggests an
inerease of the limit to six months

The reasons for which the change was proposed
are not unconvincing. However, having regard to
the comments summarised above, it appears desirable
to retain the existing period.

The proviso to clause 8(1), following cxisting sec-
tion 23, provides that a copy of a decree or order may
be presented within four months from the day on
which the decree or order was made, or where it is

1, See section §1(3).
2. Clause 29.
3. Sixth Report, page 20, paragraph 49.

‘Clause 8(1)
Time ter
presentng
documents


Chiuse 8(2)--
period of
wills

Clause 9—
documenty
executed by
several
persons in
different
times:

appealable, within four months from the day on which
it becomes final. Regarding appealable cases, a com-
ment received suggests the substitution of the words
“where an appeal is preferred”, for the words ‘where
it is appealable”. The object of this change is to
avoid the necessity of the Registrar’s deciding whe-
ther a particular case is appealable or not. Tae effect
of this change would be, that even if the case is not
really appealable, still, if the party in fact files an
appeal, the period would be extended. We are not in
fayour of the proposed change. In most cases, the
expression “where it is appealable’ and the expres-
sion “where the appeal is preferred” will not give
different result.

Clause 8(2), iollowing existing section 27, »rovides
that a will may be presented for deposit or registration
at any time, A comment has been received to the effect
that persons taking under a will should be compelled to
present it for registration within a specific perind after
the death of the testator. A similar suggestion was also
considered in the earlier Report, but rejected in these
words—“We are not inclined to accept the suggest.on'”.

Under existing section 32(1), a person claiming under
a document can present it for registration. The benefi-
eiary under a will may not always come to know quickly
of the disposition in his favour, and the fixing of a period
running from the date of death may cause hardship. No
change, therefore, should be made_as the existing provi-
sion has not caused any legal or administrative di‘ficulty.

Clause 9, corresponding to existing section 24, deals
with the cases where there are several persons executing
a document at different times. While maintaining the
main provision that the document should be presented for
registration within the specified period from the date of
each execution, the clause differs from the existing sec-
tion in two respects—

(i) the existing section mentions “re-registra-
tion” also, while it is omitted in the draft clause;

(ii) the period is reduced from four months to
one month.

The omission of “re-registration” was ‘ecom-
mended in the Sixth Report?, as a consequential
change, presumably because the section dealing with
“re-registration”’—existing section 23A—had been re-
commended to be omitted’, Comments, however,
nave been received to the effect that section 24 should
३. Sixth Report, page 21, paragraph 54.

2. Sixch Report, page 21, paragraph डा.
3. Sixth Report, page 20, paragraph 50.



39 *

be retained as it is. It is also stated, that the “re-
registration” referred to in existing section 2328 is for
curing defects due to presentation by unauthorised
person, while “re-registration” under section 24 is in
respect of a document which is atready registered
once, where re-registration becomes necessary be-
cause of its being re-executed by a different party.

The comment appears to be justified by case law.
Section 24 has been interpreted as contemplating a
partial registration of a deed! Thus, in a Privy Coun-
eil case”, three vendors, living at different places exe-
cuted a deed at different times, Vendors No.1 and 2
admitted its execution, and the deed was registered.
Vendor No. 3 then came and denied execution, but still
the registiation as regards No. 1 and 2 was held to
remain valid. In fact, section 35 was amended after
this decision, by inserting the words “as to the person
so defying appearing, or dead”, thus giving legisla-
tive sanction to the Privy Council’s pronouncement.
Sce also the following decisions*-', upholding par-
tial registration. The reference to re-registration
should, therefore be restored. As regards period, the
change proposed, is linked up with the period for
presentation allowed under clause &(1). If that is not
changed®, the period under clause 9 should also not
be changed.

Existing section 25 (1) provides that if, owing to urgent
necessity or unavoidable accident, any document, etc., is Clause 1o—
not presented within the prescribed time, then the Regis- delay in
trar, in cases where the delay does not exceed four presentation
months, may direct that on payment of a fine not exceed-
ing ten times the amount of the proper registration fee,
such document shall be accepted for registration. Clause
10 of the Bill in the Sixth Report departed from this, in the
following respects: —

(i) The fine has been reduced to a lumpsum not
exceeding Rs. 10 in addition to the registration fee.

The reason for this change was thus given in the
earlier Report’.

“It is quite inequitable to levy a heavy penalty in res-
pect of documents presented for registration after the pres-
eribed time. A multiple of the registration fee will usually

1. Malla, (1963), page 123.

each, Mohammad Hoss ©. आवक, (817) बा" 1655 LLR. 1 AN. 465

3. Jagdish y. Sunder, ALR. 1949 Pat. 393-

4. Raja Hazari v. Bhagwandas, A.LLR. 1928 Nag. 239.

5. Naresa v. Subramania, A.T.R. 1918 Mad. 323, 325, 326.
6. See discussion relating to clause 8(1).

7 Sixth Report, page 21, paragraph 52.


40

ke very high, as the fee for registration is in most States
an ad valorem fee.”.

(ii) The words “owing to urgent necessity or un-
avoidable accident” have been replaced by the words
“a proper cause being shown” for the reason’ that the
existing wording is not happy and the words “owing
to urgent necessity” are not appropriate.

(iii) Instead of the words “the Registrar....may
direct”, the words “the Registrar....may extend the
time” have been used.

(iv) Certain other verbal changes have been
made.

Now, as regards the first point, the comments received
suggest that the fine proposed is 100 low and may not be
conducive to expeditious presentation of documents; one
comment suggests that the amount may be increased to a
maximum of Rs. 50, while another suggests that the
amount of fine should be three times the amount of the
proper registration fee. Another comment suggests that
it should be five times the amount of the registration fee.
A few comments suggest that it should be at least Rs. 20
or Rs. 25.

If one has regard to the rules, one finds that in most
States the amount of the fine is linked up with extent of
the delay. For example, the rules made under the Act
by the Government? of Bombay provide that the fine
imposed under sections 25 and 34 of the Act shall be of
the following amounts, namely-—

(i) if the delay does not exceed one menth—not
exceeding 23 times the proper registration fee;

(४) if the delay exceeds one month but does not
exceed two months,—not excecding five times the
amount of the registration fee; and so on.

Prima. facie, the object of the finc would be to encourage
parties to seek prompt registration; and on principle, the
imposition of a heavy fine would not be justifiable. There-
fore, the approach adopted in the Sixth Report, on this
point, has much to commend itself. At the same time, we
have to take into account the trend of the comments.

We discussed this matter at some length. On the one
hand, the maximum amount of Rs. 10 proposed in the Sixth
Report, may be too low. On the other hand, the existing
provision—ten times the registration fee—is extremely
harsh. The Registration Rules of several States (which
have been gone through by us) show, that the registra-
tion fee is ad valorem in many cases. Hence, its multiple

Report, page
See Bombay rule 40, Mulla, (1963), page 322.

I.


41

would be very high, and some maximum appears to be
needed. Having considered all aspects of the matter, we
recommend!, that the fine should be five times the Regis-
tration fee, but not exceeding Rs. 200 (Rupees two
hundred).

As to the second point, it has been stated in the com-
ments that it is desirable that the grounds on which exten-
sion is to be granted should be given in the section itself.
This would, in effect, mean restoration of the words
“urgent necessity”, etc. We think, that it would be better
to retain the existing language.

As regards the third and fourth points the verbal
changes as such do not seem to have provoked any com-
ment. But it would be better to retain the existing langu-
age.

A fresh point made in one comment is, that it should be
made explicit that the extension of time should be on
application made within the time allowed, and the appli-
cation should be accompanied with a copy of the document
to be registered and the application should be open to the
public on payment. It has also been suggested, that a list
of cases in which time is allowed should be put wp on the
notice board, and that an application for extension should
not be allowed unless it is first put up on the notice board
for a fortnight. We think that the addition of such pro-
visions would necessarily encumber the section.

Clause 11, following existmg section 26, makes special Clause 11—
provision for documents executed outside India. It has Documents
been suggested, that there should be no discrimination be- {Mou
tween documents executed in India or outside India, and India
that the law should be uniform for both. Another com-
ment received is to the effect, that the period of four
months after arrival in India allnwed by existing section
2669), clause 11 (9) is too long.

The comments overlook the fect, that in the case
of documents executed outside India, there may be special
reasons why they cannot be promptly registered. The
parties may take time to settle down in India and to
arrange their affairs. They may not be conversant with
the local laws; they may not be familiar with the adminis-
trative arrangements for registratien, and so on. The
special provisions are justifiable. No change is needed on
this point.

Existing section 28 provides that, subject to certain ex- Clause 12(1)
ceptions, every document mentioned in the specified “7. of
clause of section 17 or section 18, in so far as such docu. "Pe
ment affects immovable property, shall be presented for
registration in the office of the Sub-Registrar within whose
sub-district the whole or some portion of the property to

1. See section 25, as proposed 10 be amended



42

which such document relates is situate. The proposal
made on this point in the earlier Report, clause 12(1),
read with clause 12(4) is, that where the property is really
situated outside the jurisdiction of the Sub-Regis‘rar, but
sorme .ion-existent, fictitious, or insignificant property
(or property which is not intended io be conveyed) is in-
cluded in the deed to confer on the Sub-Registrar jurisdic-
tion by virtue of its situation, then the validity of the re-
gistration should not be questioned by the parties, (This
is net to affect the rights of third persons acauiring rights
in the property without notice of the transaction to which
the document relates). The reasons for which this change
was proposed will be discussed elaborately later; but, for
hs present, it will suffice to sav’, that it wes regarded in-
wiable and unjust that the very ons who were par-
to the transaction and secured registration by such a
ce should be allowed 10 impeach the registration as
being a fraud on the registration law?" There ave certain
atucr verbal changes also proposed in the section. But, the
above being the most important pvint, it may be taken up
at the beginning.

Numerous comments have been received on this point.
While some comments expressly agree with the sug-
gested amendment, others oppose it or suggest its nodifi-
cation, One point made is, that the document should be
presented to the Sub-Registrar in whose jurisdiction 9
major portion of the property is situated, the reason given
being that registration raised a presumption of notice, and,
as such the registration of documents at any place will lead
to frauds. This comment, however, overlooks the fact that
the proposed change is very narrow, being confined to a
provision that the parties shall not be allowed to challenge
the registration. Rights of third parties are not proposed
to be affected’: The Clause does not give a go-bye to the
existing rule, for ordinary cases.

Another suggestion received is, that an Explanation
should be inserted below the section to lay down the
minimum requirements by which a registering officer
should satisfy himself that the property is situate ir. his
Jurisdiction. Such a provision would, however, cause un-
necessary delay in the registration proceedings, and can-
not be adopted.

Some of the comments have opposed the change in toto,
and it becomes necessary to examine in detail the reasons
why the change was proposed in the Sixth Report’. The

व, ef. Sixth Report, pages 21-25, paragraphs 55 to 57-

2, See particularly, Sixth Report, page 23 middle.

3. As to existing law, see Mulla, (1963), pages 126 to 128.
4. Sixth Report, clause 12(4)(b).

.$. See Sixth Report, pages 21—25, paragraphs 55—$7.


4a

reasons were these. Numerous decisions under the exist-
ing Act had held, that if the property is really outside the
jurisdiction of the Sub-Registrar, and some fictitious pro-
perty or non-existing property alleged to be within his
jurisdiction is included, or property (though situated
within his jurisdiction) is included without any intention.
of transferring it, then it is a fraud on the Registration
Jaw.

There are several decisions of the Privy Council on the
subject!~,

Now, the earlier Report did not question the correctness
of these decisions; but the points which it had to consider
was, whether such unsatisfactory consequences should
not be avoided in cases where the parties had resorted to
such devices merely to avoid going for registration to a
distant place. “It is inequitable and unjust that the very
persons who were parties to the transaction and secured
registration by such a device should later be allowed to
impeach the registration as being a fraud on the registra-
tion law. As 107४ as rights of third parties are not affect-
ed, no harm is likely to be caused by recognising registra-
tion effected by a resort to such devices®.”

This was the crucial argument advanced to support
the change proposed, It has been embodied in clause 12 (4),
as tollows—

[after proposing in clause 12(1) the enactment of
the general rule that the document should be present-
ed before the Sub-Registrar within whose area the
whole or some part of the property is situate]:—

“12. (4) Notwithstanding any thing contain-
ed in sub-section (1),—

{a) after a document is registered, no
party thereto shall be entitled to question the

1. See these cases—

(@) Harendra Lal v. Hari Dasi Debe, 4t A, 110 ;LL.R Ca!
972.3 ACR. rox4 PAC, 67 (Fictitious propery). की 02-

(0) Biswanath (also reported as Mathura Das) v. Chandra Ni न
48 LA 127 LL.R. 48 Cal. ६09 ; ALR. roar P.C. 8 “Cinsigniheant
share of village included without transfer of Possession, and with-
out any intention to transfer any interest therein), है

(c) Collector of Gorakhpur v. Ram Sundar, LLR. 56 All 468 ; ATR
1934 P.C. 157 (Property which could not 86 enj ० whic
there was AO access, j included). oF MOREA: anc 10 which
(d) Venkataram Rao v. Sobhandari_ Appa Rao, 63 LA. 2653
LL.R. $9 Mad. 539; ALR, 1936 P.C. 91 CA yard of tend’ sinned
in a district in which the purchaser neither resided nor owned pro-
perty, included, though the vendor’s title was doubtful, and. che
Purchaser made 19 attempt to take possession), हु
2, Decisions of the High Courts are collected in Ramanandan %
Chandra Narain, ILL.R, 19 Pat, $78 3 A-LR. 1949 Pat. 504, Prasad y.

4. Sixth Report, pa ९23, paragraph 56 middle,


44

validity of its registration on the ground that
the property which purported to give juris-
diction to the Sub-Registrar to register it
either did not exist or was fictitious or insig-
nificant or was not intended to be conveyed;

(09) a document, the registration of which
is secured by the inclusion of a non-existent,
fictitious or insignificant portion or item shall
not im any manner affect the rights of a per-
son who was not a party thereto and acquired
rights in the property without notice of the
transaction to which such document relates”.

The question may be asked whether it is likely that the
parties themselves would ever be allowed to challenge the
registration of the document. The following summary of
some illustrative cases will show the existing position on
this point: —

Case No. I~

The plaintiff was allowed to put forward the fraud of
his father (who had acted as his guardian) in including
one square yard of property situated in another district
without any intention to convey. The registration was
held to be voidt.

Case No. 2—

A parcel of land which was never intended to form part
of the security, was inserted in the morigage deed for
giving jurisdiction to the Sub-Registrar. This was held
to be a fraud on the law of registration, and hence it was
specifically held that the mortgagor could raise the plea of
valid registration even though he was party to the fraud‘.

Case No, 3--

Property which wags in existence, but in which the par-
ties did not intend to transfer any interest, was included
for obtaining registration in the district where this piece
was situated. Registration was held to be invalid. The
proceedings in which this decision was given were between
the parties te the document, because they were initieted
by the mortgagee for a mortgage decree and sale of the
property mortgaged under a mortgage deed by Udit Nzra-
yan as the head and managing member of the joint Hindu
family of which the respondents were members’.

1. Venkata Rama Rao y. Sobhandabi Appa Rao, 641A, 1693 LL.R. 59
Mad. 330; ALR. 1935 P.C. 91.
2. Ramanandan Prasad v. Chandradip Narain LL.B. 1 Pat. 573; ALR
940, Pat, 504, ४०9 (Hatries C.J. and Manohar Lall 1.1,

3. Bishwa Nath Prasad (also reported us Mathura Das) v. Chandra Norain

Ghatdnart , 48 LA. a9 3 TLR. 48 Cal. so9; ALR. 1921 B.C. 8”



45

Case No. 4—

Fictitious inclusion of an item of property, never in-
tended to be sold, it was stated, would amount to fraud.
This view was expressed in a case where the validity of
the document was challenged between the parties. On the
facts, however, it was held that there was no fraud’.

Case No. 5—

Insignificant item of no value and completely inaccessi-
ble, was included in the sale deed. It was incapable of
being utilised or enjoyed by the purchaser. This was held
to be a mere device to evade the Registration Act, and the
registration was held to be void?.

The decision can be regarded as one not between the
parties 10 the document, as will be shown by the following
analysis of facts.

Raja K., the owner of the impartible Majhauli_ estate,
died in 1911, His widow was taken as his heir. A Court of
Wards was constituted for the widow, and the Court of
Wards appointed the appellant as Manager of the Estate.
There was, however, one Indarjit who had a possible
claim to the estate (as an agnate). He died in 1921, and
his son B in 1922 sold some of the rroperty to the respon-
dent?

Only three questions were raised in the appeal before
the Privy Council, and these were decided as follows:—

First, whether Indarjit was the lawful heir of
Raja K. The answer given was “‘yes’*,

Secondly, whether the pedigree was proved. This
was also answered in the affirmative’.

The third question was whether the registration
was valid. This was answered in the negative.

The appellant was not a successor-in-interest of Indarjit,
and was, therefore, a third party vis-a-vis the document.

It is obvious, that courts have in reality permitted the
parties to challenge validity. Therefore, the assumption
behind the earlier Report is substantiated by this position of
the case law.

1. Gope Nath v. Rup Rawt, A.1.R. 1930 All. 786, 790 righthand column,
paragraphs beginning with the words “The third point........ and ending
with the on 8 “*The question before us........ (Sulaiman and Kendal.

2. Callector of Gorakhpur v, Ram Sunder Mal, 1.L.R. 56 All. 468; ALR
1934 P. 157, 165, righthand, 167, left-hand (P.C.

3. See at page 154, left-hand in the A.LR
jf See age 15% lefty read with page 164, left, bottom, inthe

5. See page 165, right, 12 lines, in the ALR.


46

Case No. 6—

‘There is one Madras case’, in which the principle adopt-
ed was that the person alleging his own baseness should not
be heard. But the authority of this Madras case is totally
shaken by the Privy Council case of 1936, and, therefore,
if it is intended to restore the principle behind the Madras
case, legislative intervention is necessary.

Case No, 7—

We may also refer to the position in an earlier decision
of the Privy Council®, There, non-existent property was in-
chided in the deed. This property was alleged to be situat-
ed at 25, Gurudas Street in Calcutta, while all the other
properties were outside Calcutta. It was held, that such 8
fictitious entry (in the Schedule) was a fraud on the regis-
tration law, and the deed was not validly registered. It is
not very clear whether the female defendant (respondent
in the Privy Council) who challenged the registration was
a successor-in-interest of the person who executed the mort-
gage (of the property in dispute) in favour of the olaintiff.
The object of the suit was to obtain a declaration that the
female defendant acquired no right in the property by vir-
tue of the purchase made by her. Apparently, the decision
may be regarded as not being between the parties.

We may now refer to the dissenting note (in the previ-
ous Report) of Dr. Sen Gupta’, as several comments have
expressed agreement with his views.

Dr. Sen Gupta’s first objection was, that the Act, which
says that the Registrar should have jurisdiction only if some
property affected by the document is within his jurisdiction,
“would stultity itself” if it is said at the same time that the
registration would be good if a document is registered
without such jurisdiction. Now. the body of the Report
does not suggest such an extreme course’. Nor doeg clause
12(4)(b) go to that length. All that is provided is, that the
parties will not be entitled to challenge the validity of the
registration.

Dr, Sen Gupta’s second point was, that if the Registrar
bona fide believed that the property existed within his
jurisdiction, then he could register it even if ultimately it
turned out that the property was non-existent or fictitious.
His objection was that the bona fide belief of the Registrar
may be difficult to prove when the matter comes before the

1. Venkataswami v, Venkata Subbayya, I.L.R. 55 Mad. 507, ATR.
1932 Madras 311.

2, Harendra vy. Haridasi Debt, 4) L.A, 110; 1.1..8. 41 Cal. 972; ALR.
1914 P.C. 67.

3. See the dissenting note of Dr. Sen Gupta, Sixth Report, page
99.

4. See Sixth Report, page 24, paragraph 3761),


al

court. Now, it is true that in the body of the Report, a
suggestion was made somewhat on these lines’. But that
was only a “principle” to be given effect to, and if reference
is made to the actual draft in clause 12(1) read with clause
12(4) (a), it will be found that validity is not made to.
depend on the Registrar’s belief.

Dr. Sen Gupta’s third objection was, that there could
seldom be any honest reason for not registering a document
where it ought to be registered. As against this, it may be
pointed out, that ordinarily the parties are the best judges
of their convenience, and if they select a particular place,
it may not always be a dishonest device.

Dr, Sen Gupta’s next objection was, that it would be
difficult to prove an intention to defraud a third party. But
under clause 12 such intention does not come in the picture,
and this objection, thus, loses its force.

Next, Dr. Sen Gupta did agree with the principle that
the parties should not be entitled to impeach the registra-
tion. He described it as “understandable”. But, he point-
ed out, that the parties did not always deal with one an-
other at an arm’s length, and the purchaser may have per-
haps taken the document in good faith upon the represen-
tation of the vendor (that the property did exist and he-
longed to him) without further inquiry. In his view, it
eould not be laid down as a general proposition that parties
who were not dealing at an arm’s length, should not be
allowed to challenge the transaction on account of defect of
jurisdiction in any case. This objection can be answered
by pointing out, that the protection given by the proposed
clause is only as regards the validity of the registration.
and does not cure any fraudulent representation as to title
or the nature of the property which might have been made
by either party. The normal consequences of such fraud
would ensue notwithstanding the proposed change. In
some of decisions, validity of the registration and validity
of the document have been mixed up. But the two are
really separate issues. The proposed changes cure a defect
in the validity of the document, onily to the extent to which
such defect is due to invalidity of registration.

Dr. Sen Gupta suggested that the proper way to attain
the object sought would be to alter the “first proviso”,
[perhaps this refers to clause 12(4)] by providing that,
after the document is registered, the party thereto on whose
representation the non-existent or fictitious property had
been included shall not be permitted to challenge the vali-
dity of the registration. But, as already pointed out above,
right of the party to challenge the document by reason of
fraud, ete., is not prejudiced by the amendment proposed in
the previous Report, and, therefore, it need not be limited

in this way.

eport, page 24, paragraph $7(3).



Quher points
—verbal
chanecs

48

Dr. Sen Gupta also stated, that scrutiny of all properties
by the Registrar might indefinitely delay registration. But
the Sixth Report did not contemplate such scrutiny. All
that the body of the Report! contemplated really was that
if the registering officer was prima facie satisfied regard-
ing his jurisdiction, ihe registration will not be invalidated.
Further, the actual clause provides only that the parties
will not be allowed to impeach it.

Dr. Sen Gupta further stated, that it was not true (us
was assumed by the majority in the Sixth Report) that pro-
perty within jurisdiction was included only for the purpose
or registration in the nearby office; he added, that in many
cases it was included not for convenience of registration
but to create jurisdiction of the Original side of the High
Court. This device should not, in his opinion, receive
encouragement from the legislature. Now, if ong has re-
gard ‘o the actual judicial decisions, many of them ere not
concerned with the Original side jurisdiction, and further,
it was not that the framers of the Sixth Report wished to
encourage fraudulent devices to confer jurisdiction on the
High Courts. Their suggestion was mainly based on the
principle, that a person alleging his own baseness ought not
to be heard. This is a principle well-recognised in the
jurisprudence of every country, and applied almost daily
by the courts where its relevancy is established. There is
no reason why it should not be given prover consideration
under this subject also.

We might state here one more reason for the proposed
clarification. At present, there is a conflict of decisions’ on
the question whether, where registration of a mortgage deed
is void in the situation under consideration. a personal
covenant in the mortgage deed can be sued upon. This con-
flict will be resolved by the proposed change.

One other aspect of the proposed change may be referred
to. At present, when the validity of registration is to be
attacked on the ground of the defect in question, oral evi-
dence for that purpose is admissible by virtue of section 92,
first proviso, in the Evidence Act, as interpreted by the
Courts." The proposed change will render such defects
immaterial: so that resort to such oral evidence will be
obviated.

This finishes the main question under this clause. The
draft suggested in clause 12(1), when compared with the
sisting section 28, would show that certain other verbal

1. See Sixth Report, page 24, paragraph 56, 8th line on the
page.
2, See Mulla, (1963), page 139.
3. Rawmandin ५. Chandra, TLR. 19 Pat. $70; ALR. 1949 Pat. sod
3. See also Ghan tv. Hrishikesh, ALR, 1016 Caleutta 465,


49

changes were also proposed. Thus, the existing section
mentions the various clauses of sections 17 and 18, while
the draft merely refers to “this Chapter’. Secondly, the
existing section uses the words “in so far as such document
affects immovable property”, while the draft speaks of a
decument “so far as it purports to affect immovable  pro-
perty”. In the draft clause, there is also an elaboration to
deal with cases where a document refers to more than one
item, The comments received suggest (in substance) the
retention of the existing language.

We think that it would be better to retain the present
wording, in view of the objections received.

In conclusion, it may be noted that the possibility that Conclusion
the proposed change may encourage fraud has to be balanc-
ed against the principle that the law should not allow parties
to back out of a transaction merely because there is a tech-
nical defect in registration of which the parties were, or at
least one party was, fully aware. A shady deal is not in-
tended to be protected. Only a technical flaw is proposed
to be neutralised and that too on sound moral principles.
Rights of third parties are perfectly safe. On the whole,
therefore, the proposed clause will lead to less injustice
than the position resulting from the existing section.

To make the discussion concrete, we may note here the Effect of
effect of the proposed changes with reference to various proposed
situations. change

Following categories of documents scem to have arisen Analysis
in practicel: — है

{i) property fictious (cases in A.LR. 1914 P.C.);

(ii) property not belonging to the vendor, ete., con-
yered without intention to convey. (But fraudulent
intention must be proved. cf. Venkata wv. Veera-
bhadrulu, ALR. 1935 Mad. 26, right hana).

Gii) Property (even if belonging to the vendor,
ei¢.) professed to be conveyed without intention to con-
vey (cases in ALR. 1921 PC. and 1934 P.C.):

(iv) Property not capable of enjoyment (case in
ALR. 1936 P.C.).

The proposed change will cover these situations; No. (ii),
which is not frequent, will also be covered, if
there is no intention to convey.

The proposed change will not affect the position in cases
where there is no fraud; e.g—

हे (9) Where there is a mistake in registration, resuit-

ing in registration in a wrong district; (the view has

7. Sze als the avalysis in Ohhorabhai v. Dadabhal, ALR, 1935 Bom.
54, 62 (left-hand column).
5—109 M of Law.



Clause 12(2)
ace of
presentation
of will or
authority to
adopt

Clause 12(3)

—Residual
rovision
for place of

registration

50

been expressed that such a case can be dealt with by
re-registration! under existing section 30);

(9) Where both parties bona fide believe that the
grantor has title to the property.”

It must be borne in mind, that the “fraud” contemplatea
by the case-law as to validity of registration is totally differ-
ent from mere failure to make out a good title. A party
may fail to make out his title, but that is not the same thing
as fraud on registration.’-*

It must also be noted, that the proposed char.ge is con-
fined to registration law. It will not affect the position re-
garding jurisdiction of courts, which will continue to he
determined by the existing principles, under which the
court can exantine the reality of the transaction®

Clause 12(2), following existing section 40. mentions
“authority to adopt”. This phrase, it is said, is no longer
necessary in view of the Hindu Adoptions, etc., Act, 1956.
The point has been already discussed under clause 3(3),
and, for ihe reasons stated there®. this phrase should be
retained.

Clause 12(3) combined existing section 29(1) and 29(2).
As stated in the earlier Report’, no change in principle was
reconimended. A few verbal changes were, however, made.
The comments received find fault with one verbal change
on the ground that the re-casting has really made a change
in substance. The following comparative chart may be use-
ful for understanding the change made.

Existing section Clause

29(1). Every document not being a Clause 12(3). Every document. not
document referred to in section 28, being a document referred to
er a copy of a decrec or order, may — sub-section (1), and a copy of a
be presented etc. cither in the office decree or order, may be presented

of the Sub-Registrar in whose Sub- for registration cither in the office
district the document was executed, of the Sub-Registrar in whose sub-

or im the office of any other Sub- district the document was executed

प. of. Suganmal ए. Mt. Umrao Bai,TL.R, 1940 Nag. 74: ALR. 1940
Nag. 13.

2, of. observations in Biskvanath (or Mathura) v. Chandra Narain
Chordiry, ATR, 1921 P.C. 8, 16 and Pahladi Lal v. Larauti, VL.R. 41 All.
22; A.LR. 1919 All. 450.

3. of. Venkata v. Veerathaduln, A.IR. 1935 Mad, 26, Right-hand.
4. See alsa Chootabhau v. Dadabhai, है... 1935 Bom s4.

5. See discussion in Nani /.al Roy v. Suniti Bala, ATR. 1952 Cal. 529,
434 (P.B. Mukherjea J.)

6. See discussion relating to clause 3(3).
7. Sixth Report, page 25, paragraph 59.


Existing section Clause

Registrar etc. at_ which all the ‘or the original decree or order was
persons etc. desire the same to made, as the ९४४९ may be, or in
be registered. the office of any other etc. (rest
same as in existing section).

29(2). A copy of a decree or order

may be presented for the registra-

tion in the office of the Sub-

Registrar in whose sub-district the

original decree or order was Made,

or, where the decree or order does

not affect immovable property, in

the office of any other Sub-Regis-

trar, etc. at which all, etc., desire,

ete.

It would thus be seen, that existing section 29(1) seems
to exclude from its scope copies of decrees or orders, because
section 29(2) deals with them specifically. The draft clause,
however, makes such copies registrable with the Sub-Regis-
trar in whose sub-district the original decree or order was
made or with any other Sub-Registrar where the parties
desire, etc. Thus, a change of substance may ensue in rela-
tion to a copy of decree or order which affects immovable
property. Under the proposed clause. they can be register-
ed elsewhere if the parties desire, while section 29(b) is (in
this respect) confined to decrees, etc, affecting immovable
property,

It may be noted, that section 29, before its amendment
by Act 32 of 1940, was not divided into sub-sections. It ran
as follows: —

“Every document other than a document referred
to in section 28, and a copy of a decree or order, may
be presented, ete.”

[rest as in section 29(1)]

This gave rise to the question whether a copy of a
decree or order was to be dealt with under section 29 or
section 28. The Bombay High Court held,’ that it was to
be dealt with under section 29, and that the Legislature had
deliberately put a copy of the decree, etc, in section 29 as
being a document which does not fall within section 28.
After this decision, the section was clarified as it stands
now. The existing language should be restored.

In clause 12(4}(a) proposed by the Sixth Report js a new Clause 12¢4
provision to the effect that, after a document is registered,
no party should be entitled to question the validity of the
registration, on the ground that the property did not exist

1, Vinayak v. Parsappa, A.LLR. 1938 Bom, 212.


82

or was fictitious or insignificant or not intended to be con-
veyed. Under clause 12(4)(b), rights of third parties were
nol to be affected if they acquired the rights without notice
of the transaction to which the document related. This
change has been considered in detail already It remains
now to consider only a few comments on matters of detail.
One comment is to the effect, that an exception should be
made in favour of a bona fide purchaser purchasing under a
ceed without notice of inclusion of the fictitious item. Now,
clause 12(4)(b) already makes an exception for persons hav-
ing no notice of the transaction, and that should suffice.
Another comment is to the effect that where a third
party is defrauded or his rights defeated the registration
should be invalid as against such party, But clause
12(4)(b) already meets this point by making the document
inoperative against the third party.

It has also been suggested that instead of the words “no
party thereto” the words ‘no party which presents a docu-
ment for registration” should be substituted. But the clause
need not be so narrowed down’.

Certain matters of detail pertaining to clause 12(4)(b)
have been considered at length by us. The object of clause
12(4)(b) was to ensure that the bar under clause 12(4)(a)
should not affect the rights of third parties. As drafted in
the Sixth Report, however, the provision seems to be
slightly wider. It may, therefore, be re-drafted ‘o ensure
that if does not go beyond what is absolutely necessary to
secure its object, namely, that the provision in clause
12(4)(a) shall not affect the rights of third parties.

The draft suggested in the Sixth Report® uses the for-
mula “a person who acquires right in the property--without
notice of the transaction—to which the document relates”,
etc. The meaning of the expression “notice” was discussed
before us in detail.

A comment! has been received to the effect that this may
lead to difficulties in interpretation; the term “notice” is
not defined in the General Clauses Act or in the Registra-
tion Act, and, it is stated, that the real value of notice might
be for the purposes of the Transfer of Property Act. It is
pointed out, that under that Act registration would itself
amount to notice, and that the provision in question may
defeat itself.

The definition of “notice” in. the Transfer of Property
Act has not been borrowed in the Registration Act, in the
definition clause. Therefore, the answer to the question

व. See discussion relating to clause 12(1).

3. See also discussion relating to clause 12(1)-
3. Sixth Report, page 46, clause 12(4)(8).

4. Comment of a High Court.



53

whether registration amounts to notice would depend on
the facts of each case, Nevertheless, being aware of the
controversy which existed on the general question as to
how far registration amounted to notice before the amend-
ment of the Transfer of Property Act in 1929', we gave
anxjous consideration to this comment. We also considered
the question whether the word “actual” could be inserted
bef the word “notice” in the draft proposed in the Sixth
Resort, and the controversy thus avoided.

We felt, that if the expression “notice” has at all to be
used, it may be better to define it as in section 3 of the
Transfer of Poperty Act? omitting the portion in that Act
relating to registration. The definition in the Indian Trusts
Act is shorter than that in the Transfer of Property Act,
but it is less elaborate, and is not comprehensive’.

The definition of “notice” in section 3 of the Indian
Trusts Act*, is as follows: —

“A person is said to have notice of a fact either
when he actually knows that fact, or when, but for
wilful abstention from inquiry or gross negligence, he
would have known it, or when information of the fact
is given to or obtained by his agent, under the circum-
stances mentioned in the Indian Contract Act, 1872, sec-
tion 229”,

The definition of “notice” in the Transfer of Property
Act, 1882, section 3, which is very lengthy, includes not only
actual notice and imputed notice (notice of an agent) and
constructive notice (wilful absention from an inquiry or
gross negligence}, but makes two further additions, name-
ly first, registration as notice, and secondly, constructive
notice io the agent. It also mentions actual possession spe-
cifically. As regards the effect of registration as notice,
according to the decision of the Privy Council, (before the
Amendment of 1929), the question of notice was not one of
law but of fact, to be determined according to the circum-
stances of each case’, As to the position in the Punjab,
the undermentioned cases may be seen’-2°.

privet chee, Mulla, Transfer of Property Act, (1966), page 37, and se, the
wy Council decision in Tilakdhart Lai v. Kchedan Lal 9 PR: 2395 LILR
48 Cal. x; ALR. 1921 PC. 112. हैं

2, Section 3, Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

3. ef. Law Commission’: Report on the Indian Trusts Act, (r7th Report),
page 5, Paragraph 11.

4. The Indian Trust Act, 1882 (2 of 1882).

5. See Mulla, Transfer of Property Act, (19663, page 37.

6, Tilakdhari Lal v. Khevlay Lal, 47 1.2, 239; 1L.R. 48 Cal.1y ALR.
921 PC, 112. है

7. Gopal Singh ४. Thakar Singh, ALR, 1935 Lah. 313, 314 (Wills).
8. D.A. College v. Umrao Singh, AAR. 1935 Lah. 410.
9. Ghulam Fatima v. Gopal Devi, A.LR. 1940 Lah. 269.


Regi istration

ler
ges
1925,
notice

Restrictions

on

wa

Illustration 3 to section 27(b) of the (old) Specific Relief
Act, may also be seen.

We also considered the sections in the Law of Property
Act.

Sections 198 and 199 of the Law of Property Act, 1925,
(15 Geo. 5 ९. 20) read as follows: --

“198, (1) The registration of any instrument or matter
visions of the Land Charges Act, 1925, or any

ct enactment which it replaces, in any register kept at the
tobe’ land registry or elsewhere, shall be deemed to constitute
actual notice of such instrument or matter, and of the fact
of such registration, to all persons and for all purposes con-
nected with the land affected, as from the date of registra-
tion or other prescribed date and so long as the registration
continues in force.

(2) This section operates without prejudice to the pro-
visions of this Act respecting the making of further advances
by a mortgagee, and applies only to instruments and
matters required or authorised to be registered under the
Land Charges Act, 1925.

199. (1) A purchaser’ shall not be prejudiciaily affected
Cons- by notice of—

the under the prov

tructive
(1) any instrument or matter capable Of registration

notice

under the provisions of the Land Charges Act, 1925, or
any enactment which it replaces, which is void or not
enforceable as against him under that Act or enact-
ment, by reason of the non-registration thereol;

(ii) any other instrument or matter or any fact or
thing unless—

(a) it is within his knowledge, or would have
come to his knowledge if such inquiries and ins-
pections had been made as ought reasonably to
have been made by him; or

(b) in the same transaction with respect to
which a question of notice to the purchaser arises,
it has come to the knowledge of his counsel, as
such, or of his solicitor or other agent, as such, or
would have come to the knowledge of his solicitor
or other agent, as such, if such inquiries and ins-
pections had been made as ought reasonably to have
been made by the solicitor or other agent.

(2) Paragraph (ii) of the last sub-section shall not
exempt a purchaser from any liability under, or any obliga-
tion to perform or observe, any covenant, condition, pro-
vision, or restriction contained in any instrument under
which _ his title is derived, mediately or immediately; and
such liability or obligation may be enforced in the same

7, For definition of purchases see section 205(1)(xxi).



55

manner and to the same extent as if that paragraph had
not been enacted.

(3) A purchaser shall not by reason of anything in this
section be affected by notice in any case where he would
not have been so affected if this section had not been en-
acted.

(4) This section applies to purchases made either before
or after the commencement of this Act”.

The provisions of sections 198 and 199 modify the doctrine
of notice!.

Section 199 of the Law of Property Act, is designed to
restrict and not to extend the doctrine of notice. Its object
is to remedy the evil consequences of such a doctrine, as
illustrated in one case where a solicitor had come to know
of a certain fact in a previous transaction, and this created
the impression that the solicitor had actually remembered
about what he had come to know and this “knowledge” of
the solicitor was again imputed to the client®, in a subse-
quent transaction.

The need for clause 12(4)(b) was also discussed at some
length before us.

The illustration given in the Sixth Report in this con-
text says, “The owner may give an unregistered sale-deed
to A and later give another ante-dated sale-deed to B and
have it registered in an office far away by including in
it....”, ete’, We have taken note of the illustration, We
think that some kind of provision is needed to avoid mis-
understanding of the scope of clause 12 (4) (a).

The main object of clause 12 (4) (0) is to emphasise that
the registration of the document under the circumstances
mentioned in clause 12 (4) (a) should not bind a third party,
ie. a person who acquires rights otherwise than under the
document, and is not a party to the document.

We, therefore, recommend‘ that the saving contem-
plated by clause 12(4) (b) of the Sixth Report should appear
in a redrafted form, as follows: —

“Nothing in this sub-section shall affect a person,
who, not being a party to the document and not claim-
ing under the document, acquires rights in the pro-
yerty in good faith”.

2. See Lewin, Trusts, (1950), pages 725-726.
3. Sixth Report, page 23, paragraph 56, lines 44-40.
4. See section 29, as proposed to be amended.


Clause 13

56

One comment makes the point that a question of burden
of proof will arise in the event of a conflict between the
transferees, and therefore suggests that an Explanation be
added which should cast the burden of proof on the parties
who have gone out of their way to secure registration by
inclusion of non-existent, etc., property. It appears un-
necessary to encumber the clause with this add:tional pro-
vision, whose purpose or effect is not very precise.

Clause 13, departing from existing section 30(2), gives
power to every Registrar to register a document without
Tegard to the situation in any part of India of the property,
if sufficient cause is shown for doing so. (Under the exist-
ing section, the power is given only to Registrars in Presi-
dency towns, but irrespective of the existence of a suffi-
cient cause). While this major change’ has not provoked
any comment, one comment received suggests thet the Re-
gistrar should record his reasons for acting under this sec-
tion. This does not appear to be necessary.

Incidentally, we may mention here that, independently
of the comments on the Sixth Report, we have received
suggestions to the effect that the Registrar in Deihi shoutd
have power to register a document executed in Delhi, irres-
pective of situation of the property. We have already sub-
mitted a separate Report on the subject?.

Our views are as follows: —

(i) The existing section 30 (2) may be ex:ended to
Delhi, as already recommended by us’.

(ii) The Sixth Report * proposes its extens.on to all
Registrars ¢.e. in substance to all district headquarters.
This is not necessary, as there may not be a big concen-
tration of people from several parts of India, or a cus-
mopolitan population, at every district headquarters.

(iii) The requirement of “sufficient cause” added
by the Sixth Report® may be deleted, as it is not neces-
sary to hedge in the section with any such resiziction.

It would be of interest to refer here to the various sug-
gestions which were made to the Law Commissions with
reference to section 30(2), before the earlier Report was pre-
pared. On the one hand, there was a suggestion that the
sub-section be deleted®, the reason given being that there
was no justification for giving a wider jurisdiction to the
Registrar in Presidency Towns.

1. As to reason for this change, see Sixth Report, page 25, para.
graph 60.
2. Thisty-First Report of the Law Commission, [Indian Registration
Act—-section’ 30(2)—extension to the Registrar af Delhi}. (May 1967).
3. Thirty-First Report of the Law Commission, (May, 1967).
4. Sixth Report, page 25, paragraph 60, and page 46, clause 13.
3. Sixth Report, page 46, clause 13.
oe ‘ No. 51 in File No. F.3(4)/s5-L.C. II (at the end) (A Sub-Registrar
in OP.


57

Most of the suggestions were, however, for extending the
section. Thus, there was a suggestion to extend it to
Deihi'. Another suggestion was to extend it to the Regis-
trar of Ambala’. This suggestion pointed out, that atler
partition there was no Registrar in the Punjab who could
exercise the powers under section 30(2) with which — pre-
viously the Registrar of Lahore was invested, and that h
ships were experienced in the absence of such a provision.

There were suggestions io extend the section to all Ccr-
poration* towns. One of the Members of the Law Commis-
sion seems to have suggested its extension to “any Registrar
of a district in or outside a State including a Registrar of
a capital town in a State’.

One suggestion made in the Memorandum submitted on
behalf of the All India Registering Officers’ Conference®
(held at Patna on December 24, 1955) was to the effect, that
section 30(2) may be amended so as to empower the Regis-
trars of all capital towns of the Union and the States, in
addition to such other towns as the Government of India
may notify in the Official Gazette, to register any document
referred to in section 28 without regard to situation in any
part of India of the property. ‘Tne reason given was, that
capital towns have generally a mixed population of inhabit-
ants from every part of the country.

Another suggestion to the same effect was of the Assam
Registering Officers Association® and of the Madhya Pradesh
Registering Officers Association’.

One suggestion to extend the section to all Registrars
was in these terms®:—

“In view of the Union of States under the Constitu-
tion of India, section 10 and 30 may be amended to take
in District Registrars other than the District Registrars
in Presidency towns”.

There was even a suggestion to extend the section to
“the Sub-Registrars”®’.

1. 8. No. 78, File No. 3(4)/55-L.C. वा (Delhi Administration).

2. S. No. 9, File No. 3(4)/55-L.C. TI (Government of Punjab).

3. Suggestion of U.P. Sub-Registrars Association (contained in file
No. F.3(4)[ss L.C* Il at page 1 after the printed Report).

4. 8. No, 33, File No. F3(4)/s5-L.C. I].

5. 3. No. 19, Enclosure, File No. F.3(4)/5s-L.C. IT.

6. S. No. 25, File No, 3(4)/ss-L.C. 1.

7. S. No. 12, File No. F.3(4)/66-L.C. II.

8. S. No. 7o, File No. के, 3(4)/5s-L.C. II (Advoate General

of a State), being copy of the orignal in file No. F.3(5)/55-L.C.

2. $, No. 73 File No, P3(qi/5s-1.C. IT Guggestion of an Acho-
cate).



38

Finally, we may note the suggestion made to empower
“the Sub-Registrars at District headquarters, i.e. the Dis-

triet Sub-Registrars?”,

Clause 14 _ Clause 14 modified? existing section 31 slightly’, by mak-
ing certain verbal changes. Our views as to these verbal
changes are as follows:—~

(i) The substitution of “ordinarily” for ‘in ordinary
cases’ is not necessary.

(ii) The mention of “presentation” in section 31 is
not necessary. Though presentation is the initial step
and the proviso to section 31 also deals with presenta-
tion, the body of section 31 need not be disturbed. As
section 32 is subject to section 31, no practical difficulty
is likely to arise by reason of the existing language.

The changes suggested may be therefore dropped.

Clause ts Regarding persons who may present documents for regis-
~ tration, clause 15{a)(i) embodies existing sections 32 and 40
with certain modifications, the reasons for which have been
given in the earlier Report’. These charges have not pro-
voked comments. But a few new points have been raised
in the comments. Thus, it has been suggested that a person
who is authorised to sign a document on behalf of another
should also have the power, to get the document registered.
The law on the subject is, however, fairly clear, namely,
that an agent who executes a document under a power of
attorney may present it for registration, and the power of
attorney does not require® authentication under existing

section 33.

The comment refers to an Andhra Pradesh case® to the
contrary. The decision is based on certain observations of
the Privy Council in Puran Chand’s case’ to the effec, that
“executing” means “person who by valid execution enters
into an obligation under the instrument”. But those obser-
vations should be taken in the context in which they were

made. No change is necessary.

1. 8. No. 6, File No, F, 3(4)/5s-LC 11 (Assam Registering Officers
Association—ecarlier suggestion).

2. Sixth Report, page 46. clause 14.

3. For reasons, see Sixth Report, page 25, paragraph 61 and page
77 (Notes),

4. See Sixth Report, pages 25-26, paragraph 62.

5. See cases sited in Mulla, (1963) page 137, foot-note (1).

6. Sardar Singh v. Pissue Mal H. Bankers, A.1.R. 1958 Andhra Pradesh
107; (1957) 2 Andhra WR. 342.
7. Puran Chand’s cate, ALR. 1998 1.6. 33.


5D

The following analysis will show the various situations
covered by the existing provisions :—

G) agent authorised to sign—agent can present it)
without the necessity of authentication under section
hb

(ii) agent authorised to sign—principal can also
present? it:

Gi) agent authorised to present—agent can present
if the power of attorney falls within section 33;

(iy) agent authorised to present—eyen then the
principal can, presumably, present the document;

(४) one agent authorised ta sign and another agent
authorised to present—the Jatter agent can alsa pre-
sent’,

The Sixth Report made certain verba} changes in exist-
ing section S2(c}. These are not necessary, and may be
bopped.

Clause 15009) provides, that a will may be presented for Clause 25 (0)
registration by the testator, or after his death, by any per-
son claiming as executor or otherwise “thereunder”. The
existing section 40(1) is in a slightly different form, and
provides, that the testator, ox, afier his death, any person
claiming as executor, ete. “ander a will” may present it,
ete, +

One comment states, that the word “thereunder” in the
Proposed clause imposes an unnecessary restriction, This
does not appear to be correct: this word is merely in एक
placement of “under a will’.

Another comment suggests, that the presentation of a
will by the agent of the executant should be permitted,
This clarification appears to be necessary in the scheme
adopted in the Bilt in the Sixth Report, whereunder a
dichotumy has been introduced hetween—

4) documents ether than will or authorities to
adopt (on the one hand}, and (8) wills and authorities
19 adopt (on the other hand), Existing section 32
speaks of documents generally, and its operation in
relation to wills and authorities to adopt is excluded
only to this extent, that during the donor’s life time,
the persons claiming thereunder, ete., or the donee of
the authority, etc., cannot present it*, Presentation by

1, Malla (2963), page 137.
3, Malla (1963), page 137.
3. Puran Chand’s case, Mulla (1963), page 744, top.

. See Mulla (1963). page 15 8 ps poting the passage from the Privy Couns
है 27220 21% 78:70 १९ te Dageage 1929 B.C. 24.


Clause 15 (0)

Clause 16

60

agents and representatives of the testator or donor is not
excluded.!. Therefore in clause 15 (0), the case of the
testator’s representative or agent should be covered,
and the case of the claimant’s representative, assign or
agent should also be covered.

We think that to avoid dilliculties, the existing
scheme of section 32 should be restored.

Clause 15{c), which corresponds to existing section 40(2),
deals with presentation of authorities to adopt. Here also
a comment has been received that presentation by agents
should be permitted2 Really speaking, if this provision is
to be retained in the form proposed in Sixth Report, more
elaborate change will be necessary as in clause 15(b).* As
regards authorities to adopt, as they are to be retained,‘ re-
ferences to such authorities in clause 15(c) should also be
retained,

Clause 16 (dealing with powers of attorney which may
be recognised) follows existing section 33 (with small ver-
bal alterations). Accordingly, it makes a distinction
between—

(i) cases where the executant resides in Indias and

(ii) cases where he does not reside in India."

In the former case, the power of attorney has 10 be pre-
sented before and authenticated by the Registrar or Sub-
Registrar within whose district, etc. the principai resides.
In the latter case, it can be authenticated by any Magistrate.
Now, a comment has been received to the effect, that the
distinction between the two cases should be abolished, and
that in the former case also authentication by a Magistrate
should suffice. It has also been suggested, that authentica-
tion before a Notary Public or any court or Judge may be
a ed.

As regards Magistrates, it appears to be unnecessary to
include them in the first case. As regards Notaries, we con-
sider that while in big cities the notaries may be responsi-
ble persons, in small cities they may not be responsible
persons, and they may not be competent to check frauds, in
respect of powers-of-attorney. In view of this difficulty, we
were first hesitant to add notaries. But, ultimately we decid-
ed to add them.

We recommend’ an amendment of existing section 33
accordingly. It may be added, that notaries are empower-

1. See Mulla (1963), page 159.
2. As to present law, see Mulla (1963), pages 158-159.

3. See discussion as to clause 15 (6).

4. 8०० discussion relating to clause 3 (3).

5. Section 33 (2X).

6 Section 33 (1) (0).

7. See section 33, as proposed 10 be ameaded (regarding notaries).


61

ed under section 8(1)(a) of the Notaries Act! to authen-
ticate the exercution of documents.

Clause 16 (1) (c).—needs no comments*, Cause 76670

Clause 16(2) and (3),--Clause 16(2) and (3) corresponds Clause 16(2)
to existing section 33(2) and (3), with verbal changes’, कप (3)
Consequential changes on the addition of notaries* will be
necessary in clause 16(2) and (3).

Clause 16(4), following existing section 33(4), provides
that a power of attorney may be proved by its production
without further proof, if it purports to have been “executed
before and authenticated by” the person etc. mentioned be-
fore. Thus, to obtain the benefit of this provision, two
things are required: —

(i) execution before the authority concerned; and
(ii) authentication by that authority.

Now, in the case of persons who are ill or are in jail or
are exempt from personal appearance, the provisa to exist-
ing section 33(1)—clause 16(1), proviso—provides, that suck
persons need not attend for executing the powers-of-attor-
ney before the authorities concerned. This has been inter-
preted as meaning that they need not execute the power of
attorney before the authority concerned." In such cases,
therefore, the condition of execution before the authorities
concerned would not be fulfilled. To bring them within
the beneficial provision in clause 16(2), it has been suggested
that the words “or voluntarily executed by the principal and
authenticated as aforesaid, as the case may he” may be add-
ed at the end. We do not think that any such change is
required.

Clause 17(1) makes a small verbal change in section Clause 17
52 (1) (a) (b). It is not necessary.*

In prescribing the time-limit for the appearance of Clause 18
parties, clause 18(1), proviso, departing from existing sec (1), Proviso
tion 34(1), provides that the Registrar may extend the time
for appearance on proper cause being shown, by a period
not exceeding two months (instead of four months as in the
existing section), The amount of fine which the Registrar
can impose is also reduced to a lump sum of Rs, 10. Other
verbal changes are also made, This reduction of period is

. Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952).

. See Sixth Report, page 26, paragraph 64.

. Sea Sixth Report, page 26, paragraph 64.

See discussion under clause 16 (1).

See Mulla (1963), page 142, cases in fuot-note (7).

. Discussed in the Sixth Report, page 32, paragraph 80 and page 77
and page 20,

AYe एफ छल


62

noted in the earlier Report, (though no detailed reasons
have been given). Since clause 10(1) allows extension un to
four nonths,* the comments suggest that here also, for uni-
formity, the period of four months should be maintained.

__ As regards reduction of the fine, it has been suggested
in the comments that the maximum fine should he five
times the amount of the proper registration fee.

The other verbal changes made in by clause 18 (1) , pro-
viso are not, in our view, necessary.

There is no objection to having a uniform period. The
period of four months should be retained. As regards the
amount of fine, the clause should follow the decision under
clause 10 corresponding to existing section 25°. We recom-
mend* an amendment of section 34 accordingly.

One important point regarding clause 18(1) should be
noted. Appearance of the party is required within the time
required for presentation, under the relevant section’.
Existing section 34 (1) , in this connection, does not refer to
section 27 relating to wills. Clause 16(1), however, refers
inter alia to clause 8, which would take in clause 8(2) re-
lating to wills. Since a will can be presented at any time®,
clause 8(2) should he excluded from the sections referred
to in clause 18(1).

Clause 182) Clause 18(2) and (3) corresponds to existing section 34(2)
and (3) and (4), with verbal charges’ which do not appear to be
necessary.

Clause 1(4)- | When the executant who presents the document does

Return ef not appear within the time prescribed or extended, the

documents | Registering Officer, it is provided hy clause 18(4), should

pearmee Make an entry to that effect on the document, and return
it without registration to the party who presented it. This
is anew provision recommended by the Sixth Report,
where the reasons were thus stated®: —

“Provision will also have to be made, for cases
where the executants do not appear within the specified
period. We suggest that in such a case the Registrar
should make an entry to ihat effect on the document
and return it without registration to the party who
presented it”,

. Sixth Report, page 26, paragraph 65.
. See clause ro (1),

‘See discussion regarding clause 10.
See Section 34, as proposed to be amended (regarding the maxiraum).
. Section 34 (1), read with section 23,

See section 23, which excludes wills, and section 27.

. ef. Sixth Report, page 77 (Notes).

. See Sixth Report, page 26, paragraph 65.

Aaupwpeo

Pes)


63

Clause 18(4) embodies this recommendation, and as re~
gards the period, in addition to the period allowed for
appearance, it permits two months thereafter. This provi-
sion has provoked numerous comments, which can be classi~
fied as follows:—

G) One point made is that it canflicts with clause
21 (1) Gv), under which, if the executant does not
appear within the time allowed for appearance, the
Sub-Registrar has to refer the document to the Regis-
trar.

(ii), Another point is, that return of documents to.
one of the executants without consent of the claimants
may cause loss and hardship to the claimant.

(ii) A third point, is, that the extra period of two
months after the already extended time-limit for pre-
sentation or appearance is unnecessary.

(iv) Another point is, that this provision will de-
prive the Government of the fee leviable for return of
the documents after one month of the date of refusal
due to non-appearance of the party. Moreover, it may
entail expenses to Government by way of postal
charges to be incurred in returning the document by
post.

(v) It is also pointed out, that it is not clear how
the Sub-Registrar is expected to deal with the docu-
ment if the executant appears within the further period
of two months thereafter and how the period will be
calculated.

(vi) A major objection is, that the claimant (who
is not the executant) will be deprived of his right to
establish his claim before the registering officer. This
is because the document will be returned to the “party”
under the clause,

There is no doubt that the proposed provision
makes a change in the existing law. At present}, while
existing section 34(1) requires the executant to appear
within the time allowed for presentation, and section
34(3) contemplates an inquiry as to execution, it does
not provide that the document must be returned to the
executant. Tt leaves open the claimant's right at least
to ask the Sub-Registrar to finish the inquiry as to
execution. it is only if the executant denies execution
that the registration is refused under existing section
35 (3) (a).

In any case, clause 21 (1) (iv) also deals with the
same situation, (unless it is regarded as limited to

1. The existing position is discussed in Mull

(£963), page 151.
2. Clause 21 (1) broadly corresponds to exsting seucion 35 (3), but suth=
clause (iv) is new.



Clause 19(0)

Clause 19(¢) a

Clause tg
New point

Clause 20(1)
(8) and (d)
धर Ge

ce acing
over docu:
ment and
proof of at-
testation,

64

cases where the executant has not presented the docu-
ment himself), and there appears to be some conflict
between clause 18(4) and clause 21(1)} (iv).

For these reasons, we consider that clause 18(4)
should be dropped.

Clause 19(b) corresponds to section 34 (3) (०), with ver-
bal changes as per re-arrangemenis which were proposed
by the Sixth Report.

In clause 19(b), the words “js right” should be replaced
by “his right”, to correct the misprint.

Clause 19(०), corresponding to existing section 41 (2),
eals with inquiry in the case of will or authority to adopt.
Regarding authority to adopt, a suggestion has been made
for adding the words “and before coming into force of the
Hindu Adoptions, ete., Act, 1956”. But, if clause 3(3) re-
lating to authority to adopt is retained’, the reference to
such authority in clause 19(c) should also be retained.

Incidentally, the opening lines of clause 19 speaks of the
persons executing the document, but the situation in sub-
clause (2) is one of death of the testator or donor. Elence,
clause 19(c) may appropriately be made into a separate
sub-section.

A new point regarding clauses 19-20 (dealing with in-
quiry before registration) had been made in one comunent.
It is stated, that the “representative or assign” of an execu-
tant can present a document for r ‘gistration through agent
under clause 19, and that admission of execution under
clause 20 should also be made through agent in case of
such representative or assign. We are not sure whether
the assumption about clause 19 is correct, However, it
seems desirable that such agents should also be brought
within the purview of clauses 19 and 20 (existing sections
34 and 35); and, for that purpose, perhaps the phraseology
of existing section 34 ते) —“agents authorised as ajore-
said” may be regarded as more clear when read with exist-
ing section 32(c). That phraseology may be restored, 1n
place of the words in clause 19, opening lines, “duly autno-
ised”.

While dealing with the procedure on an enquiry perore
registration for obtaining proof of execution, clause 20(1)
(8) and (9) (ii) introduce certain new provisions not found
in existing sections 34(3) and 35(1). The first addition is
the requirement to the effect that the registering officer
shall read over the document and explain its contents to

. See discussion as co clause 3 (3).


69

the executants or the representatives, assigns or agents, as
the case may be. The second addition is the requirement
that he should inquire whether or not the document was
attested according to law by the persons by whom it pur-
ports to have been attested (where such attestation is re-
quired by law).

Explaining the reasons for this addition, the earlier
Report? states, that it is common knowledge that a person
relying on a document required by law to be attested is
often called upon to prove due attestation after a long lapse
of time, In many cases the attestants would not _be alive,
and if none of them is alive the burden is cast on the person
relying on the document to prove due attestation. A plea of
want of attestation is bound to be successful in such circum-
stances under the existing law. To avoid such difficulty, it
was suggested that at the stage of registration there should
be an inquiry as to due attestation, and it was also sug-
gested that registration should raise a presumption of due
attestation and registration. To carry out this suggestion,
a specific provision was sttggested to the effect that the re-
gistering officer should read over and explain to the execu-
tant the nature of the document before inquiring of him
whether it was executed, and admission of execution
should be endorsed only after the document has been read
over and explained. It was also observed, that such a pro-
vision would embody the existing practice. A Provision, it
was added, should be made that where attestation was
vequired by law, at least one attesting witness should be
examined at the time of registration.

This recommendation was subject to the dissenting note
of Dr. Sen Gupta’, In his view, these amendments required
too much of the Sub-Registrar. Reading over might make
the burden of the Sub-Registrar excessive. Many documents
are exceedingly prolix, and the Registrar would have to
read the whole of it including the Schedules which may run
to fifty pages. Where the executants are literate, no ques-
tion of reading over will arise. In other cases, he stated,
there must be an endorsement or solemn affirmation by a
person who_has read over and explained the decument and
that should be sufficient. At the most, the Registrar can
state the nature of the document whether it was a mortgage
or a deed or partition or conveyance and ask whether such
a document has been executed. Again, regarding attesta-
tion, in his opinion, that was a function which could not be
expected to be duly performed hy the Sub-Registrar in
many cases. Whether a particular attestation is a proper
and legal attestation is a question which ought to be left
to the court to decide when the matter came up before it, if
there are the required number of witnesses signing as such,
the Registrar may proceed on the basis that there has been
a proper attestation, without deciding whether that is a

1. Sixth Report, pages 26-27, paragraph 66.
2. Sixth Report, page ror.
6--109 M of Law.



66

proper attestation. The details, namely, whether the
witnesses signed after the executant and whether the exe-
cutant saw the witnessess signing, etc., need not be deter-
mined by the registering officer. Even if the Registrar
accepted the attestation under the proposed section, it
would not shut out the question of attestation if the matter
came before the court. “It is true that where a document
has been registered there will be a presumption that if the
document requires attestation, it has been attested; but
only a presumption....” This further burden on the Regis-
trar would in his view, serve no useful purpose. Moreover
the question whether a document is legally attested is one
which may have to be determined not upon the statement
of the attesting witness alone but on the exarination of
the witnessess to the circumstances of execution. He,
therefore, thought that this amendment should nof be
made. A proposal that attesting witness should be required
to sign a proper attestation clause, a standard form of
which may be set out in the Act, he said, might probably
receive his support; a declaration or a solemn affirmation
in the attestation clause signed by the witness ought to
suffice for registration, without any necessity of dragging
him before the Sub-Registrar.

Many of the comments received on this clause express
agreement with Dr. Sen Gupte’s views. Registering offi-
cers, it is said, are heavily over-worked and busy persons,
and to read over the documents to the applicant would take
much of their time. As regards attestation, it is stated that
the proof 0६ attestation sought to be established will lead
to difficulties, because—

(a) there will be extra work for the registering
officer;

(b) he will have to know all the classes of docu-
ments required to be attested;

(९) he will have to find out whether the docu-
ment is attested according to law;

(d) parties will have to undergo hardship in get-
ting attesting witnesses and bring them to the regis-
tering office;

(९) a professional] class of attesting witnesses may
come into being.

This is the tone of the majority of the comments. Very
few comments have expressed agreement with the pro-
posed amendment regarding attestation, as saving the
time of the court and expenses to the honest litigant.

A few subsidiary suggestions have also been made.
One is to the effect that the executant should attest that
the attestators have attested the execution of the docu-
ment. Another comment is to the effect that the regis-
tering officer should enquire of the executant whether the


छा

attestors attested the document executed by him and then
make an endorsement to that effect. A third one is to the
effect that the provision regarding reading over may be
confined to cases where the parties are illiterate and fore-
ign to the executant. A fourth one is to the effect that
instead of “reading over”, the Registrar should “explain”
the contents of the documents to the executant or their
representatives, assigns or agents as the case may be.

We have carefully considered the proposed clause and
the comments received thereon. The clause was proposed
with the beneficial and laudable object of ensuring the
minimum of disputes as to execution. But the comments
reveal that there might be practical difficulties in the
achievement of this object. As regards reading over, the
time and labour involved may not sufficiently compensate
for the likely benefits. All documents will not come to the
court. Even if they come to the court, the registration does
not dispense with proof of execution.

In this connection, the Rules on the subject were also
gone through by us!-*,

It was felt, that while it may be desirable to have some
sort of provision to ensure that the person alleged to have
executed a document really understands the nature of
the document, it may not be practicable to insert a rigid
provision in the Act, as it may induce an interested party
to challenge the validity of registration later on flirasy
grounds. Provisions in the Rules are for guidance of
registering officers, and are adequate.

The change regarding reading over the document
should, therefore, be dropped.

The subsidiary suggestion to “explain the contents”
has not found favour with us. It is somewhat vague, and
may create complications.

As regards inquiry into attestation, the difficulties
pointed out in the comments are numerous and real.
Though not many documents are required to be attested,
and, therefore, the proposed provision would not come
into play often, yet, when it does come into play, it will
require extra work and application of mind on behalf of
the registering officer. If the work is done hurried
proposed presumption of due execution and attest

1. ¢.g., Rule 128, Punjab Rules.
2. See also Rute 59, Madras Rules, which runs as follows:

“ Adocument executed by a person who is unable torcad shall be read
out and if necessary, explained to him. A document written in a
language not understood by the executing party shall, in the like
manner be interpreted to him. When a patty to be examined is
dumb, recourse must be had tothe means by which he makes
himself understood”’,

3. Sixth Report, page 27; top.


68

may even be a source of mischief, because illiterate per-
sons and pardanashin ladies will find it difficult to displace
the presumption. There is a possibility, that the provision
will not be followed in its true spirit, particularly where
the registering officer has not much legal experienve or
knowledge. It may sometimes be difficult also to produce
the attesting witness. For these reasons, the requirement
to inquire about attestation should also be dropped. Here
again, the subsidiary suggestions that the attesting wit-
hess should sign some kind of clause in the endorsernent.
or that the executant should attest that the attesting wit-
esses have attested the execution, have not much to
commend themselves.

Clause Clause 20(2) (registration where execution admitted),
2o(2)— departs from existing section $5(1), and requires that there
Registration should be proof of attestation. The Explanation requires
sion of exe- that at least one a‘testing witness must be called for prov-
cution ing due execution. (There is also a verbal change, that
registration is “as to the person admitting execution’).

These provisions are consequential on the scheme re-
garding attested documents’. If that scheme is dropped,
these provisions will also have to be removed. The com-
ments on these provisions reiterate the practical difficulty
of securing attendance of attesting witnesses. It ig peint-
ed out, that an attesting witness has no interest in the
transaction. He may deliberately not appear before the
Registration in time, and it is unfair that merely because
he does not appear, the registration should be withheld?.

A few new points have also been made in the com-
ments. One is, that (in the case of a will or authority to
adopt), where the testator or donor is dead and the docu-
ment is presented by some other person, the registering
officer should add a certificate as to his satisfaction of such
execution by the testator or donor. Now, existing section
4(2) (a)—clause 19(c)—already requires that the register-
ing officer should satisfy himself that the will or the autho-
rity to adopt was executed by the testator or the donor.
There is no necessity to add the further formality that he
should make an endorsement to that effect. (As to endorse-
ment required under the existing law, sce existing sec‘!
58—clause 26). It may also be noted. that where con.
dered necessary, the endorsement can be provided for in
the rules?,

One comment suggests a proviso or an explanation to
the effect that a person presenting a document may, at
any stage before the registration number is assigned ६0

1. See discussion relating to clause 2०009) and (6)().

2. Under clause 21 (1)(०), in such a case the matter has to be referred
to the Registrar.

3. cf. Madras, rule 71 (2). Mulla (1963), page 316.


69

the document, withdraw it from registration. The absence
cf such a provision does not appear to have caused »ny
practical difficulty. Hence no change in needed

Clanse 20.3)

Clause 20(3) widens the scope of the registering ¢
cers power to examine witnesses!. So far as the Sub-Re-
gistrar is concerned existing section 35(2) is confined to
his examining any one present in his office. But existing
section 75(4) relating to the Registrar gives him power to
enforce the attendance of any person as if he were a Civil
Court. The clause widens section 35(2) on the lines ef
section 75(4).

This change has not provoked any comment. But a
new point has been made in a comment, to the effect that
there should be power to order the production of docu-
ments or records, This may be accepted. We also think
that the registering officer's power should be confined to
a witness within his jurisdiction. We recommend? neces-
sary amendment,

We have confined the amendment to the Sub-Registrar.
So far as the Registrar’s power under section 75(4) is con-
cerned, we do not think it necessary to disturb its wording.

There are several changes introduced by clause 21(1) arse
(which corresponds to existing section 35(3) dealing with procedure
the procedure on denial of execution). We shall, how- on desial of
ever, consider only the change that have provoked com- execution
ments. First, where the executant denies execution or
is dead or minor ete., existing section 35(3) provides that
the registering officer shall refuse to register the document
as to the person so denying or dead etc. (From such re-
iusal there is an “application” to the Registrar under sec-
tion 73). Instead of this provision, clause 21(1) propases
that the Sub-Registrar shall refer the document to the
registrar. Secondly, this procedure of reference ig to be
made applicable to two more cases, namely,—

(i) Where the executant does not appear before
the registering officer within the time allowed for ap-
pearance; or

(ii) where the attestation of the document js not
proved, and attestation is necessary in law for the
validity of the document.

Coming to the reasons for these changes,
we may state that so far as the substitution of
the reference procedure is concerned, the earlier Report"
states that the clause provides for a reference to the Re-

1, Sixth Report, page 78 (Notes).
2, See section 35 (2), as proposed to be amended.
3. Sixth Repoit, page 78, notes under clauses 21 and 22.


70

gistrar instead of making an order of refusal. In the body
a the Report?, the reason is more elaborately explained
us -—

“We are of the opinion that the procedure for ap-
peal in case of refusal by the Sub-Registrar should
be replaced by a simpler procedure. We consider that
there is no need to provide for an order of refusal by
the registering officer and then an appeal or applica-
tion to the superior officer against that order. It would
be conducive to expedition and simplicity, if instead
of refusing to register any document and driving the
parties to an appeal or application, the Sub-Registrar
himself refers the matter to the Registrar to waom
he is subordinate”.

The Report contemplates that the Registrar would then
follow the procedure under existing section 74, and if he
refuses to register, a suit can be filed under section 77.

As regards non-appearance or non-attestation, the
change regarding non-appearance as such is not dealt with
under this clause elaborately in the earlier Report, but
the change regarding attestation is consequential on the
scheme proposed in that Report—see clause 20(1)(b) (ii)
and (2)—to ensure the attestation is inquired into at the
time of registration. The intention was to treat proof of
attestation, or rather non-proof of it, in the same manner
as denial of execution?.

The addition of categories of non-appearance and non-
attestation was subject to the dissenting note of Dr. Sen
Gupta’. His argument was, that under the existing law
if the executant does not appear the document may still
be registered under certain circumstances. Of course, the
executant has to be called upon to appear and admit the
execution; but it will be unfair to a person claiming under
the document to refuse registration merely because the
executant does not appear. It was still more unfair in
his opinion, that because the attesting witnesses do not
appear, there should be a reference to the registrar. The
attesting witness has no interest in the transaction and
may fail or refuse to appear. The parties should not
suffer on this account. The provision, in his opinion, seem-
ed to mix up the authentication of the execution of the
document, which was the proper function of registration,
with a decision about its validity. He also pointed out,
that it was not clear that if the executant did not appear
within the time, a further time for his appearance would
be given.

1. Sixth Report, page 34, paragraph 92.
a. ef. Sixth Report, page 27, second sub-paragraph last line.
3, Sixth Report, page 103.


7

Many of the comments received express agreement with
Dr. Sen Gupta’s views. It is said, that if the executant
does not appear, it is unfair to the claimant under the
document to refuse registration, It has also been pointed
out, that clause 21(1)(v) providing for reference in the
case of non-proof of attestation, conflicts with clause 20(1)
(a) and (b) (ii). It is further pointed out, that appear-
ance before the Registrar might involve expenditure which
the party may not be in a position to afford.

A major and detailed objection is, that under the pre-
sent procedure a party goes to the Registrar only it he is
dissatisfied with the Sub-Registrar’s order refusing regis-
tration. Under the proposed procedure, however, a re-
ference will invariably be made in every case, and this
will result in unnecessary increase in correspondence and
expenditure in the Registration office and also be a suurce
of avoidable inconvenience to the parties. It has, there-
fore, been suggested that existing section 35(3) should be
restored with consequential verbal changes in place of pro-
posed clauses 21 and 22. It is contended, that the exist-
ing clauses have not caused hardship, and are comprehen-
sive and should be retained.

Besides these major points, a number of other points
have been made in the comments. Several verbal changes
have also been suggested. These are not being noted in
detail, because the major changes themselves seem to
require reconsideration in the view of the numerous com-
ments objecting to them. The reference procedure was
proposed ‘to be substituted by the Sixth Report, because it
‘was to be considered that a single step should take the
place of the double proceedings of refusal by the Sub-
Registrar and appeal to the Registrar. It would, however,
appear from the comments received on the Sixth Report,
that the existing double procedure has not caused much
inconvenience in practice, and the proposed new proce-
dure has not been welcomed. In this state of affairs, in
view of the strong opposition to the proposed change, the
only course left is to retain the provisions of existing sec-
tion 35(3) and sections 71 to 76. (Sections 72 and 73 were
omitted in the Bill’, because these sections relating tv
appeal ete. were proposed to be replaced by reference.
Section 76(1) (a) was omitted in view of the change pro-
posed by clause 13 in existing section 30%, and its omission
has nothing to do with the scheme of reference. Certain
changes made in sections 71, 74, 75 and 76, in so far as
they are consequential on the scheme of reference, have
to be removed.)

Regarding non-appearing parties, the position has been
considered by us. The Sub-Registrar should, we think,

1, Sixth Report, page 34, paragraph 92, and page 78.
2. Sixth Report, page 78.


Clause 21(2)

Clause 22(1)

Clause 22(2)

72

refuse registration as regards the non-appearing parties.
The contrary view taken in a Lahore cuse’ may lead to
fraud. We were, at first inclined to recommend an express
provision to that effect, by adding the case of non-appear-
ance to the existing section, Later, however, we decided
not to recommend a change, in the absence of any seious
practical difficulty.

The present position regarding non-appearance of one
of the parties is dealt with elaborately by Multa?-*,

Clause 21(2) contains detailed provisions for a refer-
ence by the Sub-Registrar to the Registrar under clause
21 (1). If clause 2] (1) is to be dropped and the existing
provision for appeal under section 71 is to be rTetained*,
the consequential changes will have to be made in this
sub-clause also.

lf the sub-clause is to be maintained along with the
procedure for reference as envisaged in the & ixth Report,
a number of small points made in the comments received
on this sub-clause may have to be considered. But, in
view of our recommendation under clause 21(1), we are
not encumbering this Report with those points.

Clause 22(1) deals with the case where the Sub-Regis-
trar has made a reference to the Registrar. If clause 21 is
modified’, this will also have to be suitably altered.

Apart from this, there is no other change suggested in
the comments.

Clause 22(2), corresponding to existing section 75(1),
pravides', that the Registrar before whom a document
comes for enquiry for the purposes of registration, shall
order the document to be registered, if certain conditions
are fulfilled.

A comment suggests a re-draft—which applies to the
existing section also—to replace the latter half by the words
“when the document was initially presented before him,
register it and in cases under section 21, order the docu~
ment to be registered”. The main object of this commert
seems to be to cover the cases where the document comes
to the Registrar otherwise than on appeal for reference
under the scheme of the Sixth Report) . In such a case he
has himself to register it; he has not to pass an order

3. See Mulla, (1963), page 151.

2. See Mulla, (1963), page 150, footnote (९), and pages 1571, 1525
155.

3. See also Sukhdeo v. Radhika Singh, A.I.R. 1950 Pat. 77, 79 and
Ragitwir ¥.Kaulesar, 1.L.R. 23 Pat. 7793 ALR. 1945 Pat. 140.

4, Seé discussion under clause at(t).

5. See discussion relating to clause 21 (1).

6, For reasons, see Sixth Report, page 68.


73

setting aside the Sub-Registrar’s order. But, as the exist-
mg language has caused no difficulty, we do not think
that this change is necessary.

Clause 22(3) provides that if the Registrar directs re-
gistration, he should also direct the parties to appear for
registration before the Sub-Registrar. This corresponds
to section 75(2) with two changes. One is the change
consequential on the reference procedure. The other is
that while the existing section seems to cover the case
01 the Registrar passing order on a document presented to
himself, this case does not seem to be covered in the draft
clause. Apparently, the earlier Report did not intend any
deliberate change in this respect, and that case should be
added, though no comments have been made on this point.

A fresh point made in the comments is, that where the
case is one of reference, the Registrar should—

(a) forward—
(i) the document;
Gi) copy of his order; and

(b) also direct the parties to appear before the
Sub-Registrar on a specified day for registration, fail-
ing which registration should be refused.

In case the reference procedure is to be replaced’, this
change may not be necessary, because sending of the docu-
ment to the Sub-Registrar by the Registrar can happen
only if, as proposed in clause 21 (2) (d}, the document in
original is to be forwarded to the Registrar by the Sub-
Registrar.

Clause 22 (4) corresponds to existing section 75(3) with-
out changes, and no comments have been received.

Clause 22(5) incorporates a part of existing section
75 (4), the other part being incorporated in clause 20 (9) ?.

Clause 22 (6) (b), dealing with the order of refusal by
the Registrar, departs from existing section 76(1) in that
it specifically enumerates the cases in which the Registrar
refuses registration and, further, in doing so, it mentions
non-proof of attestation also, This latter change (regard-
ing non-proof of attestation) is consequential on the
changed scheme embodied in clause 21 (1) (४), As that
changed scheme is replaced by the existing one’, clause
22(6) (b) will also have to be replaced by existing section
76(1). The former—specific enumeration—is not neces-
sary, and may be dropped.

1. See discussion relating to clause 21,
2. See discussion as to clause 20 (3).
3. See discussion relating to clause 21 (2).

Clause 22(3)

Clause 2.2 (4)

Clause 22(5)

Clause 22(6)
(8)


Clauses 21
and 22
mission
‘or altera-
tion of sec~
tions 61 to
76)

Clause 23

74

Clauses 21 and 22, dealing with refusal cf registration,
lay down the procedure where refusal is on the ground
enumerated in the clause. This scheme of specific enume-
ration is a departure from existing sections 71(1) and
72(1) read with section 76(1). The existing sections do not
enumerate the grounds. All cases of “refusal to register”

r “refusal to admit a document to registration” are cover-
ed (at present) —

(i) So far as the Sub-Registrar is concerned, by
sections 71 and 72; and

(ii) so far as the Registrar is concerned, by sec-
tion 76.

A query arises whether the proposed specific enumera-
tion leaves out some other grounds. It has been pointed
out that (for example), that refusal of registration under
clauses 5 and 7 (language not being understood by the
Sub-Registrar, or interlineations of insufficiency of des-
cription), would not be covered by clauses 21 and 22,
because they are not mentioned there.

There seems to be some force in this objection. Cases
under clauses 6 and 7 are not enumerated in clauses 21
and 22. In this respect, existing section 72 is much wider,
because it coveres all grounds of refusal to admit a doct-
ment for registration, except denial of execution. It may
be useful to add here, that “refusal to admit” a document
for registration would appear to include cases of refusal
to “accept for registration’.

It may also be noted, that as regards refusal under sec-
tion 25 also, the prevailing view is’ that there is no
difference (in relation to the applicability of sections 76
and 77) between “refusing to register” and “refusing to
accept for registration”.

We have already suggested® the retention of the exist-
ing provisions in sections 71 to 76.

The points noted above support that conclusion.

Clause 23 corresponds to existing section 77, and deals
with the suit to be filed in case of order of refusal by the
Registrar. One change proposed by the earlier Report is
the addition of a proviso, which seeks to save any other

|. 1, Munshi v. Daudat Ram, ALR. 1944 Lah. 349, 350.

2. Abdul Rahman & Co. v. Lakmichand, I.L.R. 40 Bom. 40, 69;
A.LR, 1925 Bom. 34, 36 (Refusal under section 21 for want of sufficient
description).

3. Gangadara v. Smbasiva (1916) I.L.R. 40 Mad. 759 (F.B.).

4. Maneklal पर. Kasturbhai, 1.L.R. 53 Bom. 644 ; LL.R. 1929 Bom-
365.
5. See discussion relating to clauses 21 (2) and 23 (7).


75

remedies to which a person may be entitled on the basis
of an unregistered document!. This change has been
agreed to in a comment received on this clause. It may be
adopted’.

A few other points have, however, been raised. One is,
that the time of thirty days allowed by clause 23(1) for
the suit should be counted from the date of the commu-
nication of the order to the applicant, and not from the
date of the making of the order, as at present. Another
suggestion is to the effect, that in computing the period,
the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the order should
be excluded.

The first suggestion relates to the starting point. The
present position seems to be that the starting point
for counting the period of thirty days under section 77 is
the date of the order, if the order wag made in the presence
of the party concerned. If the order was made in his
absence, the starting point is, again, the date of the order,
if notice of the date of the hearing of the application
was given to the party; but if no such notice was
given, then the starting point is the date of communication
of the order*. The present position is, thus, clear and just,
and no provision is needed.

As regards the time spent on obtaining copies, section.
12(2) of the Limitation Act does not in terms apply to
suits under this sectiont. Though a plaint in a suit under
section 77 of the Registration Act is not required to be
accompanied by a copy of the order, yet, in practice, it
-will be difficult to frame such a suit without knowing what
the actual order was. Hence the obtaining of a copy is a
practical necessity. Having regard to the very short period
of limitation, (30 days), this concession should we think,
be allowed. We recommend an amendment accordingly°.

Clause 24 mentions “authorities to adopt”, and the re-
tention of these authorities will depend on whether clause
3(8) is to be retained®.

Clause 25 provides that (besides a document admitted
to registration) every memorandum of document received
shall be copied in the appropriate book. This is an addi-
tion to existing section 52 (1) (c). The earlier Report?
stated that memoranda were included in view of the
changes introduced in clause 42. Clause 42(3) proposed
that a registering officer receiving a copy of decree, ete.,

I For reasons, see Sixch Report, page 34, paragraph 95, and page
78.

2. See section 77 (2), a8 proposed to be amended,
3. See Mulla (1963), page 263, and cases in foot-note (d) there.
4. See Mulla (1963), page 264, foot-note (r).

5. See section 77 (1), as proposed to be amended,

6. See discussion relating to clause 3(3).

7. Sixth Report, page 79, flote on clause 25.

Clause 24

Clause 25


Clause ab

16

under that clause shall prepare a memorandum in the
prescribed form. Under clause 36(1), which was adopted
by clause 42(3), a copy of the memorandum hed ta be sent
to all Sub-Registrars within whose sub-districts any part
of the property is situated हु

Tt has been suggested, that copying of the memoran-
dum is not necessary. (From the comments received on
other clauses', it would appear that the exsting practice
is only to file the memoranda). It has also been suggested,
that copying of the memoranda will mean mere duplica-
tion of work. Since, at present, these memoranda also
are indexed, this change can be safely dropped.?-*

It may be noted, that the words relating to “memoran-
dum” in clause 25 can refer to-—

(i) memoranda filed where an original document
has been registered—clause 36(3);

(ii) memoranda filed where a copy has been re-
ceived—clause 42(3).

In the fermer case, the memorandum is to be seni to
other Sub-Registrars concerned, because the property is
situated in different sub-districts. Since the Sub-Regis-
trars are required to file it? in Book No. 1, the furthe>
provision of copying out the memorandum is unnecessary
in relation to them, im clause 25.

In the second case, only the copies are received by the
Registration office. Since clause 42(3). earlier half, pro-
vides that the copy shall be filed in Book No. 1, in relation
to them also, the copying out of the Memoranda unde:
clause 25 is unnecessary.

While dealing with endorsement on documents adnit-
ted to registration, clause 26 provides that on every copy
sent to registering officer (under clause 42—existing sec-
tion 89) the particulars mentioned in the section shall be
endorsed. Those particulars include the signature ancl
“addition” of the executant and of all persons examined
under the Act and payment of money, ete. This is a new
provision; not found in existing section 58 (which is con-
fined to endorsement on original documents registered).
The comments received state that the endorsement will
not be possible in the case of such copies. This objection.
seems to be correct. The change may be dropped.

1. See discussion relating to clause 36.

2, This point is linked up with clause 36 and clause 64.
3, See also discussion relating to clause 42 (3).

4. Existing Section 65 (2) 5 clause 36 (3).


17

Clauses 27-28 seem to make only consequential changes Clauses 27—
as to section references, in existing sections 59-80. 28

Regarding clause 29(1) (corresponding to existing sec- Clause 29(1)

tion 61)—copying of endorsement, ete.—a suggestion has
been made, that a provision should be made enabling the
filing of maps, plans, or diagrams accompanying documents
registered in books Nos. 3 and 4 and in the indices con-
cerned. On this point, the clause does not seem to depart
from existing section 0111), This comment is apparently
linked up with the similar comment on clause 7(4)—ex-
isting section 21(4)~-and the course to be adopted will
depend‘ on the decision on clause 7(4).

Following existing section 61(2), clause 29(2) deals with Clause 29(2)

return of the document on registration. A comment has
been received to the effect, that when the presentant has
no interest left in the deed, he does not care to take it
back. and the document remains lying until its destruc-
tion after two years and therefore a provision that the docu-
ment should be returned to the presentant or his agent
should be inserted. The existing provision does not, how-
ever, seem to require any change. The matter can be man-
aged without elaborate statutory provisions.

Clause 30(1) makes no change in existing section 62. Clause 30
Regarding clause 30(2), a point has been raised that the
reference therein to clause 65 is perhaps a mistake in clause
42, But it is not so. Clause 65(1), (2) and (3) refers to
copies, and the mention of copies in connection with that
clause is intelligible.

Clause 32, following existing section 36, empowers *he Clause 32

registering officer to send a request to an officer or court
for issue of summons. A point has been made in one com-
ment, that since clause 20(3) widens the powers of regis-
tering officers in relation to issue of summons, this provi-
sion may not be necessary. There may, however, be cases
where the registering officer may prefer to get the sum-
mons issued through the court. Hence no change is neces-
sary.

Another comment is to the effect that the registering
officer should himself have the power to issue the summons.
This is covered by clause 20 (3) 5.

Clause 33 is linked up with clause 32, and, following ciguse 33
existing section 37, states that an officer or court required
by a registering officer to issue a summons shall do so on
receipt of the fee. Existing section 37 uses the expression
“peon’s fee payable in such cases” while clause 33 simply
says “fee payable’, ctc. One comment suggests the sub-

3. See discussion as to clause 7 (4).
2. See diszussion as 1 clause २० (3).


78

stitution of “process fee”. The expression used in clause
33 is better and may be adopted if the whole Act is re-
enacted!.

Clauses 34— Clauses 34-35 make no change in existing sections.

Clause 36(1) Clause 36(1), dealing with the procedure where a docu-

(३) and(4) ment relates to lands in several sub-districts, adds one
new provision to existing section 64, in that, besides pro-
viding that in such a case the Sub-Registrar should inform
all other Sub-Registrars concerned (by scnding a memo-
randum), it also provides that the memorandum shall be
copied in Book No. 1. (Under the existing section, ihe
memorandum is only filed in Book No. 1). This change
has provoked several comments, which state that since
the memorandum is filed in Book No. 1, the further pro-
vision for copying is unnecessary. It is alsa pointed cut
that making out copies will mean duplication of work, be-
cause indexes of such memoranda are prepared just like
the indexes of registered documents. There is some sub-
stance in these points. These comments may be accepted,
and necessary change made in clause 36(1) 36(3) and 36(4)
(d)?, by removing the requirement of copying.

Clause 36— A new point relating to caluse 36 has been made in

New point connection with Cantonments. It is stated, that section
287(2) of the Cantonments Act, 1924 (2 of 1924) requires
that when any document relating to any immovable pro-
perty is registered with Cantonment, the Registrar or the
Sub-Registrar shall send intimation to the Cantonmerts
Board or other prescribed authority; it has therefore been
suggested that a provision may be inserted in the Regis-
tration Act to the effect that a Sub-Registrar. on register-
ing a non-testamentary document relating to immovakle
property situate in any Cantonment, shal! forward a me-
morandum of the document to the authority approved to
administer such Cantonments. The suggested provision
would be a duplication of what is, in substance, contained
already in the Cantonments Act, and does not appear to
be necessary. It may be noted that besides the Canton-
ments Acts, there are many other Central Acts containing
provisions of interest to registration law*.

Clause 37 Clause 37 proposed certain changes in existing section
49, for reasons explained in the earlier Report!. The com-
ments received express agreement with this change. But
one comment suggests, that the words “unless it has oeen
registered” may be placed at the beginning, to make it

1. To be carried only if whole Act is :edrafted,
2, Sze also discussion relating to clause 25.

3. See the ust in Mulla (1963), pages 284-285.
4. See Sixth Report, page 30, paragraphs 75-76.


79

clear that it governs all the clauses. This change may be
carried out only if the whole Act is re-enacted".

Having regard to our recommendation? under clause
3(1) (a), existing section 49 may, as regards documents
require to be registered under any other law, be kept as
tt is, Omission of existing section 49(1) (९) and proviso
Was proposed in Sixth Report, but this may revive old
controversies’. They should, therefore, be retained.

Clause 38 corresponds to existing section 47, without Clause 38°
changes. No comments have been received on this clause.

Clauses 39 and 40 correspond to existing sections 48 and ae ae
50 with certain changes which are explained in the earlier
Report?. (The details of those changes are not relevant for
the present purpose). Dr. Sen Gupta had, however, in his
dissenting note®, expressed the view that the existing sec-
tions should be omitted altogether. He pointed out, that
ever since these sections were brought on the statute book,
successive amendments had restricted their scone. and now
there was a very tenuous survival of the original section.
When the origina! section was enacted, registration was
optional and not (as provided in section 17 of the Act) com-
pulsory, Now section 17 was proposed to be expanded so as
to include all documents concerning immovable property.
There was therefore, no justification for providing for prio-
rity of registered documents over unregistered ones (exist-
ing section 48) because the unregistered documents are “ex
hypothesi perfectly good and effective instruments”. More-
over, the giving of such priority was wrong on principle.
The prior document or oral document transfers a right to
the transferee, and the transferor should have no right to
transier the same by any subsequent document. By mak-
ing a subsequent document, he is simply transferring some-
thing which he has not got. The existing section. in his opi-
nion, left open the door to fraud. A person may transfer
a small property bona fide to another on receipt of proper
consideration, deferring only delivery of possession by con-
sent or for convenience. Under existing section 50—clause
40—even the delivery of possession would be no protection,
so that a new registered document may be got executed for
the same purpose in favour of somebody else. There was
no provision in the law even for reimbursement to the first
transferee for the expenses incurred by him.

Lastly, in his opinion, when virtually every document of
importance is compulsorily registrable, no real advantage
would be gained by retaining these sections.

1, To be carried out only if the whole Act is to be re-enected.

2. See discussion as to clause 3 (1a).

3. See Mulla (1963), pages 774 and 182.

4. Sixth Report, page 29, paragraph 74 and page 31, paragraph 77.
5. Sixth Report, pages 103 and ro4.


80

Several comments received on these clauses have ex-
pressed the view that the sections should be deleted
altogether, that they encourage fraud, that they are unneces-
sary and redundant, and expressed agreement with Dr. Sen
Gupta’s views. One comment, however, agrees with the
amendment proposed by the Law Commission, while one
comment suggests the specific mention of section 53A of tae
Transfer of Property Act in clause 39, second proviso.

It would appear,’ that the provisions for giving priority
to a registered document over an unregistered one were
first introduced at a time when registration of the docu-
ments concerned was optional. As regards documents
compulsorily registrable, the first Registration Act which
gave them priority over unregistered document, was the
Act of 1877. Before this Act, a document compulsorily re-
gistrable had no priority, so that there were cases in which
persons committed fraud by first executing a sale deed for,
say Rs. 50 (optionally registrable) and then executing a
fraudulent sale deed of the same property for, say
Rs. 101 (compulsorily registrable). The document, though
registered, had no priority over an unregistered document
under the old Act, as it was compulsorily registrable. The
result, was that the deed for Rs. 5@ held the field.

This was not all. The document for Rs. 50 was actualy
executed later, but was ante-duted* It thus defeated the
deed of Rs. 101. It was to prevent such mal-practices in
respect of documents compulsorily registrable that register-
ed dacuments were given priority over unregistered docu-
ments.*-4

The deletion of these sections, sections 48 and 50, might
therefore revive the very malpractice to remedy which the
1877 Act first introduced the comprehensive provisions now
found in section 50. That is to say, the transferee under a
document for more than Rs. 100 (registered) may be
defrauded by a subsequent transfer for less than Rs. 100
(unregistered) which is ante-dated. It is true, as pointed
out by Dr. Sen Gupta, that retention of the section can lead
to fraud in the converse case, namely, a document
for less than Rs. 100 (unregistered) can be
defeated by a document for more than
Rs, 100 (registered). Thus, either course is likely to leave
open one kind of fraud. It is not easv to say which is the
more frequent and serious type of fraud. We consider,
however, that the sections should be retained, because-—

(i) fraud of the type contemplated by the 1877 Act
cannot be ruled out until the limit of Rs. 100 is remov-
ed;

(ii) retention of the section would encourage peo-
ple to seek registration to ensure priority and thus pro-
mote the habit of registering documents:

1. See Mulls (1963), nage 201, under the heading “ Regulations”,
3. See cases cited in Mulla (1963). pages 293-204.

2. See the statement of Objects and Reasons 10 the Bill which became the
1872 Act, cited in Mulla (1963), page 204.

4. Section 50 of the 1866 Act (Mulla, page 199) may be contrasted with
section $0, 1877 Act (Mulla, page 200 ).



81

(iii) where the section is likely to cause hardship,
the Legislature has intervened to provide relief—as in
section 53A Transfer of Property Act. (This is in rela-
tion to existing section 50). .

The existing sections, therefore, need not be removed.
As regar is the suggestion to mention section 53A, Transfer
ot Property Act, in clause 39, that appears to be unneces-
sary, because section 54A is confined to cases of writing,
while clause 39 deals with competition between a registered
document and an oral agreement or declaration,

The second proviso in clause 39 (added by the Sixth Re-
port to save section 27(b), Specific Relief Act, 1877), is not
necessary, .The existing position is fairly clear.| The
second,proviso may be dropped. (The existing proviso
relating to equitable mortgages was necessary for special
reasorts), mo i

In clause 40, the saving regarding section 832, Transfer
of Property Act is not necessary, and may be dropped.

Clause 41(1) corresponds to existing section 87, which Clause 41(1)
deals with defects in the appointment or procedure of the
registering officer.

Clause 41(2) is a new provision, to the effect that any Clause 41(2)
defect in or the want of authority of a person to present
a document shail not, by itself, render invalid the registra-
tion of the document or the transaction effected by it. Rea-
sons for this change were explained in the Sixth Report,*-‘
the main point being that once registration is effected, the
executant or any other party (whether present or not) should
not be allowed to go behind the registration. This change
itself has not provoked any comment; but two comments
suggest the deletion of the words “or the transaction effect-
ed by it” in clause 41(2), because the only question with
which the sub-clause is concerned is validity of the regis-
tration. The comment may be accepted.

It is also our view, that the provision in clause 41(2)
should be confined to parties who before the registering
officer assented to registration or admitted execution. Sub-
ject to these changes, the provision in clause 41(2) is a use-
ful one, and we recommend! its adoption in a suitable form.

५. See Mulla (1963), pages 169 and 227.
. See Malia (1963), page 168.
. Sixth Report, page 36, paragraph 99 and page 80,

4. The existing law is discussed in Mulla (1963) page 134, under section
32.

5. See section 87, as proposed to be amended.
7—109 M of Law.

v

yw


Clause 41—
‘New point

Clause 42(1)

82

Regarding clause 41, a new point has been raised to the
effect that if a registering officer, by inadvertence, admits a
document affecting immovable property in a place over
which he has no jurisdiction, the defect should be curable.

The existing law seems to be that if no part of the pro-
perty is situate within the sub-district where it is register-
ed, the registration is void under section 28'. The proposed
change might appear harmless at the first sight. But there
is one risk, namely, in the district where the property is.
actually situate, the transfer registered by inadvertence in
another district would not be recorded or traceable in the
registration records, so that persons subsequently intending
to take a transfer of that property might actually have no
notice of the first transfer, and may yet be burdened with
constructive notice of the transfer under section.3, definition”
of notice, Explanation 1, Transfer of Property Act. No
change is therefere, recommended, as to this point.

Clause 42(1) deals with copies cf orders, etc., to be sent
by the court or officer. The clause expands the category
of orders to be 50 sent. The reasons for this change were
explained in the Sixth Report at various places? The
object was, that registration under the Act should operate
as a complete and effective notice concerning title. All docu-
ments affecting title to immovable property must be brought
within the purview of the Registration Act. Either the
document should be registered under the Act, or a memo-
vandum thereof filed under sections 65 and 66 under Book
No. 1 and under section 89. Bringing in all documents
under section 89 would not put the parties to any additional
expenditure, since they are not required to be registered.
Copies of all decrees or orders of court affecting immovable
property were also proposed to be sent to the Registrar,®
and so were copies of even plaints and memoranda of
appeal.

{This recommendation was subject to the dissenting note
of Dr. Sen Gupta.)®

1. See the cases cited in Mulla. (1963), page 126, under section 28, undeT
the heading ‘“ Registration void if no part’’, etc.

2. Sixth Report, page 17, Patagraph 39 ; page 18, paragraph 40 5 page 37
paragraphs 101 to 103 ; page 7 (under section 89) ; page 75 ; and page 80
(Notes).

3.Sixth Report, page 37, paragraph 102.

4. Sixth Repott, page 37, paragraph 103.

5. Sixth Report, pag 105.


1. The following chart will show how the clause widens
the scope of the existing section. -

Existing section 89 Clause 42 (7)
(2) Loan under the Land Improvement. (a) Lox under ‘the Land Im
Loans Act, 1883. batten Loans Act or the
दि ‘iculturists’ Loans Act,
. 1884 (12 of 1884).
(2) Certificate of sale of immovable. Fro: i See (k) below.

erty wader Civil Procedure: Code,

(3) Loan under the Agriculturists’ Loans See (a) above.
Act, 1884.

(4) Certificate of sdle by Revenue-Officer, See (4) below.
granted to the purchaser of immov~
able Property sold by public auction.

() Partition by @ Revenue
Officer 5

(के Vesting Order iander the
Charitable Endowments Act,
1890, ers

Grant of immovable property
- ७ ean on behalf of the Govern:
‘ ments

(९) Decree or order of a court
including one upholding pos-
session of defendant under
section 434A of T. P. Act;

Security bond executed in favour
कि 22/72/7776 81

{g) Gomposition deed accepted by a
court in insolvency 5

See (2) and (4) above . . ’ « (A) Gertificate of sale granted to the
purchaser by. a. ctvit court or
“other public officer.

Ti. Plaint or memorandum of appeal in which immov-
able property is in controversy.

As numerous comments raising multifarious points
have been received, it would be convenient if they are
classified and the points made therein divided, as follows: —

(i} One. line of criticism “is; that the proposed
amendment will throw enarmous work on courts and
registering offices, without any: substantial advantage
or benefit to the public. It would, it is stated, serve no
useful purpose, and increase ministerial work.

(ii) Regarding plaints and memoranda of appeal,
it is Pointed out, that the process of sending out copies
involves immense trouble and expenditure, and will
encumber the record of the ’ registering officers. A

ea


8h

plaint or memorandum of.appeal is only a preliminary
stage of the proceedings, and its transmission to the re-
gistering officer will be meaningless. Dr. Sen Gupta
had also in hig dissenting note,’ made.the point that
since the filing of a plaint does ‘not affect title, its re-
cording under the clause“will have no’ use except to
show that a:suitchas been filed: If it is only to give
notice to any party that there is a pending suit, it is, in

* his view, superfluous, because the doctrine of lis pen-

dens is not dependent on notice. Moreover, he pointed
out, a memorandum of appeal does not contain any
description of immovable property, and convéys (to its
reader) nothing with respect to the property which is
the subject matter of the appeal. .

(iii) Besides these objections, a few points of detail
have been also made in the comments. Thus, one com-
ment says that courts and officers fail to send copies for
years, and that, therefore, a time limit of four months
should be laid-down. Another comment suggests, that
the words “and” after the words “specified in this sub-
section” may be deletéd, so as to remove the misunder-
standing that the subsequent words “affecting, etc.” do
not apply to “decree or order”.

(iv) An-alternative suggestion is that if copies of
decrees passed after adjudication are sent to the Fegis-
tration Department, the purpose will be served. This
was also Dr. Sen-Gupta’s suggestion.’

(v)-Regarding security bonds referred to in clause
42(1)(2), it has been pointed out that they are compul-
sorily registrable under existing section 17(1)(b). The
decision in Bishnath Sahu v. Prayag Din,? is cited in
support of this; and it is argued that the original is re-
gistrable compulsorily, a copy need not be sent under
this clause?

(vi) It 888. 8180 been suggested, that these changes
may be replaced by a simple provision requiring copies
of order..of courts directing attachment of immovable
property to be registered.

(vii) Linked up with these changes is the deletion
of the relevant portions of existing section 17(2), list-
ing various documents as exempt from registration.
These are, section:17(2){vi) and. section 17(2)(vii), (viii),
(ix), (x), (xi) and (xii). As regards section 17(2)(vi)
{exempting from registration) “any decree or order of
_court except a decree or order expressed to be made on

1. Sixth Report, page 105.
2. Bishnath Sahu ¥. Prayag Din, A.LR. 1958 All. 820.
3. As to existing law, see Mulla, (1963), page 94.


85

a compromise and comprising immovable property other
than that which is the subject matter of the suit or pro-
ceeding” it has been suggested, in one of the comments,
that it should not be deleted. Clause 42{1) (c) provides
that a copy of a decree or order of a court (affecting
immovable property) is ta be transmitted to the regis-
teritig officer. But an apprehension has been expressed
that unscrupulous persons might cheat the Government
of the revenue by starting a suit on the basis of an
insignificant item and then obtaining a compromise
decree by including therein property of much greater
value. Therefore, section 17(2)(vi) should be restored
(so that such compromise decrees will continue to be
registrable).

The object with which the Law Commission, in its ear-
lier Report, proposed the changes was the beneficial one of
making the registration law more useful by bringing these
documents on the registration records under the proposed
procedure. But the comments have pointed out the diffi-
culties. We have to balance, on the one hand, the benefit
likely to result and on the other hand, the inconvenience
likely to be caused and the ‘increase in work. Even the
existing sketchy provisions are not promptly complied with,
as would appear from one of the comments. In this state
of affairs, 19 add to the burden on the courts and public offi-
cers is likely to mean the addition of a duty which will not
be fulfilled in practice, and the provision might thus remain
nugatory. The more specific objectiong are in relation to
plaints and memorandum of appeal; but the difficulties apply
even to decrees, because the number of decrees, etc., affeci-
ing immovable property which are being daily passed by
courts must be considerably large. The proposed changes
in existing section 89 will, therefore, have to be dropped.

Consequential changes will, therefore, be necessary to
retain the omitted portions of section 17(2). (As regards
section 17(2)(vi) relating to decrees other than compromise
decrees affecting immovable property, a specific objection
has been made to its deletion from clause 3(2). Though
the apprehension that the people will file suits to cheat
the Government of its revenue may not possess a strong
justification, yet the retention of. section 89 will itself
necessitate. the retention of section © 17(2)(vi)—appearing
as clause 4241) (e)—in clause 3(2) ).

It does not appear necessary to provide for the compul-
sory registration of attachment. Attachments are effected
by an elaborate procedure, which itself is intended to
secure sufficient publicity.

Imposition of a time limit for sending copies under
existing section 89 is a good suggestion; but if the time
limit is not adhered to, doubts will arise. It cannot, there-
fore, be accepted.


Clause 42 (1)
and security
bonds

Clause 42(2)

Clause 42(3)°

86

As to security bonds, the assumption that they are
compulsorily registrable under existing section 17(1)(b) -
need not be examined. There is some conflict of decisions
on ‘the point, ndoted in Mulla! and reviewed in the
cages,*-°-

We think that it is desirable to exempt a security bond
executed in favour of a court or a public officer in. his
official capacity for the due fulfilment of a condition
imposed by a decree or order of the court or public officer.

We recommend accordingly®

Clause 42(2), dealing with print and memorandum of
appeal, will have to be dropped.*

Clause 42(3), which is described in Sixth Report’ asa
new provision, provides that the registering officer receiving
a copy of the decree, order, instrument, etc., under the
clause shall—

(i) file it® in Book No. 1; and

{ii) prepare a memorandum in the prescribed
form; and

(iii) the provisions of clause 36 shall apply to such
memorandum.

The object of this provision? was to state what step s
should be taken by,the Registering Officer on receiving the
documents, ete, The words requiring preparation of a
memorandum in the prescribed form and the consequential
incorporation of clause 36 have been objected to in the
comments, on the ground that every registering officer in
whose sub-district the property is situate will get. a copy
of the document and file the same.

Since the documents received under this section (exist-
ing section 89) are to he filed in Book No, 1, the preparation
of the memorandum, appears to be unnecessary. If the pro-
perty is situated in several sub-districts and the intention
is to apply the procedure unider clause 36—section 64 —that

1. See Mulla, (1963), page 94.
2. Bishnath Sahu v. Prayag Din, A.I.R. 1958 All. 820 (D.B.).
. B. Rama Bhatt v. Kodanda Rama Bhatt, A.LLR. 1963 Mysore
332 083 (Reviews cast-law),
1 yt Ravonati v. Ajoyendu, ALR. 1956 Cal. 375 (D.B.) (Reviews case~
jaw).
5. See section 17 (2) (via) (new), as proposed to be inserted,
6. See disqussion under clause 42 (1).
7 Sixth Report, page 59 clause 42 (3) marginal entry.
8. As to filing, see existing section 89 (3) (2), etc, last 6 words.
9. See Sixth Report, page 81.


87

also is unnecessary, because, Bs rovided by clause 42(1),
every sub-Registrar concerned will get a copy. The words
in questiun may, therefore, be removed,

A suggestion has been made that Rules 88 to 90 of the
Madhya Pradesh Registration Rules! should be adopted
throughout the country, as they make provisions as to how
these documents are to be entered in Book No, 1 and how
the books are to be bound as Supplementary Book No. 1 to
prevent injury to the binding. This aspect wil] be dealt
with later’.

Clause 42(4), which is a new provision not found in Clause 4204)
existing section 89, provides, that the filing of the copies (New)
under this clause shall, for the purposes of the Registration
Act and of section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, have
the same effect as if the document had been registered
under this Act. The reason for this change was thus ex-
planned*.—

‘Sub-section (4) is intended to fill up the lacuma in
the definition of “notice” in section 3 of the Transfer of
Property Act and also to provide that the filing of a
copy of a document under section 42 shall have the
same effect as registration’.

Now, this change has provoked two comments. One is,
that between the words “under” and “this section”, the
words “sub-section (1)” should be interposed. That com-
ment also makes the point that the appropriate remedy is
amendment of section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act,
and registration of mere claim to property made in a civil
court is outside the scope of the Registration Act. The other
comment states that the filing of copies under this section
should have the effect only of notice under the Transfer of
Property Act and should not have the same effect as a re-
gistration.

Now, the real question is, what should be the effect of
the filing of copies under existing section 89. The existing
Act does not contain any specific provision on the point. On
principle, it should have the same effect as registration. It
filing in Book No, 1 (expressly provided for by existing
section 89)‘ supports this approach. Book No. 1, as des-
cribed by existing section 51(1), is the main “Register of
Non-testamentary documents” relating to immovable pro-

~ perty. One of the objects of registration is to bring into

1. Rule 88 of the Madhya Pradesh Rules (cited in the suggestion) provides
that only the copies & memoranda mentioned in the rule shall 1861 filed in Book I
or Book 4. Rule 89 relates to “Supplementary Book 1” being a separate file
‘book for copies mentioned in rule 88 (6) to(g). Rule 90 relates to “' Additional
Books x and 4." for spare copies.

2. See discussion relating to clause 61 (2), infra.

3. Sixth Report, page 81.

4. See Section 89 (1) 89 (2), etc., last 6 words.


Clause 42००
‘New point

Clause 43

88

being a statutory record under official machinery of trans-
actions of value, and the filing of copies should have the
same legal consequences. On this reasoning, the proposed
general provision equating such filing with registration, is
amply supportable.

It is true, that the very nature of the documents of
which copies are filed, is such that they would not attract
the provisions of section 50, which is confined to certain
“instruments” and leases referred to therein, Since these
are not documents “required by section 17 to be register-
ed,” section 49 may also not be attracted.

A certificate of sale also may not be an “instrument”
requiring registration®. Therefore, it may be that for prac-
tical purposes, the only usefu} consequence of the ‘pro-
posed provision would be the attraction of section 3 of the
Transfer of Property Act (registration to amount to cons-
tructive notice}.

: The need for this provision was, therefore, considered at
length by us. Documents filed under existing section 89 are,
by virtue of section 51(2), filed in Book 1, and are referred
to in section 51(2) as “registered”. It is not, therefore,
necessary to insert the proposed new provision. The doubt
raised in the Sixth Report® on the subject relates to a snall
area‘, namely, sale certificates.

(So far as section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act is
concerned, that applies only where the documents are com-
pulsorily registrable).

Clause 42 (4) may, therefore, be dropped.

It has been suggested in one of the comments that since
under rule 11(E) (2) of the Evacuee Interest (Separation)
Rules, 1951, a registering officer is required to file a copy of
the sale certificate under those rules in Book No. 1, a pro-
vision should be added to the effect that an officer granting
a certificate of sale of immovable property under that rule
shall send a copy of the certificate to the registering oficer,
ete., who shall file it in Book No, 1. This, however, appears
to be a provision which can be more appropriately made in
those rules.

Clause 43(1) reproduces existing section 42, Clause
43(2) is a new provision, to the effect that when a will is
deposited. under existing section 42, the testator shail
endorse on the cover the name and address of the person
to whem the original document should be delivered after

1, As to non-applicaton of section 50, see Mulla, (1963), page 279 and
280, footnote (7).

2 of. Mulla. (1963), pages 105 and 207, and also case at page 280 foot
mote (|, ‘f

3. Sixth Report, page 38, paragraph 104.
4. See-Mulla, (1963), pages 279 and 280.



89

his death. This chang age appéars to be a-part of the scheme
proposed regarding deposit of-will’. Many wills, it was
stated, were accumulating in the Registration offices until
the court summoned the wills. It might also happen that
even when there is a will, the man’s estate may be dealt
with without reference to the will. To remedy this situ-
ation, suitable amendments were proposed hy the earlier
Report. One of these was the provision that the testator
should endorse on the cover the name and address of the
person to whom the original document should be delivered.
After death, the will is to be opened on an application under
clause 46(1)—existing section 45(1),—and delivered to
the nominee under clause 46(1), last portion,. (Other
changes are not relevant for a: consideratiox.of clause 43).
Thus, nomination is compulsory under the proposed pro-
vision.

Now, one comment on the clause is to the effect that this
provision for endorsement is not necessary, while another
comment points out that it will defeat the object of not dis-
closing the name of any person connected With the will.
After careful consideration, we reject these objections.
Secrecy is one consideration that usually prevailg in the
case of wills; but, as-against that, one must also balance the
benefit that is likely to result from a provision for nomina-
tion. With an endorsement, specifying the nominee, as con-
templated, it would be easy for the registering officer to
deliver the will to the nominee. The present section (sec-
tion 45) merely says that after opening the will it shall be
copied in Book No. 3, and, thereafter, the original will shail
be again re-deposited. This is not satisfactory. Even a
person whom the testator wanted to kriow the contents of
the will cannot (at present) get back the will. Hence, if
the whole scheme regarding deposit of wills is to be main-
tained?, the proposed provision need not. be disturbed. Even
otherwise, we do not see any objection to a provision en-
abling nomination. But we think that it should be con-
fined to cases where the testator himself deposits the will,
so as to ensure that the agent, after taking charge of the
will from the testator, does not add the nomination by for-
gery.

1 ye recommend an amendment of the section according-
ly, है

Clause 44(1) embodies existing section 48(1) dealing
with the procedure on deposit of wills. A comment suggests
a verbal change to the effect that instead of the. words
“shali note”, the words “and shall endorse” be substituted.
‘Really speaking, the clause’ contémplates two kinds of
action, noting in the book and noting. (endorsement) on

1, Sixth Report, page 28, paragraph .72 and page 81.
2. See clauses 46 and 48. 2°)

3. See section 42, as proposed to ‘be amended.

Clause 44(1)


90

the cover. For the latter action, the word “endorse” is
more appropriate. It is, however, unnecessary to make such
a minor and verbal change.

- ‘Clause 44(2)  Clatise 44(2) makes no change in section 43(2).
Clause 45 corresponds to existing section 44.

“Clause 46 Clause 46 proposes the following changes in existing
section 45 (procegdings on death of person depositing
Wi _

Clause 45

(i) Under the existing section, after death, on
application made to the registering officer. the latter
has to oper the cover and cause the contents to be
copie! in Book No. 3 and’ then re-deposit the original
will. Under the clause, however, this provision for re-
‘deposit is omitted, for the reason' that it has been re-

"placed by provision for delivery of the will to the
nominee ofthe testator’, the nomination being under
«clause 43 (2).

{ii) Under the existing section, if the will remains
in deposit;.. it continues so indefinitely; while under
clause 46 2) , if no steps are taken for withdrawing tlie
will @y the testator) or for seeking delivery of the
deposited will to the nominee, then the Registrar has
to follow the procedure for. the destruction of the will
as given in.clayse 48. पु

Now, 076 point teade in the comments received, is, that
cat the time of the.application under clause 46(1), the
nnortinee of the testatar would rarely accompany the appli-
eant. Hdnce the provision for delivering to nominee would
never come into play. Another comment suggests that the
procedure of nomination. under clause 43(2) should be
deleted .and consequentially the provision for delivery to
the nominee should also be deleted and existing position
as in section 45 restored, A third point is that provision for
return of wills at present lying in deposit should also he

__Hf the provision for nomination is retained’, then the pro-

vision for délivéry te the nominee has also to be retained.

‘The possible situations may be studied in detail, Assuming

that the testator has made the nomination, it may be that--
_@) no application may be made for opening the

cover; or .
(ii) the application may be made but the copying
expenses not paid; or --

7. Sixth Report, page 28, paragraph 72,
2. See clause 43 (2) as to nomination.
3. See the discussion antter clause’ 43 (2).


a

‘ (iii) the nominee may not be present with the
applicant or may not be traceable. Under clause 46 (2),
in all cases the procedure for disposal as laid down
under clause 48 has to be followed, that is to say, giving
of notice to the depositor +4d his nominee, thereafter
opening the will, further notice to the executor and
beneficiaries under the opened will, and (if no steps
taken for registration of the will) ultimate destruction
of the will. i

As the scheme of destruction of wills is to be altered’,
clause 46(2), will also require changes. Our proposal for
voluntary nomination? involves a ९० ential change,
and we recommend? an amendment accord ingly. The nomi-
nee would usually have knowledge of the will, ete., and can
be expected to be present at the time of opening, As re-
garding wills lying at present, that is not a matter which
can be dealt with in a new Act.

One suggestion regarding clause 45 is that the Registrar
on application or suo motu should open the sealed cover
on being satisfied of the testator’s death and cause the con-
tents of the will to be copied in Book No. 3 and deliver the
will to the nominee of the testator or executor if no such
‘person is forthcoming to file it, “But opening suo motu may
he risky. Opening on application is already covered. Hence
no such change is needed”.

Clause 47(1) corresponds to existing section 46(1).
‘The reference to section 294, Indian Succession Act, 1925
may be substituted+ (as proposed in the Sixth Report),
in place of reference to the old Act.

Clause 47(2), which follows existing section 46(2),
provides that when a court orders production of a deposit-
ed will, the Registrar shall open it, cause it to be copied
in Book No. 3 and make.a note, etc. Now, one comment
suggests that the copying of the will should be at the ex-

ense of the person causing it to be produced in the court.
€ do not, however, consider a statutory provision to be
necessary®,

Clause 48 is a new provision, whereunder wills deposit-
ed with the Registrar are to be disposed of by destruction
(if not registered before the Registrar according to the
procedure given in the clause). Briefly, the procedure is
that the registering officer has to give a notice on the 1st
July, every third year to the depositor and his nominee,

x. See discussion relating to clause 48.

2. See discussion relating to clause 43 (2).

3 See section 43, as proposed to be amended.

4 See amendment proposed to section 46.

३. The matter can be left to rules. See Bihar Rule 87, Mulla, (1963),
Page 345.

Clause 46—
New point

Clause: 47(1)

Claust 47020

Clause 48
(New)


92

inquiring about the depositor’s present address. H, after
such notice or otherwise, the Negistrar is satisfied that
the testator had died, he has to open the cover in the pre-
sence of a judicial officer not below the rank of a subordi-
nate judge. He has then to give notice to the executor
and beneficiaries that if they do not register the will with-
in six months, it will be destroyed. Thereafter, the actual
destriction is to be in accordance with the provisions of
the Destruction of Records Act, 1917. This provedure is
a part of the proposed new scheme dealing with wills’,
It was stated in the Sixth Report? that it had been pointed
out that numereus sealed covers containing wit had
accumulated (in registrar’s offices), no persons having
come forward to claim them.

The comments received on this clause object to it, on
the ground that there is no need for destruction of wills,
because the number of unopened and unclaimed wills
cannot be large, It is pointed out, that giving of notices
to depositors every year will increase the Registrar's
work and also the work of the suhordinate judge. When-
ever the probate’ Court calls for a ‘will, the will can be
sent in origirial. Sending of notices, it is stated, will also
involve much additional expense on postage. Moreover,
the sending of the notice will naturally leak out the fact
that the testator had deposited a sealed will, and this
may result in his being subjected to pressure to disclose
the contents thereof, which will defeat the very purpose
of depositing a sealed will. If the beneficiary is a minor
and the nominee is his guardian with an adverse interest,
then it is said, the nominee may not respond to the notice,
so that the will may be destroyed under the proposed pro-
vision, thus depriving the minor of his right. erefore,
it has been suggested, this clause should be deleted.

Another set of comments favours this provision with
some modifications suggested. One suggestion is, that in-
stead of a subordinate judge, a munsif should be substi-
tuted. Another is a suggestion to the effect that refererices
to nominee should be excluded, to maintain secrecy. A
third comment is to the effect that in clause 48(2), in-
stead of “Registering Officer”, the “Registrar” may be
substituted.

Tt has also been suggested, that a notice should be issued
on the Ist July of every year in respect of any sealed cover
which remains unclaimed for more than 10 years on that

te, .

There appears to be some substance in the objections
based on the ground of increase of work and expenditure.
Though the proposed provision, would be a useful one,

x. Sixth Report, page 28, bottom, paragraph 72.
2. Sixth Regort, page, 28, middle.


98

its implementation may perhaps be impracticable. The
provision is, thus, like ely to prove inconvenient, and has,

for that reason, to be dropped... .

Clause 48(3). deals with tht actual procedure for the
destruction of wills... Since the whole clause. has to be
dropped!, the detailed comments on clause 48(3) need
not be considered. © ह

Clause 49 (1) embodies existing section 3(1) relating to
the appointment of the Inspector General of Registration.
A new point has been made in a comment to the effect that
Munsif Magistrates in the Taluka and District Magistrates
should .be given powers far supervision over the day to
day work of sub-Registrars and Registrars tespicctively.
We consider that this matter ‘depends on the administra-
tive pattern adopted in each State, and a general amend-
ment for the whole country is, unnecessary.

Clause 49(2) embodies section 3(2), and no comments
have been received, on this clause.

Clause 50 reproduces section 5, 2nd ‘ho ¢omments have
been received on this clause.

Clause 51 (1) corresponds to existing section 71).

Clause 51(2) embodies existing - section 7(2), with the
substitution in the proviso of, “reference” for “appeal”.
This change is consequential on the changed procedure
under clauses 21 and 22, and if those clauses are altered?,
the word “appeal” has to be restored in this-clause also.

Clauses 52 to 54 correspond to existing sections 8, 69 (1) ,

part, and 68, without changes. No comments have been
received on these clauses. पु

Clause 55 deals with absence or vacancy in the office of
the Registrar, It departs from existing section 10, by
omitting mention of “the Judge of the District Court”.
Under section 10(1), later half, in dafault of appointment
by the Inspector Generali, the “Judge of the District
Court” acts as a Registrar. This provision does not apply
to Presid:ncy towns, where, un or section 10(2), only a
person whom the Iispector General appoints is the Re; pis:
trar_until the State Government fills up the vagancy. The
provision authorising the District Judge to act as a Re-
gistrar was proposed to be removed by the earlier Report’
on the ground that there was no reason why there should
be any difference in this respect between the areas dealt

1. See discussion relating to clause 48.
2, See discussion relating to clauses 21 and 22.
3. See Sixth Report, page 21, paragraph 24.

Clause 48(3)

Clause 49(r)

Clause: 49(2)

Clause 50,

Clause 51(1)

Clause s1(2)

Clauses $2
to 54

Clause 55


Clause 56

Clause 57

Clause 58

Clause 59 |

Clause 60

Clause 61

94

wih t by sub-sections (1) and (2), ie, the mufassil and
residency towns. The eatlier Report, therefore, recom-
mended a uniform provision. a

Now, one comment suggests restoration of the. existing
section, pointing out that occasions may arise when the
Inspector General makes a default in appointing a Regis-
trar immediately owing. to pre-oecupation. We think, that
there is some force in the comment, and restore the exist-
ing section. . +

Clause 50 ( nding to: existing section 11) omitted
the excepting orordee ie, the last eight words which run
“except those mentioned in sections 68 and 72”. ‘The clause
has provoked no comments.. We, however, would like to
retain the existing section. हि

Clause 57 corresponds td existing section 12. It has pro-
voked no comments. .

Clause 58, following existing section 13(1), provides
that all appoimiments under sections 10, 11 and_12—clauses
55, 56 and 57—shall be reported to the State Government
by the Inspector General. A point has been made in the
comments received on this provision, to the -effect that
this clause are be deleted. The statutory duty to send
reports, it is said, serves no.‘ purpose or benefit. Appoini-
ments ere made under the Service Rules, and {it is stated)
there.ig ao point in_ the Inspector General’s sending के
report to the State Government. The section, however,
is harmless, and may be retained. Section 13(2), which
was omitted in the Sixth Réport, may also be retained.
It was regarded as unnecessary in the Sixth Report’, but

we’ de not share that view.

Clause 59 combines existing sections 14 and 16. It has
provoked no comments.

Clause 60 corresponds to @xisting section 15. It has pro~
voked no comments. a

Clayse’61 deals: with the register books to be kept in
the’ Registration offices. It departs from existing sections
51 and 52 (2), on the following points:

(i) It’ provides that “memoranda” prepared
under clause 42 or received yinder clause 36 shall be
entered in Book No. 1. This is consequential on a
similar provision in clause 25, clause os and clause
42(3), latter half;

(1) It. provides that copies of decrees, etc., re-
ceived under clause 42 shall be filed in Book No. 1;

1, Sixth Report, page 82 (notes).


95

(iii) If any of the books is in danger of being
destroyed or becoming illegible, it authorises the
‘Registrar ‘to order re-copying of that book or portion
thereof, and provides that the copies so prepared shall.
be deemed to be the original, The reasons for this.
was', that a suggestion for the insertion of such a
provision had been made and certain States (Bihar
and Bombay), had already amended the Act and the
necessity for such provision was obvious;

iv) It also incorpotates the provision in section
52(2). regarding quthentication of books, with this
modification, that it substitutes “State Government”
for “Inspector General”;

{v) The existing heading of Book No.—2“Record
of reasons for refusal to register”—is changed into.
“Record of reasons for referring a document to the
Registrar”, Consequentially, in the offices of Regis~
trars, Book No. 2A is headed “Record of reasons for
refusing to register”. This is consequential on the
scheme of reference under clauses 21 and 22.

Now, several comments have heen received on this
clause, which contain points relating both as to the exist-
ing section and as to the changes proposed therein.

Regarding clause 61(1), which lists the Books and
gives their nomenclature, it has been stated that the no-
menclature of the Registers is not clear. Proposed Book
No. 2 should be described as “Register of reasons for re-
ferring, etce.”, Book No. 2A as “Register of reasons, etc.”
and Book No, 4 and Book No. 5 should be described as “Re-
gisters of miscellanéous documents”. It is also suggested,
that a Register may be prescribed for recording the names
of parties presenting documents for registration. We do
not consider these yerbal changes to be strongly needed.
As to register of persons presenting documents, presenta-
tion is not on the same footing as registration. The change
is not ne

Regarding clause 61(2), which provides that in Book
No. 1 shall be entered certairi documents and also certain
memoranda, it has been suggested that not only the docu-
ment should be entered, but also the signatures of the
executant and the witnesses obtained to enable the docu-
ment to be treated as counterpart of the original and
legally noted to be used in proof of the transaction. This
does not appear to be necessary. The use of copies given
by the Registrar from the Register is allowed under sec-
tion 57(5) of the Act, and that is enough. Ancther point
made is that the entering of memoranda in the Register,
is not necessary. Another point made is that provision

1. Sixth Report, page 32, paragraph 79.
2. The clause is clause 61(5), in Sixth Report page 65.


‘Clauses 62
and 63

Clause 64

Clause 681)

96

should be made for keeping register Book No. 1 and Book
No. 4 in the form ofa file book forthe registration of
documents of a! temporary character, which are so pre-
pared - that printed copies: may be filed in the Regigtration
office instead ‘of the document being copied by hand... This
seems to be: a‘useful suggestion, and may be accepted’.
Some safeguards will be necessary to prevent, tampering,
and the safeguards. -¢an be provided for by rules.

It may be noted, that लि of the changes made by
clause 61 are consequential “on the changes proposed by
other clauses. - Thus, ing of memoranda is Ce
with “clauses 25, 3660) and 42(3); latter half; and filing
of the copies is linked up with clause 42. Nomenclature
of Book No. 2 and Book No. 2A (as proposed) is linked up
with clauses 21 and 22: If changes are made in any of
those clauses, then consequential changes will be necess-
ary in clause 61 also,

Regarding clause ‘61 (5), it is a useful provision, and
we recommend its adoption’,

Other changes made by the Sixth Report or suggested
in the comments are not necessary.

Clauses 62 and 63. correspond to existing sections 53 and
54, and have provoked no comment.

Clause .§4(1) corresponds to ‘existing section 55(1).

Under clause 64(2), corresponding to section 55(2), Index
I is to contain, besides the names, etc,, of executants, etc.,
‘every memorandum copied ir ‘Book 1” ete. The entering
of varticulars of ach memoranda is an addition to existing
section. 55(2). chek change, was made by way of imple-
menting® the scheme recommended under existin, g section
89. 85 the copying of the memorandim is to be ypped,*
this also has to be dropped,*

Clauses 64(2) ‘to (6);embody existing sections 55(2) to
55(6), with certain changes. -The changes were consequen-
tial on the scheme proposed, with reference to existing sec-
tion 89 and are not now required.* But clause 64(7) sug-
gested a useful provision and we recommend its adoption.®

> Clause 65(1) corresponds to existing section 57(1).

. See section 51 (3A), as —proposed, to be inserted.
. See section 55 (5), as proposed, to be inserted.
. See Sixth Report, pagé"33, paragraph 82.

. See discussion under clauses 25 and 36,

. See discussion under clause 42.

. See section $5 (7), as proposed, to be inserted.

ay bepr


aT

Clause 65(2), following existing section 57(2) provides Clause €5(2)

tthat copies of ertries in Book 3 (Register of wills) and the
relative index will be given to the executants and, after
their death (but not before), to any person applying for
‘such copies. A suggestion has been made in two com-
ments'-" to the effect that this should apply to Book 5—
Register of deposit of wills also, We are not inclined to
accept the suggestion as in our opinion Book 5 stands on a
‘different footing from Book 3.

Clause 65(3), following exisiing section 57(3), provides Claus: 653

that copies of entries in Book 4 and in the relative index
shall be given to the executant or claimant, etc. One com-
‘ment states that this Book is not a secret document and
suggests that it should be open for inspection of the public,
We do not agree, Book 4—which is “Miscellaneous Regis
ter’—contains document relating to movable property*. A
person registering such a document may not always wish a
member of the public to see it.

A suggestion has been made to the effect that in clause Claus: 65(4)
85(4), which follows existing section 57(4), mention of Book
3 may be added. As in clause 6502), this change is not
made*, then no change is required in clause 65 (4).

Clause 66, dealing with fees, gives the power to fix the Clause 66
fees to the Central Government (Union Gavernment), while
existing section 78 gives that power to the State Govern-
ment, Explaining the reason for this change, the earlier
Report® stated that the existing provision had resulted in
varying scales of fees. and that this was a matter in which
there should be uniformity. The Report also noted, that
there were complaints that the registration fee was unduly
high in some States, and observed that the fee should be
commensurate with the expense of the Department.

The comments received press for the retention of the
existing power of the State Governments, on the ground
‘that administration of the Act is a concern of the State
Government. It is also pointed out, that registration ex-
penses differ from State to State, and, therefore, uniformity
cannot be insisted upon. The proposed change, it is alsa
said, would restrict the discretion of the State Government
in the matter of raising its revenues under this head.

Besides this, a few new points have been made, One is
to the effect that fees for the issue of an “encumbrance cer-
tificate” should not be very high, because the debtor who

1. Comment of a State Government,
2. Comment of an Inspector General of Registration.
3. See existing section 51(3). .
4. See discussion under clause 65(2).
5. Sixth Report, page 35, paragraph 96.

:8--109 M of Law.


Clause 67

Clause 58

98

would require it is already Weavily burdened financially.
Another comment makes the point, that a new sub-section:
should be inserted to empower the State Government to:
exempt any document from registration fee so as to avoid.
amendment of the table of fees every time in such cases.

We recognise the force hehind’ the objection to the pro--
posed change, and recommend that:the power should remain
with the State Government (as. at present). Since admin-
istration of the Act is a concern of the State Governments,
this appears to be unavoidable. As regards “encumbrance
certificate”, the matter is one to be dealt with by the rufes.

Regarding the power to’ grant exemption, we may refer’
to the amendment made in 1956 by the State of West Ben-
gal,’ inserting section: 78 (2) to the effect that the State Gov—
ernment, if it is of opinion that there are reasonable grounds:
for doing so, may remiti awyfées-in the whole or any part:
of the State, either generally or for any class of cases and’
in respect of persons generally; or of any particular classes"
of persons. This appears to be useful’ provision which can:
be added, We recommend? accordingly:

Clause 67 corresponds: to’ existing’section 79. It has pro-
voked no comments.

Clause 68, following existing section 80, provides that
the fee for registration shall be payable on the presertta~
tion of the document. The comments received on this-
clause have pressed for the inclusion of a provision to the
effect that if the registration fee could not be realised in.
full (on presentation), the deficit’' may be recovered like
other revenues of the State. This provision, it is stated,
would be used only in cases of deficiency due to error of
judgment or other bona fide reasons, We appreciate the
object behind this suggestion. But we are not sure if the
insertion of such a provision would not create complica—
tions. If, for example, the document is at the time of regis~
tration held to belong to one class carrying a particular
fee, and that fee is levied; and afterwards it is regarded as
belonging to another class carrying a larger fee, and the
deficiency is made recoverable as arrears of land revenue
and the amount is demanded from the person who presented’
the document, then difficulties will arise, if that person does
not accept the view taken by the Department, or if that
person is dead and his heirs are called upon to pay and a
long time has elapsed. The proposed provision will net be
fairy without an elaborate provision imposing a time limit
for recovery, and will not’ be workable without a detailed
procedure for calling upon the presentant or his assigns or
heirs, ete., to pay for the deficiency. In the absence of pre~

व. See Mulla, (1963), page 267, citing the West Bengal Amercment..
2. See scction 78, propased to-be amended:


99

cise details of the provision desired, we cannot recommend
its adoption.

Clause 69, following existing section 81, prescribes the Clause 69
penalty for a registering officer or other employee who
endorses, copies, etc., a document in a manner which he
knows or believes to be “incorrect” intending, etc., to cause
injury to any person. One comment suggests that, in order
to cover cases in which registration documents or records
are fraudulently altered, destroyed or tampered with, the
following words may be added after ‘incorrect’: —

“or who alters, destroys or tampers with, wholly or
partially, any document, register book, index or other
record, or any entry therein or the contents thereof”.

The matter seems to be covered by the Indian Penal
Code," though there is some controversy regarding acts of
officers. No change in the Registration Act appears to be
called for.

Clause 70 corresponds to existing section 82. The inser- Clause 77-
tion of a new provision for the control of document writers New point
has been suggested in a few comments. The provision fensing of
would, it has been suggested, be to the effect that, from a document
notified date no person shall write a document for another writers
person for presentation to a registering officer except under
the rules under this Act. Contravention would be punish-
able with fine which may extend to Rs. 200 and writing of
a document by an authorised agent or pleader, ete., would
be excepted from the proposed restriction, A similar pro-
vision has been inserted in Madhya Pradesh, see section
62A inserted by Madhya Pradesh Act 8 of 1955. Bengal Act
5 of 1942 (Hengal Courts Act) has also inserted section 80G,
authorising the Inspector-General to make rules on the
subject.4-"-* See also the power to make rules on the sub-
ject provided by local amendment in Andhra Pradesh under
section 69(1) (bb) inserted by Andhra Pradesh Act 5 of
1960.7 See also a similar amendment by Rajasthan Act 17
of 1950 and Travancore Cochin Act 25 of 1952.7

We are, however, not inclined to introduce such a provi-
sion, as we are not sure whether it would be really
beneficial.

व. Section ३०5 read with section 464, second clause, Indian Penal Code
forgery} and section 466, Indian Penal Code,

2, See section 29, Indian Penal Code also.

3. Ratan Lal, Law of Crimes, (1966), page 1248.
4. Mulla : 1963), page 272,

5. See Mulla, (1963), page 269.

___,6, 8510 the validity of rules under the Bengal Act ३९९ Dittriet ate. Asso~
ciation ९. Stas, ALI.R. 1963 Cal. 124.

7. Set Mura, (7963), page 245.



Clause 7o(¢}

Clause 71

Clause 72

Clause 73

100

Clause 70 (c), following existing section 82,
bunishes a person who “falsely personates another” and in
such assumed character presents any document, etc. One
comment suggests the use of the phrase “personate some
other person whether real or imaginary” in place of ‘‘per-
sonates another”. The suggestion, apparently, is inteaded
to supersede the decision’ to the effect that there must be a
real person in existence who is personated, so that the
assumption of fictitious name would not constitute an offence
under this section. It would appear, that on a similar pro-
vision in the Indian Penal Code, section 205, there is some
conflict of decisions as to whether impersonation of an ima-
ginary person is an offence under this section?

There appears to be no harm in making it clear thet the
offence is committed whether the individual personated is a
real or an imaginary person.’ We recommend‘ an ariend-
ment to that effect.

Clause 71, corresponding to existing section 83, deals with
the sanction required for prosecution for offences under the
Act. It makes one verbal change to make it clear that
without such sanction a prosecution cannot be instituted.
As explained in the earlier Report,’ this change was intend-
ed to settle the conflict of decisions on the point whether
private prosecutions could lie notwithstanding the langu-
age of the existing section.’ This change has not provoked
any comment. It may be adopted.7 A fresh point has heen
made in one comment to the effect that there should be a
further provision (on the lines of section 476 of the Crimi-
nal Procedure Code) to the effect that any party can move
the registering officer for taking action under the section.
We do not, however, consider a statutory provision for the
purpose to be necessary.

Clause 72 corresponds to existing section 64, and has
provoked no comments.

Regarding clause 73(1), which corresponds to existing
section 88, a comment has been made which relates only to
the typography of the draft. The words “to appear in pet-
son........” should govern paragravhs (a), (0), (0) and (व).

1. Emp. v. Rangamma, A.LLR. 1935 Madras 913, 914-

2, See Ratanlal, Law of Crimes , (1962), page $26, Other sections in the
4ndian Penal Code dealing with impersonation are 140, 170, 171, 177 D and

16.

. 4. cf. the Explanation to section 416, Indian Penal Code.

4. See section 82, as proposed io be amended.

§. Sixth Report, pages 35-36, paragraph 97.

“6, Sea Mulla, (1963), page 273.

7. Ses section 83, as proposed 10 be amended.



101

Ciause 74, corresponding to existing section 85, pro-
vides for the destruction of documents remaining un-
claimed in a registration office for a period exceeding
two years. Wills are, however, expressly excluded from
this clause, as in the existing section. One comment sug-
gests, that even for wills the period should be two years.

The suggestion cannot be accepted. So far as other ducu--

ments are concerned, their destruction may not matter,
because the possession would have been delivered ordi-
narily at the time of the execution of the document. A
will, however, is intended to speak only from a future
date, and its destruction might cause inconvenience to many
persons. If the testator has not died in the mean-time
and has not made another will, then the will lying with
the registration office would be a subsisting will, and there-
fore, a valuable one. If, on the other hand, he has died,
and has not made any other will, the will would be his
last testament and would, therefore, be still more valu-
able, Hence no change should be made in this respect.

The clause in the Sixth Report provided for the des
truction of documents should be after notice. This change
may be accepted’.

Clause 75 embodies existing section 68, which is a pro-
vision to the effect that a registering officer is not liable
to any suit, etc., for anything in good faith done or refused
in his official capacity. Now one comment makes a fresh
point that a provision should be inserted to the effect that
a Registrar shall not be made a party to a suit under exist-

ing section 77—clause 23—by reason of his refusing regis--

tration. It is stated, that this is necessary in view of the
decision in a recent Madras case*. That decision, however,
does not seem to hold that the Registrar is a necessary
party. All that it held was, that since in that case V had
not disputed the genuineness of the will before the Regis-
trar and it was the Registrar who had refused to register

the will because execution had not been proved, therefore:

V was not a necessary party. In fact, there are earlier
decisions*-t which clearly hold that the Registrar is not
a necessary party. No change is, therefore, needed on this
point. 7

Existing section 69 vests the rule-making power in
the Inspector General, while clause 76(1) vests it in the

1. See section 85, as proposed to be amended.

b ng: Kanakarainam v. Venkatachalam, ALR. 1945 Madras t1, 12, left
and,

3. Sie Wishambhar v. Prabhakar, (1884) LL.R. 8 Bomba
Also iee (1880) TLR. 5 Caloutee ats वेब 2 269, 271.

4, Ste Matla, (1963), Pas: zio.

Clause 74

Clause 7%

Clause 76(2):


Clause 76(2)
(e) and (h)

Clause 76(2)
(New
point

Clase 76(2)
छ)

Clause 76(2)
other points

Clause 76(2)
New point
regarding
do-ument
Writers,

Clause 77--
Exemption
for Govern-
meat

102

State Government. The change is in accordance with re-
cent practice, and may be adoptied’.

Clause 76(2)(e) [corresponding to existing section 69
(1)(g)}] and clause 76(2)(h) [mew] propose certain shan-
ges which appear to be consequential on the add:tions
made by clauses 61(2)(b) and 64(7). In bric!, they deal
with the “manner” of copying and authentication af cer-
tain books and “manner” of recopying of certain indexes.
An objection has been raised that the word “manner of”
are not clear; we do not agree.

Regarding clause 76(2)(h), a new point has been raised
in one comment to the effect that, since clause 61(5) pro-
vides for re-copying of books which are in danger of being
destroyed, power to make rules regarding such re-copying
should also be added in clause 76. The suggestion may
be accepted?.

Clause 76(2}(i) empowers the making of rules as to the
notice to be issued before destruction of documents. As
notice has been provided for?, this new provision may also
be adopteds,

Other additions and changes proposed by the Sixth
Report under clause 76(2) appear to be unnecessary, and
may be dropped.

Regarding the rule-making power under clause 7(i(2),
a new point has been made to the effect that there should
be power with the State Government to make rules re-
gulating the profession of document writers. The desir-
ability of a provision for licensing document writers has
already been separately considered’,

Clause 77 exempts certain documents from registration
(see existing section 90). The question whether the Cen-
tral Government should have power to exempt from com-
pulsory régistration (all) documents to which the Govern-
ment is a party has been considered by us. If such a change
is made, docusnents in favour of Government will find no
reflection in the registration records. That, of course, may
not be a fatal objection by itself, ag in most cases the pos-
session would have been transferred to Government, so

1, Sue sectioa 69, as proposed to bz amzuded (relating to power to make
rules).

2. Sze section 69 (1), as proposed to be am-uded (relating to re-copy-
ing).

3. See discussion relating to clause 74 (existing section 85).

4. See section 69, as proposed to”be amended (relating ta notice before
destruction).

5.Se¢ discussion relating to clause 70—new point.


103

“that persons intending to take the property can he expect-
-ed to inquire about the Government's title. The Govern-
ment’s possession is usually—

(i) overt,

(ii) easily ascertainable,

(ili) known to many persons, and
(४) exercised openly.

With reference to clause 77, it is not clear if in the
Sixth Report!, any change of substance in respect of docu-
ments executed on behalf of the Government, was intend-
ed with reference to section 90. The discussion in the
Sixth Report speaks of “verbal changes”. The draft of
“the clause’ speaks of “Sanads, Inams, title-deeds, grants
-and other documents affecting immovable property made
by Government”. This wording is different from. the word-
ing in existing section 90(1)(d). (There is some contro-
-versy® as to whether the existing words “other documents”
in section 90(1} (d) are to be construed ejusdem generis,
but those words are retained in the Sixth Report, clause
‘77 also}.

In any case, it is unnecessary to exempt all Government
-documents,

Provision suggested in one of the comments, to empower
-the Central Government to exempt Government documents
-from 1९०५, is also unnecessary.

Clause 78 embodies existing section 91 with very minor Clause 78
-verbal changes, which aeed not be carried out as the whole
Act is not to be re-enacted.

Certain sections were omitted from the existing Act in Omittea
the Bill annexed to the earlier Report. Since comments Sections.
have been received suggesting restoration of some of these
sections, we may now consider them.

Existing section 17(1)(¢) provides for the compulsory re- Or ited
-gistration of non-testamentary instruments which acknow- section 17
1९०8९ the receipts or payment of a7 1 consideration on ‘U?
account of the creation, declaration, evc., of any right, title
-or interest (in immovable property). This was omitted’ in
the Sixth Report. The reason for the omission of this clause
was, that there was a conflict of decisions on the question
whether this clause came into operation only where the
document effecting the substantive transaction was ri

1. Sixth Report, page 38, paragraph 105 and page 83.
2. Sixth Report, page 71, clause 79 (1) (d).

3. Su Mulla, (1963), page 281,

4. Sinch Report, page 13, paragraph 29.


Omitted
section 17
(2) (8)

एक

registered, or whether, even if that transaction was evi--
denced by a registered instrument, the receipt of mcney
thereunder required registration where payment was made
on account of the creation, ete., of any such right, ete. The:
earlier Report recommended that the Transfer of Property
Act. should be exended to the whole of India, and that on
that basis, this clause should be omitted.

If the Transfer of Property Act is extended to the whole
of India, there would be no need to retain the clause, be-
cause most of the substantive transactions could in “hat
event be effected by registered document. (Most of the
cases under this clause relate to mortgages.)'

A comment has been received to the effect, that so long,
as the Transfer of Property Act is not made applicable to
all States and Union Territories, this clause should be re-
tained. The comment may be accepted.” The section may:
be retained.

The alternative suggested in the Sixth Report! was, that.
it should be made clear that section 17(1)(c) does not app.y
to a receipt in respect of a document already registered
under existing section 17(1)(b). We have, however, decided,.
that the reverse provision should be adopted, namely,
iuistruments which acknowledge the receipt or payment of
any consideration on account of the creation, ete, of any
right, etc., to or in immovable property should be compul--
sorily registrable, whether or not the document by which
the right was created, etc., was registered. We think that
this is desirable to ensure a comprehensive record. We
recommend an amendment accordingly.*

Existing section 17(2)(ii) exempt from conspulsory re-
gistration any instrument relating to shares in a Joint Stock
Company, notwithstanding that the assests of the company
consist of immovable property. This was proposed to ke
omitted in the Sixth Report, for the reason® that sectior: 8
of the Companies Act, 1956 already lays down that a share
in a company is movable property. Section 82 runs as 101-
tows: —

“82, The shares or other interest of any member im
a company shall be movable property, transferable ir
the manner provided by the articles of the company”.

A comment has been made to the effect that if the shares’
cantain any cortract for the sale of immovable property
worth over Rs, 1.000, they should need registration. We do:

1. Sea discussion in Mulla. (1963), page 603 ४५० Mulls, pege ९9 vrcer
“Recital not reccived”’.

2, See also discussion relating to clause 3 (1).

3. Sixth Report, page 14, paragrapli 30, latter half.

4. See section 17 (1){c), 88 proposed to be amended..

5. Sixth Report, page 17, paregraph 35.


105

not consider any such provision to be necessary. Another
comment makes the point that even though the provision
in the Registration Act has become redundant in view of
section 82, Companies Act, it should be allowed to stand,
since a statute which is intended to be a complete Code
should show explicitly the nature of document requiring
registration. We agree with the last comment. Section
17(2)(ii) should be retained.

Existing section 17(2)(vi) saves from compulsory regis-
tration a decree or order of a court (excepting certain
decrees or orders made on compromise and comprising
collatera] immovable property). This has been proposed to
be omitted by the earlier Report! Restoration of this pro-
vision has been suggested in the comments, as it serves a
useful purpose. The matter has been considered separate-
yt

Existing section 23A, regarding re-registration of certain
documents accepted for registration from a person not duly
empowered to present the same, has been popused to be
omitted by the earlier Report,’ for the reason that the Re-
port itself proposed to provide‘ that irregularity or defect
with respect to the presentant should not invalidate the
registration. A comment has been received pointing cut
that under the existing section the right to represent the
document is confined to the person claiming under the docu-
ment and suggesting that the section should be widened so
as to give the right to any person who would have been

Omitted
section 177
2) (vt

Omit ce
section 234%

omitted to present the document in the first instance, under ~

existing section 32. The comment seems to have been
made with the object of codifying the view that the ex-
pression “claiming under such document” is intended to

cover all persons enumerated in existing sections 32 and 40°

and to include other persons not falling under that list.
See the Madras case, where the facts were these. After the
registration of a will had been held by the Privy Council
to be invalid on the ground of its having been presented by
unauthorised person, the will was presented again by a son
adopted under a power conferred by the document. The
re-regisiration was held to be valid by the Madras High

Court® We do not consider it necessary to encumber the:

section with the suggested elaborate provision. We, how-
ever, recommend, that section 23A be retained as the sav-
ing provision which we propose,® is narrower than that
proposed by the Sixth Report.

1. Sixth Report, page 17, paragraph 3¢,

2. Sze discussion relating to“ clause 42 (1),
3. Sixth Report, page 20, paragraph 50

4, Clause 41(2).

5. Sudarsans Rao v. Seetharamamma, (1933) Madras Weekly Notes 11485.

1165 (Division Bench). See Mulla.(1563), ऊ get
6. See recommendation regarding clause41 (2).


106
Omitted isti. i
Sodion yo Existing section 70, authorizes the Inspector General of

Registration to remit the difference between any fine levied
कि er existing section 25 or section 34 and the anioutt of
t 2 proper registration fee. This sec‘ion was omiited by the
eau ter Report,’ in view of the fact that in the clauses re-
ating to fines—clauses 10 and 18(1)—the earlier Report
prpposes, a maximum fine of Rs, 10 only. As we are imodi-
5 Propo: it i : in existing
elon 40. proposal,’ it is necessary to retain existing
O:nitted feet वि
section 72 Existing sections 72 and 73 provide for “application” to
and 73 the. Registrar in respect of orders of the Sub-Kegistrar re-
fusing registration. These sections were omitted by the
earlier Report,’ in view of the scheme proposed in that Re-
port substituting reference in place of appeal. As that
scheme is now to be abandoned,’ sections 72 and 73 will
have to he retained.

Code of Civil Procedure

बियर Certain amendments were suggested by the earlier Re-

of Civil port in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. One was to the

Procedure effect that under Order 21, Rule 16, Code of Civil Proce-
dure, a provision be added making it obligatory on the part
of the assignor of a decree to report the assignment to the
court after notice to the judgment-debtor, within three
months from the date of the assignment. This recommenda-
tion? was made while proposing modification of section
170) (७) of the Registration Act so as to exclude executable
decrees or orders. The reasoning was, that under Order 21,
Bule 16, the assignment must be in writing, and therefcre
the further requirement of registration was unnecessary.
“The addition of a provision for reporting of the assignment
under Order 21, Rule 16 was suggested in order that the re-
quirement of registration [in section 17(4){e)] would further
Jose its force, As the change proposed by the earlier Re-
port in section 17(1) (e) is not to be maintained,’ this re-
commendation need not be carried out. (The commerits
received on this recommendation state that a decree cannot
be executed at present unless the transfer is recognised by
the court after notice to the judgment-debtor, and therefore,
reporting by the assignor would serve no useful purpose.
Another comment states that the obligation should be on
the assignee, under the Code of “ivil Procedure).

1. Sixth Report, page 33, Patagraph 90.
2. See liscussinn relating to clause 10 and clause 18 (1) proviso.
3. Sixth Report, page 34. paragraph 92 and page 78, (rotes), discussion.
relating 10 clauses 21 and 22,
“See discussion relating 10 clauses 21 (1) and 22.
5. Sixth Report, page 15, Paragraph 32.
6. See discussion relating to clause 3 (i) @).


107 i

Another change recommended by the earlier Report was
in relation to memoranda of appeal. In arder te implement
the scheme requiring Courts to send to the registering offi-
cer copies of plaints and memoranda of appeal involving
immovable property, the Sixth Report recommended,! that
appropriate rules should be inserted in the Code of Civil
Sp.e-aure, requiring a-schedule of property to be given in
every memorandum of appeal relating to immovable pro-
perty. This recommendation was linked up with the scheme
embodied in clause 42(2). As clause 42(2) is to be dropped,”
this recommendation need not be implemented. (The com-
ments received on this recommendation oppose it, One
comment makes the point, that a certified copy of the decree
cf the lower court must always accompany the memoran-
‘dum of appeal and since the decree necessarily contains
a schedule of property, there is no need to include the
-schedule in the memoranda of appeal. The comment need
not be considered, if the recommendation is to be dropped).

Suggested new provisions

We may now consider comments which suggest addi- Suggested
tions of provisions on certain matters not coveted hy the इक गत
-existing Act or by the earlier Report.

One comment suggests that the registering oflicer should Enqu ring
sce not only whether the deed is registrable, but also whe- है '° ™"*
there it is valid. It is pointed out, that in some of the for-
mer Indian States, there were systems by which it was in-
cumbent upon the person applying 107 registration to file a
true copy of title-deed. This lessened the chances of cheat-
ing. Such a provision, it is said, would be based on pru-

-dence and expediency. Though the suggestion is an a‘trac-
dive one, we are afraid that it is outside the scope cf the
Registration Act.

It has been suggested, that there should be a provision Registration
-on the lines of section 22A (as inserted by Bombay Amend- tee
rnent), empowering the State Government to declare _ by posed to
notification that the registration of any document or class public
-of documents is opposed to public policy; the result of such Policy
notification would be that the registering olficer has to re-
fuse to register such documents. It would appear? that
under the section as added in Bombay, a notification was
issued in 1959 declaring that the registration of a document
containing a declaration as to proprietorship of trade marks
is opposed to public policy. We are not convinced about the
need for such a provision for the whole of the country and
would leave the matter to be dealt with by local amend-
ment, if necessary. We may also add, that it may be diffi-
cult to define what is opposed to “public policy”.

1. Sixth Report, page 37, paragraph 103.
2. Sea discassion relating 10 clanse 42 (2).
3° Bee Mulla, (1963) pages 117-118.


108

Cop ying by Another new provision suggested in one of the corn-

Photograph rents is the one for the copying of documents hy photo-
graphy in areas to be notified by the State Government.
Reference has been made in this connection to sections 703.
to 108 inserted by the Bombay Amendment. These sections.
were inserted in 1930 as “Part XI-A. Copying of documents
by means of photographs”.’ This is a useful suggestion, and
may be accepted.? Consequentially, it will be necessary to
insert a provision in the rule-making section, section 39—
clause 76(2) in the Sixth Report authorising the Govern-
ment to make rules to regulate the procedure for transmit-
ting documents for being photographed and incidental mat-
ters. The matter was dealt with by section 69(1)(gg} in-
serted originally by local amendment in Bombay, and is
now dealt with by section 69(1)(ggg) inserted by Bombay
Act 35 of 1958 (24th April 1958). Clause 76 (Existing sec-
tion 69) may be amended accordingly?

Transfer of Another new provision suggested in the comments is as

Proceedings 10 transfer of appeals and applications under existing sec-
tions 72 and 73 from the file of one Registrar to another, and
the transfer of an.inquiry under existing section 41(2) from
the file of Sub-Registrar to another. It ‘has been suggested,
that the insertion of such a provision may be conducive to
efficient administration. We do not see any need for such
a provision. The suggestion need not be accepted,

Remission of A new provision for the remission of registration fees
fees under an order of the State Government has been suggested.
This point has already been dealt’ with.

Registration One point dealt with by the earlier Report was that of
by Panacha- registration by Panchayats, A suggestion had been made
” by one Member (Dr. Sen Gupta) that power should be
given to Panchayats to register documents of a simple

nature and, if the experiment succeeded, to enlarge the

power gradually. The view of the majority of the mem-

ers of the Commission* was, that Panchayats have no

knowledge or experience of the procedure for registra-

tion, and it would not be expedient or practicable to give

them the power. Disagreeing with the majority, Dr. Sen

Gupta had expressed’ the view that he had made the sug-

gestion for conferring this power in a limited number of

cases where the document related to land wholly within

the jurisdiction of the Panchayats. Where registration

1. See Mulla (1963), pages 246—249.

2. See sections 70A ef seg, a8 proposed to be “1serted.

3. See A. 1. R. Manual, Vol. 9, page 939.

4, See section 69, 33 proposed to be amended (relating to photographed
copics).

5. See discuss‘on relating to clause 66.

6. Sixth Report, page है , paragraph 18,

7. Sixth Report, page 94.



109

was acceptable te both the parties, the Executive Officer
of the Panchayat, if authorised by the State Government,
could register the document. If the document was nat ad~
miffed, the presentant could cefer it to the Sub-Registrar.
The advantages of this procedure (according to Dr. Sen
Gupta) would be that it would provide the Panchayat with
a record of all transactions recorded in the office, it would
simplify the process of registration, because the Panchayat
was likely to know the executant personally, If would also
lessen the chances of false allegation or denial of execu
tion, and possibly would add to the revenues of the Pan-
chayat. Certificate of registration in simple cases, he added,
did not require much expert knowledge or experience; the
maintenance of several registers, would be handied by the
Sub-Registrars. The increased cost if any, would set off
by the reduction of cost owing to reduction of work in the
Sub-Registrar’s office. Sub-Registrar, he observed, were
sometimes seven miles or more away without any railway
communication, so that a long journey delayed the regis-
tration of document after execution,

Most of the comments received on this fopic agree with
the views of Commission that Panchayats should not be
vested with powers of registration. Panchayats, it is stated,
are likely 10 commit mistakes in these technical matters.
It ts also pointed out, that having regard to the low stan-
dard of education in turst areas and Iack of qualified
people, the power might be mususec. A small group of
comments, however, agree with Dr, Sen Gupta; and the
point is made that Panchayats should gradually be en-
couraged to shoulder responsibilities for registration of
documents of a simple nature. There is also the alterna-
tive suggestion, that panchayats with proper and trained
staff can be athorised to register deeds up to say Rs. 1,000.

Another alternative suggestion is, that there should
be 4 provision for optional registration by the Executive
-Officerg of notified Panchayats, and that copies of all docu-
ments registered with the Panchayats could be sent to the
लकी of the Sub-Registrar for future use and public re-

rence,

We have given careful and anxious cousideration to the
subject. We féel that one has to balance here the advant-
ages put forth by Dr. Sen Gupta ageinst the injurious
consequence that might follow if the scheme is adopted.
Ti is true, that a limited number of Panchayats may be
able ta discharge the proposed functicns satisfactarily;
‘put then, from the opposition which the scheme has re-
cevied, we venture to say that their number may not be
large enough te justify a statutory provision. As regards
conferring of power for registering documents of a limit-
ed value, it may be pointed out that event in respect of staal
documents, the questions that arise may be beyond the


Later sug-
gestions

(0) Section
30 (2)

110

Capacity of the Panchayats in general. Optional registra-
tion as suggested may not prove to be of much legal value,
if no sanctity is given to the record.

We may also like to add that registration is not a mere
formality; it is a process whiech—

(i) affects immovable property, which will last
for ever;

(i) has permanent consequences by conferr:ng.
validity on the documents;

(iit) is of importance not to one person but to
all subsequent transferees; and

(iv) brings into being secondary evidence of &
valuable nature.

These being the consequences, the process raust be done’
not merely carefully, but with some sort of meticulous-
ness, neatness, uniformity and efficiency. As at present
advised, we do not suggest any change in the Law.

We may also, in this connection, refer to the need fo
an efficient institution of Panchayat Secretaries, a topic
which has been discussed in detail by the study-team on
Nayaya Panchayats', When the general administration.
of panchayats assumes a higher standard, it may be
possible to reconsider the matter. The question is not
really a legal one. It is more an administrative one, de-
pendent on the capacity and resources of panchayats and
their establishments.

Later Suggestions

Apart from comments on the Sixth Report received by
the Ministry of Law and forwarded to us, we had to con-
sider a number of other suggestions, that is to say, sug~
gestions not by way of comments but made independent-
ly’. We proceed to consider them section by section.

Gi) Section 30(2)—A suggestion for extending section.
30(2) of the Act to Delhi has been made. We have dealt.
with this in a separate Report®. The Andhra Pradesh
Amendment Act of 1966 has deleted section 30(2) and

1. See Report of the study-team on Nyaya Panchayats (April, 1962
Ministry of Lw), e 109, paragraph 3.

2. We shall refer to them as “Later suggestions”, as they were received
afier the comments on the Sixth Report were forwarded to us for 000-
sidera' ions.

3. See Thirty-first Report of the Law Commission (Section 30 (2) of the
Indian Registration Act—Extersion to Delhi), (May, 1967).

4. 8. No, 14,


‘iL

section 67, in their application to the State of Andhra Pra-
desh. We recommend’ that suitable action should be
taken te restore the application of these sections to the
State of Andhra Pradesh, as otherwise section 30(2)
would Jose its practical utility in Andhra Pradesh, so that
registration of a document would be invalid in a part of
India and valid in the rest,

ii) Section 201}—definition of “eddition”—We  re- Gi) Seclon 2

commend! that nationality may be added in the definition wood of

efini-

of “addition”, Although the expression “addition” daes “addition”

net seem to occur except in a few places’, this change is
desirable to make the definition comprehensive, in view
of the change which we proposed to section 34°.

(iti) Section 34—and foreigners—In the suggestion of (iii) Sectiow
a State Government’, several points relating ta foreigners it and के
selling property in India and taking away this sale price in Sree”

violation of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act have
been made. We have considered these at some length.
Having regard to the paramount impertance of conserving
foreign exchange, we recommend? that in section 24 a
provision should be added, earmpowering the registering
afficer te make an inquiry into nationality for the purpose
of checking such violation of the Foreign Exchange Act.
it is nat, in our opinion, necessary to insert a provision ex-
tendii the time-limit for registration {as hag been sug-
gested). Once the parties present the document in time
and appear in time, there is no time-limit for completion
of the registration; that is an act of the registering OM-
cers ,for which the Registration Act specifies no time-
mst,

(iv) We have considered a point raised by the Govern-

ment of West Bengal? in relation to section 8602), and the
provisions of rule 78 of the West Bengal Registration Rules,

+, To be carried out by suiteble action.
3. See Section 2 (13, as proposed ta be amended.
3. See sections 55 (2), 55 (ay, 55 15), 58 (4) (ayo,
4. See below, under “Section 34 and foreigners”.
5. $. No. 9.

6. See section 34, as proposed 40 be amended (regarding inquiry into
Nationality}.

2 3. Neg,
8. Stem

& Maila (2963), pages igs and 752,

(a) Rustomji, Registration Act (7939), pages 199—180.
9. S.No. 23.

(iv) Scction
67 homNew


112

The difficulty, as stated by the Government of West
Bengal’, is this. The Registrar has, under section 66 (2), to
send a copy of the document to every other Registrar
within whose district any part of the property is situate. It
may not be possible to send the copy on the very day of
registration, and, to meet such contingency, the West
Bengal Government has, by rules’, made a provision to
the effect that a “short note” in the prescribed form may
be sent by the Registrar to the other Registrars. This
“short note” is intended to be a kind of ad interim infor-
mation. It is stated, however, that the Registrars in the
other States (with two exceptions) do not accept the
“short note”. They return the “short note”, and press for
sending the full copy.

This problem has been brought by that Government to
the notice of the Government of India, and a solution re-
‘quested. The Government of West Bengal has referred to
the absence of a specific provision on the subject, though
it has not suggested any particular amendment.

We quote rule 78(1) of the West Bengal Registration
Rules, 19623:—

“78 (1) When a copy of a document is sent to the
Registrar of another district under sub-section (1) of
section 65, sub-section (2) of section 66 or secticn 67,
no memorandum required for any Sub-Registry office
of that district need be sent along with the copy. The
Registrar receiving the copy shall cause the required
number of memoranda to be prepared in his own office
and forward them to the Sub-Registrars subordinate
to him. If the Registering Officer is unable to des-
patch copies of documents on the day they are acmitt-
ed to registration a short note in Form No. 6A, Appen-
dix I, shall be sent on that day”.

1, $, No. 13.

> Rute 78, West Bengal Registration Rules, 1:62 (referred to in S.
“No. 132.

3. Taken from West Bengal Registration Manual (19€6, Vol, 1,
spage 87.


ns

Form 6A in Appendix 1 to the West Bengal Registra-
tion Rules, 1962 is as follows!: —

“FORM NO. 6A
Form or Sxort Note
[See rule 78(1)]

Nature of
document

‘Names of parties

Executants Claimants

tau

\

Short name of
the property
affected or

zi number

where possible

and the
thana,

The matter was discussed by us at some length. It was
felt, that the proper solution would. be to insert a provi-
sion in the Act enabling the sending out of “short notices”
as in the West Bengal Rules?, in cases where a copy of the
document could not be sent as required by section 65(1),
66(2) or 67. (It was felt unnecessary to cover copies re-
quired to be sent by section 64, as section 64 is confined

to Sub-Registrars

in the same district).

As it

was not

known whether there would be any practical difficulties
in the implementation of such a provision, we felt some-
what diffident in suggesting a change. On the other hand,
however, the usefulnéss of some such provision is obvious,
as such a “short note” would prevent persons in the other
States from being duped for absence of copy of the docu-
ment (where there had been a delay in sending the copy,

as in the case of

lengthy documents).

We recommend a suitable provision on the subject®.

106

2. Rule 78, West Betigal Registration Rules, 1962.
3. See section 67A, as proposed to be inserted.

9—109 शर्त Law.

1, Taken from West Beng R egistration Manual (1966), Vol. 1, page


Recommends
ed changes

Appendix

lid

Recommended Changes

_ The changes which have been recommended by the pre-
vious Report fall into the three categories:—

(i) changes of substance;
(ii) verbal changes; and
(iii) changes in the arrangement of clauses.

Some of the changes of substance will, according to our
recommendations, have to be dropped. If that is done,
the question arises whether the need for revising the whole
Act and re-enacting it will still remain. We feel, that if
the changes in substance are to be a few only, it would
not be worthwhile to re-enact the whole Act. And if re-
enactment is to be avoided, we feel that changes of the
second category—verbal changes—should be kept to the
minimum; and that changes of the third categary-~re-
arrangement—should be avoided.

On this assumption, we venture to annex to this Re-
port, a draft embodying, in the form of amendments to
the existing Act, changes of substance and verbal changes
that, we think, appear to be really needed, after a con-
sideration of the earlier Report and the comments receiv-
ed thereon and on the basis of our own views expressed
in the preceding paragraphs.

1. 7. 1.. KAPUR—Chairman.
2. K. G. DATAR. है|

8. 8. 8. DULAT.
ि Members.
4.T. K. TOPE.
5. RAMA PRASAD
MOOKERJEE,
P. M. BAKSHI,
Joint Secretary and
Legislative Counsel.
New DELHI; .

The 30th September, 1967.

x. See Appendix.


115

APPENDIX

Draft amendments to the existing Act.

[This is a rough draft only}.

Existing Gist ofthe amendment = Reference to the Page of the Bill
section proposed discussion in this annexed to the
Report on which Sixth Report
the amendment
is based
I 2 3 4

Section 2(1) In section 2 of the Indian
Registration Act, 1908,
(16 of r908) (hereinafter
referred to as the princi-
pal Act) clause (1),—

(वो after the _ words
“place of residence”
insert the
tionality” 5

(8) after the
“then his mother’s
mame”, insert the
words “and in the case
of a married”.

words.

Section 2(5) In section 2, of the prin-
cipal Act in clause (5),

insert. the following

words at the end, ma-

mely—

“and to an entry in writ-

ing made by “the regis-

tering officer on a sealed

eaves deposited under this
let?

Section 2(6A) In section 2 of the prin-
cipal Act, clause (6A)
shall be omitted.

In section 2 of the prin-
cipal Act, in clause (7),
omit the words “and
an agreement to lease”,

Section 2(7)

and, after the word,
“kabuliyat? insert the
word “and”,

(6) As 10. nation-
ality, see dis- ality, Sixth Re-
cussion under port did not
“Later Sugges- suggest a change.
tions”,

@) As to nation-

@ As to married
women, see
Sixth “Report,

2386 4g, clase
. For rea
sons, see Sixth

Report, page 9,
paragraph 21(A),

(४) As to maz
ried women, see
discussion re-
lating to clause
2a).

See discussion Sixth Report did
relating to clau- not suggest this
se 2(5). change.

See discussion re- This wes,
lating to clause not proposed in
2(8). the Sixth Re-

Pay
Bante 2a +*
See discussion Sixth Report,

relating to clau-

6 47:
se 2(9)- pose #

1. In view of the nature of the materials which had to be examined the
form of this Appendix is different in some respects from the form usualy
adopted in the Law Commission's Reports.


116

1 2 3 4
Section 2(9) In section 2 of the prin- See discussion Sixth Report,
cipal Act, in clause (9), relating to 41, clause
for the words “fruit clause 2(7). i ), deals with
‘upon and juice in trees” these items by
the words— excluding them
fei and from the defini-
“fruit upon juice in tion of “immoy-
trees whether exis able property’”,
tence or to grow in For reasons:
future, machinery em- see Sixth Re-
edded in or attached port, page 9,
to the earth, when aragraph = 21
dealt with apart from कि
the land”.
ion 2 Im section 2 of the prin- See discussion Sixth Report,
(QA) (New) cipal Act, after clause relating to age 47, clause
(9), the following clause clause 2(11). 211). Bor tea-
shall be inserted, name- sons, sce Sixth
ly: Report (Notes),
Page 74
“(QA) ‘prescribed? means
prescribed by rules
made under this Act!””.
Section 17 In section 17 ofthe ptin- See discussion Sixth Report had.
(yc) cipal Act, relating 0. suggested—
omitted sections.
@ in sub-section (1), (i) Omission of
in clause (0), insert section 170)
the following words ०95
at the end, namely:
Gi the alter-
“whether or not the do- native, exclu-
cument, if any, by sion from sec-
which the right, tile on 370 Xc) of
or interest was created, receipts in res-
leclared, assigned, pect of regis-
limited or extinguished, tered transac-
was registered”. tions. For rea~
sons, see Sikth
Report, pages—
1314, para-
graph 29.
Section 17 In section 17 (ii) in sub- See discussion Sixth — Repor
(2) cvia) section (2), after clause relating page 59, claus
Gv), insert the following clause #2(1). 42(2(f) adopted
clause, namely,— different sche-
me, whercunder
“(via) 2. security bond the cout or
executed in favour of a public officer
court or a public officer was to send
in Iris official capacity a copy to the
for the due fulftiment registering offi-
‘of ६ condition imposed cer within whose
by a decree ar order of jurisdiction the
the court or public offt- immovable pro.
cer”, perty 10 which
the bond applies
is situated.
x. This definition is to be ingetted oaly if the expression “prescrived’

used in the Act.


है

Section 17(2) In section 77 of the prin- See discussion Sixth Report,

(x cipal Act, in sub-section relating to © 43, a jase
(2), for clause (xi), sub-  Gause a(aye)” 5B

stitute the following

Bie), is ie on
different lines.
clause, namely— For

Sivth He.

see em

“Gd) any endorsement port, page 18,
ona e-deed Paragraph 41,
acknowi

the
payment here © whole
or any part of the
mortgage-money, and
any other receipt for
payment af money dus
under 2 mortgage, be-
ing an endorsenient or
other receipt which sic~
rely acknowledges पर
ceipt of the money or
recites discharge of the
wortgore-debt, and
does not purport to
extinguish ‘the mort~
gage in whole or in
part vr"?

Section 21(2) In section 21 of the prin- See discussion Sixth Report,
cipal Act, for gab-sec- relating to gage 44 is on
tien (2), substitute the clause 72). different fines,
following — sub-section,
namely—

“@) Houses in_ towns
shall be described as
situated on the north
or other side of the
‘street oy yoad {which
should be specified),
to which they front
and by their existing
and former ocenpan-
cies, and by their
numbers if the houses
in such styeet oy road
are humbereds wm ait

ay areas,
fuses and lamds sha
abo be described by
their cadasteal survey
mumber as in the (डाक
कु maps and re
cords”,
Section 22(2) In section 22 of the prin. See discussion Sixth Report,

ginal Act, in sub-seo- yelating २०. page 44.
don (2), for the words, clause 7, provi-
figures and brackets so.

“Save as otherwise pro-
vided by any role made
under sub-section (1);
substitute the wards,
figures and bracke



118

“Except in the case of
City surveyed areas and
except as otherwise pro
vided by any rule made
‘under sub-section (1)””.

Section 25(1) In section 25 of the
i rincipal Act, in sub-
section (1), for
words ‘“‘ten times
amount of the proper
registration fee” substi-
tute the words “five
times the amount of the
proper registration fee,
not exceeding rupees

Section29 In section 29 of the
principal Act, insert the
following sub-section at
the end, namely ~~

“(Q)_ Notwithstanding
anything contained in
section 28 or in sub~
section (1) of Wits sec-
tons

(a) after a document is
registered, no party
thereto shall be en-
titled to question the
validity of the regis-
tration merely on the
ground that the pro~
perty which purpor~
ted ta give jurisdic~
tion to the Sub-
Registrar to ree ister
it either did not
exist or toas fictitious
or insignificant or
Saree

convey q
बे sument but

“(b) nothing in this
Cuoco ” shat

not 6 4 party
10 the document
not claiming under
the document, ac-
quires rights in the
broperty

faith”,

See discussion Sixth Report

relati
clause 0.

to

See discussion

relating
clause 12(4).

to

clause 10, re-
duced the am-
count 501 fur~
ther.

Sixth — Report,
page 46, clause
32(4). For rea-
sons sce pages:
21-25,  para~
graphs 55—57.



119

I 2 3 4
Section 30 See the separate Report See discussion Sixth Repert,
‘on the subjectt, relating to page 46, se
clause 13, 13, applies this

also separate provision to any
Report on the Registrar, if he
subject.? is satisfied that
there is suffi-
cient cause for
doing so. For
reasons, se6

Sixth " Report,
page 25, para~

graph 60.
Section 33 ( In section 33 of the As to Notary Sixth Report, page
principal Act— Public, see dis- 47, clause 16,

cussion relating does not make
(@) in sub-section (1), ] to clause 16 this change.
amdsection §
(in clause (@), in-  ()(@), Notaries
sert the following Act, 1952५
words at the end,
namely :--

“or a power of at-
torney —_execttted
before and aut!
ticated by a No-
tary Public”,

Gi)in clause (c), for The verbal cha- Sixth Report,
the words dian nge regarding page 47, clause
Consul or Vice- diplomaticoffi- 16(rXc), makes
Consul orrepresen- cers is propo- this change in a
tative of the Cen- sed in view of different form,

Government’ the phraseology by substituting
substitute the words adoptedin the ‘‘any Consular
dian onsilar Diplomaticand Representative
officer or diplomatic Consular Offi- of the Union
officer or other re- cers(Oathsand Government”,

presentative of the Fees) Act, 1948
Central Govern. (41 of 1948).
ment”, Section 3(r) of

t, Thirty-first Report of the Law Commissior
Registration Act, 1908—Extension to De!

faeetion 30(2) of the Indian
ay 1:



120

change. The
existing words
“or represen
tative of the
Central Gove
ernment” map,
perhaps be re-
tained for other
representatives
not falling vith-
in the cate~
एक of “dip.
foniatic: oF
congufar offi-
cer”,

{iii} ta the proviso,
after the wo
“or court’? insert
the words “or office
v (fe Notary Puby
0,

(8) in sub-section &
after the words “or
Mogistrate”* the

og oe
pubtic” shall be in-
serted.

(०) in swb-section (3).
the following words
shall be ingerted at
the end, namely —
“and to satisfy Hitt

Uf abous

dentary navure es
come 8

taey say
go to such house or
t? such jait, and
Pat quastions to seicit
person”.

Section 34, pro~ In section 34 af the Seve discussion Sixth Report,
wise principal Act,

Foal relating to page 49, clause.
clause 3 8 (3 78, suggests 3

Proviso. maximo of

yen ropes.

@ in sub-section (0,

peovisa, for the
words “ten times the
soot of ote ee
per registration fee",
gubstiture the wards
“five gine the कोश
ount ef the proper
egivirotion fee, frit
not excee rupees
ep eas J



121

(४) after sub-section (3), As to nation is a new
insert the following lity,see dis- paint not dealt
sub-section’, namely,—- cussion under —_ within the Sixth

“Later Sugges- Report.
tions”,

“@A) The register
‘ing officer may,
for the purpose
‘of satisfying himself
about the nationality
of the parties to
the document, hold
such inquiry as he
‘may consider neces
sary, in order to
ensure that the pro-
visions of the Fo-
ra nn Exchange Re-
dation Act, 1947,
(7 of 1947).
have been and shall
be complied with in
relation to the con-
sideration received
or to be received for
the transaction to
which the document
relates”.
Section In section 35 of the prin- Discussion re- Sixth — Report,
35(2) cipal Act, for sub-sec- lating to clause page 50, and
tion (2), substitute the  20(3). Teasons at page
following sub-section, 78 (Notes).
namely —
“(2) For the purpose of
any proceeding under
this Act, @ Sub-Rogis-
trar shall have all the
powers vested in a civil
court under the Code
of Civil Procedure,
1905, (5 of 1908),
when trying a
suit, in respect of the
following matters, na-

‘mely —

(a) Summoning and en-
forcing the atiend
‘ance of witnesses
examining them on
oath 5 .

(b) discovery and in-

लि, h
(c) compelling the pro-
‘duction of docu
ams
reception ‘faa eur
fence on affidanty
and
(©) issuing commission
for the examination
of witnesses; and

any proceeding of ex-
isting section 8403),

1. This is a new amendment not deal (with in the Sixth Report.


122

as to judicial pro-
ceeding before the
Registrar shail be
deemed to be ८ ju-
dicial proceeding wi-
thin the meaning of
sections 193 and 228
of the Indian Penal
Code, ( 45 of 1860).
Provided po-

wer under this sub-
section shall not be
exercised in respect
of @ person not
residing! or car
rying on business
or personally work-
ing for gain within
the “local Himdts of
the sub-district of the
Sub-Re; gira
Section 42 Section 42 of the princi
‘pal Act shall be re-num-
ered as sub-section
thereof, and after sub-
section (I), as so re-
numbered, insert the
following sub-section,
namely =

(2) A testator who per
nally deposits a ei

also endorse on

the cover the name and

address of the person
to whom the

document shld be dix

er tra

tion thereof jer bis

Section 45... In section 45 of the prin-
cipal Act, to sub-section
(2) add’ the following
proviso namely,-

“Provided that where the
testator has, under sub-
section (2) of section
42, endorsed on the
cover the name and
address of the person
to whom the inal
document should
delivered after registra~
tion thereof after his
death, Registrar

shail, after such copy

has been made, deliver
the original document
to such person”.

See discussion
relatiny

clause 43(2)>
where vol

ry nomination
is recommen-
ded, in case of
8 testator who
personally de-
posits a will.

See change pro-
posed to exist-
ting section 42,
and dis-
cussion relating
to clause 46,
where delivery
to nominee is
recommended,

Sixth Report,
Page 60, clause
43@), rans on
somewhat diffe-
rent lines, by
making nomi~

com-
pulsory.

Sixth Re
61, cl 4036
ioe) ane clause
48, are on some-
what different
lines.

I. of. section 20(a), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

2. The proviso modifies Order 16, Rule 19; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 which

would otherwise apply under

the main paragraph of the section s8 proposed


123

Section 4607) In section # Bub
section (2),

‘gection 259
of the Indian Succession
Ast, 1865 Or section 8z
of the Ps and Ad.
ministration Act, 1881”,
substitute the words om

8008 “section 294 of
the Indlion  Succesion
Act, 1925, (39 of 1925)

Section 5--.. 7७ section st of the prin-
‘cipal Acty—

new sub~
sections) (@} after sub-section (3),
insert the following
Hew sub-sections, na~
mely २

“GA) Rules made un-~
this Act muy
provide for the matt
ane ‘of Addition
or Supplement

Book 1 and Boch 4
in the form of a File
Book or ather seit~
able Jorn for regis

documents of a
temporary charace
ter; oF

Gi} documents which
are printed on
paper and im res-
pect of witch en-
tering by hand
feosmnes unneces~
sary; oF

Git) other 12१22 %
er copies of a spe-
character,
which cannot be
sonuentently en
tered in the main
Book x and Book
ro

(38) Such 3

See discussion See Sinth Re~
relatin, w By clause 47
clase 47(t} (2) wherein’ the
(cccommendation section of the
Indian Success
sion Act, 1925
is referred &,

Sixth — Report,

555
Rot make this
change.

See discussion
relating to
clause 61208)
ind clause 42
re ox
pressions “Sap-
plementary”
and “Aadi-
tional" Books
owe their ori
gin to the com-
whett received
on clause 42
@) i
the Max
Pradest rates
og the subject
which ase the

desh Registra

tion Rites),

As to section 294, Indian Succession Act, 1925, see Paruck, Succession Act, (1966)
page 577.


124

I 2 3 4

(B) insert the following See discussion See Sixth Report
sub-section at the relating to page 65, clause
end, namely clause 61 (5). 61 (5). 9 For
See also Bihar seasons, see
and Bombay Sixth ” Report,
Amendments! page. 32, Para-
to section 51, graph 79.
reproduced “in
Mulla, (1963)
pages 228-229.

5 (9) If in the opinion
“Of the Registrar, any
of the books mention-
ed in sub-section (1)
is in danger of
being destroyed or
Becoming illegible
the Registrar may,
yy written order,
‘ect such book or
portion thereof, as

thinks fit, to be
recopied and au-
thenticated in such
manner as may be
prescribed, and the
prepared and
authenticated under
such direction shall
for all purposes of
this Act and of the
Indian Evidence Act,
1872, (1 of 1872)
be deemed to be the
original book or por-
tion, and ail re-
ferences in this Act
to the original book
shall be deemed to
be to the book or
portion so recopied
and authenticated’.

Section 55(7) In section 55 of the See discussion Sixth Report,
(New principal Act, insertthe relating to page 66.

following sub-section at clause 64(7). For reasons, see
the end, namely — Sixth Report,
page 32, para-
graph 79 ard

page 82 (Notes).

© (9) If in the opinion of
of the Registrar, any

of the indexes ‘men-
tioned in sub-section

(1) és in, danger of

ing destroy ed or
Secoming illegible

7. See Mulla (1963), pages 228-229.


125

whally or partially,
the Registrar may,
by @ written order,
divect such index or
portion wheraof, as
he thinks it, to be
vecopied in such
manner as may be
prescribed, and cop~
es 39, prepared jee
Sor the purposes of

this Act and of the
Indian Boidence
Act, 1872 (of
3872} be deemed
$0 be the original
badex or portion, ama
Ql seferences” ie
che Act to the arie
Binal index or pors
tion shalt be deemed
to be veferences to
the indsxes oy por
tions prepared” as

aforesaid”.
Segtion 67A After Section a7 ofthe Sve discussion
(New) principal Act, insertthe under “ Later
following section, dame- Suggestions”,
¥ tom

* 679 (2) Where the te
gistering officer #3
unable to despatch
a copy of a docu-
ment ynder sub *

Sending of section (1) of section
short notices 85, sub-section (2)
‘of documents ‘of stetion 66 or see-

wan 67 (hereinafter
veferred to ax * the
requisite copy’) on
the aay on which
the —decument és
adimitecd for region
tation, he shall send
on that day @ short
note abaut the do-
cument in the 9:
eribed' form, giing
particdars of the
nature of the dacu—
ment, Wee nares ff
the parties (inch

ing the executants
and claimants), and a
description of the
property affected, to
the Registrar ‘to
wehom te requisite

1. Ag ta the expression * prescribed *, see she definition of that ex-
ession (proposed).


126

copy ts to be sent
Ww ‘any of the
sections referred to
tng his sub-section.

(2) The Registrar receiv
ing such note shall
take action thereon
‘as if it ware the 78-
guistte copy the
document, and such
short note sfall be
deemed to be the
requisite copy काम
the requisite copy is
wceiucd by the Re-
gistrar.

(3) Whrn the requisite
copy of ths document
is received by the

Beat करत हा the
fect that the copy
cancels the shart ngte
shall be made on the
copy and ot the
short note”.

Se-tion 69 In section 69 of the See discussion
principal Act,—
elause 7601)

(a) in sub-section (1),

[0 for the words
“and shalt have
power from time
to time ३9 make
rules consistent
with this Act”,
substitute the
words and the
State — Govern~
ment, may, 2:
notification in the
Off neat Gapeite,
make siles*”,

Compare Sixth
८909 page 407
tanse 76, nd
reasons, see
Sixth Report
page 3: ‘a pata~
graph BS

(if) after clause (gg), [f) As to photo- Sixth Report,

insert the follow- gerry
ing new clauses, हित

namely — tating to “Sug-

cael (8), ems

its only one

*“Cege) regulating gested new sec~ ofthese amen d.

‘procedure tions", § and
for tranwmitt- the Bombay हि

‘tng documents Amendment.

onl famely
nag te~

3 g # Sixth Report, page 70, clause 76.
2, See gection 70A, as proposed,

3. For the Bombay Amendment, see Mulla (1069), page 44.


127

r 2 3 a
cor baittg Pho- copying of
ope ond Speindices.
the serial
menier bering,
bi ond
preservation
‘af the photo-
eraplac prints
and negatives
the manner of
fixing — the
pipiature at
the ona af 3
kenge cS
film, and
the procedure
generally in
the Govern-
खबर Phota
Registry’.

{gggg) regulating the (ii) As to manner
manner of ree of  re-copying
copying in-~ the indexes see
dexes Nos. 5, clause 78{2)(h),
IL, HE and and discussion
IV, respecti~ relating there-
vely and por~ to, This is
tions thereof, consequential?
under section
55.

(weges} regulating tke (iit) As to man-
manner of re- ‘ner of re-copy-
copying and ing and quthen~
authentication cation of rea
af register gister backs,
beaks or por- ete, see dicuss
tons thereof, sion relating to
ander section clave 762%),
Ria This is conse-

squential.?

Gi) after clause (६). See _ discussion Sixth — Report,
insect the fallow. relating to page 71, ‘lowe
ing clause, name- clase 7626). 76 (2) (४) sug

an and recommen-

Goh) regulating whe dation for issue aimilar —provi-

manner of of the pres sion,
suing the cribed notice
notice refer. before destruc-
ted 26 in tion, .
section 357,

i See section 35, a8 proposed to be amended,

3. See section 57, as proposed २० be amended.


128

(8) Omit sub-section (2),

Sections oA After section 70 of the
to 70E, Principal Act, insert the

(photo- following new sections,
graphing namely :—
of docu-
ments)
“PART XI-A

OF THE COPYING OF
DOCUMENTS BY MEANS
OF PHOTOGRAPHY,

70-A. Application of this
‘part.—This Part’ shall
apply to the areas only
in respect of which a
notification ts issued by
the State Government
under Section 70-C.

70-B. Definitions. —In
this Part,—

(1) “ Government Photo
Re istry ”* means the
office where docu
ments are photo-
graphed under the
provisions of this
Parts

(2) * Manager, _Go-
vernnent ' Phato
Registry’? means
the person in charge
of the Government
Photo Registry 4

"Photo Registrar”
means any” person
ointed by the
Stare Government
to perform the
duties of | Phota
Registrar under this
Part.

20-C, Documents —_ may
be photographed — in
areas notified by
Government.

This is _conse-
quential on the
8९. छा0-
posed in sec-
tion 69 (1).

See discussion This is a new

relating to
“Suggested new
provisions ”,

and the Bom-
bay Amendment,
sections 70A et
sea.

provision. Sixth
Report did
not propose this
change.



(0) The State Government
may, by notification in
the official Gazette, di-
rect that in any district
or sub-district specified
tn the notification copies
of documents admitted
to registration under
this Act shall be made
by means of photography.

(2) On the issue of suck
notification it shall be
translated into the
language of the district
and shali be posted tx @
conspicuous place at the
Registration offices ,
affected by the notifi-
cation.

70-D. Application of
Act to areas notified
under section 70-C.—
dn: any district or sub-
district in respect of
which a@ notification has
been issued under sece
tion 70-C, the provision
af this Act, shall, for
the purposes of this Part,
be subject to the follow-
ing modifications, name-
bm

@@) every document
admitted 10 registra-
tion under Section 35
or section 41 shall
be carefully marked
with an identifica-
tion stamp and the
serial number of the
document on every
page.

(6) Le shall then betranse
mitted by the re-
gistering officer_to
the Manager, Go~
vernment pote Re
istry, who 3/
cause each side of
each page of such
document together
with all stainps, en-
dorsements, seals,
signatures, thatmb-
impressions and
certificates appearing

10-109 Mof Law.


180

thareon to be photo~
graphed without sub-
traction or altera-
tion. He may for
this purpose cut or
unite, without break-
ing any seals, the
thread or — ribbon
wheretoith the pages
of the — dociinent,
are sewn together
in order to separate
the pages of the
document, and, as
soon as the document
has been photogra-
phed, he shall re-
hind the document
exactly as before
aud if ke has cut the
thread or ribbon shali
seal it over the joint
wath his seal 3

Provided that before
transtussion of the
document to the Go-
verament —— Photo-
Registrar the party
presenting the docu-
auent may require
the registering offi-
cer to have it copied
by hand under sec-
tion §2 भा mere
of an a tational
copying fee.

Ce) There shall shen be
Brepar Pre-
served the negative
and at least one pho-
tographic print, and
fo each such nega-
toe and print
the —_ Photo-Regis-
trar shall Fiat his
signature Seal

ae dee token of the exact

of the

copy to the original

१८ fy 44 ad~

mitted for registra-
tion :

Provided that when
more than one such

aroma length of fe
gistrar has affixed



131

Ais signeaure asd seal
at the end of such
Jengch of filet cere
foing in the manner
proscribed dy mules
wade in this dehalf,
che exter correspon
dence of all copies
it such Lengel of
‘lea with che original
dacummatits, she
photo-Registrar shall
be deemed to have
affixed his signature
and seal in each such
negarive on such
(कु af Sif

Provided furvher that
ix case of documents
containing plans or
maps the negacives
of such plans
waps may be pre
pared on paper ins-
read of on films and
uuhere the negatives
are so prepared the
Photo-Registrar shal)
fix fis signature and
seal separately ww
eack such ae toe
and pring uf such
plan or wop itt tole
af the exact corres.
fondence of the copy
mo the original wap
ee plan — contatised
in the dacuwiets as
adititted for regis
tration.

id) One set “of such points
arranged in the order
or their serial
mansbers shall be
made up inte books
und sewn Dr
sogether. Zo euch
suck 690k the Rem
gistrar or SubjRe-
gistrar shall काशी 6
certificate af tke
seria} numbers it cat-
tains, and the books
shall then de pre
served in the re
cords of the Sub-
Regivrar,



132

The negatives shall
be preserved in such
suitable place as the
Inspector - General
may direct 5

Provided thar prints
plans or maps
comained in docu~
anents may either be
bound with the
prints of such
documents or filed
Separately i stich
manner as the Ins-
pector-General may
direct,

(2) All words and ex-
pressions used in
this Act with re-
ference to the mak
ing of copies of
documents by hand or
the entering or filiig
of documents — or
snemorandum ia
books provided under
section 16 shall, so
far as may ba neces-
sary, be construed
as” referring to the
making of such cop-
ies by means of photo-
graphy or the enter-
ing or filing af docu-
ments or memoran-
dim in books made
up of copies preparcal
by means of photo-~
araphy.

(3) Where this Part app-
lies, the sections
mentioned below
shall be deemed to
be modified as fol-
Joss i

(a) In section 19
the words ‘and
abo by a true
copy” shall be
vinitted 3

(8) Sub-section (4)
of section 21
shall be omitted 3

() the words ‘ac-
cording to the



order of its ad-
mission? occtr~
ving in clause
fo) of, sub-
section (1) of
section 32. shail
he omitted 3

(a) section 53 shall
be omitted 3

fe) tn sub-section
(0 of section
60 the words

Sand page’
shall be omit-
tec

CP sub-section (0)
of section | 6.
shall be osnit-
ied 5

(g) के subesection ¢
of section 62

Mor ihe
word * ran
soribed’ the
word * cup
ted? slat
be substitu
wed; and

i) for the
words and
figures

copy re.
Served toin
section 19
the words
‘photographs
of the origi~
nal? shail be
substituted,

JO-BA) Nothing in
this Pare shalt apply
to any — docuntent
which is prepared

@ primed of
lithographed form or
which 1 the opinion
of the — registering
Sficer ts not in a fit
condition to be pho-
ragraphed.



(2) Notwithstanding any-
thing contaixed in
this Part, in the case
ef any — dociunent
containing a map,
plan or trade mark
label if the — party
presenting the deeue
ment so desires, the
registering officer
may accept true
copies of such map,
plan or trade mark
label and where
Stich true copies are
accepted the map.
plan or trade mark
tabel shall not be
photographed — and
such copies thereof
shall be filed in the
appropriate book”,

Section 772) धरा section 77 of the See discussion Sixth Report,
Principal Act, to relating © Pages 52-55 did
sub-section (3) add clause 23, not Tecommerd
the following Expia- this change.

nation, namely ;—
“ Explanation : In coun-
ting the period
of thiny days refer-
red to in the  sub-
section, the time
requisite for abtain-
ing व copy of the order
of refusal "shall be
excluded”.

Section 77 (2) (i) to sub-section (2), See discussion Sixth Report,

add the following relating to page 53.
proviso, namely — clause 23 (2)
proviso.

“Provided that failure
tofileasuitor the dis-
suissal of a suit filed
wider this seetion shal!
not disentitie a party
to any other remedy
to which he may be
entitled on the basis
of the unregistered do-
cuments””.

Section 78. Rentumber section 78 of See discussion Sixth | Report,
eetron 7 the principal “Ace as telating (0. page 67, ०४७४९
sub-section (1) thereof, clause 66, and 66 is silent on
andafter sub-section(r) the West Ben- this point.
as so renumbered, in: gal Amendment
इक the following sub- Act, 195.
section, namely —



“(2) The State Gov-
ernment, if it is of
opinion that there
are reasonable
grounds for doing so,
may by order
lish in the ०.
Gazette, remit in the
whole or any part
of the State any fee
or fees in respect of
any matter or mat
उड़ा einunerated in
clauses (a) to (7) of
sub-section (1), either
generally or for any
class ov classes of
eases and in respect
of persons generally
or of any particular
classes of persons”.

Section 82 In section §2 uf the See discussion Sixth _ Report,
principal Act, in clause relating to page 68, clause
(2), after the words clause 7o(e). = 4०019 silent ,on
** Dersonates another”, this point.
insert the words

“whether the individual
personated is a real
or an bnaginary
person”.

Section 33(1) Insection 83 ofthe prin- See discussion Sixth Report,
cipal Act, in sub-sec- relating 10. page 68,
tion (1), for the words clause 71. botcomn.
“A. prosecution + for
any offence under this
Act coming to the
knowledge of _regis-
tering officer in his
official capacity may
be commenced” gubs-
titnte the words “No
prosecution for any
offence under this Act
shall be {commenced

ancapt?*,

Section85 In section 85, inserc the See discussion Sixth Report,
following words at the relating 10 page 70, clause
end, namely -— clause 74—re- 74, also provi~

commendation des for notice.
“after such notice as-_—relating to des-
may be prescribed’*, truction after

notice.

2. See Mulla, (1963), page 267, for the West Bengal Amendment,


136

I 2 3 1
Section 87 Re-number section 87 of See discussion Sixth Report,
the principal Act as relating to page 58, clause
sub-section (1) thereof, clause 41 (2), 40(2) proposed
and after sub-section a wider pro-
(1), as so renumbered, vision, For
insert the following reasons, see
sub-section, uamely:— Sixth — Report,
page 36, Para-
(2) A person — who graph 99, and
has before the 78- Page go.

gistering officer ad-
mitted execution of
@ document or as-
sented to tts regis
tration, shall not be
allowed to question
the validity of its
registration on the
ground of any defect
in, or the want, of
authority of a per-
Son presenting the
document”,

GMGIPND —T. S, Wing—109 Law (4346/-+22-9-19/.. 18608