LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT

36

re

(SECTIONS 497, 498 AND 499 OF THE CODE OF
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1898—GRANT OF
BAIL WITH CONDITIONS)

DECEMBER, 1967

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW


CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION,
5, Jorbagh, New Delhi-3,
Dated the 9th January, 1968.

Shri P. Govinda Menon,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My dear Minister,

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the thirty-sixth
Report of the Law Commission on sections 497, 498 and 499 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and the grant of tail with
conditions.

2. The circumstances in which the subject was taken up for
consideration are stated in the first paragraph of the Report.
As the matter was understood to be of an urgent nature, a draft
Report on the subject was prepared as soon as the subject was
taken up.

(The usual Press Communique inviting the public to express
its views was not issued, having regard to the urgency of the
subject).

3. The draft Report was considered at Ninety-first ering
of the Law Commission, held on the 16th December, 1967 an
approved with certain modifications.

The Report was revised accordingly.

4. Inthe drafting of this Report the Commission received
valuable help from its Secretary Mr. Bakshi.

(it was decided that in view of the urgency cf the matter
the draft Report need not te circulated to State Governments,
High Cousts, etc. for comments).

Yours sincerely,
J. L. Kapur.


REPORT ON SECTIONS 497, 498 AND 499 OF THE
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1898—
GRANT OF BAIL WITH CONDITIONS

CONTENTS

Para. No. SUBJECT-MATTER PaGB
1 Subject why taken up separately. 1
2-5 Existing provisions (sections 496 to 500). 1
6 Section 497(1)—Suggestion regarding. 2
7 Report of U.P. Police Commission. 2
8 Suggestion relating to section 497 analysed. 3
9-14 Case-law as to conditional bail—sections 497 and 498. 3
15 Case-law as to conditional bail under section 496. 5
16-17 Recommendation regarding section 497. 6
8 Whether sole object of bail is to secure attendance. 6
19—20 English law as to object of bail. 7
21—-25 Indian law as to object of bail. 8
26—27 Constitutional aspects of conditions of bail. n
23 Section 498(1)—Introductory. व2
29 Section 498(1)—Suggestion regarding. 12
30 Recommenation regarding section 498. 13
£1 ५ Section 499—-Recommendation regarding. 13
32 Appendix. 33.
APPENDIX,
Recommendations as shown in the form of dratt 24

amendments to the existing Code.


REPORT ON SECTIONS 497, 498 AND 499 OF THE CODE
OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1898—GRANT OF BAIL
WITH CONDITIONS

1. This Report deals with the question whether, under Subject why
sections 497 and 498 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, taken aly.
1898, bail can be granted with conditions. There is a sug- .
gestion made by a State Government for an amendment
of the law on the subject,’ and, as it appeared that early
action on the suggestion was desired,” it was decided that
the matter should be taken up separately from the general
revision of the Code.

2. A brief resume of the provisions of the Code’ on ‘he Existing
subject may be useful, before the amendment suggested* is Garon.
considered in detail. 496 to 500).

As regards bailable offences, under section 496 (so far as
is relevant), if a person other than a person accused of a
non-bailable offence is prepared at any stage of the pre:
ceedings before the Court to give bail, “such person shall
be [leased on bail”. There is, thus, an absolute right to
bail.S

3. So far as non-bailable offences are concerned, under
section 497(1), a person accused or suspected of the com-
mission of such offence “may be released on bail, but he
shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds
for believing that he has been guilty of an offence punish-
able with death or imprisonment for life”. (There is a pro-
viso regarding persons under the age of sixteen years, and
women, etc., but it is not important for the present purpose.
Nor is it necessary to refer to the other sub-sections of
section 497).

Thus, the Court has a limited discretion. But the sec-
tion itself is silent about the imposition of conditions.

4. Under section 498(1) (so far as is relevant), the High
Court or the Court of Session may, in any case, whether
there be an appeal on conviction or not, direct that any
person be admitted to bail or that the bail be required by a
police officer or Magistrate be reduced.

Thus, there is a very wide discretion." But there is no
mention of conditions.

1. Paragraphs 6 and 19, infra.

2. Correspondence in the Law Commission’s file relating to the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, in November—December. 1967.

3. Section 496—500 of the Code.

4. Paragraphs 6 and 19, infra.

5. See also paragraph 15, infra.

6. Cf. Mahmood Muzaffar, A.I.R. 1963 Al. 127.


Section 497

1) —-Sugges>
Ga regard
ing.

tees पा

Sections 121
to 130.
Chapter
XVILP.C.—

Sections
378 to 462.

Report of
U.P. Police
Commission,

2

5. Under section 499(1), before any person is released
on bail, a bond shall be executed by such person and his
sureties, “conditioned that such person shall attend at the
time and place mentioned in the bond and shall continue
so to attend until otherwise directed by the police-officer
or Court, as the case may be”.

Under section 500(1), as soon as the bond is executed,
“the person for whose appearance it has been executed
shall be released”.

6. The amendment suggested by the State Government?
seeks to replace section 497(1) as follows: —

“(1) When any person accused of or suspected of
the commission of any non-bailable offence is arrested
or detained without warrant by an officer incharge of a
police station, or appears or is brought before a court,
he may be released on bail which may be subject to
such conditions as may appear necessary in a particu-
lar case if the off ence is one punishable with
imprisonment, extending to seven years or mOre or is
one falling under Chapters VI, XVI and XVII of the
Indian Penal Code including abetment, conspiracy or
attempt to commit any such offence, but shall not be so
released if there appear reasonable grounds for
believing—

(i) that he is likely to tamper with the evidence;
or

(ii) that he has been guilty of an offence punish-
able with death or imprisonment for life;

Provided that the court may direct that any person
under the age of 16 years or any woman or any sick or
infirm person accused of such an offence be released on
bail.

Explanation—In granting a conditional bail the court
may impose conditions like requiring the person to reside
in a particular locality or to report to the police Or any
other specified authority.”

7. The above suggestion? regarding amendment of sec-
tion 497 was made by the Government of Uttar Pradesh in

1, Law Commission’s file No. ¥,3(2)/ss-L.C. Part 19, S. No. 238
and F.3(2)/ss-L.C. Part VI, 8. No. 267.

2. Paragraph 6, supra.


3

‘pursuance of the recommendation made by the U.P. Police
Commission,’ which is quoted below: —

“We have received overwhelming evidence that
after being bailed out the bullies and goondas tamper
with evidence, threaten witnesses, and sometimes com-
mit crimes afresh. It was urged that the powers of the
Sessions Court to grant bail are too wide and restric-
tions similar to those applicable to Magisterial Court,
should be placed on its powers. We agree that the
court which has the power to try and acquit an accus-
ved should have full powers to deal with interim mat-
ters. We also feel that any absolute restriction on the
powers of the Sessions Court would lead to incon-
venience and expense inasmuch as the accused will
have more often to run to the High Court. We, how-
ever, recommend that the law should be amended
authorising the Sessions Court to grant conditional bail
in appropriate cases relating to specified offences such
388 dacoity, murder, etc., “In granting a conditional bail
the court may impose conditions requiring the person
to reside in a particular locality or to abstain from
visiting a particular locality, or to report daily to the
police or any other specified authority. It should also
be provided by law that in granting bail it should also
be considered whether the accused is likely to tamper
with the evidence...... ”

8. Broadly speaking, the following changes would re- Suggestion
‘sult. if the proposed amendment? of section 497 ‘is relating to
accepted— sectio on 497

(i) a power of imposing conditions while releasing
on bail will be conferred expressly; and

(ii) release on bail would be prohibited if the
person concerned is likely to tamper with the evidence.

9. So far as the first point* is concerned, the position is Case-law as

not entirely satisfactory. A few illustrative cases may be ५० fendi
mentioned to show the existing position. Before the Cal- sections 497,
‘cutta High Court.’ the question arose whether, in the case and 498.
‘of an offence under section 124A, Indian Penal Code (a non-
bailable offence), a condition could be imposed to the effect
that the person released on bail would not deliver any
speech until disposal of the case. The condition was re-
garded as beyond the competence of the Court. It was
stated, that only a condition for “attendance in Court”
could be imposed.

7. Report of the U.P. Police Commission, paragraph 152, referred
to in the suggestion.

2. Paragraph 6, supra.
3. Paragraph 8(i), swpra.

4. Giant Mehar Singh v. Emp. 1.L.R. (1939) 2 Cal, 423 A.LR. 1939
‘Cal. 7143 43 C.W.N. 639 (Edgeley J.).


4

In an early Calcutta case, the conditions were as
follows: —

“The sureties in each case must be zemindars of the
district whose names as such are written in the towji
of the Collector, and no one zemindar will be accepted
as surety for more than one of the accused, ie., there
must be twice as many zemindar sureties as there are
accused’. As to this condition the High Court observ-
ed—

“This would make it necessary that the accus-
ed should find sixteen zemindars to give bail for
them. The Judge, upon an application under sec-.
tion 436, reduced the security required for the
appearance of the accused from rupees 96,000 to
rupees 6,000.”

We may observe ‘that the conditions that the sureties
should be zemindars and that no one zemindar should be:
accepted as surety for more than one of the accused, throw-
ing unnecessary difficulties in the way of the defendants
procuring bail, were illegal, and:such as the Magistrate had
no right to impose.’.

10. In another Calcutta case? (which did not involve
any question of the validity of conditions generally), a con-
dition imposed on A that he should not leave the limits of
Midnapore was set aside, as A was living with his family
at Kharagpur. The High Court regarded the condition as.
one which the accused could not possibly comply with, and,
which was, therefore, “tantamount to refusing the bail”.

In an earlier Calcutta case,*-* a condition was imposed
with the consent of the accused that “he be guarded at his
own house and debarred from all communications with
persons said, rightly or wrongly, to be his associates in
crime’.

11. The Madras High Court’ and the Andhra Pradesh.
High Court® have upheld conditions under section 497.

1. In the matter of Mahesh Chandra Banerjee, (1870) 13 W.R. Criminal
15 4 Bengal Law Reports, Appendix 1, 10.

2.Kamla Pandey v. The King, A.I.R. 1949 Cal. 382; 53C.W.N. 699°
(Harries C.J. and J.P. Mitter J.).

3. Rajah Narendra Lal Khan v. KiE., 13 C.W.N. 43, 50 (Shurfuddin
and Coxe JJ.).

4. For comment, see B.H. Monnier, Article on bail, 13 C.W.N. (Journal),
pages 3, 5 and Editorial Note in 13 C.W.N. (Journal), page 9.

. In re Varadaraja, (sgn) x ML. Cri. 717 (Ramaswami J.) (Reviews:

cases) noted in A.I.R. 1965 lhra 444.

6. In re Saradamma, A.1.R. 1965 Andhra 444 (Vankatesam J.).


5

12. A condition that the accused should report every day
at the police station has been upheld in a Madhya Pradesh
case, as not restrictive of his movements.!

A restriction to the effect that the accused should be
kept in a “Mahila Ashram” was held by the Chief Court
of Oudh to be void, on the ground that the accused is not
“released” within the meaning of section 500, and that the
court has no power to put any restrictions on the move-
ments of the accused.*

“So long as the accused lived in the Mahila Ashram
under the order of the Court, she was virtually in the cus-
tody of the Court.” :

13. As regards powers of the High Court under section
498, it was observed in a Nagpur case," that the court was
unaware of any restrictions on the High Court's pqwer of
imposing conditions on which it grants bail. “It is open,
for instance, to the High Court in granting bail, where an
accused person has been convicted of making a seditious
speech, to impose the conditions that the accused should
abstain from addressing any public meeting or publishing
any matter until the decision of the appeal...... ”

14. In a Lahore case,’ the validity of a condition impos-
ed by the Magistrate under section 497 to the effect that
the person released shall attend the investigation when
needed, was upheld: (On the merits, however, the condi-
tion was set aside). :

15. In bailable cases, ४.९., those governed by section 496, Case-law as
the court cannot, it seems, impose conditions, as the accus- to gona
ed has a right®--7-*-" to bail. (Nor can a police-officer impose under sec-

conditions requiring attendance before the police) tion 496.

This does not, of course, affect the High Court’s power
to cancel bail in case of abuse.” “This jurisdiction springs
from the over-riding inherent powers of the High Court and
can be invoked in exceptional cases only when the High

1. (1964) Jab. LL,R. 277, cited in ए, Ramanatha Iyer; Code of Criminal
Procedure, (1963), Vol. 3, page 2286.

8 Fa Raghubar Dayal v. Emp.) 1.L.R, 13 Luck. 7205 A.LR. 1938 Oudh
1, 82.

% Adkoo Umrao v. Emp., LL.R. 1939 Nag. 1703 A.LR. 1938 Nag. 420
421 (Grille J.).

4.Kimat Rai v. Emp., AIR. 1945 Lah. 215, 216 (Munir J.).

5. In re District Magistrate Vieagapatan, AIR. 1949 Med. 77.

6. In re Kote Appalakonda, A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 740.

TPP. x. Raghuramniah, (x97) 2 Andhea W.R. 383. (Chandra Reddy}.
Inre Saradamma A.LR. 1965 A.P. 444.

8. Re. v. Genda Singh, A.I.R. 1950 All. $25.
9. Jayantilal v. State (1966) Cr. L.J. 209 (Gujarat).

10. Talab Hussain, (1958) S.C.R. 12273 A.LR. 1958 S.C. 376, affirming
Mudhukar Purushottam, A.I.R. 1958 Bom. 406.


6

Court is satisfied that the ends of justice will be defeated
unless the accused is committed to custody.*

Recommen: | 16. So far as the first point? is concerned, the suggestion

garding sec- is a useful one. The existing position as to the power to

tion 497. impose conditions while granting bail is somewhat uncer-
tain, though the power to impose conditions is recognised
by most High Courts.’-* The proposed change will settle
the law. It is, however, necessary that the conditions to
be imposed must be such as are linked up with preventing
the escape of the accused or preventing repetition of the
offence or otherwise required in the interests of justice.
Moreover, a condition tantamount to refusal of pail ought
not to be authorised.

17. So far as the second point—tampering with evi-
dence’—is concerned, it does not appear to be necessary to
mention tampering with evidence specifically as a ground
for prohibiting bail |. Release (in the case of a non-bailable
offence) is in the discretion of the court. The Court can,
therefore, even now take into account the possibility of
tampering with evidence.’-8.°-°

The observations in a Supreme Court case also make
this clear.

It would not be necessary to over-emphasise this consi-
deration, in granting or refusing bail.

Subject to these modifications, there is no harm in
accepting the suggestion.
Wether वि 48. In connection with conditions intended to prevent a
Of bail is © Tepetition of the offence, we should refer to one aspect of
to secure at- the matter which may be relevant to such conditions. A
tendance. controversy appears to have existed at some time as to
whether the sole Object of bail is to secure attendance of
the person released. We shall briéfly deal with the posi-
tion on the subject under English law and Indian law.

Ty Asstt, Customs Collector (1967) Cr. L.J. 1576, para.

1. Ratilal Bhanji
5 (December) (Supreme Court).

2. Paragraph 80), supra.

3. Paragraphs 9--143 supra.

4. In England, a condition for medical :xamination can be imposed’
where an inquiry into physical or mental condition of the accused is necessary.
See section 26(4), Magistrates’ Courts Act, 1952 (15 & 16 Geo. 6 and I Eliz.
2C. 55).

5. See paragraph 10, supra.

6. Paragraph 801), supra.

7. Public Prosecutor v. Sanyasayya, A.LR. 1925 Mad. 1224, 1225 (Courts
Trotte D.CJ.).

8. Harnarain, A.I.R. 1958 Punj. 123, 127. \ .

9.K.E. v. Nga San-Hiwa, A.I.R. 1927 Rang. 205, 208 (F.B.), app_—_ ing:
A.LR. 1926 Rang. 51.

10. Vidya Sagar, A.I.R. 1962 Punj. 487, 488, paragraph 5.

11, See State v. Jagjit Singh, (1962) 3 S.C.R. 6223 A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 253,
255, paragraphs 3 and 5, where some of the considerations in granting or
refusing bail are outlined.


7

19. As to English iaw, the position has been thus English law
a

stated?: —

“Bail is not to be withheld merely as a punish-
ment.”

The requirements as to bail are merely to secure
the attendance of the defendant at the trial. की, v. Rose,
67 LJ. Q.B. 289.

203. The proper test of whether bail should be granted
or refused is whether it is probable that the defendant will
appear to take his trial. Re Robinson, 23 LJ. Q.B. 286.

The test should be applied by reference to the following
considerations :--

(1) The nature of the accusation. R. v. Barronet
and Allain, 1 E. & 8. 1;

(2) The nature of the evidence in support of the
accusation. Re Robinson, ante.

(3) The severity of the punishment which convic-
tion will entail. Re Robinson, ante,

(4) Whether the sureties are independent, or in-
demnified by the accused person. Hermann v. Jeuch-
ner, 15 Q.B.D. 561; Consolidated Exploration etc. Co, v.
Musgrave [1900] 1 Ch. 37; R. v. Porter [1910] 1 K.B.
369; 3 Cr. App. R. 237.

For observations on the undesirability of bail being
granted by magistrates in cases of house-breaking, where
there is a likelihood of the offence being repeated, see
R. v. Phillips, 32 Cr. App. R. 47.

20. A few cases may be referred to, to show how the
discretion to grant bail is exercised in England. It was
pointed out in one case, that “it is the duty of the Justices
to inquire into the antecedents of a man who is applying
to them for bail.”

In another case,’ it was held that where the crime is of
a nature that there is a likelihood of its being repeated if
the accused is released, particularly where the evidence
indicates that there 15100 defence to the charge preferred
(e.g. accused arrested in the act of house-breaking), the
grant of bail pending trial would be wrong.

1. Archbold, Criminal Proceedings, etc. (1966), pages 71—72, para-
graphs 202—203.

2. R. v. Armstrong, (1951) 2 All. E.R. 219 (C.C.A.). Stone’s Justice
Manual), (1962), Vol. I. paragraph 45, f.n. (h).

3. 8 V. Phillips, (1947) LIT J. ए, 335 32 Cr. App. Rep. 47 (C. CA.)

10 object
of bail. रण


8

In that case, the applicant had pleaded guilty in two
charges of house-breaking and larceny, and asked that ten
similar outstanding offences be taken into consideration.
Nine of these offences were committed while the applicant
was on bail, seven before and two after his committal for
trial. He was sentenced to four years’ penal _ servitude.
The Court of Criminal Appeal {Lord Goddard, C.J., Atkin-
son and Cassels, JJ.), in dismissing an application for leave
to appeal against the sentence, made the following obser-
vations’: —

“The Court feels very strongly that the applicant ought
not to have been released on bail. In cases of felony, bail
is discretionary, and the matters which ought to be taken
into consideration include the nature of the accusation, the
nature of the evidence in support of the accusation, and
the severity of the punishment which conviction will entail.
Some crimes are not at all likely to be repeated pending
trial, and in those cases there may be no objection to bail;
but some are, and house-breaking particularly is a crime
which will very probably be repeated if a prisoner is re-
leased on bail, especially in the case of a man who has a
record for house-breaking such as the applicant had. It is
an offence which can be committed with a considerable
measure of safety..... There were three charges against
the applicant. With regard to one, there was no defence,
and in the case of ancther, he was actually arrested in the
act. Yet in spite of all his previous convictions the appli-
cant was given bail, not once but twice, first pending the
hearing before the Magistrates, and again on committal
for trial. To turn such a man loose on society until he has
received his punishment for an undoubted offence, an
offence which was not in dispute, was, in the view of the
Court, a very inadvisable step. They wish Magistrates
who release on bail young house-breakers, such as this
applicant, to know that in nineteen cases out of 20 itis a
mistake. The Court hopes that some publicity will be
given to these observations, so that Magistrates may know
the view of the Court of Criminal Appeal.”

Indian law 21, As to the Indian law, some of the cases? to which we

है] £0, object have already referred while discussing how far conditional

of bail, bail is permissible now. expressly or impliedly recognise,
that while one object of bail is to secure attendance, other
considerations cannot be tuled out.

22..This aspect of the matter. we find, was debated at
length in the discussions* that took place in 1923, particu-
larly in the speeches of Dr, Gour and the Law Member
Dr, Mian Sir Muhammad Shafi.

1. See Luxford, Police Law in New Zealand, (4950), page or.
2. Paragraphs 9——14, 16, 17 (foot-notes), supra.

3. Legislative Assemb!y Debates, Vol. TH, No. 35, dated rath
February, 1923.



9

The two sides of the question were well represented in
the debate in the speech of Dr. Gour and the reply of the
Law Member, which we quote :-—

‘Dr. Gour—What does the existing provision, how-
ever, provide? It says: no Magistrate shall release a
person on bail if there appear reasonable grounds for
believing that he has been guilty of the offence of
which he is accused. The Magistrate is to prejudge
the case and he is to say to the accused: I have
reasonable grounds for believing that you have been
guilty of this offence; therefore, whatever may be the
Teasons which would move me to release you on bail,
you cannot be released on bail. That is the sole crite-
rion from which Magistrates in India regard the ques-
tion of bail. Now, if we turn to the English law, we
shall find a very different criterion there for releasing
persons on bail. and, in iniviting this House to adopt
either the one or the other, 1 shall ask the House to
vemember what is the underlying principle for arrest-
ing a person and releasing him on bail. It requires no
large legal training such as my Honourable friend,
the last speaker, possesses, nor need one be an unpaid
Magistrate to understand that. When a man is arrested,
the sole and single purpose of his arrest is that he
should not run away, and, when he is released on bail,
the sole criterion for releasing him on bail and fixing
the quantity of bail is that he should not run sway.
(Mr. N. M. Samarath: “Nor commit suicide”?). Very
few people do that; and even people under arrest some-
times commit'suicide. That is, the sole criterion. Well,
I submit, if the Magistrate is assured that the man is not
likely to run away—(The Honourable Sir Malcolm
Hailey: “How?”) best security against his absconding, is
there any reason why he should be detained in
custody?”

23. The reply of the Law Member was clear,—may be
quoted: —

“Dr. Sir Mian Mohammad Shafi:—Sir, it was said
that the sole object of arrest is to prevent a person
from running away or from protracting or delaying the
trial) As a general rule that is a perfectly legitimate
criterion. I admit that that is the main purpose of
arrest. But cases might be conceived where other
considerations also come in. Let me give but one case
which is not only possible but which we, some of us
who have practised at the Bar long enough, can well
conceive. A man falls out with two brothers, Bitter
enmity subsists between that one man on the one side
and the two brothers on the other. He has a fight
with these two brothers intending to kill them, but


10

succeeds only in killing one and injuring the other
He is arrested by the police. There is ample evidence
against him to prove that he murdered one of the two
brothers, and he knows himself that he cannot escape.
He knows that he is sure to be convicted and hanged.
Well, now, in a case like that, is it not conceivable that
he would like to be released on bail in order to go
and kill the other brother also before he is hanged?
(Laughter), With all deference, I am afraid that my
Honourable friends from the South do not know what
stuff people of the North are made of. It is perfectly
conceivable that that man may be anxious to be re-
leased on bail in order to achieve the very object
with which he assaulted the two brothers, which
object he failed to achieve in the first instance, and
succeeded only in killing the one and simply injuring
the other brother; and knowing that he will be hanged,
before he is actually hanged, he may take advantage
of his release on bail to go and kilt the other brother.
Sir, with all deference it is hardly right to say that
the sole consideration is his presence at the next date
of hearing. There may be other considerations also
which come in in cases of this kind.

It seems to me that taking all the circumstances
into consideration, seeing that admittedly the clause
as we propose it is a decided advance, a decided im-
provement in the existing law, seeing also that the
clause as we propose it gives the fullest discretion to
the Magistrate in even the most serious class of cases
in_ certain instances to release on bail and prohibits
release on bail only when circumstances or facts have
been established which have led the Magistrate to
believe or have reason to believe that the accused has
committed the offence—only in this very narrow
circle is he prohibited from releasing the accused on
bail in this most serious of all crimes,—I submit that
the Legislature ought not to go beyond that, that the
Legislature should limit in such cases the discretion
of the Magistrate in so far as release on bail in non-
bailable cases is concerned.”.

24. The matter seems to have attracted considerable
attention in India, in various Editorial and other notes in
the Calcutta Weekly 1९०९४.

25, As we have already stated,” case-law in India does
not rule out other considerations while deciding the grant
of bail.

| 1. For example, see 2 C,W.N. (Journal) 325 16 C.W.N. (Journal) 286,
1 CLW.N. Gournal 214312 C.W.N. Coumnal) 253 and 13 CW.N. Journal}
pages 3, 5 and 9.

2. Paragraph 21, supra.


i

26. We also considered the - question whether there Gonstitu-
would be any objection, on the score of interference with pecs of cone
fundamental rights, particularly under article 19 of the ditions — of.
Constitution, if conditions other than those intended to tait.
secure attendance are allowed to be imposed. We noted,
that according to the decision of the Supreme Court?,
judicial orders in or in relation to matters brought before
adjudication before a Court cannot be said to affect Funda-
mental Rights. The relevant portion of the majority
judgment may be quoted—

“(38) The argument that the impugned order
affects the Fundamental Rights of the petitioners
under article 19(1), is based on a complete misconcep-
tion about the true nature and character of judicial
process and of judicial decisions. When a Judge deals.
with matters brought before him for his adjudication,
he first decides questions of fact on which the parties.
are at issue, and then applies the relevant law to the
said facts. Whether the findings of fact recorded by
the Judge are right or wrong, and whether the con-
clusion of Jaw drawn’ by him suffers from any infirmity,
can be considered and decided if the party aggrieved
by the decision of the Judge takes the matter up be-
fore the appellate Court. But it is singularly inap-
propriate to assume that a judicial decision pronounc--
ed by a Judge of competent jurisdiction in or in rela--
tion to a matter brought before him for adjudication
can affect the Fundamental Rights of the citizens
under article 19(1). What the judicial decision pur-
ports to do is to decide the controversy between the
parties brought before the Court and nothing more.

If this basic and essential aspect of the judicial
process is borne in mind, it would be plain that the
judicial verdict pronounced by the Court in or in re-
lation to a matter brought before it for its decision
cannot be said to affect the Fundamental Rights of
citizens under article, 19(1).”

27. We were, however, asked to consider whether,
having regard to the fact that a condition intended to pre-
vent repetition of an offence is not directly concerned with
the proceedings before the Court which relate to the
offence already committed, the majority judgment would
cover it. We have come to the conclusion, that even as
regards conditions intended to prevent repetition of
another offence, there would be no constitutional objection.

1. Naresh v, State of Maharashtra, ALR. 1967 S.C. 1, 11, 12, para-
graph 38 (majority judgment).


Section 498
गा

luctory.

Section 498
1 _
lon ropard-
ing.

12

The reason is, that the need for such conditions arises
because the person is suspected of a serious offence, there-
by raising a possibility that he may commit a similar
offence in the future.

The observation that bail cannot be punitive! has, thus,
to be qualified, to this limited extent, namely, in relation
to the objective of deterrence of similar offences by impos-
ing reasonable precautions.

28. We now come to section 498, Section 498(1) can be
divided into two portions. The first part provides that the
amount of every bond executed under this Chapter shall be
fixed with due regard to the circumstances of the case, and
shall not be excessive. This is also the English law?
where, in addition, a writ of habeas corpus can be applied
for if the bail is excessive. The second part of section
498(1) provides that the High Court or Court of Session
may, in any case, whether there be an appeal on convic-
tion or not, direct that any person be admitted to bail, or
that the bail required by a police officer or Magistrate be
reduced. It is the latter half that is more important.

29, The State Government* has suggested amendment
of sub-section (1) of section 498 in the following terms: —

“498(1):—The amount of every bond executed
under this Chapter shall be fixed with due regard to
the circumstances of the case, and shall not be exces-
sive; and the High Court or the Court of Session may,
in any case, whether there be an appeal on conviction
or not, direct that any person be admitted to bail
(subject to such conditions as may appear necessary in
the circumstances of the case), or that the bail required
by a police-officer or magistrate be reduced.

Explanation:—In granting a conditional bail, the
court may impose condition requiring the person to
reside in a particular locality or to abstain from visiting
a particular locality or to report daily to the police or
any other specified authority.”

‘The amendment is on the same lines as those‘ proposed
to section 497(1), except that there is no restriction as to
the offences.

x, Paragraph 19, supra.
2. Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 10, page 37% paragraph 678.

3. Law Commission's file No. F.3(2)/58-L.C. Patt IV, S, No, 238 and
F.3(2)/$5-L.C. Part VI, $. No. 261.

4. See paragraph 6, supra.


13

30. The discretion under section 498 is very wide, and Recommen-
there is not much case-law’ as to conditional’ bail under gitding seo-
that section. tion 498.

The amendment to section 498 may be accepted. But,
in our view, the restriction regarding the offences should
be incorporated in relation to section 498 also, Further,
the conditions to be imposed should be on the same lines
as indicated in the observations made by us’ regarding
the amendment proposed under section 497(1).

31. If the above changes are made,* it will be necessary Section 49
to insert, in section 499, a sub-section to the effect that [Reon
when a person has been released on bail on a condition, regarding.
the bond shall contain that condition also.

32. In order to give a concrete picture of our recommen- Appendix.
dations,’ we have, in an Appendix, put them in the form
of draft amendments to the existing Code.

1. J. L. KAPUR.—Chairman.

2. हू, 6. DATAR. है

3. S. 8. DULAT. | Members.
4.7. K. TOPE.

5. RAMA PRASAD MOOKERJEE. }

P. M. BAKSHI,
Joint Secretary and Yegislative Counsel.

New Delhi, the 16th December, 1967.

Sce paragraph 13, supra.
See paragraph 16, supra.
. Paragraphs 16 and 20, supra.
. Paragraphs 16, 30, 31, supra.

yor

+


APPENDIX

Recommendations as shown in the form of draft
amendments to the existing Code.

(This is a tentative draft only)

Section 497(1A) (New)

In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (hereinafter 5 of 1898.
referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (1), insert
the following sub-section, namely: —

“(1A) The Court may, when releasing on bail 45 of 1860.

under sub-section (1) a person accused of or suspected
of the commission of an offence punishable with im-
prisonment which may extend to seven years or more
or an offence under Chapter VI, Chapter XVI or
Chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code or abetment
of or conspiracy or attempt to commit any such Offence,
impose any cOndition which, in the circumstances of
the case, the court considers necessary—

(a) in order to ensure that such person shall
attend in accordance with the conditions of the
bond executed under this Chapter, or in order to
ensure that such person shall not commit an
offence similar to the offence of which he is accused
or of the commission of which he is suspected, or

(b) otherwise in the interests of justice.”,

Section 498
In section 498 of the principal Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), insert the words “or that any
condition imposed by the Magistrate be set aside or
modified” at the end;

(b) after sub-section (1), insert the following sub-
section, namely: —

“(1A) The High Court or Court of’ Session 4s of 1860.
may, when admitting to bail under sub-section
(1) a person accused of or suspected of the commis-
sion of an offence punishable with imprisonment for
a period which may extend to seven years or more
or an offence under Chapter VI, Chapter XVI or
Chapter XVII of the Indian Panal Code or abet-
14


15

ment of or conspiracy to or attempt to commit any
guch offence, impose any condition which, in the
circumstances of the case, the court considers
necessary—

(a) in order to ensure that such person
shali attend in accordance with the cOnditions
of the bond executed under this Chapter, or in
order to ensure that such person shall not com-
mit an offence similar to the offence of which
he is accused or of the commission of which
he is suspected, or

(b) otherwise in the interests of justice.”

Section 499(1A) (New)

In section 499 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1),
insert the following sub-section, namely:—
“(1A) Where any condition is imposed for the
release of any person on bail, the bond shall also con-
tain that condition.”

GMGIPND—TSW—28M of Law—28-6-69—-1,800.