LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT

INDIAN POST OFFICE ACT, 1898
February, 1968

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW
61 Law—2


EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE REPORT
5. No.—Serial Number in the Law Commission's file on the subject.


REPORT ON THE INDIAN POST OFFICE ACT, 1898
- CONTENTS
शक जाओ ‘SUBYSCT-MATTER Pace
1 Reference ६० the Commission . पु . . . . . 1
2 Existing Act boone ry Z
3 Scheme of revision . . पु पु पु पु . . 1
4° Scheme of the existing Act पु 2
5 Roles ang notifications. पु . 2
6 Cognate Acts . . + . . . - 3
7 Examination of the Act . . . पु पु हु 4
8 Section 1—Tite =. . . . . पु : 4
9 Section 2(0)—"* Director General” foe . 4
-म Sorte eh NS Reeder दशकों: cues A Om 4
12 Section 2 (d)—Mail ships ‘ . . . . . 5
«3-14 Section a (g)~“ Postage Stamps” and franking machines . s
15 Section 2(g) and surcharge on stamps. . + . ‘ 5
16 Section 3 (#) and (#)—Definition of Post Office . . 6
17 Section 2 (0-1 Postal Artictes” =. . . . . . 6
18 Section 2(7)—“ Postmaster General” . - + . 4
ip Setiong . - 2. 1. 2 se 7
ao Sections gands . . पु पु . . . . न हि
21-27 © Section 6—Lisbility of Post Office . पु °
28—29 English law—Statutory provisions regarding Crown liability 10
30 Whether changes necessary in section 6 . . 2
३71... Liability for‘insured articles - . . . 12
32 Liability of the officers themselves—Indian and English law =. 13
a3 Section 6 and the general question of State liability in tort 3
34 Position apart from statutory provisions . . . . . 14


Gi)

PARAGRAPH SUBJECT-MATTER
No.

35-36 Sections 6, 30, etc. Suggestion regarding limitation and liability
for regist:red articles . पु

37~38 Suggestion regarding liability - पु . पु +

39 Section 6 and suggestion to make Post Office liable for misdelivery,
etc., due to dishonesty, etc. . पं

40 Section 7 and petitions to President, Parliament, etc.

41 Section 9—Renewal of registration .
42-43 Section 9—Foreign newspapers .
44 Section 9—Constitutional aspects
45 Section 9 (2) (a2)—Interval of 31 days
46-47 Section 11—Service stamps
48 Section 13~Customs duties . . . .
49 Section 17—Forged. money orders and ficititious stamps
50-51 Section 18
§2~53 Sectionrg . . : .
54 Section 19A .
$5 Section 20
56~60 Recommendation regarding destruction of obscene articles
6x Suggestions regarding section 20 .
62 Section 20 and communications with the enemy and official
secrets . .
63 Section 20 (6) and objectionable matters
64 Sectio2r 2... .
6§—66 Section 21 (1) (6)—Certificate of posting .
67 Section2z . .
68 Section 23.
69—71 Section 23 (3) («) .
qe Section 23(39)@@) +- -+- +- -+- - .
73 Sections 23 and 27 and Police Officers .
74 Section 24 . .
75-76 . Scction 24 and action. under other sections
77-78 Section 24—Power under first proviso
79 Section 244 rs .
Bo Section 246 and Customs Act . . * .

18
18
19
19
20
2r
2r
डा
at
ar
ar
22

23


dit)

PARAGRAPH SUBJECT MATTER Page
No.

हा Section 250... 9. +- 8D
82-85 Section 26. an rs 29
86 Recommendation regarding section 26. ss *+ tt 30
$7—~92 Section 26 and comments received on the draft Report oo. Et
93 Recommendation regarding section 5, Telegraph Act . 33

o4 Section 27-006 . |. - +- | : . 34

9g Section 7B. 5 *+  « « #
96-7०. Sections 28 and 29—Court Notices sent by post... . . 34
roz—104 Section 28 and liability of the State for registered articles | पु 36
ros Sections 30 and 32 : . पु . . . . . 37
106—107 Section 33—insured articles - पु . . . . पु 7
108 Section 34 and V.P.P. articles . . . . पु . 35

109 Section 34 and cases of वरणा-पैदाए्टापए . . + . : 33
rte—rir Section 39 - . + पु . . . न पु 39
112 Section 46—Moncy Orders to foreign countries foe 40

113 Analysis of penal sections =. ee 4t

114 Sections 49, 59, 51, 63 and 67 . . . . पु पु 4l

rg Section 52. + पर पु . पु . पु पु वर

m6 Section 55... - ee « «  * : 42

117 Section 53, proviso (Interpretation) . . . . . 42
118—119 Section 62. . न . . . . . पु . 42
wo-12r Section 68 2. - +- *+ « */ « a
122 Section 69 - . . पु . + . . . 43
123124 Section 72, Authority for prosecutions section of Act. 44
125 Suggestion to make certain offences cognizable considered . 44

126 Section 73 + पु . पु . . . . पु पु 45

127 Power to place post boxes on municipal Jands Lo 45

m8 Strikes A

129 Telegrams sent by post in places where there is no telegraph

office . + पु . . . . . . . + 45

130-142 Limitation for suits for compensation for postal article oe aT
143—144 Locatton of the New Articles A and 1B. + . 50


Gy)

ee.
Panaguarlt ‘SUBJECT-MATTER Page

145 Limitation—Starting point . . पु पु 35I

146% English law as to limitation . . पु hoe पु 51
147-156 Meaning of the expression “loss”, “non-delivery”, etc, and ह

scope of relevant articles reluting to carriers . ee 52

157 British Statutes applicable to India on the subject . + : 55

158 Other changes . . . . . . . . . 55

159 Amendment of rules not considered . . . . . 55

wo Appendiccs © 6. 7 wee - | $6


(४)

APPENDICES
APPENDIX SUBJECT-MATTER Page
Appendix I Recommendations as shown in the form of draft am-
dments . 57
Appendix II. Notes on Clauses eee 64
Appendix ITT Recommendations in respect of other laws (or rules
under the Act). : 7०
Appendix IV . Constitutional aspects of some sections of the
Act. . : . . न : न पु ve
Appendix V. Detailed note on section 26 7
Appendix VI . List of some important provisions of Central Act,
dealing with “emergencies’ ror
Appendix शा Statutory provisions as to interception of postal articles
in England : + 7०9
Appendix VIII Report of Committee in England regarding intereep-
tion of communications गाव
Appendix TX . Legal issues raised by interception of postal arti-
cles. 117
Appendix X Position in Canada regarding interception of postal
articles : . 126
Appendix XI . . Australia—Position regarding interception of postai
articles . पु . न पु पु पु पु 129
Appendix XII New Zealand—Position regarding interception of
postal articles ‘ पु पु . . . 130
Appendix XIII . U.S.A.—Position regarding interception of postal
articles . . . 13
Appendix XIV Liability for registered articles in England 139

61 Law—3


Shri P. Govinda Menon, CHAIRMAN,

Minister of Law, LAW COMMISSION,
Government of India, 5 Jorbagh, New Delhi—3.
New Delhi. February 24, 1968.

My 08570 MINISTER,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the
Thirty-eighth Report of the Law Commission on the Indian
Post Office Act, 1898.

2. The circumstances in which the subject was taken up
for consideration are stated in the first paragraph of the Report.
After the subject was taken up, a Press Communique was
issued inviting suggestions as to the changes needed in the
existing Act. A study of the subject was undertaken, and a
comprehensive draft Report was prepared. The draft Report
was considered at the fol flowing meetings of the Commission :-—

81st meeting, on 28th to 31st December, 1966;

8and meeting, on 30th January, , 3ist January and
Ist February, 1967.

3. The draft Report was revised according to the decision
taken at the meetings mentioned above, and then circulated to
State Governments, High Courts and other interested persons
and bodies for comments.

4. The काशी Report as circulated, and also the comments
received ihereon, were considered at the gand meeting of the
Law Cornmission, held on the 15th and 16th January, 1968.

The Report has been revised according to the decision taken
at that meeting.

5. I may add, that though the changes recommended by
us are not extensive, consideration of the Act involved a
detailed examination of several legal and constitutional issues,
a comparative study on a vast scale, and a research into
several branches of law, particularly torts and contracts.

6. In the drawing up of the report we received a great
amount of help from our Secretary Mr. P. M. Bakshi who
collected together all the references and highlighted the points

of controversy on which the decisions of the Commission had
to be given.

Yours sincerely,
J. L. KAPUR.


REPORT ON THE INDIAN POST OFFICE ACT, 1898

1, The revision of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898, has Reference
been referred to the Law Commission by the Government)! (2.006 sion,
and this Report has been prepared accordingly. One of the
points w! the Ministry concerned with the Act desired
the Commission to consider was, the period of limitation
for a suit for compensation for a postal article which is not
delivered?. The whdle Act has, however, been referred ‘to
the Commission for examination, and consequentially, this
Report proposes to deal with the entire Act.

2. The Indian Post Office Act, 1898 was enacted to re- English
place the Act of 1866. In the Statement of Objects and Act.
Reasons annexed to the Bill which led to the existing Act,
it was pointed out, that since the 1866 Act was passed, cer-
tain defects and omissions had been brought to light and
experience had shown that the express provisions of law,
as contained in the Act, were, in respect of several matters,
not suited to the requirements: of.postal work. Further,
protection was also needed by the Post Office and powers
were also’ required to enable its officers to deal with
articles posted in contravention of the Act. Moreover,
various schemes, such as postal insurance, the value-
payable system and the money order system, remained out-
side the provisions of the Act and required legislative en-
actment. Finally, with the development of the Post Office,
and the knowledge of the course of English Postal legisla-
tion, the necessity for some new penalties had become
apparent. The 1898 Act was, therefore, intended to remove
these difficulties and deficiencies and to bring the Act up-
to-date.

. 3. The considerations which impelled the enactment of Scheme of
the 1898 Act’? show, in a fair measure, the lines on which 'tvision.
periodical revisions of the Post Office Act should be
attempted. They, therefore, constitute a good practical
guide in fixing the objectives for revision of that Act it-
self. So ascertained, the main objectives for revision would
be—

(i) removal of difficulties felt in practice;
Gi) bringing the Act in line with postal systems
and facilities introduced later;

(iii) need for new provisions on the lines of ana-
logous useful provisions in the legislation of other
countries,

oa & No. 1 in Law Commission’s file relating to the Indian Post Office
ct, 1898.
2, Ses paragraph 130, et seq., infra.
3, See Gazette of India, 1897, Part V, page 385.
4. See paragraph 2, supra,
4—61 Law


‘Scheme of
the existing
Act.

Rules and
notifications,

2

Besides these, of course, the considerations generally borne
in mind in revising any Act {eg., conflict of decisions,
constitutional problems, recommendations made in other
reports and the like}, have to be kept in view, in revising
the Act. .

4, We shall first examine the scheme of the Act. The
existing Act is intended to consolidate and amend the law
relating to the Post Office in India. Sections. 1 to 3 contain
preliminary provisions, and sections 4 to 5 embody the
exclusive , privilege of conveyi: letters reserved ta the
Government, Settion 4 deals rich, the Hebility of the Gov-
ernment or its officers in respect of loss, misdelivery, delay
or damage of postal articles in the course of transmission
by post. Seetions 7 to 15 deal with the rates of postage and
incidental - matters. Provisions ss to postage stamps are
contained in sections 16 and 17, The general conditions - of
transraission of postal articles would be found in sections
18 to 27-D.

Having so far dealt with provisions appliesble to all
articles, the Act proceeds next to deal in detail with
specific kinds of postal services. Thus, sections 28 to 33
deal with registered and insured ar‘icles, and sections 34
to 36 are intended to provide for valie-payabie pestal
articles. Undelivered postal articles are regulated by sec-
tions 27 to 39, and prcvisions regarding the cb'ezsions of
snips to carry and bring letters are dealt with im sections 40
to 42, Money orders are covered by sections 43 to 48. and,
with this, the substantive provisions of the Act come to an
end.

‘Yhe Act, thereafter, proceeds to prescribe the penalties
for yaricus offences.

The provisions on the subject are divided into two
groups, namely—
(i) offences by officers of the Post Office, sections
49 to 57;
(ii) cther offences, sections 58 10 69.

General provisions regarding penalties are contained in
sections 70 to 72.

Supplemental provisions contitute sections 73 to 75,
and the maximum rates of inland postage are given in the
First Schedule,

5. {a} An examination of the detailed provisions of the
Act would reveal, that while the general principles are
given in the Act, the Act contemplates rules to be made on
a numberof important matters.

1. See, for example, sections 8, 9, 16, 18, 0. 20, 22, 23, 29, 22, 33
35, 36; 37+ 39> 40. 43 44, 46, 73 and oy


3 a

(०) Besides rules prope, there are a number of sub-
jects on which notifications and orders can be issued; for
example, fixation of rates of inland postage!, declaration
of rates of foreign postage’, notification regarding delivery
of articles to Customs authorities’, authorisation of officers
to search postal articles transmitted in violation of the
Customs Act’, notification of fees for registration’, notifica-
tion regarding insurance of postal articles and compulsory
insurance’, notification regarding value-payable articles’,
Notification. regarding | gratuities payable for conveyance
of postal articles by ships®, notification authorising remis-
sion of sums by money orders’, authorising the issue of
postal order” and delegation of pewers".

(c) In addition to general orders and notifications the
Act also contemplated a number of special orders by the
Government. Thus, in emergency or in the interest of
public safety or tranquillity, the Government may direct
that a postal article shall be intercepted or detained or
otherwise disposed of in the specified manner”.

(d) The range of the powers to make rules and orders
so conferred is, thus, wide enough, This is understandable
in view of the nature of the Act. The business of the Post
Office is varied and multifarious. Details of its adminis-
tration cannot be covered fully in an Act. The Department
‘being concerned with international communications also,
it may not always be possible to lay down. rigid provisions
on matters having international aspects. Further,
geographical, economic and other relevant factors go on
changing from time to time, and some elasticity has to be
ensured for the smooth working of the Act. It is for these
reasons that the Act seems to leave a wide discretion to
the executive to make provisions on the various matters.

6. The main subject of transmission of postal articles is Cognate
dealt with in the Indian Post Office Act, 1898. The Post 10%
‘Office discharges a number of other functions also, and
several Acts have been passed relating to these functions,
the important amongst which are listed below:—

(1) The Government Saving Banks Acts, 1873.
(2) The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885,

Section 7.
Section 10.

Section 244.

- Section 25.

Section 28.

Sections3oand31.

Section 34.

Section 42.

Section 43 (1), earlier Paragraph,
Section 45.

11, Section 75.

Tz. Section 26.

+
89 or ky Nn


Examination
of the Act.

Section 1—
Title,

Section 2(a)
“' Director
General”.

Sections 2(d),
10 (1), 15;
27 :
Explanations
36 (0), and
46 (1y—Re-
ferences to
HerMajesty’s
Govern-
ment, etc.

4

(3) The Post Office Cash Certificates Act, 1917.

(4) The Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933.

(5) The Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession}
Act, 1950.

This Report ig concerned with revision of the Post Office
Act, and not with the other enactments mentioned above.
We have, however, considered section 5 of the Telegraph
‘Act, which is analogous to section 26 of the Post Office
Acti. We may also note, that we were requested to con-
sider that section’,

7. We now proceed to consider the important points
in connection with the Act which require examination.

8. In sub-section (1) of section 1, the word “Indian”
may be omitted, in accordance with recent legislative
practice.

9. In section 2, with reference to the definition of
“Director General”, it has been suggested’, that Members
of the Posts and ‘Telegrap! h Board should be nominated as
ex officio Director General, so as to be included in definition
of “Director General”. The Board, it is stated, is an entity
above the Director General, and exercises the powers of
Government over the Directorate. Members of the Board
are, (itis stated), now full time Members, (and not
ex officio Members holding other posts in the Directorate
and functioning as deputies to the Director General). The
proposed change concerns the administrative set up of the

epartment, and we make no recommendation thereon.

10. A suggestion’ has been made to remove references
to “Her Majesty's Government”, and “British possession”,
etc. in the marginallr noted sections (i.e., only the words
“foreign country” may be retained in these sections). The
suggested change could have been made by the Adaptation
of Laws Order in 1950. As it has not been made so far, and
as the whole Act is not being re-enacted, this verbal change
is unnecessary. We do not, therefore, accept the sugges-
tion.

11. As regards references to “Her Majesty”, etc., and to
“British possession”, the comment of a State Government*
on our draft Report was as follows: —

“As to the two expressions objected to, “British
possessions” may perhaps be allowed to remain, since
some overseas possessions are still left to Great Bri-
tain, Retention of “Her Majesty’s Government”, is,

1. See paragraph 93, infra.

2. S. Nos. 40 and 53 on Law Commission file.
3. S. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Departement),

4. S. No. 170 (Comment of a State Government).


5

mowever, wholly indefensible. The impression created
4s that the Queen of England is being referred to as
India’s Queen as well. In the opinion of the Govern-
ment, the references to “Her Majesty” should be de-
leted from the Act, wherever they occur.”

Our view is, that no change is needed. Deletion of the
references might lead to misconceptions. The apprehension
expressed in the comment (about an impression being
created about the Queen of England) is not shared by us.

12. (9) Regarding “mail ships” defined in section 2(d), Section 2
@ recommendation has been made in a previous report! to ee
the effect, that if India is enjoying the powers and privi- .
leges under the Mail Ships Act, 1891, we should have a
legislation of cur own after entering into direct conven-
tions with foreign countries (if India is not an_ original
party to such a convention), This can appropriately be the
subject-matter of a separate legislation, and need not be
considered for incorporation in our Post Office Act. .

18. We have considered a suggestion? to include “im- Section2g)—
pressions taken through franking machines authorised by stamps’!
the Director-General” in section 2(g), Which defines and franking
“postage stamp”. This seems to be covered by the existing machines.
words “impressed... .. . or otherwise indicated”. No change
is necessary.

14, In this connection, the following comment on our
draft Report was considered by us :—~

“It is doubtful if impressions taken through frank-
ing machines are so covered, (by the words “impressed
serene ete.”), because all the stamps and marks, re-
ferred to in the existing definition, seem to be indica-
tive of payment of postage or other fees, whereas im-
pressions made through franking machines seem to
authorise and indicate despatch by post, free of charge.”

The matter was further considered by us. In our view,
no change is needed, and the existing language is wide
enough to cover franking machines.

15. The following suggestion, regarding surcharge on Section 2()
stamps, was made by the Department in its comment on Shicgeon
the draft Report*— stampe.

1, Fifth Report of the Law Commission (British Statutes applicable to
India), page 56, bottom, and $7, top, entry No. 144 relating to the Mail
Ships Act, 1891, etc.

2 S$, No, ‘Suggestion of the Department).
‘See 96, Ss पक ent)

$. No. 170 (Comment of a State Government).
4. S.No. 169 (Comment of the Department),

y


Section 2(H)
and ()—~

‘ition
of Post

Section 2
(2-71 Postal
Article”.

Section 2

6

“This Department has had under consideration for
some time a proposal for issue of stamps with sur-
charge.* 7

The intention is to enable this Department to issue
such stamps for collecting money for benevolent funds,
such as children’s fund, etc, There is at present diffi-
culty in the issue of such stamps as the existing pro-
visions of the Post Office Act do not permit such stamps
being brought out, It is, therefore, suggested that sec-
tions 2(g) and 16 of the Act may be suitably amended
to permit, the issue of such stamps.”

In our view, this is a matter of policy. We do not ex-
press an opinion in the matter.

16, Section 2, clauses (h) and (k), contain two defini-
tions of the same expression “Post Office”, as spelt with
small letters and with big letters respectively. Sir James
Westland, while presenting the Report of the Select Com-
mittee on the Bill which led to the Act, admitted that there -
Was a certain incongruity in this', but he said, that there
was no difficulty in distinguishing which of the two ex-
pressions is used wherever they occur; one refers to a par-
ticular building or place, and the other refers to the —
partment of the Post Office. Since no difficulty has been
experienced on this account, the definitions need not be
disturbed.

17. Tt has been suggested’, that in the definition of
“postal article”, “money orders” may be added. We are
not, however, inclined to disturb the existing definition in
the absence of any difficulty experienced in practice,

18. A suggestion has been, made? to re-define the ex-

OP Scctmaster pression “Postmaster General”, in view of certain changes

General”,

in the instructure of the Department and in the nomencla-
ture of its officers.

The suggestion states—

(i) that there are no longer any “Deputy Post-
master-General”, who are replaced by “Directors”, and

(ii)_that the Postmaster General is incharge of a
Postal Circle, and further, that in some circles, there
is no Postmaster General, but only a Director of postal
Services or a Director of Telegraph holds change. In
order, therefore, to have a better legal authority, the
expression “Postmaster General” should be. redefined,

t.Gazette of India, March 19, 1898, Part VI, page 99.
2.8. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department).


7

as the “Head of a Postal circle including a Director
of Posts and Telegraphs or any other officer exercising
the powers of the Post-master-General.”’

This is an administrative matter, and we make no re-
commendation thereon. ५.

19. It has been suggested’, that it should be provided Section 4,
that the exclusive privilege under section 4 is in the Central
Government “in the Posts and Telegraphs Board”. We are
not in favour of the suggested change. The “Central Gov-
ernment” is the only expression that can be used in the
Act; which particular Department of the Government
should deal with a particular subject, need not be men-
tioned in the Act.

20. We have considered a sugges tion’ to provide that Sections 4
the monopoly under section 4 shall extend to transmis- #"4 5-
sion by air or through air carriers. No such amendment
appears to be necessary, as, in section 4(1), the words “by
post” seem to be wide enough to cover transmission by
air".

ion +, “tee. seat, Secti 6
21. (a) Section 6 makes certain stringent provisions as Liabilit iat
Post Office,

Gi) liability of the Government, and

(ii) liability of the Post Office employees, as to
loss, delay, misdelivery, damage, étc., of postal articles
in course of transmission by post.

As to the Government, it provides, that the Government
shall not be Hable, except where the liability is expressly
undertaken under the Act. As to officers of the Post Office,
they are liable only if they have caused the loss, ete,, frau-
dulently or by wilful act or default.

22. In the notes on clauses to the Bill which led to the
Act’, it was stated, that in this clause the provisions of the
corresponding section in the Post Office Act, 1866 (section
65) had been “amended’®--. No further. explanation is
given there. But it would appear from the proceedings in
the Council after presentation of the report of the Select
Committee on the Bill’, that some persons, mostly, strange

r. §. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department),

2. Certaln other provisions —sections 4 (aXe) and 5 (®)~ are proposed to be
sections extended to aircraft, by am ents as proposed in this very
Report, to 4 (1)(c) and section 5.

Gazette of India, November 6, 1897, Part V, page 385.

4. The earliest section was section 49. Post Office Act, (7. ० 1834)
See, Winter v, Way. (1863) 1 ICR 200, 202.

$. Gazette of India, March 19, 1898, Part VI, page 99.

y


8

0 fasten upon the Pest Office
than the Bill originally
provided. st rd referring to these sagges-
tions, replied, that the clause defined the responsibility of
the Post Office officials “in terms which es nearly as possi-
ble expressed the English law on the subject”. He stated
that the difficulty of making a Post Office official liable for
mere negligence, that is to say, for doing something which,
if the offical bad taken better care, he would not have done,
‘arose out of the circumstance that Post Office business has
always to be done at enormous pressure, Tn the despatch
cof letters and in- their delivery, “any extremely careful
sorting of letters is a practical impossibility.”

to say, officials, had desir:

23. The apparently sweeping exemption from liability,
embodied in section 6, has to be read in the light of the
judicial decisions thereon, Thus, it has been held, in
one case, that the word “loss” does not mean “pecuniary or
other loss to the owner of the goods sent by post”, who has
been wrongfully deprived of the possession or enjoyment
thereof, It means loss to the Government of the article
sent by repost. Tn that case, a V.P.P. parcel delivered to the
Post Office was not delivered by it, and the Government
was held Hable. The court observed, that a loss occurs
where the department involuntarily or through inadvert-
ence loses possession of the goods. i the Government does
not prove that the article has been lost, it cannot escape
liability to pay compensation for loss caused by non-
delivery.

Similarly, it has been held’, that, where, by reason of a
Jabel having been torn, it is not possible to deliver a
VPP. article, the post office is not exonerated by section 6
or section 34.

24. In an Allahabad ९88९१, which contains a lengthy dis-
cussion on the subject, it has been held that the exemption
in section 6 does not give the Government the right to_do
what it likes with the articles entrusted to its care. The
Post Office, if it accepts a V.P.P. article and does not realise
the price at the time of delivery, 4s liable in damages to the
sender. Section 6 was intended by the legislature to serve
as a shield for the post office and its officers “in the legiti-
mate discharge of ihe e functions”, but the shield cannot be
converted into a weapon of inequity in the hands of a gov-
ernment department enjoying a monopoly of essential

1. Union of India v. Narayan, A.LR. 1955 Cal. 371, 372 (D.BL.

2. Secretary of State for India v. Radhey Lal, LL.R.46 All. 455 3 ALR
1924 AU. 692 (D.B.).

3. Union n of India v. Firm Ram Gopal, A.LR. 1960 All. 672, paragraph 17
xg and 40 wan J.). But see Union of India v. Ramgi Lal,
A.LR. 2965 All. 183, 186, paragraph 10.


9

service; the section does not empower the post office or
its officers to do what. they like with articles entrusted to
their care or commit wrong acts against the owners of
these articles. The cou: at length and followed
the observations. of the: reme Court in C..T, v. P. M.
Rathod’ to the effect, that the e post office becomes an agent
of the seller for ‘the récovery of the price and if it fails to
recover the price and delivers the goods, it is liable for the
damages to the seller. In the Supreme Court case, the
facts were these: The asgessee was a manufacturer of per-
fumery at Rathlam (in Madhya Bharat—a Part B State)
and sent out goods by V.P.P. to various customers in
Part A and C States, and the question was whether the in-
come from these sales accrued in the Part A and C States,
where the payments were made, or in Ratlam where the
proceedings were handed over by the post office to the
assessee, (In the latter case, the concessional rates of in-
come-tax then applicable to Part B States would come into
play). The Supreme Court held, that payment to the t
‘office was a payment to it as agent of the seller and no! Pes
agent of the buyer. The Supreme Court pointed out, that

goods handed over to the post office could be delivered to
fhe buyer solely against payment, and this payment is re-
ceived for the seller. Once the buyer paid the price, it is
the post office that is responsible for the payment of the
money to the.seller. Theréfore, payment to the post office
is payment to the seller at the place where the goods are
delivered. This would negative the post office being an
agent of the buyer. “This shows that whatever be the jural
relationship between the seller and the post office in_ res-
pect of carriage of goods sent by the seller under the V.P.P.
system, it becomes the agent of the seller for the recovery
of the price and if it fails to recover the price and delivers
the goods, it is liable for damages to the seller, ILL.R, 28

fad. an पु

)
Now, the decision in 28 Madras 2131 referred to by the
Supreme Court was to the effect, that the post office, when
it accepts an article as V.P.P. is bound by contract to deliver
the article to the addressee and to recover the price. If it
does not do so, it has committed a breach of contract, for
which it is liable in damages. In that case, a parcel con-
taini jewellery was delivered for transmission to
Colombo as a V.P.P. article, but it was, by mistake, de-
livered. without collecting the amount from the addressee.
The Post Office neither paid the money nor returned the
article to the sender, who thereupon sued for recovery of
the value of the parcel. Section 34.0f the Post Office Act,
proviso, was relied upon in defence, the argument being

1 GET. v. P.M. Rathod, ALR. 1959 8.0. 1394, 1397, 1398.
2, Moth Chetty v. Secretary of State, (1905) I.L.R. 28 Mad. 213, 2:
(ही. आकार धिक्षाली 19° 13: 245


English
wa
statutory
provisions
regarding
Crown tia-
bility,

10

that actual realisation from the addressee is a condition
precedent to the State's liability to ey the amount to the
sender.. This contention was rejected, on the ground that
the section did -net affect “the oe daw ability of the

st office to damages for delivery 8 parcel with-
Pat chee io Pe money". The court observed,.thet the
Post Office. is bound by contract to collect the money when
it delivers the article.

“The Madras decision is, thus, expressly based on con-
tract. है हि

26. If an Orissa case’, the liability of the Post Office for
insured articles was regarded as statutory and not contrac-
tual. Whatever be the basis of the liability, it is clear that
the sweeping provisions of section 6 and section 34, proviso,
would not come in the way of recovery in such circum-
stances,

27. As regards the contractual element, it may be * in-
teresting to note an English case’.', in which it was held.
that the Postmaster General is in a quite different position
from a private individual. He is responsible to the Crown
for running a ‘public service and incidentally a monopoly.
In accepting postal articles, he does not enter into a con-
tract for carriage, and the mete acceptance of 2 postal
packet does not create any contractual tie. (That case re-
lated to a registered postal article sent for international
transmission, and there were provisions in the Post Office
Warrant and in the certificate of posting which excluded a
right to compensation).

28. In England, under section ${2) of the Post Office
Act, 1958, the seg stration” of or giving of a receip t for a
postal: packet or the giving or obtaining of a certificate of
posting or postings or delivery of a postal packet shail not
render the Crown in any manner liable for the loss of the
packet or the contents thereof. Under section 2६1) (a) read
with section 17 of the Crown Proceedings Act’, 1947, the
Crown is liable in respect of certain acts of its servants or
agents, But this does not.apply in matters relating to a
postal packet, under section [171 of that Act. Section श्र
of that Act, however, provides, that proceedings may be
brought against the Crown in respect of a registered in-
land packet for the loss or damage due to any wrongful act
done or any default committed by a person employed as @
servant or agent of the: Crown while performing functions
in relation to the receipt, carriage, delivery or other deal-
ings with the packet. The amount recoverable is limited so

1, No cases were cited,
2, Debananda v. Union of India, AIR. 1965 Orissa 118,

% Triefis & Oo : yy Pee Os 0957 2 AU BR. 387, 394 (0.2.)

5. The Grown Proceedings sAct, 1947 (70 and 17 Gee. Vas 44)



il

as not to exceed the market value of the cket, and cannot
also exceed the maximum~ amount av: etka ble under Post
Office Regulations, having regard to the fee paid for regis-
tration’, Relief is available only on a claim by the sender’
or the addressee. There are other detailed provisions,
which need not. be considered.

29, The basis of the cause of action for registered in-
land postal packets, by virtue of section 9(2) (b) of the
Crown Proceedings Act, 1947, has been described as “statu-
tory, but resembling bailment”, The history of the law, as
explained by Lord Denning in a recent decision, may “be
reterred ६02.

Before 1947, when you sent a letter by post and it wags
lost or damaged in transit, you could recover nothing. You
could not recover in contract, because it was held that
neither the Postmaster General nor the Post Office, made
any contract to carry the letter’, You could not recover in
tort, because the Postmaster General was not liable for the
‘torts of his subordinates‘. Even when you sent a registered
letter, you could recover nothing for the loss of it, because:
any claim was excluded by statute’.

Since 1947 you. can still recover nothing for ordinary
letters; and nothing for registered letters sent overseas. It
is still the case than no action lies in contract®. Nor in tort’.
But the law has been changed entirely as to registered in-
land postal packets, By section 9(2) of the Act of 1947 it
is enacted that ‘proceedings shail lie against the Crown.
under this sub-section in respect of loss or damage to a.
registered inland postal packet” ’. The cause of action is,
to my mind, entirely statutory. The section does not merely.
lift a barrier to proceedings against the Crown {as it does.
in cases under sections 1 and 2 of the Act}. Ht gives a new
statutory cause of action.

One thing is quite clear, The Post Office is a bailee of
the registered’ packet and when you examine this new
statutory cause of action you will find it is very like the-

1. For details, ‘see Haisbury, 3ri. Edn., Vol. 30, page 178, Daragraph
303.

2, Buildings and Givit Parineering Heli ४ Schente Management Lid.
8 0 G65 2५177 72 न WR,
(GA fed in 236 Law ‘Timed छल C968) ? AUB. R, 163,

z sphighls ८ Lord Le Despencer (1778) 2. Cowp, 75क 764 (per Lord’

4 Bainbridge ¥. Postmasver-General, (1906) 1 K.B. 178 ; 22 TLR

», CA,

5, See section 13 of the Post Office Act, 1908.

6, Tr हि w. Post ica, (31 90.8. A 793 WLR. 15
ifs Be Pa Offic ५» 0959) 3 QB. 352 5 (957) 3 WLR. 15/1957)

section 9 (1) of the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947.


‘Whether
changes
‘necessary i n
section 6.

Liability for
insured
articles.

12

action which the common law gives on a bailment. So
much so that, in matters not specifically covered by the
action recourse may be had, I think, to the general prin-
ciples governing the law of bailment. At common law,
bailment is often associated with a contract, but this is not
always the case’, An action against a bailee can often
be put, not as an action in contract, nor in tort, but as an
action on its own, sui generis, arising out of the possession
had by the bailee of the goods**, The incidents of this
cause of action are not to be found by looking at the old
books on detinue and trover. We have out those forms
of action, together with trespass and case’. Suffice it to say
at the present day that if goods, which have been delivered
to a bailee, are lost or damaged whilst in his custody, he is
liable to the person damnified (who may be the owner or
tne bailor) unless the bailee proves that the loss or damage
is not due to any fault on his part®-". Likewise the Post
Office (when they have accepted a registered packet, and
३६ is lost or damaged whilst in their custody) are liable to
the person damnified unless they can prove it was done
without any fault on their part®, but as a matter of
machinery the action must be brought in the name of the
sender or addressee’.

30. The language of section 6 may thus create Broblems
as discussed above’. But it does not appear to be irable
to make any verbal amendments in the section, the reason
being that, in the first place, it will be better to wait for
some time and to see if difficulties arise; and, in the second
place, the law relating to State enterprises in general may
be expected to. develop in the near future, and if any
points arise, they could be dealt with on a study of the
concrete points.

31. As regards insured articles, under section 33 of the
Indian Act, subject to the prescribed conditions, the Cen-
tral Government is liable to pay to the sender compensa-
tion not exceeding the amount for which the postal article
has been.insured, for the loss of the postal article or dam-
age caused in transmission by post. But the compensation

1. Reg. ¥. McDonald, (1885) 15 Q.B.D. 323 3 1 T.L.R. 561.

2. Maun. v. Great Hastern Ratieay, (1895) 2 0.8. 387 11 R.L.R. 517

3. Winfield on the Province of the Law of Tort, page 100.

4. Fifoo’s History of the Common Law, page 24, Midland Silicones v.
Senutton, (1963) A.C. 446 (1962) 2 W.L.R. ra (1962) 5 T All E.R.
1 ELL. (8).

5. Letang ¥. Cooper, (1964) 2 ALE.R. 929, C.A. 3 (1964) 3 W.L.R. $73.

6. Coldman v. Hill, (1919) 1 K.B. 443 5 35 T-L.R. 146 CA.

7. Coldman ४. Hill, (1919).1 K.B. 443, 455; (per Scrutton L.J.).

8. See section 9 8 of the Act of 1947 at the beginning and end.
9. Sea section 9 (3) and (4). 47 "8 °

xo, Paragraphs 22-29, supra.


13

is not to exceed the value of the article or the amount of
the damage. This provision seems to have worked smoothly,
and need not be disturbed, so far as its substance is con-
cerned,

32. (a) So far as the officers themselves are concerned, Liabilityfof
wectiin S 2५४ the Indian Post Office Act provides, that an {ite offcss
officer of the’post office shall not incur Viability by Indien end
reason of loss, misdelivery or delay of or aa jamage,. to & English
postal article in course of transmission by post, unless he lew.
has caused the same fraudulently or by his wilful defauit.

“Default” has been interpreted as failure in duty, care, etc.
which is the cause of some untoward event),

(b) In England, an officer of the Crown is not subject
to any civil Viability for anything done or omitted to be
done in | elation to postal packet, except at the suit of the

Town".

The English Act goes too far in excluding liability even
of the servants for a postal packet*-*,

Tn this respect, the Indian Act is more just and fair to
the sender, 89 section 6 preserves the liability of the postal
officer for wilful ects.

33, While on section 6, we may draw attention to a Pre~ secon 6
vieus report of the Law Commission‘, in which the general and the
question of liability of the State in tort was considered. general

State Tabi

The recommendation made there was, in substance, to Ity ip tort.
the effect that (so far as is material to the subject under
discussion) while the State shouid be generally liable for
the torts of its servants and agents, the existing immunity
under the Indian Post Office Act, 1898, may be preserved’-§,

‘ .

1. Rikhan Lal v, Banavasi Singh, ATR. 1932 All. 139.
2, Section 9 (1), Crown Proceedings Act, 1947.

3: See Garner, Administrative Law, (2963), Page 225.

4. Winfield on Tort, (1963), page 63.

5. See also Wade, Administrative Luw, page 220.

6, Firs; Report (Liability of the State in Tort), page Paragraph 66
sub-paragraph V.—Exceptions—Item (v7) CMiscellancousy sagran

3. Compare the Federal Torr Claims Act, 28 U.S. Code (1948 die
ciary aad Judicial Procedure, seclien 2680 का which bated aay oe

arising out of the loss, miscarriage or negligent transmission of letters or
postal matter".

8, Title, 23 0.5. Code (964 Ban} deals with the question,


4
“Position $4 Tt would be an interesting inquiry to man. as to

aoe eom what would-be the position of the Post Office apart from
wrovisions, Statutory provisions. The following points may be made: —

(i) The Post Office is not perhaps a “common
carrier” es known to the common law.’-? Therefore,
the common Jaw rule of absolute ability of a carrier
gin certein qualifications} may net apply ta the Post

ce.

Gi) The Post Office is not (apart from V.P.P. and
insured. articles) a bailee by contract, because, (apart
from V.P.P. and insured articles), it does not receive
any consideration irom the sender, and what it receives
is merely a statutorily fixed fee. It is, of course, possi-
ble té atgue, that such fee is the consideration for
carrying all kinds of postal articles, but the position® is
not very clear as to how far there is a contract. If there
is no contract, the Post Office is not a bailee, by
contract, because bailment requires delivery of goods
“on contract” under the Indian Contract Act*. Hence
the obligation of a bailee to take as much care of the
goods as a man of ordinary prudence would take of his
own goods!, may not app! i. Tt must, however, be
noted, that in an English case-the Winkfield—the
‘Postmaster General has been held to be entitled to sue
for damages ‘or 1058 of mails due to collision of ships
-caused by the defendant’s negligence®’, anvszently as
a bailee in possessioné-*,

Winfield gives this summary of the case! :—

“When conversion of a thing bailed is coim-
mitted by a third person (i.2,, one who is neither
bailor nor the bailee), the bailee can recover the full
value of the thing from the third party, although

न. Gf. section 2, Carriers Act, 1885, which, while defining “common
ecattier”, excludes the Government.

2. See also Lane y. Cotton, (170%), 1 Ld. Raym 646, where it was held
that th: Postmaster General is not a common carrier. In that, case,
he was held not liable for the toss of Exchequer Bills in the post, though
there was a powerful dissent of Holt©.J. See Winfield, Selected
Legal Essays, (2952), page 36.

3. See paragraphs 24—30, sutra.

-4. Section 148, Indian Contract Act, 1872,

5. Section 151, Indian Contract Act, 1872.

“6, See the Winkjield (1902) Probate 421 (1900-1903), Al Eng. Reports
Reprin: 345, 349 (CAD.

2. Street, Torts (1959), pase 35-

8. See Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 30, page 176, fovinote Gm), and ¥ol, 2.
page 144.

Also see Winfield, Tort, (1963), Page 52.

a”
eld, Tort (1963), pages $45—$45-



15

he (the bailee) would have 2 good answer to the
bailor if he were sued for the less of the chattel.
Thus, in the Winkfield’, mails were lost in a colli-
sion between ships one cf which was carrying the
mails. Now; the Postmaster General was not liable
to the Senders of the letters and parcels for their
Joss. Yet he was held entitled to recover their
value ‘from the owners of the ship responsible for
the accident. But he was also bound to pay to the
bailors any excess above his own interest and this
“serves to Soothe a mind disconcerted by the notion
‘that a persom who is not himself the complete
owner should be entitled to receive back the full
value of the chattel converted or destroyed.”?,

(iii) The Post Office is not an “inveluntary bailee”.
Tt gets possession by choice’. .

(iv) Since, however, the Post Office professes to
accept goods of a certain description for conveyance to
the addressee, it must be regarded as standing in some
posit‘on akin to a baileet. As a matter of fact, shere
is one view, that a beilment can exist independently of
contract’, But, apart from that, a person who receives
goods knowingly, and for certain service to be pe,
formed thereon, cannot remain absolutely without
legal cbligation. On this reasoning, the duty to take
reasonable care may arise, and an action may lie in tort
irrespective of contract. The relationship existing be-
tween the sender and the Post Office, and the nature of
the service performed by the Post Office (apart from
statute), might impose on the Post Office the obligation
to take reasonable care of the goods’. This is nearest
to the position of a private carrier, i.e, a carrier who is
not a common carrier.

(५) The discussion may appear to be academic in
view of the express provisions of section 6, But it is
useful to bear these points in mind, in order to appre-
ciate how section 6 has changed the rules that could
otherwise have prevailed.

1 The Winficld (1902), Probate 42, overruling Claridge v.
Franses 8aa} 1B 422. See (नर ee oe की
Law, ttt, pages 442 et seg., for the history of the matter.

2 Collins MLR. in The Winhgield, (1902), Probate 42, 60.

As 00 involuntary bailees, sez Winfield on Tort (196: ar bt

3 Malsbury,, grd Bdn., Vol. 2, page 99, Peng BN किया माल
“Conversion by an Involuntary Bailee”, (1960 76L.Q.R. 364.

4 Compare the discussion by Lord Denning ia th: cms: cited in
paragraph 29, supra, पर

5 Winfield on Tort (1963), page 7, citing his “Provirce of the Law of
Tort” (1931), pages 97—99.

6 As pe the theory that there is a genzral conception of the relations giving
riss to a duty of care, see Lord Atkin’s judgment in Donoghue

_ We. Stevenson, (1992), A.C. 562, and the discussion in (1953), Cuccent
Legal Problems, 236, 238.



Sections 6,
Bilggestion
jugges'
Kmitation
andfiebilicy
or regis-
tered arti-

cles,

16

35. It has been suggested!, that the Department should
be empowered to make rules to impose time-limits for com-
‘pensation for loss or damage in respect of postal articles.
The: suggestion states, that sections 33, 34 and 48 “give
Bower to the Central Government to frame ruies about the
liability of:the Central Government”, It adds, that the De-
‘partment hag prescribed certain time limits within which
it will aceept complaints and claims in- respect of payment
of compe gation with regard to loss or-damage in respect
of postal articles, but it has been found that the courts.
have rejected the cases on the ground that the time limits
fixed by the Department had no le; gal force as these sec-
tions de not empower the Central Government to fix time
limits. The suggestion, therefore, is, that section 6 may be
amended to empower the Central Government to fix time
limits for the receipt of complaints or claims of compensa-
tion in such cases.

36. On & study of the rules, we find that there are certain
rules? prescribing time limits. Thus, rule 81(d) provides:
that no compensation should be payable to the sender of
the insured articles, where the sender has not given inti-
mation of the loss within three months from the date of
posting. Rule 102 provides, that the Central Government
shall not incur any liability in respect of the sum specified’
for remittance to the sender in respect of a value-payable
postal article, unless and until that sum has been received’
from the addressee and unless a claim for that sum has
been preferred within one year from the date of ting
of the article. Rules regarding various postal artic! Jee ean
be made under sections 33, 35, 36, 43 read with sections
48(a}, and 74(1). Section 48(d) is also relevant as to wrong:
payment of a money order.

it is not necessary for us to express any opinion as to
the validity of some of these rules, or to discuss the effect
of the Provision in section 74(3) under which rules made
under the Act “shall have effect as if enacted by this Act.”
We are confining ourselves to the question whether the
suggestion to amend section 6 on this pcint should be
accepted. We are not inclined to accept the suggestion. A
tule of limitation annexes a condition to the exercise of &
right24. Ordinarily, a power to impose a period of limita-
tion should not be made exercisable by subordinate
legislation.

T. 5. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department).
2. Rules 81 (d}, 102°& 1800 Indian Post Offlce Rules 1937.

3. Cf. ESE Corp. v. Government of Madhya Pradesh, ATR. 1984 MP
‘TS, 775 ४8 also Solar Works v. E.S.2., AIR. 1964 Mad. 376.
4, See also Miss Maria v, B.R. Baliga, ALR. 1967 Born. 472.


iv

37. It has been suggested! that the liability of the Gov- Sugmestion
ernment shoutd be extended to registered articles. it Haha
would not, however, be praclicadle to accept this suggestion .
in toto. Certain facilities are given in respect of registered
avticles.* To make the Post Office liable for the loss of
Tegisteved article; would practically amount t¢ placing 1९-

istered articles on the same footing as insuved arvicles.
'€ are, however, recommending a limited provision? in
this respect.

38. A State Government! has suggested that a liability
for liquidated damages be imposed for negligence in the
delivery of letters. We think, that it would be impracti-
cable to impose such a liability. We are not, therefore, in
favour of the proposed change.

39. With reference to section 6, a High Court has ex-
pressed this view’, “The existing section 6 of the Indian {ion tomeke
Post Office Act, 1898 gives complete immunity to the Gov- Post Office
ernment. In the opinion of the Court the principles laid jiable हे:
down by the Single Bench of the Allahabad High Court in शव
ALR. 1960 All. 672, should be given statutory recognition® gisionesty,
by amending section 6 of the Act so as to make the Post et:.
Office liable where misdelivery, deley or damage to any
postal article is duc either to negligence cr dishonesty on
the part of the postal employees. The necessity of giving
the principles iaid down by the Allahabad High Court a
statutory basis arises because it is a judgment of a single
Judge and may not necessarily be followed by the oihber
High Courts”.

This suggestion may be examined with reference to the
various categories of postal articles, namely:—

{i} ordinary;

Gii) registered;

(iii) V-P.P.; and

(iv) insured.
For ordinary (unregistered articles), no change is desir-
able, The Government cannot be made liable, having re-
gard to the vcluminous business that is transacted by the
Post Office. For insured articles, no change is needed, as
there are specific provision.?” As to registered articles, we
are recommending certain changes?

As to VPP. articles, the changes which we are recorm-
mending will suffice*

. S.No. 102 (Suggestion of 8 High Cour).

Indian Post Office Rules, 1933, rules $8 t0 65.
See section 28 (as proposed).

S.No, 97 (State Government),

S.No. 167 (Suggestion of a High Court).

As to the Allahabad case, see paragraph 20, supra.
See section 33.

|. See section 28 as proposed.

५ See section 34 as proposed.

Pra aya ७०

8—61 Law.


Section 7
and peti-
tions to
President,
Parliament,
ete.

Section 9—
Renewal of
registration.

Section 9
foreign
newspapers.

18

40. Under the English Act,! there is an exemption from
postage in respect of petitions to the Queen, Par-
liament, etc. (provided the conditions mentioned in the
section are fulfilied). We considered the question whether
the adoption of such a provision would be desirable. We
decided not to recommend any such change, as the exemp-
tion might be found to be unworkable, in practice.

41. Section 9, dealing with rules for the registration of
newspapers for transmission by inland post, has figured in
certain decisions. In one case,* the main point related to
the power of a Postmaster General to cancel registration
under the Rules. It was held, that if the Postmaster Gene-
ral once holds that a magazine comes within the purview of
section 9, then it is not open to him, on the same set of facts,
to come to a different conclusion afterwards, during the
,eriod when the registration is in force, and to cancel re-
gistration on that ground. Every successive Postmaster
General cannot, while the registration is in force, cancel it
on the ground that the newspaper does not satisfy the pres-
crived conditions. There is also a discussion in this case
alout the meaning of the expression “current topics”, used
in section 9(2), opening paragraph. No amendment of the
section is, however, called for.

In a Bombay case,’ it has been held, that the right to
concessional rates under the Act and rules thereunder is
not a fundamental right under article 19 of the Constitu-
tion, where registration as a “newspaper” is denied to a
short-story magazine.

42, A reference has been made in a previous report of
the Commission‘ to the Post Office Act, 1913, which enables
newspapers published in the British Dominions to be regis-
tered in England as rogistered newspapers under the Post
Office Act, 1908. The Act merely confers a privilege upon
newspapers published in India and circulating in England.
A suggestion, however, has been made in the Report that
the Ministry concerned may consider this statute clong with
other postal arrangements between India and the U.K.

Attention may, in this connection, be invited to the
power of the Central Government to make rules under sec-
tion 9 (providing for registration of newspapers for trans-
mission by inland post as registered newspapers). The
significance of registration is mainly for the purpose of
postal rates, because, as would appear from section 7(1) und

1. Section 560, proviso, English Act.

2,Kali Charan v. Postmaster General, A..R. 1956 All. 87, 39.

3. Sevantilal v. 17. 0. Dalvi, AJLR. 1961 Bom. 10g, 110, paragraph
23.

4. Fifth Report of the Law Commission (British Statutes applicab’e
to India), page 65, bottom, and page 66, 109, entry Ne, 220.


19

the First Schedule to the Act. the Central Government, in
fixing the rates of postage, fixes different rates for register-
ed newspapers as a class of postel articles, as contrasted
with other postal articles. Now, the conditions for regis-
tration in section 9(2) do not require that the newspaper
must be published in India. Accordingly, there is nothing
in the Act itself to bar registration of foreign newspape:s
if atherwise permissible under the Act and the rules made
thereunder. Reference may also be made to section 10 of
the Act, under which, when arrangements are in force with
the U-X., or with any British Possession or foreign country
for the transrr.ission by post of acstal articles besween India
ané thac country, the Central Government may, in confci~
mity with such arrangements, declare the postal rates and
other sums chargeable in respect of such postal articles.

43. The matter would not, therefore, require an amend-
ment of the Post Office Act. The relevant provision in the
jatest Act on the subject in the UK.—the Post Office Act.
1953—is section 13(1)(b), under which a publication is re-
gistrable under section 12 as a newspaper if it is printed
and published in “the British postal area or some other
part of Her Majesty’s Dominions or _.. India (provided it
satisfies the other general conditions of registration). Under
section 15 of that Act, where arrangements have been made
with the Government of any other country or postal admin-
istration for the conveyante of postal packets between th
British postal area and places cuiside the area, regulati
vaay be made for carrying the ar-angements into eifect and
other matters.

44. The constitutional esperis of section 9 have been
dealt with separately.

45. With reference to section 9(2){a), the following
suggestion was made* in the Department’s commence on our
draft Report:—

“One of the conditions provided in section 9(2) ot
the Act is that the publication applying for registration
for concessional rates of postage, should come out at
intervals of not more than 31 days. There may b=
need Zor reducing the fsequeney. Jc is felt thet
periodicity regarding the intervals within which a pub-
lication should come out, need be stipulated in the Act.
This may be left to the Central Government to pres-
eribe by framing necessary rules under this section.
It is suggested that this section may be suitably
amended.”

1. See Appendix 4.
2, No, 169 (Suggestion of the Departmenry

Sectian 9—
Goastitu-
tional
aspects,

Section (9)
12) iter.
ralof ar days,


In our view, this is a matter of policy, and we would

express no opinion thereon.

Section 11—
Service

46. With reference to section 11, the following sugges-

‘Stamps, tion has been made relevant to service stamps!:-~

wo

“Under section 11 of the Act, addressee of the-
articles sent under deficit service postage are liable to-
pay the deficit postage with such extra postage as is.
charged by the postal Department before the postal
article is accepted, or to refuse payment of the postage:
and return it to the sender. In view of these provi--
sions, even important and urgent articles may some-
times go undelivered for fault of the sender if sufficient
postage is not affixed. It is, therefore, suggested, that
in regard to postal articles sent under service postage,
postage should not be collected from the addressee, but
it may be delivered and the postage so collectable from
the addressee may be collected from the sender only,.
following the same procedure as provided under section
27(2) of the Act.”.

The position, as stated in the suggestion, is true’. It
uld not, however, be practicable to collect the deficiency,

once the postal article is delivered.

be
ed

(The suggestion states, that the procedure in section 27(2)
followed, but that would be cumbersome). The suggest-
change cannot, therefore, be adopted.

47. A State Government had, in its comment on the

draft report, stated as follows?:—

I

“It appears to this Government, that great incon-
venience and at times great prejudice, may be caused,
if the provisions of section 11 are followed even in the
case of postal articles sent under service postage, but
insufficiently stamped. The postal articles concerned
may be a letter summoning a candidate for a post for
an interview or a letter addressed to the Public Works
Department of a State for arranging the accommoda-
tion of some Minister or superior officer of the Central
Government in the State Guest House or a dak bun-
galow. It appears to this Government that in the caxe
of insufficiently stamped postal articles sent under Ser-
vice Postage, it will be quite easy to make a note of
the particulars of the sender by the Post Office at the
delivery and then to recover the deficit postage-
from the office which had sent it. The collection wit!
be by way of mere book transfer.”.

S.No. 114 (A State Government).

2, Rules r81(zXa) and 182, Indian Post Office Rules, 1933,

3.

S.No, 170 (Comment of a State Government).


21

We considered these points, but we came to the conclu-
sion that no change is possible. It would not be practicable
to recover the deficiency, as elaborate records wall have to
be kept before delivery.

48. It has been suggested’ that we should insert, in the
Post Office Act, a provision authorising postal officials w
detain articles Liable to customs duty for examination and
assessment. Existing provisions of the law’ are, in our
sopinion, adequate, and no change appears to be necessary*.

49. We have considered a suggestion* to add a provision
as to forged money orders and fictitious stamps. The exist-
ing provisions of the law appear to be adequate,’ and no
change is necessary.

50. Section 18 deals with the re-delivery to the sendex
-of postal articles, and with the recalling of postal articles.
As has been held by the Supreme Court,® the right of the
sender to reclaim a letter is not an absolute right, as it is
left entirely to the postal authorities to decide whether a
‘letter once posted should be returned to the sender. The
negative proposition given in section 18(2) sufficiently
brings out this aspect emphasised by the Supreme Court.
‘This section need not be disturbed.

51. With reference to section 18, we have received a
suggestion’ 40 empower the Government to make rules for
changing the name and address of the addressee. We feel,
that a wide power to change the name and address may be
abused. The suggestion has not, therefore, been accepted.

52. The constitutional aspects of section 19 have been
dealt with separately.®

53. It has been stated, that there is some repetition be-
tween sections 1901) and 19(2), and that the section should
be recast. It may be that there is some overlapping. But,
in the absence of any practical difficulty, no change need
be made.

54, The constitutional aspects of section 19A have been
dealt with separately,

55. The constitutional aspects of section 20 have been
separately dealt with? ह

J. S.No, 96, last paragraph (Suggestion of the Department,
2, Sections 13, 24, 245, 25, Post Office Act, and sections $2 to ९4, Cus
ioms Act, i962 (52 Of 1962) may be seen,
4. See also paragraph 80, infra,
4. S.No, 88. |
5. Sections का 263A, Indian Penel Code, read with section 177",
6 Incoms-tax Commissioner v. ks Lid., ( c
TR Sanh iener ys Oeale Glass Works Lid., (1953) 1 S.C.R.,
7. S.No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department).
8. See Appendix 4,
9. S.No, 9 ¢(Suggestinn of the Department),
10, Sec Appendix 4.

Section 13—
Customs
duties,

Section 17—
Forged
money or
ders and
fictitious
stamps.

Section 18,

Section 19,

Section 194,

Section 20


Recommetl-
dation re-
ganding

22

56. We apprehend that, with reference to clause (a) of
section 20 (obscene articles, etc}, the power to destroy the
obscene article under section 23 (8) (9) of the Act read with
the rules, as exercisable under the existing procedure, may
perhaps be invalid, as such a restriction may not be eonsi-
dered “reasonable” within article 19(2) of the Constitution.
Reference has been separately made* to the ease-law relat-
ing to analogous Acts and to comparable provisions in the
Young Persons, etc, Act, the Cineriacographs ‘act, शॉट.
which provide for review or other suilable saieguards.
Noties ie the sender and to ihe addressee seems to the
minimum safeguard which can be devised from the point
of view of procedural reasonableness. We, therefore, re-
commend, thai, before destruction of the obscene article
under section 23(8)}(b) read with section 20(a), notice should
be given to the sender, and te the addressee.

We think that the new proviso should be confined tv
action under section 20(a).

57. in its eomtnent on our draft Report, a State Govern-
ment! had stated:—

“From the point of view of an invasion of the
sender’s freedom of speech and expression, the iwo
clauses of the section {section 20) stand on the same
footing, and action, which may amount to destructicn,
can be taken under section 23(3){b} in respect of arti-
ele sent in contravention of clause (a).... In tae opi-
nion ef this Government, the proviso suggested to be
inserted after section 23(3)(b) should refer to clause
(Co) of section 20 as well....The Postmasier General
is the sole and final judge whether an article comes
wishin she mis: of section 19 or 194. This Scvern-
ment, therefore, thinks that the proviso suggested
by the Central Commission should be recast so as to
mae it a proviso to the whoie of section 23(3) and to
include in it a reference to all the sections concerned
namely, section 19, section 19A and both the clauses cf
section 20.”.

+ High Cour: had also suggested, that clause (b) of sec-
qion 20, should be mentioned in the proviso to secfion
23(3)(b) as proposed to be added by us.

58, In our view, however, no such change is required.

Cases under section 19 and 19A would hardly raise ques-
tions of freedom of speech. As regards section 20(b), it is

1. Rule 217, Indian Post Office Rules, 1933. .

. See Appendix 4 (Constitutional aspects of certain secticrs).
५ Of. section 24, Post Office Act.

|. No. 170 (Comment of a State Governmens.

. S.No. 267 [Comment of a High Court).

»

aes


23

not necessary to provide for notice, etc., because section
20(b) relates to postal articles containing on the cover, elc.,
obscene, ete. writing, and the present procedure is not
likely to be regarded as unreasonable.

59. The following :uggestion' relevant to proposed sec-
tion 23 (3) (०), was made in a comment on our draft Re-
port: —

“As regards sections 24, 27 and 27B, in each case, it
is a provision for a notice on the addressee and not on
the sender. Of the three sections mentioned above,
section 27B also provides for an opportunity for test-
ing the validity of the action of the Postal authorities,
for it gives a right to “any person interested in 1
article” to apply to the State Government for reli
and if that application fails, to apply to the High Court.
Further, it is to be considered whether express provi-
sion should not be made for a right of the person
notified to seek relief from other authorities. To this
Government it seems that it will be better and more
tn conformity with the recognised method of amending
statutes, to adhere to the scheme of the Act and frame
Bp proposed proviso on the lines of section 27B(2) anc.
3).

We have carefully considered the comment.

In our view, section 27B is too cumbersome, and need
not be followed. Moreover, section 27B is meant for sedi-
tious articles, while section 23 (3) (b), provise (proposed) is
intended for obscene articles.

60. With reference to proposed proviso to sectior.
23 (3) (b), the following comment has been made? by the
Department:

“The proviso to section 23 may be amended ic
prescribe a period of less than one month in respect
of explosive or obnoxious or deleterious substances, as,
for obvious reasons, it would not be possible or desir-
able to keep such substances in the post office up toa
Period of one month.”.

__ Tt may, however, be pointed out, that the proposed pro-
viso® is not relevant for explosives, etc.

No change is, therefore, needed in the proposed proviso.

61. We have received a suggestion* to add a new clause Suggeatiors

in section 20, to the effect, that no person shall send by post

3, 3, No, 170 (Comment of a State Government).
2. 8. No, 169 (Comment of the Department).

3. Section 23(3}(b), proviso (As proposed).

4.8, No, 81 (A State Government).

regarding

section 26, =


Section 20
and com-
munications
with the
enemy and
Official
secrets.

Section 20

able matters.

Section 21.

24

any article which is prejudicial to the security of India,
or which is likely to bring India into disrepute with other
countries or which questions the territorial integrity of
India. We think, that the existing provisions of sections
20(b) (ead with section 61), 26 and 27B (i){ii), Post Office
Act, and section 1244 of the Indian Penal Code, and the
general law of abetment end conspiracy under the Indian
Penal Code and the Criminal Law Amendment Act,! deal-
ing with writings questioning the territorial integrity of
India, are enough. In the absence of any practical diffi-
culty; it would not be advisable to insert a wide section in
the Post Office Act, particularly when there is no such gens-
ral crime of “acts prejudicial to the security of the State”
(apart from the provisions in the Defence of India Rules
and other similar special or temporary laws).

62. We have received a suggestion® to add, in section 20,
the following, namely :—

(i) communication with the enemy, ete., and
{ii) communication in the nature of disclosure of
official secrets.

As regards communications of the first type, section 26,
Post Office Act, is the appropriate section, and section 20
need not be amended for the purpose.

As regards communications of the second type, penal
provisions of the Officis] Secrets Act, appear ta be suffi-
cient. That Act. it is true, does not empower the intercep-
tion of communications.‘ If the suggested addition (in
section 20) is intended to attract the provisions of section
23 (under which the articles can be destroyed), then the
power is likely to be abused. The suggestion has not,
therefore, been accepted’.

63. It has been suggested® that in section 20{), the
words “objectionable or any matter which is an offence
under Indian Penal Code or any other law” should be add-
ed, The expression “objectionable matter”, however,
would be very vague, and the wording “any matter which
is an offence under the Indian Penal Code, etc.” would be
very wide. We have not, therefore, accepted the sugges-
tion.

64. The constitutional aspects of section 21 have been
separately dealt with.”

व, The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1961 (23 ० 1961).

2. 5. No. 101 (Suggestion of a Deputy Inspector General of Police)

3. The Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 Of 1923), sections 3(1)fe", §(Ti(a),
3623, 663), ete. हु

4. The power under section r1, Official Seerets Act, 1923, is ofa limied
nature.

5. As to general power of interception, see scetion 26, Post Office Act.
6. 8. No, 108 (AD.1.G, of Police’.
7. See Appendix 4.


25

65. We have received a suggestion! to insert a provision
regarding the maintenance of a register in the Post Office
for articles sent under a certificate of posting. This would
unnecessarily increase work, for which the fee charged
would not be commensurate. A change in the law is not
needed. If unscrupulous persons succeed in getting a cer-
tificate without actually posting a letter (as stated in the
suggestion), the proper remedy would be to see that the
letter is posted before the certificate is issued. In fact, the
rules’ do provide that the certificate shall be presented to
the officer on duty at the post office alongwith the article
to be posted.

66. With reference to articles sent under certificate of
posting, a State Government has, in its comment on the
draft Report, stated’: —

“In the opinion of this Government, the Rule re-
ferred to (Rule 195) constitutes no safeguard at all,

Section 21

1) —
Certificate
of posting,

because the guarantee of a certificate of posting is, -

where it is abused, abused in collusion with the officer
who stamps the postal seal on the certificate. If he is
a colluding party, he cannot be depended on the insist
on strict compliance with the Rule. A register in which
all articles sent under a certificate of posting would be
entered serially and in a chronological order would,
on the other hand, make such abuse almost impossible,
because tampering with such a register or making fic-
titious entries in it, would not be easy. Nor can it be
said that the work of maintaining such a register wi!l
be unduly heavy.” .

We have carefully considered the point raised in the
comment. But we think that no such change is needed.

Even if it were practicable to provide for a register of
articles posted under certificate, that cannot constitute a
safeguard against collusion. An entry can be made ficti-
tiously even in the register which is suggested in the com-
tment under consideration.

67. It has been suggested,* that section 22(2) be deleted,
as there are no separate parcel posts. We have not accept-
ed the suggestion, as the existing provision is harmless.

68. The constitutional aspects of section 23 have been
separately dealt with5

7. S. No, 108 (A D.1.G, Police).
2, Rule 195 (1), Indian Post Office Rules, 1933.
3. 5. No, 170 (Suggestion of a State Government).
4. S. No, 96 (Suggestion of the Departmert).
5. See Appendix 4.

Section 22.

Section 73.


Becrion 23,
3)

Section 23
129०.

26

89. We have received a & stiont-fram the =
Tent to add “Superimendent ee Post Offices* in हिना म
23 (3) (a). Having regard to the fact that under section
23 (3) (a) any Bostal article sent by post in contravention
of the provisions of sections 19 and 194 tan (under the
authority of the Postmaster General) be opened and
destroyed, it is not desirable to extend the Scope of the
section in this manner. Wp have not, therefore, accepted
the suggestion.

10, In its comment on the draft Report, the Department
reiterated its suggestion, stating that “leaky articles are
received in a large number in post offices and every case of
destruction of such articles has to be veferred to the Past-
master General and this unnecessarily takes considerable
time”

We do not, however, think that it is wise, io give the

. Power of destruction to lower officers, Delay should not he

caused even by the existing provision, because in cases of
urgency, instructions can be cbtained by phone.

Ti. In its comment on our draft Report, a State Govern-
ment* had stated that section 19 prohibits the transmis-
sion by post of, inter alia, explosive, dangerous or deleteri-
ous substance and also of living creatures and things like-
ly to injure postal articles or officers of the Post Office. If
a postal packet wes found tc contain such substsauces or
creatures or things, it would (it was siated) be dsncercus
to weit for the direction of the Postrazster General befors
the articles were destroyed. In the opinion of the State
Government, therefore, the suggested addition’ of the
Superintendent of Post Offices should be made to section
23 (3) (a).

The Comment was discussed before us at length. In
our view, no such change is needed. It may be noted, that
even under the suggested change, the directions of the
Superintendent would have te be awaited, so that the posi-
Hom may not be better.

72, We have already réecommended* a suitable amend-
ment in section 23 (8) (b}, with reference to the power to
destray cbscene articles.

1. 9. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department). . .
2. Section श्र oe with injurious articles, and section 9A ¢ deals with
tickets, advertisements, etc., relating to lorteries not aut ed by the
Goewzrmrent.

Pace: H. 189 (Suggestion of the Department}. 5

4. 3. No, 770 (Comments of a State Government).

5. Paragraph 76, supra.

6, See paragraph 56, ef seq.. “pra



27

Such a provision appears to be necessary, having re-
gard, to the consideration that a determination as to whe-
ther an article is or is not obscene should not be left to the
Postmaster General without some such safeguard.

73. We have considered a suggestion! to add “police
officers” in sections 23 and 27. It is not in our view desir-
able to confer the powers under these sections on police
officers. We do not, therefore, accept this suggestion.

74. The constitutional aspects of section 24 have been
separately dealt with?

75, Section 24 does not, in our view, apply to acticn
under other sections of the Post Office Act itself?

In its comment on our draft Report, a State Govern-
ment* had stated as follows:—

“This Government cannot agree that the opening
words of section 24 exclude its application to cases
under the different clauses of section 23, though it mz
be otherwise excluded. So far as opening words of sec-
tion 24 are concerned, they constitute an all-embracing
provision for a notice in all cases of receipt by Post
Office for delivery of articles sent in contravention. of
the Post Office Act as well as other Acts. The notice,
however, will have to be a notice to the addressee.,. ..”

The State Government, further, observed that the real
difficulty is that the opening words of section 24 cannot, at
least in the case of some of the postal articles, be reconcil-
ed with the second proviso, and therefore how those
general words are to be construed in their bearing on the
duty of giving notice, is a question.

76. The matter was discussed at length before us. The
history of the opening words of section 24 (substituted by
the Amendment Act of 1912) was looked into. In our view,
section 24 does not apply to the matters provided for in
sections 19 to 23, having regard to its history, and also
having regard to the consideration that the words “Except
as otherwise provided in this Act” are adequate to ex-
clude the operation of the section in relation to cases
specifically provided for,

. 5. No. 108 (A D.I.G. Police).

. See Appendix 4.

. See also Appendix 4, under section 1998,

. §. No. 770 (Comment of a State Government).

pw

Sections 23
and 27, and
Police’
Officers,

Section 74.

Section 24
and action
under other
sections,


‘Section 24—
Power unde r

28

We may, in this connection, refer to the relevant part

of tne statement of Objects ang Reasons to the Amend-
ment, Act of 1912°—

“Clause 5—The absence of any definition of “con-
traband goods” in the existing Act has been repeated-
ly felt, and it is proposed to substitute a defining phrase
making it clear that the provisions of section 24 are
applicable to goods of which the import or transmis-
sion by post has been prohibited under the Excise,
Opiwm or other laws.”

77. It has been suggested", that the power under section

first proviso. 24 be delegated to the Postmaster General, instead of the

‘Section 248५

Section 245.

and Cus-
stoms Act.

Director General. This seems to refer to section 24, First
Proviso, This is an important power, and no change is
desirable.

78. In its comment on our draft Report, a State Gov-
ernment had stated*:—-

“This Government thinks that the first proviso to
section 24 should be so amended as to make the calling
in of two respectable witnesses, whenever a postal
article is opened in the absence of the addressee or his
agent, a universal rule, compulsorily to be followed in
all cases without any direction of any higher author-
ity.”

In our view, no such change is needed. In a small vil-
lage, it may not be practicable to call witnesses.

79, The constitutional aspects of section 24A have been
separately dealt witht.

80. With reference to section 24A and the Customs Act,
the following suggestion® was made: —

“Section 24A of the Act empowers the Department
to hand over postal articles for customs examination
to customs authorities. In actual practice the articles
are being detained for customs examination in foreign
post offices, but there is no provision for this in the
Act. The Sea Customs Act, 1878, does not provide for
the delivery of articles to the customs authorities, but
provides that articles may be kept in the custody of
the post office. The provisions in the two Acts are not
consistent. It is felt that the law must be consistent,

t. Extract from the Statement of Objects and Reasons to -he Bill which
led ro Act 3 Of I912.

2. $. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department).

3. S. No. 170 (Suggestion of a State Government},
4. See Appendix 4. .

5. 8. No. 169 (Suggestion of the Department).


29

and there should be no conflict between the two
enactments and, therefore, this discrepancy is pointed
out to the Law Commission for such action as may be
deemed proper.”

The statutory provisions on the subject were examined
by us. It appears to us, that there is no discrepancy. The
subject is mainly governed by section 84 of the Customs
Act, 1962, which leeves the matter elastic!-2,

81. The constitutional aspects of section 254 have been
separately dealt with*.

82. Section 26 of the Act provides, that on the secur-
rence of any public emergency or in the interests of the
public safety or tranquillity, the Central Government or 2
State Government or any authorised officer may, by order
in writing, direct that any postal article or class of deserip-
tion of postal articles in course of transmission by post
shall be intercepted or detained or disposed of in suca
manner as the authority issuing the order may direct.

83. Section 26, thus, imposes a restriction on the right of
freedom of speech and expression, guaranteed by erticle
19(3) fa) of the Constitution, and the question has to te
considered whether the restriction would be valid. The
permissible heads of restriction under article 19(2) of the
Constitution (so far as is relevant) are—“seeurlty of the
State”, “public order”, incitement to the commission of
an offence, and friendly relations with foreign States. It.
would be desirable to bring the language of the section in
Tine with the permissible heads of restriction, The expres~
sion “public emergency” in section 2f appears te be very
wide, because, if the “emergency” is not of such a nature
as to affect the security of the State or public order, the
provision would travel beyond the permissible heads of
restriction.

84. It may be of interest to know the history of section
26. In the Bill which led to the Act,in the notes on
clauses’, it was merely state, that the clause was based
on the anzlogy of the Indian Tziegraph Act, 1885 (७०८
ly, the reference was to section 5 of that Act). When, how-
ever, leave to introduce the Bill was sought for, Sir James
Westland explained, that “in this respect we copy the
English law”, Referring te a Bill which had been intro-
duced in Parliament two years earlier, he said, fhat the
English Bill did not directly make any special provision of

t. See gection 84(6), Custorns Act, 4962 {52 of 1962).
2. See also paragraph 48, supra.

3. See Appendix 4.

4. Gazette of India, Movember 6, 1967, paze 388.

Section 254...

Section 26.


Recommen-
dation re-
garding

tion 26.

30

this kind, but it implied it in imposing penalty ए|
on a Post
Ofce officer, who delayed or intereepted vy article
ot erwise than by direction of the State. In the Report of
he Select Committee!, Shri 9, Ananda Charlu, in his note
of dissent, said, that after action is taken under the clause,
the grounds for it should be published; to hush up an affair
Was, he said, bad policy, while to give publicity would be
a tangible warning to similar offenders. He stated, that
the balance of advantage to the public, for whose protec-
tion the power was being taken, was to place even the
Government under the reign of law.

85. When the Report of the Select Committee was dis-
cussed in the Council?, Shri P. Ananda Charlu rep eated his
objection to the clause, He said, “a strong and just Gov-
ernment, above all others, must not shrink from daylight.
The power in question is one which, it seems to me, must
be as abhorrent to good Governments #s to the public, and
good Governments should themselves provide effectual
checks and safeguards to render it impossible for bad Gov-
ernment......teadily to resort to arbitrary or high-handed
proceedings.” Shri Bishambar Nath also pointed out, that
Without due publicity about the occurrence of any “gublie
emergency”; the power may be regarded as srbitrary.
The clause was, however, passed without amendment.

86.4 detailed note examining section 26 in the light of
article 19(1)-(a} of the Constitution, and discussing other
relevant aspects, is attached to this Report®.

The important points indicating our conclusion on the
subject are: —

Point No. (1).—The expression “public emer-
gency” in section 26(1), Post Office Act, may not be
enough to make the power of interception of postal
articles valid with reference to the freedom ०८ expres-
sion, as it may embrace situations not falling under
article 19(2) of the Constitution‘.

Point No. (2).—In order to bring section 26 into
conformity with article 19(2) of the Constitution, it is
necessary to confine the section to the various heads
given in article 19{2) of the Constitution, 80 tar as its
operation in respect of letters, pocks, posteards and
newspapers is concerned.

[Other postal articles would not ordinarily raise
questions of freedom of expression, (when the articles

¥. Gazette of India, March 12, 1898, part V, page 212.

2. Gazette of India, March 26, 1898, part VI, pages 285 to 287.
3. See Appendix 5.

.4, See paragraph 83, also.


31

are intercepted in pest}, Hence, it is not necessary
to disturb the operation of the section in relation to
them.]

Point No. (3)—Section 26(2), Post Office ct,
may be omitted, as the legislature cannot bar judicial
review of unconstitutional action taken under a sec-
tion, The vires of an interference with the freedom of
expression, when challenged, have to be examined on
a consideration of the question whether, in point of
fact the interference is attributable to a permissible
source under article 19(2) of the Constitution,

Point No. (4).—Section 26, sub-section (1) need
not be disturbed. Our recommendation to bring it
into conformity with article 19(2) of the Constitution,
recorded above’, should be implemented by adding a
new sub-section in section 26, to the effect that the
power of interception, etc., shall, in respect of letters,
books, postcards, and newspapers, be exercised only :n
the interest of the security of the State, public order,
friendly relations with foreign States or preventing
incitement to commission of an offence. (Other heads
of article 19(2) will not, in practice, be important for
the present purpose},

87, With reference to section 26, it was noted® that the
amendment is acceptable to one of the Ministries of the
Government of India. .

88. With reference to section 26 (as proposed), the
comment of a State Government* on our draft Repost
raised certain pcints. The first was—

“(1) This Government doubts whether it is at all
necessary or proper to attach to section 26(1), in ex-
press terms, the limitations imposed by the Constitu-
tion.”

In our view,
it is necessary to amend section 26, as proposed,

89. The comment of the State Government, further,
says—

“In so far as the proposed sub-section ignores the
other freedoms ef which also section 26(1) is restric-
tive, it is defective.”

The point had been considered by us before formulating
our proposals, Ordinarily, it is letters or newspapers whica
would be intercepted, under section 26, and their intercep-
tion would not affect the freedom to carry on business, the

1. See Point No, (2), above,

2. 8, No, 169, zead wich S.No. 174.

3. S.No. 170 (Comment of a State Goverament).
No, 170 (Commer t of a Sttea Government!

Section 26
and com-
ments re-
ceived on
the draft
Report,


32

freedom ५0 bold yroperty, etc. Hence, the other fundamen-
tal rights sre not of practical impartance ia relation to
section 26. In any case, so far as the other fundamental
rights are concerned, the permissible restrictisns under
article 19 are wider, than those under freedom of expres-
sion.

90. The State Government’, in its comment, has stated—

“One of the occasions on which the power under
section 26({1} can be exercised, is occurrence of any
“public emergency”. But it seems to have been overlooked
that the words ‘“putlic emergency” used in sectior. 36(1)
are perfectly general and must also inciude an emergency
proclaimed under Article 352 of the Constitution.”

The comment is not acceptable to us. It is precisely be-
cause the expression “public emergency” is very wide—
much wider than the language of article 19, and that is why
a difficulty may arise’,

91, The State Government's comment*, further, says—

“fivy) Section 26(1) authorises interception or de-
tention cf a postal article in the course of its transi
sion by post. It is not clear to this Government why,
if a notice to the sender was considered necessary in
the case of action taken under section 23(3) (b), no
notice should be considered mecessary in the case of
action taken under section 26 (1) .7

Now, we should point out, that there is 2 distinction
between the situation envisaged by section 26, (on the one
hand) and the situation envisaged by section 23 (in rela-
tion to obscene articles) {on the other hand).

“ction under section 26 is taken ir. urgency and,
Casually) for reasons of security of State. Novi to the
sender would not be practicable. In our view, in consider-
ing the constitutionality of section 26—if it shouid ever he
contested on the ground of want of notiee— this distinction
could be very properly relied upon.

92. Another paint made by the State Government’ with
reference to the recommendation for deletion of sub-section
(2) of section 26 is this—“This Government is unable to
support the recommendation. Whether a public emergency
existed at a certain point of time or did not, cannot be jus-
ticiable by <he Court nor can a Court decide whether a
particular act was done in the interest of public safety or

. 5. No. 170 (A State Government).
, See paragraphs 83 to 86, sapra,

. See also Appendix 5.

S.No. 170.

. & No. 770 [A State Government).

wee!

we


33

tranquillity, , except perhaps when malice is alleged. It
may further be pointed out, that whatever an Act of a
legislature may say, the jurisdiction conferred on the High
Courts by Article 226 of the Constitution and that con-
ferred cn the Supreme Court by Article 32, can never be
taken away and, therefore, no uneasiness need be felt about
sub-section (2) of section 26.”

We do not agree with the comment. The vires of an
action (when challenged) have to be examined with re-
ference to the question whether, in point of fact, the action
is constitutional.

93. We have considered the provisions of section 5, Tele-
graph Act, which are similar to section 26, Post Office Act.

ir recommen lation as to section 5 of the Indian Tele-
graph Act' is es follows:—

(a) Section 5(1) (b) of the Telegraph Act may be
similarly amended, i.e. on the lines on which section
26, Post Office Act is to be amended?.

(छ) Section 5(2} of the Telegraph Act may be
omitted, for the same reason for which section 26 (2),
Post Office Act is to be omitted.

{c) As a result, section 5, Indian Telegraph Act*
should be amended to run somewhat on these lines!

“§. On the occurrence of any public emergency,
or in the interest of public safety, the Central Gov-
ernment or a State Government or any officer
specially authorised in this behalf by the Central
Government or a State Government, may—

(a) take temporary possession of any
telegraph established, maintained or worked
by any person licensed under this Act; or

(b) order that any message or class of
messages to or from any person or class of per-
sons, or relating to any particular subject,
brought for transmission by or transmitted or
received by any telegraph, shall not be trans-
mitted, or shall be intercepted or detained, or
shall be disclosed to the Government making
the order or an officer thereof mentioned in the
order:

Provided that an order under clause (9)
may be passed only when such order és re-
quired in the interests of the security of the

1. The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885).
2. See paragraphs 83-26, supra, as to the section 26, Post Office Act,
3. Indian Telegraph Acc, 1885 (3 of 1885).
4. This is a rough draft only,

5—61 Law.

Recommen-
dation re~
garding sec-
tion 5,
Telegraph
Act.

Power for
Government
to take pos-
session of
Yicensed.
telegraphs
and to or-
der inter-
ception of
messages.


34

State, friendly relations with foreign States or
public order or for preventing incitement to
the commission of any offence.”

Section 27, 94. As to section 27, the discussion regarding section 28
‘ be seen’.
Section 27B. 95. The constitutional aspects of section 2B have been
1 separately dealt with?.

Sections 28 96. The following suggestion®, relevant ‘to section 28,

and 29— a
Court No« was considered by us—
hy post. . | “Sometimes certain notices sent by the Courts or

Government Offices are returned back on the plea of
non-availability of the parties which indirectly helps
the parties in delaying matters or escaping appearance.
To avoid such recurrences, in every case of non-
delivery or by non-availability of the addressee, it is
suggested that a certificate may be obtained from the
village Munsif and Sapanch of that particular place to
that effect, and the certificate so obtained may he pro-
duced alongwith the letter or notice which is to be
returned.”

97. Our conclusion on the point raised in the suggrstion*
may be thus summarised—

(a) The necessity of ensuring proper delivery of
court notices cannot be denied.- It may not, however,
be practicable to require the postman to go to a village
Munsif (or other corresponding authority), and it is
also doubtful if the suggested provision will improve
matters much. Hence, the suggestion could not be
accepted in toto.

(b) But, the question of requiring a legibly written
endorsement by a higher postal official in the case of
all registered articles which are unserved or returned
as “refused”, was considered by us. We think, that
such an endorsement, specifying the name of the post-
man who gave the report, would be useful, as a_safe-
guard . for ensuring that proper efforts were made to
effect delivery. We recommend that the rules -under
section 29 be amended for the purpose. We may note
that this recommendation of ours has found the
approval of one High Court®, in its comment on the
draft Report which we had circulated, and has not been
objected te in the other comments.

1, See paragraph 73, supra.

2, See Appendix 4.

4. S. No. 14 (A State Government).
1. Paragraph 96, supe a.

5. 8. No, 163 (A High Court).


35

There should be no special fees for such an endorse-
ment, The intention is, that the fees for registration
(which are charged at present) should suffice for this
extra facility’. . .

[With reference to rules under section 28, the fol-
lowing suggestion has been made*:—
5

“As regards section 28, the suggestion of the
Commission in case of non-delivery is acceptable
with this proviso that the name of the witness
before whom the article is tendered should be
mentioned and his signature obtained, wherever
possible.”

In our view, this would not be practicable.]

(९०) Further, in the case of summonses, notices and
other similar documents sent by courts or other autho-
rities empowered jo issue them, where they are sent
by registered post, a special form should be obtainable
by the sender on payment of an extra fee. This would
be something like a “declaration” by the postman,
analogous to the affidavit of a process-server required
under the Civil Procedure Code’,

We recommend, that necessary amendment be made in
the rules made under the Post Office Act.

98, The comment of a State Government as regards our
suggestion’ in ease of delivery for a declaration by the
postal peon was—“the affidavit of the postal peon as in the
case of process server under the Civil Procedure Code
should be insisted upon so, that it may be evidence in
Court till rebutted”.

In our view, however, an affidavit would not be practi-
cable in the case of postal peons.

99, We have considered these points® in detail, in view
of the fact service of summons, etc. by post is now in-
creasingly employed’-*,

3. As to the existing facilities for registered articles, see Rules 62, 63
64(1) and 65, Indian Post Office Rules, 1933.

2. $, No. 170 (Commen: of a State Government).

3. See Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Appendix B, Form No. 11, pre-

sotibed with reference to Order 5, tule 18 (Affidavit of process-server),

4. S. No. 7° (Comment ef a State Government}.

5. Paragraph 97, supra,

6. Paragraphs 96 00 98, supra.

7. Cf. Code of Civit Bracesure, 1908, Order 5, Rules 9-70 (as amended
locally), Order 5, Rule २०१ (a3 added by local amendments) and
existing Order 3, rufe 20A(2).

#, See also Twenty-seventh Report of the Law Commission -(Code of

Civil Procedure 1908), page 46, Order 5, Rule 19A, (Proposed and
Notes at page 136.


Section 28
and liability
of the State
for regis-
tered arti-
cles.

36

Occasions for setting aside an ex parte decree on the
ground that the defendant did not actually “refuse” the
summons served by registered post, often arise’-?, and in
the absence of some reliable evidence it is difficult later to
prove the refusal. The proposed changes may be of help
in bringing some proof into existence.

100. Reference may also be made to the various statutory
provisions as to letters sent by post*-‘-*.

101. As to service by registered post, the under-mention-
ed cases may be seen 9-7-8.9.10.11,

102, In the comment of a State Government” ox our
draft Report, the following suggestion was made (The sug-
gestion was made under section 6): —

“Tt appears to this Government that some relax-
ation of the absolute terms of section 6 is called for. It
will not make any extreme suggestion, but thinks that
the law in this country should at least be brought into
conformity with the present law in England in this re-
gard. In the opinion of this Government, section 6 of
the Indian Act should be amended so as to provide for
an exception in the case of registered articles on the
lines of the British Statute.”

A High Court’ has also made a similar sugyestion (on
the assumption, that in England the Post Office is liable to
pay compensation in respect of registered inland packets
where loss or damage is caused by any wrongful act done
or any default committed by a person employed as a ser-
vant or agent of the Crown).

1, As to such instances, see (a) Sunder Spinner v. Makan Biula, LR

46 Bom. 130; A.I.R. 1922 Bom. 377, and
(०) Appibai v. Lakshmi Chand, VLR. 1954 Bom. 243; ALR. 1954
Bom, 137.

2. Also see Butto Kristo v. Govindaram A.I.R. 1939 Pat. 540,547 (Harries
C.J. and Chatterji J.),

3. Section 16, Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

4, Section 114, Indian Evidence Act, 1872 [illustration (6) J.

5. Section 27, General Clauses Act, 1897.

6. Teja Singh ए. Jaswant, ALR. 1935 Lah. 171, 172 (0, 5, R. 10, C.P.O-
—Lahore).

7. In re DeSouza, A.1.R. 1932 All. 374 (s. 27, General Clauses Act).
8. Romesh Chandra v. National Tobacco Co. A.L.R. 1949 Cal, 36,
537) 538 (s. 27, General Clauses Act).
9. Roopchand v. Ranga Lal A.I.R. 1914 Bom. 31, 32 (s. 27, General
Clauses Act).
10, Marihar v. Ram Shastri, AR. 1918 P.C. 102, 111, 112 (Notice
under $. 106, Transfer of Property Act).

पा, Sundaram y. Sesha Ayar, A.I.R. 1957 T.C. 208 (0,5 R. 10, C.P.C.
as amended in TravanOrce-Cochin) (Reviews Bombay cases).

12, 8. No, 170 (Comment of a State Government).
13. 5. No, 167 (Comment ofa High Court).


37.

103. The question of liability in England for “registered”
articles was considered by us in detail. It appears to us,
that “registration” in England really corresponds to “In-
surance” under the Indian Post Office Act’. Hence the
analogy of the English Act would not be appropriate, in
this context.

104. The matter was, however, considered by us on the
merits. It was felt, that having regard to the high fees now
charged for registration, some liability for registered
articles should be imposed on the Post Office. A modified
proposal was submitted to us, namely, a statutory maxi-
mum for registration fee. But that was not approved. We
think that a fixed liability of (say) Rs. 50 should be im-
posed. To implement this, we recommend a suitable
amendment? of section 28,

105. It has been stated’, that sections 30 and 32 are re-
petitive, and may be re-cast. But the sections appear to
be complementary to each other, and need not, therefore,
be disturbed, in the absence of any difficulty caused in
practice,

108. Section 33 deals with insured articles‘. It has been
suggested’ (apparently with reference to section 33), that
besides the sender, the addressee must also be entitled to
recover Compensation (in respect of insured articles), Now,
as between the sender and the addressee, this has to be
worked out according to the contract between the sender
and the addressee. On that Point, the Post Office Act can-
not appropriately make ‘a provision. But, as against the
Government, only the sender is, as the law stands now.
The addressee can (if so advised and if so permitted by
the contract), sue only the sender, at present,

We think, that where the sender has assigned his rights
to the addressee, the compensation should be payable to
the addressee, by the Post Office.

To put the matter beyond doubt (particularly because
the liability may be only “statutory”)*® section 33 should be
suitably amended to provide, that where the sender has
assigned his rights to the addressee, the compensation shall
be payable to the addressee.

An express provision is desirable in view of the restric-
tive language of section 33, which refers to the sender only.

1. For a detailed discussion, ree Appendix 14.
2. See section 28 as proposed.
3. S. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department).
4. See paragraph 31, supra.
> $. 8. No. 102 (A High Court).
6. See paragraphs 24, 25, 29, supra.

Sections 30
and 32.

Section 33—
ingured arti-
cles.


Section
and VPP,
articles.

Section 34
and cases of
non-delj-
very.

38

107. For the present purpose, it is unnecessary to consi-
der whether, apart from such a provision as is proposed,'
the right to compensation, under section 33 would be assign-
able as a benefit of contract and therefore as an “actionable

aim" *-",

108. As regards V.P.P. articles, under section 34 of the
Indian Act, the Central Government may direct that, sub-
ject to certain provisions a sum of money specified in
writing at the time of posting by the sender of a postal
article “shall be recoverable on the delivery thereof from
the addressee, and that the sum so recovered shall be paid
to the sender.” There is, however, a proviso that the Cen-
tral Government shall not incur lability in respect of the
sum specified for recovery unless and until that sum has
been received from the addressee, Though the proviso is
expressed in rather wide terms, the cases already cited*
would show, that if the post office delivers an article with-
out realizing the price of the V.P.P. it is lable to the
sender for the value of the article. In view of this inter-
pretation, the question arises whether the proviso requires
any modification. Recovery of the price is a condition
precedent to delivery, and if the post office does not carry
out the condition which is meant to protect the sender, it is
just and fair that the sender should not suffer damage.
This principle, applied by the courts, should find a piace
in the proviso to section 34. We recommend that the provi-
sion should be modified accordingly®.

109. Originally, this was the only change that we had
proposed. But, regarding liability where the article is not
delivered, the following suggestion was made in a com-
ment® on our draft Report; sent by a State Government.

“In the opinion of this Government, the proposed
amendment is a very reasonable one, but it might go
further. This Government.......... thinks that not
merely in the case where the postal authorities have
delivered an article sent by Value Payable Post, to the
addressee, but also in the case where they have failed
both to deliver the article to him and to return to the
sender they should be made liable under a direct pro-
vision made in section 34”.

i. See paragraph 106, supra,
2-3. As to assignment in English law, see—
(0) Bailey, articles in 47 L.Q.R. $16 and 48 L.O.R. 248.
(४) Chitty on Contracts (1961), Vol. 2, paragraph 867.
(ii) Hardy Ivamy, General Principles of Insurance Law (1966), pages
364, 372) 374, 376, and 382.
4, Paragraph 24, supra.
5- This may also necessitate modification of rule 102, Indian Post
Office Rules, 1933.
6. ‘S. No, 170 (Suggeetion of a State Government).


39

The matter was discussed before us in detail.

The assumption made in the comment (that the Govern-
ment is not liable) is correct. And we think that this
position is not fair.

In our view, in the following case also, the State should
be liable, namely,—
“where the article has neither been delivered to
the addressee nor returned to the sender in the original
condition.”.

In this respect, a query was raised before us, as ६0 the
following points—

(a) whether this amendment does not make an in-
road on the general provision in section 6, and

(b} whether it is proper to make the Government
liable for the value. We have reached the conciusion,
tha, to prevent hardship, the proposed change is desir-
able, particularly because fairly heavy charges are
levied for Value Payable Post, whic: mclude charges
under several heads’.

110 Under proviso (9) to section 39, money or saleable
property (not being of a perishable nature), found in any
undelivered postal article, shal) be detained for one year
in the office of the Postmaster-General. Thereafter (if no
person has established him right thereto), then the money
is to be credited to the Post Office, and the saleable pro-
petty is to be sold and the procéeds credited to the Post

fice.

It has been suggested* that, in section 39, in place of the
period of one year, such period as the Central Government
may specify may be substituted. The suggestion states.
that the number of undelivered postal articles is increasing
owing to increased postal traffic. and it would be desirable
to reduce the period.

111. We considered the suggestiont at some length.
There are certain risks in reducing the period in the man-
ner suggested.

The periods taken up in various formalities under sec-
tion 37(3) and section 38(1)§, and in detention under section
39, main paragraph", may not, in a particular case, take uy

1. Of. Union of India vy. Ramji Lal, ALR, 1965 All. 184, 186, paragraphs
8--10.

2. See Rule 96 (2), Indian Post Office Rules, 7933.

3. S. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department).

4. Paragraph 110, supra.

5- See also rules 208 and 209, Indian Post Office Ru‘es. 193.
6. See Rules 212 and 213, Indian Post Office Rules, 1933

Sction 29.


Section 46
Money
Orders to
foreign
countries.

40

more than, say, five months. If the period of compulsory
detention under section 39, proviso (b), is reduced to, six
months, there is a risk of the articles being destroyed ;
fore the periad of limitation has expired’. The claimant
can get the sale proceeds, it is true, but valuable evidence
will be lost, if. the article is destroyed. We are not, there-
fore, in favour of the proposed change.

112. (a) In a previous Report? of the Law Commission,
a recommendation was made to the effect, that if an
arrangement has been made between the U.K. and India
for the transmission of money orders, under the Post Office
Act, 1908, prima facie an appropriate provision might be in-
cluded in our Post Office Act to obviate the necessity of
referring to the English statute. (The English Act, section
87, provided, that when arrangements have been made
between the U.K, and any other country for the transmis-
sion of money orders, the provisions of the statute would
be applicable to such money orders as far as is consistent
with the tenor thereof").

(b) Reference may be made, in this connection, to sec-
tion 46 of our Post Office Act, under which, when arrange-
ments have been made with any foreign country (including
the U.K. or any British possession) for the issue and pay-
ment of money orders, the Central Government has power
to make rules to give effect to such arrangements. There
is also a general power to make rules under section 74, for
carrying out any of the purposes and objects of the Act.
Rules on the subject would, therefore, suffice, and an actual
amendment of the Act is not strongly required. The rele-
vant provision in the latest U.K. Act on the subject—-the
Post Office Act, 1953—is section 24, under which, when an
arrangement is made with the Government or postal admin-
istration of any other country for the transmission of small
sums through Post Offices under the charge of the Post-
master-General and the postal administration of other
countries by means of money orders, then sections 20 to 23
of the Act (containing detailed provisions as to money
orders) shall, so far as is consistent with the tenor thereof,
apply as they apply to British money orders.

No amendment of our Act is, therefore, required.

1. As to the period of limitation, see discussion in this Report on the
subiect, paragraph 83 et seq, infra,

2.Fifth Report (British Statutes applicable to India), page 63, bottom, and
age, 64, top, Entry No, 198 relating to the Post Office Act, 1908 (Tm
the U.K. this Act has been repealed by the Post Office Act, 1953).

3. See now, section 24, Post Office Act, 1953 (English Act).


41

113. We now take up section 49 and the succeeding sec- Analysis
tions. The penal seciions of the Act are analysed below, Bere)
with reference to the punishment prescribed!

Fine only 2 + Sections 49, 58, 59, 60 ), 63, 64, 65, 66
7.

Tmprisonmest and Fine . Sections 52, 54, 35. 56, 58.

Imprisonment or fine . Sections 50, 51, $3, 60 (@), 61 (1), 62. 69

The sections providing for imprisonment may oe further
analysed, as follows:—

Imprisonment

| | |

7 years: 2 years: T year; F 6 months 1 month
Re 52) © (Sections 53, (8. sx (1) {Sections 5r. (8. 5०).
54, 55, 56, 89). 69).
Be (७), 58). x

114. We have received a suggestion from the Govern- Sections 49,

ment of a Union Territory? to enhance the punishments tor 5%, 51: 635
certain offences. The suggestion states, that during recent ही 67:
years, there have been many cases of (8) misappropriation
of V.P.P, and insured articles, and (b) delivery of V.P-P.,
and insured articles and money orders to wrong persons
and that the Post Office Act requires to be amended to
ensure that these articles are delivered to the right person.
It suggests enhanced punishment for the relevant offences.
We went through the penal provisions in the Post Office
Act, from this-point of view. We feel that, for acts of dis-
honesty and the like, sections 52 and 69 are enough. For
negligence, section 49(d) already provides a fine up 10 fifty
rupees, We also considered the question of increasing the
amount of fine (in section 49 to 51, 63 and 67). We, how-
ever, felt that, on the whole there is no need for a change
in the law. Active enforcement of the existing provisions
would be a better course. We are not, therefore, inclined
to recommend any change in this respect,

115. With reference to section 52, it has been held’ that section 52.
it is a necessary ingredient of section 52 that a paper should
have been extracted from the parcel (and not merely exa-
mined), [That was a case in which the postal employees
(accused) tampered with and extracted question papers of
the S.S.L.C. Examination for March, 1936 (Madras)].

1. Of. Ramchandra wv. State of Mysore, ALR, 1964 S.C. 1701, 1703,
paragraphs 8—10,

2. $, No. 98 (Government of a Uni ory).

3. da te Sattar Khan, ALR. 1939 Mad, 283, 229 left band coum.



Section $3.

Section 53.
Proviso.

(Interpre-
tation):

Section 62,

Section 68.

42

‘No changes are necessary in the section.

116, As regards section 53, the expression “wilfully” has
come up for detailed consideration before the Supreme
Court! No changes are necessary.

117. Section 53, proviso,.deal with interception. It does
not, however, stand on the same footing as section 26. Sec-
tion 26 interferes with the freedom of expression, and re-
quires amendment, while section 53 deals only with prose-
cution. Hence, it need not be amended.

118. We have received a suggestion® to increase the
punishment under section 62. The section embraces many
acts,—serious as well as light—and, therefore, it would be
unwise to enhance the punishment for all acts punishable
under the section. It may also be added, that some serious
acts of interference with letter boxes, etc.,—for example—-
mischief by fire—would be punishable under the Indian
Penal Code also‘. The punishment need not, therefore, be
enhanced

119: In its comment on our draft Report, a State Gov-
ernment had stated, “It seems to this Government that the
term of the sentence of the imprisonment which can be
imposed under the section (section 62) should be enhanced,
so that adequate punishment may be awarded in the case
of serious offences such as trying to burn down a letter

box".

In our view, no such change is necessary. Serious cases
of burning can (as already pointed out)? be dealt witn
under sections 435—438, Indian Penal Code.

120. Under section 68, whoever fraudulently retains or
wilfully secretes or makes away with or er) s or detains,
or, when required by an officer of the Post ice, neglects
or refuses to deliver up any postal article which ought to
have been delivered to any other person, etc. is punishable.
A private Member’s Bill introduced in the Lok Sabha‘ pro-
posed an amendment of this section whereunder, in sub-
stance, a person who does not return to the Post Office such
a postal article becomes punishable; the existing require-
ment that there should first be a requisition by a postal
officer before mere neglect or refusal to deliver may be

1. Ramchandra v. State of Mysore, A.LR, 1964 8.C. 1703.

3. Paragraph 86, supra (Recommendation regarding section 26).

3, S. No. 108 (A Deputy Inspector General of Police).

4. Sections 435 to 438, Indian Penal Code.

5. 8. Mo. 140 (Suggewtisn of » State Government).

6. See paragraph 118, supra.

7. See Bill No, 31 of 1962 (Lok Sabha), introduced by Shei Satis Chandra
Samant.


43

punished, would, thus, be dispensed with, under the pro-
posed amendment. We do not think that such a far-reach-
ing change is advisable, While it would be a good thing if
every person manifested his civic sense by returning a pos-
tal article wrongly delivered to him, even without a request
from the Post Office, failure to do so should not be made
an offence. Attention may, in this connection, be invited
to section 55 of the English Act, which also does not go to
that length.

121. There is one point on which the section in the Eng-
lish Act! differs from and is wider than section 68. Under
the English Act, the provision is.applicable to a postal arti-
cle (in course of transmission by post) or any mail bag
which has been found by the offender or any other person.
(besides a postal article which ought to have heen delivered
to any other person). This seems to be intended to cover
a case where an article meant for ‘X’ is found by ‘Y’,
though net “delivered” to him (the assumption being that
the words “ought to have been delivered to any other per-
son” do not cover this case). It does not, however, appear
to be necessary to make such an elaborate provision. So
far as articles of value are concerned, such cases would be
Tare, because they would be insured or, at least, registered,
and, therefore, there would always be actual delivery by
a postal official.

In its comment on our draft Report, a State Govern-
ment? had stated: —

‘The real deficiency in the section which required
to be made up is, that it does not cover postal articles
found by a person though they were not delivered to
hin and it has been sought to be made good in the
corresponding section of the British Post Office Act of
1953, section 55, by introducing the words “any postal
packet in the course of transmission by post or mail
bag which has been found by him or by any other per-
son.” In the opinion of this Government, section 68
of the indian Post Office Act should be remodeiled on
the pattern of section 55 of the English Act of 1953.”.

No such change is necessary, in our view.

122. (a) Under section 69, a person who wilfully and
maliciously, ete., opens any letter or does any act preventing
due delivery to another person is punishable. A private
Member’s Bill introduced in the Lok Sabha* proposed to
substitute the word “knowingly” for the words “wilfully
and miliciously", We think that the word “knowingly”

4. Section 55, Post Office Act, 1953.
2. S. No, 170 (Suggestion of a State Government).

3. Bill No. 31 of 1962, (Lok Sabha) introduced by Shri Satis Chandra
‘Samant.

Section 69


Section 72,
Authority
for prosecu-
tions section
ef Act.

Suggestion
to make
certain
offences cog-
niszable cons
sidered.

“4

would not fit in with the general tenor of the section.
Diversion of letters with the intention of injuring another
person is the gist of the offence punished by the section,
and intention is the paramount consideration; knowledge
has not much relevance. No change, therefore, is neces-
sary on this point. The corresponding section in the Eng-
lish Act* runs on the same lines (on this point} as our
section.

(b) There is one point on which the English section! is
wider. The Indian section is confined to letters, while the
English section speaks of “postal packet” which, as defined
in section 87(1) of the English Act, means a letter, post-
card, reply-post-card, newspaper, printed packet, sample
packet, or parcel and every packet or article transmissible
by post and includes a telegram. Though cases of postal
articles (cther than letters) being diverted would not be
many, there is no harm if the section is widened to cover
all postal articles...

123. Section 72 runs as follows: —

“72, No Court shall take cognizance of an offence
punishable under any of the provisions of sections 51,
53, 54, clauses (a) and (b), 55, 56, 58, 59, 61, 64, 65, 66
and 67 of this Act unless upon complaint made by
order of, or under authority from, the Director General
or a Post Master General.”.

As a new section? has been proposed to penalise steal-
ing a mail bag or postal article, we considered the question
whether the new section should also be mentioned in sec-
tion 72. After some discussion, we have come to the con-
clusion that it is not necessary to mention it in section 72,
particularly because it embraces the stopping of a mail train
also.

124. We have received a suggestion® to give the power
under section 72 to Postmasters of District Headquarters
and to Superintendents (in view of the opening of large
number of Post Offices). We think, that this may lead to
harassment or inequality in the actual administration of the
law, and are not in favour of the suggested change.

125. We have received a suggestiont to make certain
offences under sections 52, 61, 62, 63, 67 and 68 of the Act
cognizable and non-bailable. The penalties under some of
these sections (e.g., section 67) is fine only, or imprison-

1. Section 56, Post Office Act, 1953.

2. See section 56A (proposed).

3. S. No. 98 (Government of a Union territory).

4. 8. No, 108 (A Deputy Inspector General of Police).


45

ment for a short period. It is, therefore, better to leave
the matter to be governed by the ordinary provisions of the
Second Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, rather
than to enact special provistons as to cognizability or bail.

126. Section 73 relates to district posts. It has been sug-
gested,’ that the section may be deleted, as there are no
district posts. The section is harmless, and we have not
therefore, accepted the suggestion.

127. A suggestion for inserting a provision to empower
the Post Office to place letter boxes on the land of local
authorities, has been made by the Department.!_ The sug-
gestion states, that the Central Government has “full pow-
ers” to erect telegraph or telephone poles on any land,
under the Telegraph Act, and that difficulty is caused he-
cause municipalities refuse to give permission to place post
boxes on their land.

We have considered the relevant provisions of the Tele-
graph Act. It appears, that the assumption that the powe:
under the Telegraph Act is full or unqualified, is not cor-
rect. The relevant provisions of that Act? do not go to
the length of empowering the Central Government io place
telegraph poles, ete., on the land of local authorities.

That being the position, we are not in favour pf the
suggested change.

128. A suggestion’ has been made to add a provision
penalising strikes, “go-slow” tactics etc, by postal em-
ployees, We think, however, that the Post Office Act is
not the proper place for penalising such action of a concert-
ed type. For acts of an individual employee, the Post
Office Act* does make the necessary provision. No change
is, therefore, recommended on this point,

129. Regarding telegrams, the following suggestion has
been made™—

“At present, telegrams are being sent by ordinary
tappal in place where the telegraph offices are not pro-
vided. In such cases the telegram will be delivered
later than an ordinary letter. It is, therefore, suggest~-
ed, that provision may be made either in the Act or
rules for delivering telegrams by special messengers
on payment of a nominal fee from the addressee for
such special delivery.”.

lL 5. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department).

= See sections 10, 12 (2) 14, etc. Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of
1885).

3. $. No. 108, (A Deputy Inspector General of Police).

4, See section 50.

5. S. No, 114 (A State Government).

Section 73.

Power to

place post
Boxes on

municipal
lands,

Strikes.

Telegrams
sent by

post in plap
ces where
there 18 no
telegraph
office.


शक] 6

The suggestion really pertains to rules under the Indian
Telegraph Act!. Hence, an amendment in the Post Office
Act is not required.

Limitation 130. A question? has been raised as to the period of
compensa- limitation for a suit for compensation for a postal article

tion for which is not delivered. Some of the articles in the Limita-

postal arti- tion Act of 1908 apparently relevant to this subject, were
cle. the following: —

Art.30 0. 9. «(3 year) Against @ carrier for compensa-
tion for losing or injuring

Art, 31 . . - [व year) Against a carrier for compensa-
tion for non-delivery of, or
delay in delivering “goods.

Art. 48 + +. (4 years) For specific movable property
lost or acquired by theft or
dishonest misappropriation or
conversion or for compensa-
tion for wrongfully taking or
detaining the same.

Art. 49 . . + (3 years) For other specific movable
Property or for compensation
for wrongfully taking or in-
juring or wrongfully detaining
the same.

Art. 65 . + + (3 years) For compensation for breah of a
promise to do anything at a
specified time or upon the
happening of 8 specified con-
tingency.

Art. 115 पु : + (3 years) For compensation for the
breach of any contret, express
or implied, not in writing re-
gistered and net herein specially
provided for.

Art. 120 . . + (6 years) Suit for which no period of

limitation is provided else
where in the Schedule.

131. (a) Of these® articles 30 and 31 related to
“carriers”, and could not apply to the Post Office.

“1. The Indian Telegraphs Act, 1885 03 of 1885), section (2).
2, Paragrah 1, supra,
3. Paragraph 133, supra,


47

(b) Articles 65 and 115 were based on “contract” and
their applicability to the Post“ Office could be 2 matter
of some debate.

(c) Articies 48 and 49 allowed a period of 3 years
Article 48 was intended for acts of conversion and the
like, but article 49 could have been argued as applicable to
certain kinds of acts, e.g., wrongful detention of, or injury
to, a postal article.

132. The distinction between article 31 and article 48 is
explained in the undermentioned cases*-1-5.

183. As to the distinction between articles 48 and 49,
the undermentioned case® may be scen.

134, The question whether, in a case which falls withix
the language of both articles 31 and 36, article 31 applies
or article 36 applies would perhaps deserve consideration’.
But it is unnecessary to discuss it now, as old article 36
has now been combined with old article 120°.

135, It may be noted, that the Limitation Act does not
contain any specific articles dealing with suits to recover
compensation under statute®-*. For a suit by the Central
Government to recover a statutory cess, the starting point
would be governed by article 120 (residuary), and not by
article 50 (hire of animals, etc.)™.

Again, for compensation under Rule 75A of the Defence
of India Rules 1939, article 120 is the appropriate’*-’.

1. Cf. paragraphs 24-29 and 34, supra.
2. See also Debananda v. Union of india, 1L.R. 1964 Cut. 907 ; ALR.
1965 Orissa 118
G. P. Venkataraman & Co., v. Union off India, ATR. 1958 Mad.
321,324, Paragraph 10, 11 (Article 48 does not apply if the relief Prayed
for is not for possession).
4. Union of India v. Megh Rej, ALR. 1958 Cal. 434, 437, paragrah 14+
(K. 6, Das Gupta & U. C. Law JT.
5. Mariah Ali v. Union, ALR. 1954 Bom. 297.
6. State of West Benga! v. Ghandi Charan, AR. 1958 Cal. 433, 434.
& P. Venkataraman & Co, v. Union of India, AIR. 1958
iad. 321, 325, paragraph 13
8. See article 113, Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).
9. Bapiraju v. Azimuiiah, ALR. 1957 A.P. 79, 81, paragraph 15 (Subba
a J. and Bhimasankeran J.) (Article 120 applies to a ‘suit for
compensation under the Vegetable, etc. oils Order).
10, See also paregraph 105, supra.
गा, R. ©, Jali v. Union of India, ALR, 1962 5.0, 1981, 1284, paragraph 5,
12. Penchanan Das v. Province of Orissa, ALR. 1955 Orissa 57, 69,
Paragraph &.
13. See also State of West: Bengal v. Brindaban, AJR. 1937 Cal. 44,
Paragcap: 13—19, and paragraphs 42—44.


38

Henee, if the liability of the Post Office is regarded. as
purely statutory, article 120 would apply to suits for com-
pensation for loss, ete., of postal articles,

Since there is no specific article fixing the time limit for
a suit to enforce a statutory liability for specific perform-
ance of the contract inferrable from a statute or statutory
rules, article 120 would, presumably, apply?.

136. It is possible to argue that the Government is not
governed by article 115, particularly in respect of claims

relating to insured postal articles where insurance is com-
Pulsory-+5,

137. In one case, it has been held®, that since the Post
Office does not carry articles for hire, but is performing its
duties as a branch of the revenue, it is not a “common
carrier”, As regards limitation, it was held, that articles 65
or 120 (of the Act of 1908) would apply. In either case,
the period would be three years or more.

{It may be noted, that though the Government is not a
“common carrier” for the purposes of the Carriers Act’,
it has ben held’, that the Secretary of State, when sued
as the owner of a railway concern, is a “carrier” for the
purpose of article 31 of the Limitation Act, 1908].

188, Whatever be the precise article applicable, it is
obvious, that the period would not be less than 3 vears,

Now, it has been suggested’° by the Department, that
the period should be one year. The suggestion also states,
that article 120 of the old Act has been held to be applica-
‘ble to suits for compensation for postal articles,

1. Gf. Mathura Prasad v. Gaya Municipality, ALR. 1938 Pat. 192.

2. Of. Brij Lal y. State of U. P., ALR. 1954 All. 383, 495, paragraph
54 (case relating to specific performance of a contract for mining lease).

3. Of. Tre'tel (Law of Contract) (1966), page 5.

4. Asto “compulsory contracts, compare Jaitindra Nath v. Calcutta Cor-
poration, ALR. 1945 Cal. 144, 152 (Article 120),

‘5. For history of article, 115, see Tricomdas v. Gopi N ath, (1916) LL.R.
44 Cal. 759, 766 (P.C.).

6. Debananda v. Union of India, 1.L.R. 1964 Cuttack 903 ; ALR. 1965
Orissa 118.

“7. See sectian 2, definiton of “common carrier”, Cartiers Act, 1865
of 1865).
8. Se Alamgir Footwear Co. v. Secretary of State, A.R. 1933 All.
466 (case regarding railway).

+9. S. No, 1—Sugggction of the Department of the Government of India
concerned with the Post Office,

to, ‘The suggestion in question was made after the Law Commission
‘Third Report (Limitation Act) was submitted.


49

The judgment referred to by the Department seems to
be a judgment of the District Judge, Jaunpur’. It was
held in that case, that a suit for compensation for loss of
-currency-notes sent in an insured cover would not be
governed by articles 30 and 31, as the Post Office is not a
“carrier”, but it merely transmits articles from one place
to another and the transmitted articles are actually carried
‘by other carriers?

139. [t may be noted, that the reason why a short period
‘ef limitation was provided in articles 30 ang 31 was the
difficulty of investigating and settling claims preferred
against carriers after a long lapse of tim, in respect of a
few articles out of the quantity of goods that are constant-
ly passing through their hands’-". These reasons apply
to the Post Office also.

140, The above discussion is with reference to the Limi-
tation Act of 1908. The Limitation Act of 19635 which has
replaced the Act of 1908, makes certain changes. There-
under, the suits governed by old articles 30-31 are govern-
ed by the time-limit of three years (instead of 1 year).
This change is the result of the recommendation made in
the Law Commission's Report on the Limitation Act®.
That Report recommended an increase in the period,
because, in the case of railways, it is common knowledge
that a long time is spent by the consignee in correspond-
ence and, often, lengthy ‘correspondence ensues. The
-question of postal articles was not, considered  specifi-
cally. We think, that in respect of postal articles, the
period of one year should suffice. Postal articles are not
so costly as those sent by rail, and do not pass through
many “systems” (as in case of Railways). Nor are they
so numerous as to involve a study of many accounts
before a suit is filed.

1. Firm Sanwa! Das ए. Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 646 of 1954
decided by the District Judge, Jaunpur on 31-3-1968,
2A of the judgment is cortained in D. 5. P. & T. file No,
1295-16 5, which we had obtained for perusal.
3. See 0. 7. P. Rly Co. v. Radha Kishan, ALR. 1926 Nag. 57, 59,
right-hand (D.B.).
4. Jaldu v. The Asiatic Steam Navigation Co., (1916) LL.R. 39 Mad.
314, 315, left-hand (referring judgment of Spencer J).; A.LR. 1976
Mad. 314 and 315.
5. Gulab Rat v. Secretary of State for Inidain Council, LLL.R, (1941)
2 Cal. 160, 167.
6, Limitation Act, 1963 (36 Of 1963).
7. See Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) articles ro and 11.
8, Third Report of the Law Commission (Limitation Act), page 30, para-
graph 72, and page 83, draft Article 1.

7—61 Law. . fo


141, We, therefore, recommend, that two articles deal-
ing with compensation for postal articles may be inserted
in the Limitation Act}, say, after article 11 o2 the new
Limitation Act (corresponding to old article 31), fixing a
period of one year® for such sutts*.

The starting point should be the same as is mentioned
in articles 10 and 11 of the Limitation Act, 1963.

142. The new articles to be added* in the Schedule to
the Limitation Act, 1963 may run somewhat on these

lines: —~

5 “tA, Against the Central Qne year When the loss of injury
Cf article, Government for com- occurs.
tia Act, ton for losing or
2965 G6 of inh ing @ postal arti~
1963). °
Cf. articlerx IIB. Against the Central One year When th: postal arti-
Limitation Government for compen- cle owtht to be de~
Act, 1963 sation for ‘non-delivery livered, ®
(36 Of 1963} of or delay in delivering

@ postal article,

Nots.—The heading in the portion of the Schedule to the Limitation
Act, 1963 which governs articles 6-55, is “Suits on Con-
tracts." The articlzs thzm3elves 1149, however, cover suits on
torts also. 7-*

Locptfon of 143. About the placing of the new articles, the follow-

the new ing comment had been made® on our draft Report :—
articles 171A

and 11B. “It appears to this Government that since the
proposed Articles relate to a specific category of
cases, namely, suits against the Central Government
for loss of or injury to or non-delivery cf articles
sent by post, the difficulty may easily be solved by
placing them under a separate and appropriate
heading.”.
In our view, no such change is needed.

r.Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).
2.See paragraph 140, supra.

3.83 to rules relating to disposal of undelivered postal articles, see sec-
tions 37 to 39 of the Act, and Rules 208 to 25 of the Indizn Post Office
Rules, 1953.

4.Paragraph 141, supra.

5.Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).

6,As to the expression “Central Government”, see section 79, Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, and article 112, Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).

7.See tulings under old Articles 30 and 31 ; particularly G. I. P. Rly Co.
¥; Rasett Chanduill (1895), TLR. 39 "Bom. 185, 786 “(Bayley C.
JD, 187, 188 (Farran J,).

$.See also the 1899 Amendment as construed in Jaldu Venkatasubba
Rao v. Asiatic Steam Navigation Co., (1914) LL.R. 39 Med. 1, 10, 11,
12 (F.B.) and in Chiranji Lal ९. B. N. Rly., LR. 52 Cal. 3725 ALR.
1925 Cal. $59, 560.

9.5. No, 170 (A State Government),


BL .

144. We give below a chart showing the new articles
(e,, in the Limitation Act, 1963) corresponding tc arti-
eles of the 1908 Act, relevant ta the subject.

files ie we Toxdign Articles Re Limitation

30 ५. - -.* 70० {period inere sed from 1 year to 3 years),
£* . - Tr (period increased fram 1 year to 3 years,
go. . - «OF {also 63).

oe. + + SF {also 69).

& 7" - .- «- थ्ए-

WS... 55%

ग्ड0 , पु : + 13 (period reduced from 6 to 3 years).

145, In its comment on our draft Report, a State Gov- Limitstion.

ernment had stated’ as follows:— starting
‘The starting point of limitation right be fixed >"

et the date on which the article menticned wus

posted, as under the English Act, thus taking away

from the plaintiff the advantage of the period bet-

ween that date and the date when the loss or injury

occurred or when the article ought to have been Geli-

vered and, at the same time, the period of limitation

might be enlarged to two years. is would also

remove the uncertainty about he starting point

which, under the existing law, is vague and indeter-

minate This Government suggests the above pro-

posal for consideration. This Government thinks

that instead of “for losing or injuring a postal arti-

cle”, it will be better to say “loss of or injury to a

pestal article”.’,

Our view is, that ne change in the draft is nesded
regarding the period, or regarding the starting point or
the wording, as the proposed articles follow the wording
of the existing articles regarding carriers. (The English
provision which the comment has in mind is discussed
elsewhere) 5.

146. The corresponding provision in England is quoted English law
below? —~ ag छ) linia

Lion,
“(3) No proceedings shall lic against the Crown
under sub-sector, (2) of section nine of the Crown

3. S. NO. 170 (A Stare Government).
2. Paragraph 146, defra.

3. Section §, sub-section (3), of the Law Reform (Limitation of Actions)
“Act, rosa 72 and 3 Eliz 2, ० 35).


‘Meaning of
the expres;
ion “loss”
very”, etc.
and scope
of relevant
articles re-
lating to
carriers,

52

Proceedings Act, 1947 (which authorises the taking
of proceedings against the Crown in respect of loss
or damage to registered inland postal packets) unless
the proceedings are begun within the twelve months
beginning with the date on which the packet in
question was posted.”.

The provision has been thus explained'--

“Sub-section (3).—This is the one exception to
the general rule of parity between Crown and sub-
ject. When the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947, was
passed, the Crown had the benefit of the twelve
months period under the Limitation Act, 1939, sec-
tion 21, so that no special provision was required,
With the abolition of section 21, however, it was felt
that serious embarassment would be caused to the
Post Office, if, in relation to their liability for regis-
tered inland postage packages, the old twelve months
period was not re-enacted. To check a claim and
trace out the relevant documents (which ex hypo-
thesi would have ta be kept} would after that lapse
of time be inordinately expensive, if not impossible,
and might well result in a mass of bogus claims to be
paid because they could not be refuted. Any honest
person would know about, and claim for, a lost regis-
tered package long before twelve months had gone
by, and it seems not unreasonable that a special
period should exist for this special type of case. The
old Limitation period of twelve months is according-
ly re-enacted by this sub-section”.

147, We are aware, that the various expressions used
in articles 10 and 11 {old articles 30-31), have raised
several questions.

Thus, one question is as to the precise meaning of the
expression “loss” in article 307.

As to the starting point under article 30, it has
peen held, that time does not run from date of knowledge
of loss, but from date of loss*-*-*.

“Loss” in article 30 means loss to the carrier®

1, Stephen Chapman, Statutes on the Law of Torts (1962), page
444. :

2. See Jai Narain v, G. @. of tndia, ALR. 1957 Cal. 462, 464, pare-
raph 12.

3. Fusrhay v. Union of India, A.1.R. 1960 Cal. 458, 462, paragraph 27.

4. 8. 7. Bly. v. Gops Lal, ALR. 1941 Cal. 304.

5. 0. 7. 707. v. Mrs. Karam Chand, AJR. 1958 All. 234, 253, para-
graph 66.

6. Jugal Kishore v. GLP. Rly. LL.R. 45 AML 43 3 ALR. 1923 All.
22.



148. Under article 30, the burden is on the defendant
(who seeks to non-suit the plaintiff on the ground of
limitation) to prove that the loss occurred before one year
from suit!,

149. Another question is, as to the meaning of the
expression “non-delivery” in article 31. The expression
has now been given a wide meaning by the case-law.

“Non-delivery” of goods may be due to a variety of
causes—

‘The word “non-delivery” is a genus, Non-deli-
very of goods may be due to a variety of causes, e.g.,
(1) loss of the goods by the carrier, that is to say,
loss owing to acts such as theft and robbery. (2)
Deterioration owing to natural causes. (3) Destruc-
tion owing to natural causes such as flood or artificial
causes, e.g. incendiarism. (4) Conversion. (5) Deten-
tion, ¢.g., where there is a dispute about wharfage
and the railway administration wrongfully detains
the goods. (6) Misdelivery either by honest mistake
or on account of fraud. (7) Capricious act of the
railway employees, e.g., the goods even on arrival at
the destination are not delivered to the owner with-
out any rhyme or reason. (8) Wrongful sale of
goods, e.g., where the railway administration wrong-
fully sells the goods on arrival at the destination’.’.

Whatever be the cause of non-delivery, article 31
applies‘.

150. The starting point in old article 31, as indicated
by the words “ought to be delivered”, may not be easy
to apply, in a particular case®-§. The matter has been
discussed elaborately in a judgment approved by the
Supreme Court?-*.

7. As to ‘logs’? in section 72, Railways Act, see G. G. in Council v.
Musaddi Lal, (1961) 3 S.C.R. 647, 651.

2. Union of India v. Amar Singh, (1960) 2 S.C.R. 75, 88 ; ALR. 1960
S.C. 233, 235-

3. Of. G. G . in Council v. Mahabir Ram, A.1.R. 1952 All. 891, 896.

4, See Union of India v. Ainkumar A.1.R. 1962 M.P. 190, 192, paragraph

% Se Mitra, Law of Limitation and prescriPticn, (1949), page 409

6. See also Anandalal v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 108, 110, para-
graph 5.

3. Bootumal v. Union of India, (1963) 1 S.C.R. 70, 76, 78, approving
‘Dominion of India ¥. Firm’ Aminchand, ATR. 1957 Punjab 49 (F.B.).

&. The discussion in Dominion of India v. Firm Amir Chand, AIR.
~ 1957 Punjab 49, $4, 55, paragraph 21 —24 (F.B.), may be seen,


54

151 Most High Courts have taken the view that article
31 applies to suits on contracts, as well as to suits on
tort. There is, however, some uncertainty as to whether
article 30 applies to suit on contracts’.

152. It may, sometimes, be difficult to decide which of
the iwo articles apply to a case of short delivery*.

It is, however, clear, that where the goods are deli-
vered but in a damaged condition, article 30 applies*-*.

153. Further, the question is sometimes raised if there
may be some overlapping between the two Articles®
or whether the two are distinct from each other.

154. These questions cannot, however, be considered
in this Report. For the present purpose, we have to
adopt the existing language of the articles in question’.

155, The Articles apply not only to a suit by the con-
signee, but also to a suit by the consignor.2,

x. See Union of India v. Probhat Marketing Co. ALR. 1953 Assan 190-
19z, paragsaph 10.

Say for damages for breach of contract for shortage, Article 115 ap-
8).

2, See the rival contentions put forth in Shambhuram v. Union of India.
ALR. 1958 Pat. 118, 119, paragraph 4.

3. See case-law discussed in O. T. Rly. v. Mrs. Karam Chand, ALR
1958 All, 234, Paragraphs 12, 21, 40, 42 SFB

4 Yotnmil v. D. A. Rly. AL... 1962 8.C, 1879, 1885, para graph
23.

5. See also'Dominion of India y. Nagardas and Co., A.LR, 1955 Mad.
235, 236, paragraph

6. Cf. National Swadeshi Stores ¥. G. G. Council, A.1.R. 1948 Sind 265
28, paragraph 18.

7, For an explanation of the distinction berween the two articles, see O. T.
Rip, ¥ Mrs,Karam Chand, A.LR. 1958 All. 234, 246, 253, Paragraphs
23.and 60 (F.B.) (Article 30 app ies only when the carrier loses or
injures the goods. It does not apply when the loss occurs 10 the plaintife
for some other fault of the cartier, Article 31 was applied for loss

owing to miscendnct),

8, See Fwata Dart v. Union of India, A.LR. 1953 Pat. 2 368, para-
graph 7(Sinh aj.) ( Under article 30, the goods should be lest or damaged
Onder article 31, the goods should nor have been delivered, or there

have been de fy).

g. See paragraph 144. supra.
10, Muisaddi v. की. N, Riy. (1920) LL.B. 42 All 390 3 ALR. 1920 All.

197, (58.

qi. Chiranji Lal. B. N. Rly. (1924) 52 0, उ72 t ATR. 1925 Cat.
559 $61.

(Article 30 applics only when the carrier loses the goods).

12, Vally Mohamad v. Netierlind S.N, Co. Ltd, MLR, 1924 Cal. 173
175 (Reviews cases).



55

156. Yhe question where exactly the new articles!
should be placed, has caused us some anxiety. Articles 10
and 11 (of the Limitation Act of 1963) are grouped under
the heading ‘Suits on Contracts”. If the new articles are
Placed immediately after them, there is, no doubt, a
bossibility, that aa argument may be advanced that they
are confined to suits on contracts. Now, if the liability of
the Post Office is regarded as purely statutory*-"-'-', then
the placing of the new Articles after Articles 10 and 11
may become inappropriate. On the whole, however, we
think® that it is convenient to place them after Articles
10 and 11, because of the similarity in the language of
those Articles (existing Articles 10, 11) and the proposed
new Articles.

157, The pvints arising out of British statutes applicable British Sta-
to India, on matters connected with the Post Office, as che appli-
dealt with in a previous Report’, have been already dis- Yhdia on the
cussed® at the appropriate places. subject.

158. The important changes which we recommend in Other
the Act have been explained above. The other changes changes.
which we recommend will be apparent from the draft
amendments? and Notes on Clause”.

159. We should make one point clear here, namely, that Amendment
the question of revision of the Rules made under the Act hot con-
is not within the scope of this Report. We have studied sidered.
some of the rules, for the purpose of understanding the
actual working of the Act, and have also ventured to stig-
gest some changes!!, in the Rules where the matter was
very important. Nevertheless, our study of, and recom-
mendations regarding, rules are confined to points which
arose in connection with revision of the sections of the Act
themselves.

r.Paragraphs 141-144, supra.
2.See paragraphs 25-29 and 34, supra.
3.f. Lord Denning’s judgment, referred to im paragraph 29, supra,
4.As to Indian cases on statutory Liabiliry, see—
@ Secretary of State ¥. Guru Prasad, (1892) 11.8. 20 Cal. st,
an

(i) Mathura Prasad v. Gaya Municipality, AIR. 1938 Pat. 192
(Article 120 applied).
5.See also paragraphs 13§ and 141-143. supra.
6,See also paragraph 142, supra.
7.Fifth Report of the Law Commission (British Statutes Applicable to
India).
iscussi ion ३ (d)—-for mail ships ; section 9, for re~
8 See पा पाल ection 46 for money जला, Paraarert
12, 4 aud 112, supra).
9. Appendix 1.
xo.Aprendix 2.
11.For example, paragraph 97 and paragraph 108 (foot-note), spray


96

160. In order to give a concrete shape to our recommen-
dations, we have, in Appendix I, put them in the form of
draft amendments to the existing Act.

Appendix II contains Notes on clauses, explaining,
with reference to the draft amendments in Appendix 1,
any points that might require elucidation.

Appendix IT] summarises our recommendations in res-
pect of other laws (or in respect of rules under the Act).

Appendix IV contains a detailed note discussing the
constitutional aspects of some of the sections of the Act.

Appendix V discusses in detail section 26.

Appendix VI contains a list of some of the important
provisions of Central Acts dealing with “emergencies”.
The list is not exhaustive.

Appendices VIi to XIII deal with the position as to
interception of postal article, including laws in some other
countries,

Appendix XIV contains a note on Liability for regis-
tered articles in England.

1. J. L. KAPUR—Chairman.
2. K. G, DATAR . ]

3. 8. 8. DULAT
4. T. छू TOPE है { Members,
5. RAMA PRASAD MOOKERJEE Jj

P. M. BAKSHI,
Joint Secretary and
Legislative Counsel.

New Delhi;
The 20th February, 1968


57

EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATIONS USED It
APPENDIX 1

Eng, Act=The Post Office Act, 1953
(1 and 2 Eliz. 2 ०. 36).


APPENDIX I

RECOMMENDATIONS AS SHOWN IN THE FORM 0७ DRAFT
AMENDMENTS

(This is a tentative draft only)
HEPORT ON THE INDIAN POST OF ACT, 1898
Section 1

In section 1 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (herein- 6 of 1898,
after referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),
the word “Indian” shall be omitted,

Section 2

In section 2 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely: —

‘(bb) “mail” includes every conveyance by which cy. s. 87)
postal articles are carried, whether it be a ship, air- Eng. Act
craft, vehicle, horse or any other conveyance, and also
a person employed in conveying or delivering post2l
articles’

Section 3(c)

In section 3 of the principal Act, in clause (c), after the
words “according to the usual manner of delivering postal
articles to the addressee” the words “or the placing of a
postal article into a Post Office Box at the post office rented
by the addressee” shall be inserted.

Section 4

(i) In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), Cf. 5.3

after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, 22, Act.
aamely : —

“(bb) letters conveyed and delivered by the sender
thereof personally:

(bbb) documents issued by a court of justice or cf. s. 3(2)
other authority entitled to issue the same, or any re- (4); Eng. Ac.
turn or answers to such documents, sent, conveyed and & Ei 3°2)
delivered otherwise than by post.” .

(ii) in clause (c), after the words “by sea” the words
“or air” shall be inserted,

Section 5

In section 5 of the principal Act, in clause (0), after the Compare
words “ports or places in India’ the words “and owners section 3D)
of or persons in charge of any aircraft on a flight between (4) Engl
places in India” shall be inserted.


59

Section 10
In section 10 of the principal Act, the following sub-
section shall be inserted at the end, namely: —

“(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions of sub-section (1), the Central Government
may, make rules io give effect to such arrangements,
in respect of postal articles other than those to which.
sections 36 and 46 apply.”

. Section 23
Jn section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section 3),
after clause (09), the following proviso shall be inserted.
namely :—

“Provided that before any such article as is speci-
fied in clause (a) of section 20 is destroyed, notices in
‘writing shall be sent to the sender and the addressee.
and the article shall not be destroyed until the expiry
of one month from the date on which the last of such
notices ig sent.”

Section 26
In section 26 of the principal Act—
(i) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;

(ii) the following sub-section shall be inserted at
the end, namely: —

(3) In respect af amy letter, postcard, book of
newspaper, an order under sub-section (1) may be
passed only when such order is required in the
interests of the security of the State, frizndly rela-
tions with foreign States or public order or for
preventing incitement to the commission of any
offence’.”

Section 28
Section 28 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as
sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-
numbered, the following sub-section shall 98 inserted,
namely :—

“(2) Subject to such conditions’ as the Central
Government may by rule, prescribe, the Central Gov-
ernment shall be liable to pay compensation, not cx-
ceeding fifty rupees, to the sender of a registered post-
al article for the loss of the postal article or its con-
tents, or for any damage caused to tt in course of trans-
mission by post:

3, Compare section 5B (1), Cinematograph Act, 7952 (37 of 1952), which
reads as follows :—

“SB. Principles for guidance in certifying films.—(1) A film shall not be
certified for public exhibition if, in the opinion of the authority comperent to
grant the certificate, the film or any part of it is against the interest of che
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
decency or morality, or involves defamation or contempt of court or is
fikely to incite the commission of any offence.”

2, 11 is mot necessary co mention “ restrictions”, as in section 33.


60

Provided that the compensation so payable shall
in no case exceed the value of the article lost or the
amount of the damage caused.”

Section 34

In section 34 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for
the words “that sum has been received from the addressee”
the words “the postal article has been delivered to the
addressee or except where the article has neither been
delivered to the addressee nor returned to the sender in
the original condition” shall be substituted.

Section 33

Section 38 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as
sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as 50 re-
numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely: —

(2) Where the sender has assigned his right under
this section to the addressee, and gives a ‘written. inti-
mation of such assignment to the officer-in-charge of
the Post Office, the compensation under sub-section (1)
shall be payable to the addressee.”.

Section 422A (New)
After section 42 of the principal Act, the following
section shall be inserted, namely :—
Application “424. The provisions of sections 40, 41 and 42 shall, as

toaircraft. far as may be, apply in relation to persons in charge of air-
craft departing from or arriving at any place in India as

they apply in relation to masters of ships departing from of

or arriving at any port in India.”.
Section 45

- In section 45 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the
words “ten rupees”, the words “one hundred rupees” shall
be substituted.

Section 47A (New)

After section 47 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be inserted, namly— a 8

Time and “47A. Money orders shall be paid at such times and
i ae in such manner as the Director General may, from time
mottey orders. to time, appoint'.”

Section 52

_In section 52 of the principal Act, for the words “im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to seven years”,
the words “imprisonment for life or for a term which may
extend to ten years” shall be substituted.

1. Gf. $. 27 (3), section 29 (3), section 32 (3).

Gf. section
26 read with
8. 67 (1.
definition
of “Com-
English Act.


Compare S¢
65.

61

Section 564 (New)

After section 56 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be inserted, namely: —

“568. If any person— Stealing mail
(a) commits theft in respect of— rae PO

(i) a mail bag, or

(ii) any postal article in
course of transmission by post, or

(iii) any movable property out .
of a postal article in course of transmission by
post, or

(b) stops a mail with intent to rob or search
the mail,

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life or for
aterm which may extend to ten years, or fine, or both”.

Section 64

In section 64 of the principal Act, for the words “by this
Act” the words “by or under this Act” shall be substituted. Penalty for
tion in charge of
See 65A (New) in charge °
After section 65 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tion shall be inserted, namely: —

“654. Whoever, being the person in charge of an air-
craft,—

(a) fails to comply with the provisions of sec-
tion 40 read with section 42A; or

(b) without reasonable excuse, the burden of
providing which shall lie on him, fails to deliver
any postal article or mail bag or to comply with the
directions of the officer-in-charge of the Post
Office at a place of arrival, ag required by section 41
read with section 42A,

shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees.”

Section 66
In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub-section (0),--

(a) for the words “being either the master of a
ship arriving at any port in India or anyone on board”,
the words “being the master of a ship or the person. in
charge of an aircraft arriving at any port or place in
India or anyone on board” shall be substituted;

(b) for the words “port of arrival” the words “port
or place of arrival” shall be substituted.


Section 69

In section 69 of the principal Act, for the word “letter” cy. 5. 56
wherever it occurs, the words “postal article” shall be sub- English Aci.
stituted.

Section 724 (New)

After section 72 of the principal Act, the following
section shall be inserted, namely: —

“2A. Trial of offences—(1) An offence under this Cf 7
Act may be tried by any court within the local limits of Pnetish Act.
whose jurisdiction it was committed or the alleged of- &f. 8.13 a
fender is arrested or is in custody or, where the offence Rilways Act,
is in respect of a mail, mail bag, postal article, or money 1890.
order or any movable property sent by post, within the See also
local limits of whose jurisdiction the mail, mail bag, at ale
postal article, money order or movable property passed ५ Sp Coy
in the course of transmission by post. Procedure,

1898.

(2) Abetment of an offence under this Act may be
tried by any court by which the offence abetted may be
tried.

(3) Nothing in this section shall effect the jurisdic-
tion of a court competent'-*-*-* to try an offence under
this Act by virtue of the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898.” 5 of 1898.

Section 74
In section 74 of the principal Act,—

(i) in sub-section (3), the words “and on such pub-
lication shall have effect as if enacted by this Act” shall
be omitted; .

(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely: —

“(4) Every rule made by the Central Govern-
ment under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions: and, if, before the

1. As to provisions applicable in ordinary cases, see sections 17 to 182,
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

2. As to theft and misappropriation see section 181 (2) and (3), Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898.

3. As to offender in journey, see section 183, Code of Criminal Procedure
2998.

4 As to trial in Presidency Towns, see: ection 184, Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898.


63

expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the
session immediately following, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule.”,


APPENDIX II
NOT£g ON CLAUSES
Section 1
The change is verbal.?
Section 2

Definition of “mail” is being added, which will be useful
for the new section proposed to be inserted?, The expres-
sion occurs in the existing provisions also. For example,
see section 3(d), section 67, etc.

Section 3(c)

It has been suggested by the Department’, that in “he
definition of “delivery” should include delivery into— (i)
P.O. Boxes at the post office, and (ii) private letter boxes
at the addressee’s premises. We have accepted the sugges-
tion as to the first point. The second is already covered by
the words “at the house or office of the addressee”, in
section 3(c).

Section 4(1) (bb) and (bbb) (New)

Certain provisions are being added on the lines of the
English Act, to save—

(i) letters taken by a person himself;
(ii) Summons etc. issued by courts, ete.

The English provision is confined to courts, but
other officers have also to be covered, as they possess a
power to issue summons, etc.).

The following comment was made’ by the Department
on the draft Report:—

(2) The proposed clause (bbb) to sub-section (1)
of section 4 is acceptable so far as “documents isstted
by a Court of Justice” are concerned. The words “or
other authority entitled to issue the same’? may be
dropped since, if such “other authority” exercise the
powers of a court of justice. It is automatically
covered by the words “a court of justice”.

It is felt that the assumption made in the comment is
not correct.

व. See the body of the Report, paragraph 8.

2. See section 56A (proposed), regarding stealing of mail bag, etc.
3. S. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department).

4,8. No. 168 (Comment of the Department).


65

Section 4(1) (८)
This has been extended to aircraft.
Section 5(b)
This has been extended to aircraft.
Section 10

It has been stated by the Department!, that while sec-
tion 19(1) gives power to make rules on ce:tain matters,
it dees not give a general power to give effect to arrange-
ments made with foreign countries in respect of postal arti-
cles generally. It has been suggested, that such a power
should be given,

The suggested change appears to be unobjectionable,

Necessary amendment has been: proposed.

As regards registered, insured or value payable postal
articles, and money orders, a suitable provision ady
exists in sections 36 and 46, and those articles have, there-
fore, been excluded from the provision sought to be added,

Section 23

The reasons for the proposed amendment have been
already stated?.

Section 26

The reasons for the proposed amendment have been
already stated.

Section 28

Reasons for the amendment proposed tc section 38 have
been already given'.

Section 33

The reasons for the change recommended in section 33
have been already explained®.

Section 34

The proviso to section 34 has been amended, for reasuns
already stated®.

1.3, No, 94 (Suggestion of the Department),
2. See body of the Repost, paragraphs 56 —72.
2, See body of the Report, paragrarhs 88-96.
4, See body of the Report, paragraphs 102~104,
5. See body of the Report, paragraphs ro6—107,
6. See body of the Revort, paragraph 108, et seq.

8—61 M of Law


66

Section 42A (New)
The object of the proposed amendment is to extend the
provisions of section 40, section 41 and section 42, to aircraft,

Compare section 26 of the English Act, read with the defini-
- tion of “Commander” in section 87(1) of that Act.

Section 45

In section 45, the proviso states that a postal order should
not be issued for an amount in excess of ten rupees. It has
peen. suggested,! that the proviso be deleted.

The point was thus reiterated in the comment on the
draft Repart?—

“Jt is felt that the proviso to section 45 may better
be removed, altogether, as that would make for great
flexibility in bringing out postal orders in different
denominations according to public demand.”

The comment was not accepted in toto."

It may not be desirable to delete the proviso, but the
limit of Rs. 10 may be replaced by Rs. 100. (Some limit
must be there, in this respect*).

Necessary change is proposed.
Section 47A (New)

It has been suggested by the Department’, that regard-
ing delivery of Money Orders a provision should be insert-
ed similar to sections 21(3), 29(3) and 32(3), There
appears to be no objection to this suggestion.

Necessary provision is proposed.
Section 52
(1) Punishment under section 52 has been proposed

to be increased to life imprisonment or 10 years®, in view
of the gravity of the offence.

(2) Theft, (though it is also mentioned in the new sec-
tion proposed for stealing mail bags, etc.?) has been retain-
ed in section 52, to retain its comprehensive scope.

1. 8. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department).

2, 8. No. 169 (Comment of the Department).

3. As to postal orders, see Rules r80A to 1808, Indian Post Office Rules,
1938.

4. Section 21 (1), English Act, leaves the maximum amount to the Post
master General.

5. S. No. 96 (Suggestion of the Department) under sections 21 (3), 29 (3)
and 32 (3)

6.Compare section 56A (proposed) and section 57, English Act.

7. Section 56A (proposed).


87
Section 56A (New)

Section 56A is new. It is considered that it would be
desirable to have a comprehensive provision on the lines
of section 52 of the English Act, authorising severe punish-
ments etc. in respect of any person who steals a mail bag
or postal article or anything out of the postal article, or
stops the mail with intent to rob or search the mail.
While the subject matter of the proposed provision is (to
some extent) covered by the existing provisions, either in
the Post Office Act (e.g. section 52), or in the Indian Penal
Code, the punishment under those provisions is not suffi-
ciently severe. Thus, stopping a mail, even if it falls
under the sections dealing with “robbery” in the Indian
Penal Code’, would not attract severe punishment. The
same applies to the general offence of “theft”? under the
Indian Penal Code.

Necessary change has therefore been propesed. A pro-
vision for fine has been made, to cover cases where the
offender has sustantially enriched himself. It is also con-
sidered, that the fine should be available as an alternative
punishment to imprisonment, and the provision is framed
on that basis.

Section 64

Section 64 provides that whoever, being required by
this Act to make a declaration in respect of any
article, etc. makes a false declaration shall be punishable,
ete. In a Madras ९8७९7 the question arose whether the
section could be applied against a person who had made
a false declaration to the effect that a V.P.P. article was
being gent in execution of a bona order ‘teceived by
him. Such declaration was req by the rules under,
section 35. The Court held, that such rules should be re-
garded as part of the enactment, and pointed out, that sec-
tion 74(3) already provides that the rules shall have effect
“as if enacted by the Act.”*. If seems, however, desirable
to make the position clear.

Necessary amendment has been proposed.
Section 654 (New)

The object of this amendment is to apply tc aircraft the
same provisions as are found in section 65 for ships. It
is consequential on the proposed addition of a section®
applying the provisions of sections 40, 41 and 42 to persons
in charge of aircraft.

1. Sections 390 to 398, Indian Penal Code.

2. Sections 378 to 382, Indian Penal Code,

3. Crown Prosecutor v. G. Kothanda Ramiah, (1910)—I.L.R. 33 M sdizs
577, $12, 473.

4, See algo rule 9§, Indian Post Office Rules, 1933.

5. See section 42A (proposed).


68

Section 66

The amendment is intended to extend the provisions
of the section to aircraft.

Section 69

The reasons for the amendment have been already
explained’.

Section 783A (New)

Section 78A is new. Under section 70 of the English
Act, an offence under the Act can be tried (briefly)
by the court within whose jurisdiction the offence was
committed or the offender is in custody or apprehend-
ed, or within whose jurisdiction the postal article passed
in the course of transmission by post?, A similar provi-
sion in our Act would be useful. The general rules re-
garding local jurisdiction of Criminal Courts are contain-
ed in section 177 et seq of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1898. But there are no special rules to cover the case
of offences committed regarding a postal article, which, in
the very nature of things, has to travel from one place to
another, While the cases where the offender himself is
in journey, would be dealt with by section 183 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, the case where the postal
article passed through several jurisdictions in course of
transmission would not fall under any special provision.
Section 184 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 does
provide (inter alia), that offences aginst a law relating
to the Post Office may be inquired into or tried in a Presi-
dency Town where the offender and all the witnesses for
the prosecution are to be found. But that section is con-
fined to Presidency towns. It would be convehient to
have a provision on the lines of section 70 of the English
Act. Necessary changes has been proposed.

The following comment has been made® as regards
proposed section 723. sub-section (2) (in the comment on
ihe draft Report)

“Difficulties are bound to arise in the course of acmai
application of the proposed section if it is to co-exist with
Criminal Procedure Code and co-act. It appears to this
Government that since the proposed section is a special
law and by virtue of the provisions of sectiong 1(2) and
5(2) of the Code will prevail over the provisions of the
Code, it is not necessary to go out of one’s way to save
the jurisdiction of courts under the Criminal Procedure
Code by means of a saving clause. Sub-section (2) of the
proposed section may, therefore, be omitted.”

” 4. See the body of the Report, paragraph 122 (0).
2. This is in addition to the provisions relating to offences*committed

during journeys and offences committed in more than one country or plce=

Criminal Law Act, 1826 (7 Geo. c. 64), section 13 (a).

3. S.No, 170(A State Government).


99

The comment was considered by us. In our view, it
is necessary to have a savings provision, particularly
yecause there are provisions in the Code! under which also
jurisdiction can be exercised

Section 74

Section 74(3}, latter half, provides that rules under the
Act shall have effect as if enacted by the Act. Kk is not
the practice in modern times ta have such a provision
the rule-making section generally, and this part of the
sub-section should be removed.

In conformity with recent legislative practice, 4 provi-
gion required the cules te be laid before the Parliament
with powers te modify or annul the rules, sould be in-
serted?.

Necessary change has been proposed.

With reference to section 74 as proposed, a State Gov-
ernment had, in its comment on the draft Report, stated? —

“This Government cannot agree that recert legislative
practice has been to provide that Rules made by Executive
authorities under a Statute must be laid before the Parlia-
ment and submitted to revision and mod:fcation. It
appesrs to this Government that the procedure contemplat-
ed by section 23 of the General Clauses Act is far vrefer-
able. Section 74 may, therefore, simply provide
that the rules should be framed after previous publica-
tion.”

Having regard, however. to well established recent
legislative practice’, no alteration of or addition to the
draft was considered necessary.

व, See sections 183 and 184, Code of Criminal Procedure, r898 (88
examples).

2. This is subject ro any recommendarion which the Law Commission
fray. make in oonnection wich the Generali suses Azt, 1897 on the
subject of laying of rules.

3. 8. No, 170 (Comment of a State Government).

३ For a recent example, see section 21, Unlawful Activities (Prevention )
Act, 1967 (37 ०६ 1967).


APPENDIX IT

RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF OTHER LAWS (OR IN RESPECT
OF RULES UNDER THE ACT)

I. Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963)

Two articles should be inserted in the Limitation Act,
to provide a period of one year for a suit for compensation
for loss of, damage to, non-delivery or delay in delivery
of, postal articles.

IL. Mail Ships

Separate legislation should, if necessary, be enacted for
Mail Ships, after entering into conventions?

IIL. Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885)

Section 5 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, should be
amended as indicated in the ly of the Report}, in order
to bring it into line with article 19 of the Constitution.

IV. Indian Post Office Rules, 1933.

Certain amendments may be made in the Indian Fost
Office Rules, 1933, as indicated in the body of the Report!.

3. See body of the Report, paragraphs 141—142.
2. See body of the Report, paragraph 12,
3. Ses body of the Report, paragraph 93.
4, See body of the Report, paragraph 97 and paragraph 108 (foot-note)*

0


प्रा

APPENDIX IV

CONSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS OF SOME SECTIONS OF THE Post OFFict AcT

Main section in
the Indian Post
Office Act

Connected section
in the Indian Post
C

Other analogous
laws

Constitutional
position

Section 9—

It empowers the
making of rules
as to registered

newspapers.
(Geerules 1, 30, 303
and 212, ‘ada

Post Office Rules,
1933).

Section 19(t) bars
the sending of ex-
plosives, danger-
ous and filthy arti-
cles, noxious subs-
tances, living ani-
mals cic., likely to
cause injury to
postal articles or to
a officer of Post

Section 19(2) bars
the sending by
Post of any arti-
cle or thing likely
10 injure postal ar-
ticles in course of
transmission — by
post or any officer
of the post office.

I€ the newspaper
is registered under
the Post Office
Act, it gets the pri-
vilege of conces-
sional postal rates
under rule 7, Indian
Post Office Rules,
1933.

Section 23(1)—Any
postal article sent
by post in contra~
vention of any pro-
vision of the Post
Office Act may be
detained, and cither
sent to the sender or
the addressee” (char-
ging prescribed ad-
ditional postage, if
Necessary).

Section 23(3Xa) u-
thorises opening
and destruction, 7,

Section 61 provides
for punishment.

The section does
not seem to con-
flict with any pro-
vision of the Con-
stitution. Rules
under the section
must, of course,
keep themselves
withi2 the limits
allowed by the sec-
tion,’ 1.

Section st1) ot the The restriction is
dia

in “Explosives
Act, 1884 (4 of
1884) empowers the
Central Govern-
ment to regulate, by
rules, the trans-
portation ete. of ex-
plosives. A breach
of the rules is pun—
ishable under sec-
tion 5(3)(b) of that
Act.

reasonable. Explo-
sives in a postal
article, may, when
the article is stamy Pp
ed for defacing tl
postaye stamps, ex-
Plode the article.
This appears, there~
fore to be a reason~
able restriction, in
the interests of
public order, or in
the public interest
It, therefore, seems
to be Possi-
bility of its coming
into conflict with the
freedom of speech

expression is
small.

3. See Rules 1,30, 308, 212, Indian Post Office Rules, 1933.

2. The power under section 23 (3a) is in addition to destruction under rule 214,
Post Office Rules.
3. See also discussion relating to section 20, on the point whether bre ach of ruies is

an otlence.


72

Main section in Connected section Other analogous Constitutions]
the Indian Post. in the Indian Pose laws Fosition
Office Act. Office Act.

Section 194-—bars Section 23(1)—em- Section 2944—-Ind- The restrictions do
the sending of powers ntion ian Penal Code pu- = not raise any ques-
tickets, ete., relat- of the article, plus nishes the keeping tion of freedom of
ing to unauthoris- return toch2sender —oflotrery houses,or “expression” under

ed lottery. १५ or addressee. publication of pro- article 19(1). It is,
posals as to lorte- therefore, unneces-
ries. sary to consider

whether they fall
under “morality” in.
article 19(2).

Section 23(3)—Not-

withstandiag any-

thing in sub-section

(0), any postal arti-

ele sent by post in

contravention of

section 19A, may

“under the autho-

rity of the Post-

master General, if

necessary, , be open-

ed and destroyed.”

[Section 24 does not

seem to apply; see

its opening words.)

Section 61—provides

for punishment.

Section 20—No per- Section 23(1)—Any (a) Section 292—In- (i) ‘The provision re-
son shall send by postal article sent “dian Penal Code iating 10 obscenity
post— in contravention of punishes publica- or indecent matter

(०) aay: indecent or any provision of the tion, sale, distribu- is justified in the
obscene printing, Post Office Act, tion, etc., of obs- interests of “decen-
Photograph, litho- may be detained, cene books, pam- cy”, or “morality”?

graph, erc.,orany and either returned _phlets, ete. under article 19(2)

other indecent or to the sender, or of the Constitution.

obscene article? forwarded to its, Hence, it is valid

destination (charg- so far as the sub-

(8) or any postal ar ing prescribed ad- stantiveaspectis con-

ticle having there- ditional postage, if cerned,

on oronth cover necessary).

thereof, —

As to the meaning
of “okscenity” une
der the Indian Pe-
nal Cade, see a de-
cision of the Sup-
reme (Court? which
upholds the validity
of section 292, In-
dian Penal Gode.*

1. Cf. rule 44, Indian Post Office Rules, 1933.

2. A similar provision is section 1r of the (English) Po Office Act, 1963 discussed
in Russell on Crime, (1964), Vol. 2, page 1427.8t

3. Ra jit Udeshi v. State, A.LR. 1965 S.C. 880.

4. See also Shanker & Co., v. State A.I.R. 1955 Mad, 498, 501, paragraph. 9, upholding

the. validit of section 3. (०) of the Press (Objection” “Matter) Act, 1951, in so far
as it elated to obsceie or indecent


13

Main section 10. Connected section Other analogous "Constitutional
the Indian Pose in the Indian Post laws Position
Office Act Office Act

any words, marks Section 23 (2).—~Any (B) Section प्रा) (6) G8) The

procedural
or desigas of an— officer incharge of ofthe Customs Act, “part, however, re~
@ Indecent, a Post Office or 1962 (52 of 1962) quires considera
GH) obscene, authorised by the empowers the Cen- tion. Scction 33239)
Gid) seditious, Postmaster General tral Government to (8), read with rule
Gp) scurrilous, in this behalf may — prohihitthe import 217 of the Indian
(8) threatening, or many newspaper, of goods for various Post Office Rules
(i) grossly offen- ‘Pook, Packet or purposes, one of 1933 authorises

sive, character. sample suspected to which is “ main- Grier alia) the

be in contravention tenance of standards destruction of the
of section 20(a). of decency or mo- article without
rality (Burther notice to the ade
procedure to be fol-  dressee.. (Contras-
lowed, if the pro. section 24 of the
hibitionis violated, Act, which provides
is contained in for notice, ete.).
sections 112-113 of
the Customs
Act).

(© Section 98 (x) (०)
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure,
1898 empowers the
issue of a search
warrant by 8 spe-
cified Magistrate,
for search of a
house ete. for ob-
scene articles, if
found in the house,
are to be carried
to a Magistrate).

Section 23 (3) (b).— Section 3 (c) of the
Notwithstanding Dramatic Pertor-

anything contained mance Act, 1876,
in sub-section (1), prohibits, | Ginter

any postal article afi), the display of
sent by post. in a dramatic per-
contravention of formance likely to
section 20 may be deprave and ‘cor-
disposed of insuch rupt persons pre-
manner as the sent at the perfor-
Central Govern- mance. There is no
ment may, by rule, provision for giving
direct. (See Rule notice, and this pro-
217, latter half,of vision has
the Indian Post to be void.
Office Rules, 1933,

which authorises,

inter alia, destruc~

tion of the postal

article),

(ection 24 does not
seem to apply.)

7. Section 3 (@) of the Dramatic Performance Act, 1876 was held to bo veld In State

y. Baboo Lad, A.LR. 1956 AIL 571. The point was considered, but not decided,
in Harnam v. State, ATR. 195% Punj, 243, 244.


74

dain section in Connected section Other analogous Constinuional
the indian Post in the Indian Post tows position
O five Act Office Act,

(QA somewhat si-
mifar Provision is
contained in yec~
en sB of the Ci-
AeMmatographs Act,
1953¢37 of 1952).
There is ako 2

power to Forfeitcer-

tain publications in
the Young Perscas

Garnfil " “ Publi-

cations? Aor, 56

(93, ण 1958). But

both these — Acts

eomaia procedure!
safeguards. ‘Thus,
the ‘Cinemare-

grazbs Act, 1952.

sections 4 @ end

S provic for
eating and appeal.

‘The Younes Per

BOS CED. # 05 2936 is

section 45, provides

Section 23 G3) 8:
goncernplates wo Bote

to हि
This #3 also the poste
Hon under section 2,
Dramas ee, Att,
186, Rule = 217,
relating to postal
articles == governed
‘Dy agctiOn 20, आ1-
thorises the destruc.
fio of rhe anicler
oy disposal in sack
manmer an the Post
Muster General di-
rects. The require-
sent of Peecedural
reigonableness has
therefore to 66 consi-
dered.

‘The requirements of
notice and = judiciy!
review have been
repardez. as weg
important in 3)

cases. to support the
validity of — pravi-
sions iMzererring

1. Compare, also, section 4, Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1961 (23 of 1961).
2,88 to the invalidity of seetiow 4 २०) of che Dezmetic Performances, etc. Act ,1876

ste State v. Batoo Lat, ALR. 1986 Al. 671. The point was considered but pot
ecided, in Hersam, vPuniob, AUR. 1958 Pun j2u3.


1

Main secon in Gannected section Other analogous Crmseinutioral
the India: Post jn dhs Indian Post Tee ‘Pration
Office Act Ollie AA

freedom of spesch
and expression,*

Apower to approach
we High = Gourc
may save the validiry
ef such restrictions?

It was held ina very
early Allehebad case?
that destruction of
copies of a book
which was obscene
could not be ordered
by the Magistrate,
fm the absence of a
specitic power. (The
decision related 10
section 4x8 of the
Criminai Proce-
dure Code as it was
then in force. The
Presemt section is
specific on = the
point).

In a case under sec-
tion cf the Post

noxious or delete-
vious within section
1. Tr was also

served, thst even
if rules had been
made to prevent the
ending: Of cocaine

tion 61,. which caly
deals with the send-
ing of articles ia
cconavention of the
sections — themycbuet,
iste, sections 1g and
20.

Gh Rama Shanker v, State, ALR. 1954 All. 562, 568, 565, paragraph 22, 2, relating
हि 1] rs of the Press Emergency Powers Act, 1931, empowered the
District Magistrate to restrain the printing ‘of newssheets,

» OF i Lali v, Star ALR. 1934 Bom. 508, S09, paragrash 3, upholding
? Ss of section x1 of the Press (Objectionable Marter} Act $51 in Vicw

of the position for judicial review.
३. Empress of India v. Indarman,¥ (1881) TLR. 3 All, $37, 844. (Straight J).
4. Section 521,5Code of Criminal Procednne, 7858.
5. Emp. v. Ismait Khan, (191s) LL-R. 37 All. 209.



76

Main section in. Connected section Other analogous Constitutiona!
the Indian Post in the Indian Post laws. position
Office Act Office Act

In one Calcutta case,/

a prosecution under
section 61 of the
Post Office Act
read with section 29
for transmission by
post of a printed
post-card = contain—
ing an _ advertise
ment of a Patent
medicine in laz-
guage of an obscene
nature, was upheld
and the court adopt -
ed the wellk own
test -n Queen v.
Hicklin? as to the
test cf obscenity.

Gi) The provision as
to “ seditious ” mat-
ter is valid. The
Supreme Court
interpretation of
section 124A, Indian
Penal Code will be
applied here also
sO as 10... justily
the provision in
the -nterest of
“ public order **
withia article 10
(z) (@) and 19 (2) of
the Gonstitution,

Ge) The provision as
to “scruvrilons  at-
tacks appears 10 be
valid, It is unneces-
sary to consider
here whether the
provision will be
interpreted as
* scurrilous” and
“indecent 4 though
this is not Likely, *
If such narrow,

1. Sarat Chandra Ghose v. Ki , ILR. वि
and Parr I पर्टआड Biperor, (904) 32 Cal. 247, 248 (Ameer Al

2, Queen v, Hicklin, (1868) L.R. 3 Q.B. 360, 371.

3. See Kedar Nath v. State of Bihar, (1962), Suppl. 2 S.C.R, 769 ; ALR. 1962 S.C.

955.
4. P. Ramarathnam, (1964) 2 M.L.J, 440 (Section 292A, Indiaa Penal Code—
ad: ndment—upheld) (Kalasham J.). (“Indecent and Scurzilous ”),

5. Of. Shankar& Go. v, State, ALR. 1951; Mad. 491, 501, pare yh 8 as 1६ 4
०), Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, प्रथा 7 eS e seen


77

Main section in Connected section Other analogous Constitutional
the Indian Post in the Indian Post Laws. position
Office Act Office Act

interpretaton is plac-
ed the section
is undoubtedly va-
lid But, even if
it is construed
widely, it seems to
be saved by “mo-
raliiy” in article
19 2).

(8) The provision re-
Jate1 ६0 “ threaten-
ing’ matter does
not raise a question
of — freedom, of
“expression
Hence, it is not
necessary to discuss
the question whe-
ther the  proviion
may be justified in
the interests of
“morality? within
article 19 (2) of the
Constitution.?

(vi) Taere is some
difficulty about the
worl “ off2nsive 7”
but it seems 10 fall
within “ morality ”,
in srticle 19 (2) of
the Constitution.

Section 21 (2)—(a) Section 23 (1). —dis- The power is, _no
(8) and eo. cussed above, under dou, wide. The
power the making — section 20. ruks may be in-
of rules specifying valid if they go be-
articles which may Section 23 (2)—dis- yond article 19 (2).
not be transmitted cussed above, un- The validity of the
by post, prescrib- der section 20, section itself _ 18
ing the’ condition howsver, not -affect-
on which articles Section 23 (3) @)— ed, In any case, it
‘may be trans- Discussed. above would be neither
mitted by post, under section 20, Necessary nor con-
and providing ven: entto modify the
for detention language of the 3०6०
and disposal ०७६ tion sO as to provide
articles sent = in that the rules shall
violation of such oo comply with — the
rules, various heads men

tioned in article 19,
The Provision

would have to be
extremely cumber-
some, as it will have
to deal not only with
article 19 (2), but
also with article 19
(3) (40, ete.

1. Of. Krishna Sharma y, State ALR. 1952 San. 28, 30, paragraph 6, regarding
section 3 (णु) Press, etc,, Act, 1997.

2. Compare section 503, Indian Penal Code,
3. See Basu, Commentary on the Constitution, (1965), Vol. 1, pages 671-672,
4. The matter is discussed in Basu, Constitution of India, (1965), Vel. I,page 672.



1B

‘Main seczion in
the Indian Post
Office Act

Connected section Other analogous Constiutional
in the Indian Post Ws. Position
Office Act

Section 23.—See dis-
cussion in this
Appendix under

sections 19, 20,
21.

Scetion 24. Except
and otherwise pro-
vided in the Act,
where a postal ar-
ticle suspected to
contain any of the
following three
categories* of
goods, nemely,

(a) any goods of
which the import
by post is pro-
hibited by ory
under any enact-
ment for the time
being in force, or

(ayany goods of
which transmission

pestis pro-
Bowed by or
under any enact-
ment ete, or

Moreover, many of
the rules! would
never come in com
flict with article 79.
Their true nature
and character is not
to jnterfere with
the freedom = of
speech at all, but to
regulate Packing
contents etc. of
postal articles, or to
exclude from the
Post injurious subs-
tances.?

(0 So far as the first
category under sec-
tion 24 is concerned,
the salidiry of the
section is inked up
with the  orher
enactment = (auch
as ux Imports and
Exports ~~ Control,
euc., Act or the
Customs Act), un
der which import is
prohitited. The
procedure giver. in
section! 24 is also
a fairly reasonable
one, und DSrima
facie, therefore, the
Provis.ons of the
section as to this
category would not
raise any serious
constitutional — di-

culty.

x. See Rules 8 to 43, gad 44 10 46, Todinn Pos; 006 Rules, 1933,
2. Cf, discussion in’ Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of india, ALR. 1960 S.C. 554

564 paragraph 20.
3. This is 000 a reproduction of the language of the section, but an analysis.


78

Main section in Connected section Other analogous
the Indian Post in the Indian Post Laws

Office Act Office Act
(०) anything — liable 0) These remarks also
ro duty, is re. apply to the second
ceived for de- category of goods,
Every at 8४ Post ie., goods — whose
Office, a notice is transmission by post
to be sent to the is prohibited under
addressee “ invit~ any enactment.
ing him to attend ’*
within a specified (Hi) The third  cate-
time. The postal gory, ie, ‘any
article is then thing liable to duty”,
opened ard cxa- must 02 confined to
mined — (before goods on which a
witnesses if 50 duty is lawfully levi-
directed by the able ; and, therefore,
Director General), (though the section
and then deliver does met say #2),
ed to the addres- action can be taken
sec, mnless = re- in respect of this
quired for the category of — goods
Parpose of any only where the duty
proceed- is leviable under
ing under the some other law. For
law. this ae ite or 21
idity of the sec-

tion im respect of
this category need
not be independent
ly examined, The
procedure is also
fairly reasonable.

Note.—§ ection 24
can, possibly, apply
ais 10 goods the
trensmission where-
of is prohibited by
al Order under sec-
tion 144 Of the Code
of Criminal Proce-
dure—(assuming
that section = 144
can be lawfully
used for that pur-
pose). It is, Howe
ever, unnecessary
tw consider the
aspect for the pur:
pose of cevision Of
the Post Office Act.

1, As to the use of section 144, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 to restzzin freedom
of the press, see—

Gi) P. T. Chandra v. Emp., AAR. 1942 Lah, 171, 172 (F.B.), (Tribune Case}.
Gi) In re Ardeshir, A.I.R. 1940 Bom. 42, 43.
Git) Babu Lai v. State, (1961) 3 8.C.R. 423 3 A.I.R.19618,C. 884.


380

Main section in Connected section Other analogous ‘Constituticnal
the Indian Post in the Indian Past Laws position
Office Act Office Act

Section 244.—Em- on oe This is linked up
powers an officer with the Customs
of the Post Office Act, or other — rele-
empowered _by the varit law, which
Central Govern- imposes the duty.
ment to deliver The power can be
to the Customs exercised by an offi-
authority any cer of the Post
postal article te- Offce empowered
ceived from be- by the — Central
yond India and overnment, and is
suspected to con- corfined to articles
tain anything lia- reotived from,
ble to duty to a beyond the limits of
Customs authority Incia, and suspected
specified in the to contain anything
Central Govern- linble to duty. Its
ment’s order. Fur- validity in this
ther action is to comzext need not
be taken by such therefore, be exa-
Customs authority mined minutely. It
in accordance with is not likely, in
the Customs Act, practice, to inter-
or other law, fere with the free-

dora of speech, and
so far as the other
rights guaranteed
by the Constitution
are concerned, the
prevision seems to
be a reasonable
restriction in the
public interest.

Articles sent in con- . + (1) The section is
travention of उन connected with the
port and = Export restrictions under
(Control) Ace, 1947 the Import and Fx-
or the Customs port (Control) Act,
Act, Section 25.— 1947 or under sec-

powers an tion 11, Customs
officer of the post Act. 1962 or similar
office empowered laws, Most of these
by the Central are within the ambit
Government — in of the — words,
this behalf, to ‘in the interest of
search for any general public ? used
goods in course of in article 19 (6) of
transmission by the Constitution. In
Post, being goods case the restrictions
whose export or imposed in those
import is banned other Acts are
or restricted under themselves held to
the Customs Act ‘be void, then sec
or other law, The tion 25 of the Post
goods are to be Office Act will be
delivered to an. void in relation to
officer appointed those _ restrictions.
by the Central Its validity need
Government, who not be — indepen-
may dispose of the dently considered,

goods in such
manager.



Main section in
the Indian Post
Office Act

jonnected sect
in the Indian

oat

Other aralogous
Laws

Constitutiona!
position

as the Central
Government may
direct. “In car-
rying outa
such search suc
officer of the post
office may open or
untasten, or cause
to be opened or
uns any
paper of any
books, a pattern or

mission by post.”
Section 26.—Em-~

powers the Gov-
or an
authorised officer
to order to intez-
cept, etc. postal

articles in a pub-
lic emereency or

for public safety

or tranquiliry

There is 2 wider
provision for in-
terception in rule
23, Defence of
India Rules, 1962.

(2) The last sentence
of this section does
authorise the open-
ing of many postal
articles, bute ot
Jetters, Hence, in

ractice, its coming
into conflict with
the freedom of
speech is not likely,

(0 Interception of
letters under — sec-
tion 26 might con-
fice with free-

oma cf expression,
under article 19 (1)
(को of the Constitu-
von.

(४) Interception and
destruction O°
VPP. artice
might conflict with
the sender's free-
dom ef | propert:
urider actkcle 19 (1)
(६2 of the Constitu-
tion.

Gift) Interception ard
destruction of arti-
cles. ordered by post
afd already paid for
by the “addressee

10 comfict with

ce idresace’s

to property,
under article

(2) (6) of the Consti-

saree aia for,

are not r,
auch interception
etc. might affect the
ender’ similar
right.

‘The last two kinds of
conflicts, however
would be rare, in
‘view of the circums-
tanets in which the
order under section
26 would be passed,
i¢., public emer-
gency or — public-



82°

Main section in ‘Connected section Other analogous Conetitutionst
the Indian Post in the Indian Post Laws. ‘position
ct

safety, etc. There-
fore, only the fret
Kind of conflict with
the Constitution re-
quired to be con-
sidered. It has
been separately dis-

cussed),
Section 27 (1). —Where (a)In so far as the
am article is receiv- section, affects the

ed from a place
beyond India,
bearing a used or

afer incherge at ok

officer incharge rights arises.

the Post Office

shall aend @ notice कु) व so far as the
to the addressee to section affects the
come to take the addressee, the posi-
delivery, don is this :—

Section 27 (2).— Wf
the ine ee ap-
pears and agrees
to make known
the same of the
sender and to
deliver the _ ficti-
Hous stamp ond

e part contain~
ing the address,
erticle shail be de-
livered ए० him.

Section 29 (ते
the addressee. ab-
sents himself, or

be deliver to him
and will be dis-
Posed of as the
tral Governi-
ment ntay direct.
The addressee has
two fundamental
rights with regard 10
puch articles, aame-
ly न

1, See detailed Dore relating to section 26.


a3.

‘Main section in Gonnected section Other analogous Constitutional
the Indian Post in the Indian post Laws Position
Office Act Office Act

@ freedom oof
speech and ex-
pression, (which,
inchides, the
right to seek
and receive ideas.
ard = informa-
tion,
any medium) ;

(i) right to pro-
perty.—if the

addressee has
pre-paid the
price for

article, or if an
ariicle belong-
ing to him is
sent back by
post, by, say, a
repairer) ;

At first sight, the
restriction envisaged
by section 27 @
may appear (०
violative of the
Constitution, on the

ear
penalty gua the
addressce has no

bearing’ to or rela~
tioa wich any crime
of the person pen a~
lised (the addres-
see).

The sender (or his
servant) or ‘some
othe ick person TRY
iad guilty party,
md they are not th
representatives - or
agents of the ‘ad-
dressee.

Buc the answer iss
that the crime is
with regard w fa-
reign postage, and
to check it or wo
punish i-, this course
is necessary, as it
would be difficult to
trace the actual

~ offender,



84

Main section in Connected section Other analogous ‘Constitutional
the Indian Post in the Indian Post Laws “position
Office. Act Office Act

Further, the penalty
by way of detention
of the article and
subsequent disposal,
in such manner as
‘may be directed by
the Central Govern-
mem, is impo:

ealy on refusal of
the addressee to
make known the
address and name
of the sender, etc.
The restriction,
thersfore, appears:
to be reasonable,
and in the public

interest.
Section 27९20) (a) Seetion 273 (2).— ‘Section 99A, Code Secticn 278.—G) De~
vempowers an offi- Notice co be given of Criminal Pro- tention of seditious
ser of the “Post to the addressee. cedure, 1898, em- articles will not vio-
Office authorised powers the State late the  Constitu
by the Post Mas- Section 27.8 (3).— Government to tion as such action-

ter General to Order passed by seize any document will be in the in-
detain any postal State Eovernnen or newspaper or _terestof the security
article suspected after notice stb- book as defined in of the State or pub-
10 cOmtain any jectio review by the Press and Re- fic onder.
hewspaper, book, the High Court. gistrartion of Books

oc document, cofi- ‘Act, 1867, if it is (7 The Government's
taining seditious seditious 07... pro- order is not
matter (¢.¢., matter motes hetred, etc. but, can be judicially
punisheble” under or hurts religious reviewed — by the
section 124A, In feeling. . High Court, Hence,
dian Penal 003०). procedural validity
is satisfied.

Section 278 (70). --

empowers such

down in that Act.

Gi) Under section 4 of
the Young Per-
sons (Harmful Pub-
lications) Act, 1956
gs of 1968), the

tat: = Government
is empowered to
declice any  publi-
cation as likely to



85

Main section jn Connected section Other artalogous Constiruional
the Indian Post in the Indian Post WS Besition
Office Act Office Act

corrupt young per-
sons and incite
them to commit
violence or offence,
and to order for-
feiture of = every
copy. This order
is Open to judicial
review by the High
Court, on the eppli-
cation af aay person
interesced in the
forfeited article.

(ii) As regards the
Press and Regis-
tration of — Books

Act, 167, the rela~
tive provision in
section 27B of the
Post Office Act is
linked up with that
Act of 1367, It may
also be added, that
it has beeh held
that the Act of 1867,
is not violative of
article 19 (1)@) of
the Coristiturion, as
it does not, in fact-
place any more ves-
triction than is ne-
cessary for registra
tion. ‘The object of

registration under
the 1867 Act is
merely to obtain
information —_ebout

the press and their
publications, The
1867 Act was not
intended to estab-
lish control over
printing presses and
newspapers, but to
regulate pringing
presses and news-
papers and [७ pre-
serve copics*, In
ang case, the validi-
ty of s. 27B, Post
Office Act, need
not be independent-
ly examined,

1. fwe G. Alavondar, A.LR. 1957 Mad. 427.

2. Mrs. Taramati v. Addl. District Magistrate Kutch A.1.R. 1964 Gujarat 278, 280,


86

‘Main section in Connected section Other analogous Constitutional
the Indian Post in the Indian Post Laws position
Office Act Office Act

Ge) Sections 27B_and
27G «of the Post
Office Act, ina way,
only aid the law
given in section 994
of Criminal Pro-
cedure Code! — by
providing for detain-
ing the  objection-
able article, and
sending it to the
officer appointed by
the State Govern-
ment. It may be
noted, that section
994, Criminal Pro-

. cedure Code is
wider, as it covers
also artilces which
are violative of sec-
tions 193A _ and
295A of the Indian
Penal Code.

1. As to the validity of section 998५ Cr. P. 0. see N, Veerabrahman ¥, State, ALR.
i959 Andhta Pradesh 572, 576, paragraph 13 (Provision for judicial corrective
Teled on for maintaining the validity).


APPENDIX V
Derarep note oN Secrion 26, Post Orricz Act

Section 26 of the Indian Post Office Act raises certain
questions of vires, as it empowers the Govermment, etc.
to intercept, detain or dispose of any pcstal artic.c of pass
of postal articles, ete.. in = “public emergency” or for are
serving public safety ox tranquility.

The validity of the section has to be examined with
reference to the freedom of speech and expression guar-
anteed by article 19(1}(a) of the Constitution.

Article 19(1)(a} and Article 19(2), as they, now stand,
yun as follows:—

“19, (1) Ail citizens shall have the right— हु
rection of

fa) to freedom of speech and expression;””  certaia tights

(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall fenacd ing

affect the operation, of any existing law, or prevent speech, ete.
the State from making any law, in so far as such law

imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the

right conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests

to the sovereignity and integrity of India’, the security

of the State, friendly relations with foreign States,

public order, decency or morality, or in telation +0
tontempt of court, defamation or incitement to an

offenes.

Té the object of the right to freedor. of sneech is to
prevent public authorities irom pssuming controk of the
minds of the people, then jt is cbviows that section 26
comes into conflict with the right. Freedem of speech
must imply freedom of effectively conveying one’s views".
The interception of a letter means हे break in this freedom,
as it hampers the free and uninhibited communication of
one’s views. Thetefore. section 26 does impose a restric-
tion on the freedom guaranteed by article 19(1) (8) of the
Constitution.

Now, in ordinary times, precensorship is incompatible
with the freedom of expression’, at least uniess there ave
reasonable safeguards’. The power of interception is ana-
logaus to censorship, as it permits a specified authority “2
determine what shall or shall not pass abrough the mails
and, therefore, requires strong justification for its validity.
‘That validity can be derived, if at all, only from article
1942), which enumerates the permissible sources of res-
triction.

1. See the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963.

2. Cf. Romesh Thappar y. The State ALR. 1980 S.C. 12% which was
referred to by the Privy Council in Olver v. Burtipieg (1966) 2 AD
ER. 459(P.C.) (Case from Malta). (966), 3 WLR 310 3 320.

३, Of. Exeres wenapapers ४. Unica of कप, ALR. 1988 5.0. 373.
4, Virenira-¥. State, ALR. 1957 S.C; 896, gor, Peragrapi 72८



58

The next question is, whether the resviction is saved by
article 19(2), that is to say, whether the restriction is—

{i} reasonable, and

(ii) in the interest of one or more of the permis-
sible heads specified in article 19{2).

In coming to a decision on this question, cne has te bear
in mind several points, chief amongst them being—

(i) the situation in which the power of intercep-
ion can be exercised;

(ii) the authorities by whom the power can be
exercised;

Gii) the articles in respect of which it can be
exercised;

(iv) the nature and effect of the power; and

(iv) the procedure for the exercise of the power.

As regards the situction, it is deseribed in the section
es-one of “public emexgency” or “public safety or tran~
quilliity”. The former—‘public emergency”—will require
detailed treatment,

Regarding the authority, the Central Government or the -
State Government or any officer specially authorised by
either of them can exercise this power by a written order.
There is, thus, delegation, no doubt, but that by itself does.
not appear to be a fata) defect. The provision for delega-
tion does not seem to be unreasonable in itself. The pro-
visions of the section are attracted only in an emergency,
and the initial judge of the emergency must, often, be an
officer of the locality’.

As regards erticles, any postal article or class or des~
cription of postal articles in course of transmission by post
can be interfered with. This certainly includes letters and
newspapers and books.

As regards the nature and effect of the order, the arti-
cles can be—(i) intercepted, (ii) detained, or (iii) disposed
of in such manner as the authority concerned may direct.

As regards procedure, there is no provision ‘or judicial
review, apparently Decause the power is to be: exercised
jn & public emergency or in the interest of the public safety
or tranquillity.

Bearing in mind this analysis of the section, we may
proceed to examine in detail the substantive as well as pro-
eedural aspects of the section.

t, Cf. Babuial v. The State (1961), 3 SCR. 423 5 ALR, 796 S.C,
884, 889, parsgraph 22.
2. See also Veerenndra v. The State ALR. 1957 S.C. 896.


89

The procedural aspect may be disposed of first. The
section does not lay down any hearing, etc, but that not
be conclusive as regards the validity of an for an emer-
gency law’, In judging the रो, leness of a restriction,
the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied
thereby, disproportion of the imposition, and the Erevail-
ing condition at the time, ete., have all to be considerecl*.

We may now consider the substantive aspects.

In this connection, the situation in which, the power
under section 26 can be exercised is described as one of
“public emergency” and “public safety or tranquillity”.
These will have to justify themselves.

It is from this angle that the matter is to be viewed,
and, though in a substantial number of cases, the power
may not be abused, yet if it is capable of being exercised
in o situation not expressly permitted by the Constitution,
it may require modification. We have, therefore, to con-
sider in detail whether the power is confined to the permis-
sible heads.

Before the First Amendment to the Constitution, under
article 19(2), the only permissible head of restriction on
the freedom of speech and expression (so far as is rele-
vant for the present Purpose) was “security of the State”,
in Romesh Thappar ¥. State of Madras’, the ban imposed
by the Government of Madras under section 9(1-A) of the
Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act, 1949, on the entry
and circulation in the State of a journal called the “Cross
Roads” was declared to be invalided, on the ground that
the Constitution had placed in a distinct category these
offences against public order which aimed at undermining
the security of the State or overthrowing if, and made
their prevention the justification for legislative abridgement
of freedom of speech and expression. Nothing less than
endangering the foundation of the State or threatening its
overthrow could justify curtailment of the right to free-
dom of speech and expression. The Supreme Court fur-
ther observed, “The Constitution thus requires a line to
be drawn in the field of public order or tranquillity, mark-
ing off, mere or less roughly, the boundary between those
serious and aggravated forms of public disorder which are
calculated to endanger the security of the State and the
relatively minor breaches of peace of purely local signi-
ficance, treating fer this purpose the difference in degree
to be a difference in kind.”

1, Base, Commentary on the Constirution, (1965), Vol. 1, page 671.

2. Of. Babulal v. The Stave, (1961), 3 S.C.R. 423 5 ALR. 1961 S.C. 884,
889, paragraph 22

3. Gf. State of Madras v. V. G. Row, A.-R. 1952 S.C. 196.

4. Romesh Thappar v. State of Madras, (1950) S.C.R. $043 ALR. 1957
S.C. 124, 128, paragraph 16,


90

Therefore, according to this decision “pub.ic order” is
“to be classified inte two categories—one major and the
«other minor, that is to say—

(a) major offences affecting the security of the
Stete; and

(b) minor breaches of peace of local significance,
This decision was followed in Brij Bhushan’s case’.

1६ is well-known, that by the First Amendment to the
Constitution of India, minor categories of public order were
brought in. After the First Amendment, the Supreme
Court examined the scope of article 19(2) in 1952, and
upheld the validity of section 4(1) (a) of the indian Press
{Emergency Fowers) Act, 1931, relating 10 words etc.
-which incite to, ete., the commission of any offence of mur-
-der or a cognizable offence involving violence”.

Thereafter, in 1900, Mr. Justice Subba Rao {as he was
then) had oceasion to interpret the expression “public
order”, While examining the provisions of the U.P. Special
Powers Act, 1932, he observed, “But in India under Article
19(2) this wide concept of public order is split under dif-
ferent heads. It enables the imposition of reasonable res-
trictions on the exercise of the right to freedom of speech
and expression in the interest of the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign States, public ovder, decency
or morality or in relation to contempt of Court, defamatiori
‘or incitement 40 an offence, Ali the grounds mentioned
therein car: be srought under the general ‘1ead ‘public
order’ in its most comprehensive sense. But the juxta-
position of the different grounds indicate that though
sometimes they tend to overlap they must be ordinarily
intended to exclude each other. Public order is something
demarcated from the others. In that limited sense, parti-
cularly in view of the history of the amendment, it can be
postulated that public order is synonymous with public
“peace, safety and tranquillity”

A later decision of the Supreme Court reiterates this
views.

Tt is true, that the expression “in fhe interest of” in
article 18(2) is wider than the expression “/or the main:
tenance of”, so that a law which is not designed directly
te protect the general public against any particular evil
may be valid if it is enacted in the interest of the public
order or the general public, as the case may be®

. Brij Bhushan v. Shailia of Dethi, ALR, 7930 S.C, 129.
, State of Bihar v. Shailja Bala, ALR. 1952 8.C, 329,
The Superintendent, Ceatrel Prism 5. Dr. Rams Menchar Leila, ALR.
T960 «S.C, 633, 639-
4. 0, K. Ghosh v, Foerph, ALR. 1963 S.C. 812, Ste, £15. paragraph 10.,

5. Cf. Rami Lal v. State of U.P., AIR, 1957 S.C. 620, 622, paragraph 7,
referring to Debi Saran v. State, ATR. 1954 Patna. a ,

wey


a

This amplification, however, does not “ignore the neces-
sity for an intimate connection between the Act and the
public order sought to be maintained by the Act*.”

As was observed by the Supreme Court?, “The limita-
tation imposed in the interest of public order, to be a tea-
sonable restriction, should be one which has a proximate
connection or nexus with public order, but not one far-
fetched, hypothetical or problematical or too remote in the
chain of its relation with the public order”.

In short, the serious and grave forms of public disorder
- which are calculated to endanger the security of the State
fall under “security of State”, and the relatively minor
breaches of the peace of purely local significance fall under
“public order’’. Therefore, national upheavals, suck. as
revolutions, civil strikes, and war, may be covered by
“security of the State”, and local disorders may be covered
by “public order*”;

In a recent case before the Supreme Court’, the meaning
of the expression “maintenance of public order” in ule
30(1) (b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, and section
3 of the Defence of India Act, 1962, was considered in de-
tail, and the expression “maintenance of law and order”
{which was employed in the detention order in issue in
that case) was also considered. According to the majority
view®, “public order” was narrower than “maintenance: of
law and order’. According to the analysis contained in
one of the judgments’, there are three concentric circles.
‘The expression “law and order” represents the largest cir-
cle, within which is the next circle representing “public
order”, and the smallest circle represents “security of the
State.” By using the expression “maintenance of law and
order”, the District Magistrate was widening his own field
of action and was adding a clause to the Defence of India

ules.

Now, the expression “public emergency” in geciion 26,
Post. Office Act, appears in addition to the words “public
safety or tranquillity”, which also are mentioned in the
section. It is therefore, obviously intended for cases other
then these covered by public safety or tranquillity--in

1, Superintendent, Central Prison v. Dr. Ram Manohar Lokia, AR
1960 S.C, 633.

3. Superintendent, Central Prison v. Dr. Ram Manohar Lokia, A.LR.
1960 S.C, 633, 639.

3. Gf. discussion in the judgment of Patanjali Sastri J. in Romesh Thappar
¥. State of Madras, (1950) 8.C.R. 594, 601 ; A.LR. 1950 8.C. 124.

4. Basu, Commentary on‘the Constitution (1965) Vol. 1, page 671, assumes:
that section 26 would be covered by “in the interst of public order”.

5. Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia v. State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 740, 745,
758, 761, paragraphs 8, 52 and 66 (May, 1966).

6, Sarkar, Hidayatullah and Bachawat JJ.

7 Jacarnent of Hidayetullah J. (on behalf of himself and Bacha”

wat J.)


other words, for a situation other than local disorder. It
takes in national upheavals which affect the security of
the State. But, apparenily, it also takes, in emergencies of
a public nature which might have nothing to clo with the
security of the State (or with public order), and it is here
that. it seems to go beyond the Constitution.

“Emergency”, it may be noted, may be of an economic
character also’.

There is another aspect of the matter. The class of arti-
cles which tan be intercepted is not linked up with “pub-
lic order”, ete., so that the section sweeps within its
ambit even activities constituting a legitimate exercise of
the freedom of speech**, There is no principle to guide
the officer concerned—except that of emergency” etc.
which itself goes beyond the Constitution,—with the result
that the restriction may not be regarded as reasonable’.

_ We may examine in detail the meaning of the expres-
sion “emergency” as explained in some decisions®.

It has been observed, that the word “emergency” in
section 2(1) (a) of the Compensation (Defence) Act, 1939
(2 & 3 Geo. 6 ०. 75), may require different meanings to be
attributed to it, having regard to the power in right of
which possession was taken®.

‘The expression “emergency”, as used in Admiralty
directions relating to vessels in convoy, means the sudden
occurrence of facts causing an apprehension of danger or
difficulty’.

The expression “present emergency” in the Rating and
Valuation (Postponement of Valuations) Act, 140 (3 & 4
Geo. 6, c. 12), section 1(4), means the World War, 1939—
1945, and its concomitants, such as the blackout*.

1. As to economic emergencies, see Helvering v. Davis, (1937) 301 U.S.
619; 8t 1... Ed. 1307, and contrast 4.G. for Canada v. A.G. for Ontario, (1937)
AC. 355 (P.C.).

2. See generally,—

@) Virendra ¥. State, ALR. 1997 8.6. 806.
Gi) Hamdard case, AR. 1960 5.0, 554 (decision बढ (०
of the Drugs, etc., Act).

3. Of. Lovell v. Griffin, (2938), 308 U.S. 444, and Basu, Commentary
on the Constitution, (1965), Vol. 1, page 651.

4. Of. R. M. Seshadri v. Dist. Municipality, Tanjore, ALR. x954 5.0.

747: 74% Paragraph 4.
5. For legislative definitions, see Stroudi’s Judicial Dictionary (1952),

Vol. 2, page 940.
6, (1943) 7 All. E.R. 672, 675, approved on other ground (1944)

7 AIL E.R. 60.
7. The Larehbank, (1943) A.C. 299.
8. Conservative Club v, Westminster Assessment Committee, (1943) 1
AIL ER, 104, 106, affirmed in Westminster Assessment Commitee v. Conser-

vative Club, (1944) A.C. 55.

section 3


93

Thus, “emergencies” may be of various types, that is to
Say, not only of imminent war or a rebellion or internal
subversion, but also natural catastrophes, and economic
emergencies. The last mentioned (economic emergencies)
‘do not necessarily fall under “security of the State”,

In England, under the Emergency Powers Act, 19207, an
emergency can be declared by the Crown whenever it
appears that the supply and distribution of food, water,
fuel or light or the means of commotion or generally the
essentials of life of the community or any substantial por-
‘tion of it are in danger etc. The Act was invoked at the
time of the coal strike of 1921, the threatened strike in
1924 and the general strike in 19264.

Similar provision is found in the emergency laws of
other countries, for example, in the Emergency Powers -
“Ordinance of Northern Rhodesia’.

In a Lahore case®, the court followed ‘the dictionary
Meaning of the word “emergency” as given in Webster’s
Dictionary, which is, “An unforeseen occurrence or corn-
‘bination of circumstances which calls for immediate action
‘or remedy”. The court observed. that an emergency may
‘result from an unforeseen combination of circumstances,
and that this combination may not take place all at once,
‘but gradually. An immediate action may be rendered
mecessary when the culminating point is reached.

As to Ordinances under the Indian Constitution or
under the Government of India Act, 1935. undermentioned
‘cases’. may’ be seen.

1. For materials as to’ emergency, see --

(४) Holland, “Emergency Legislation in the Commonwealth”, (1940
13 Current Legal Problems 148;

Gi) Note “Civil Liberties in Great Britain and Canada during the
War’, Vol. 55, Harvard Law Review 1006,

Gi) M. C. Setalvad, “War and Civil Liberties” (1946).

Ge) “The War and the Constitution’, Vol. 4, Modern Law
Review 82.

(०) Jennings, “Rule of Law in Total War”, 50 Yale Law Jour-
nal 365.

(wi) Rossiter, Constitutional Dictatorship, page 177.

2. Emergency Powers Act, 1920 (10 & 11 Geo. 5, ८. 55).

3. See also the Emergency Powers (Defence) Act, 1939.

4. See also the orders passed in 1966.

5. Section 2{1), Emergenty Powers Ordinance of Northern Rho-
desia, discussed in (1960) 13 Current Legal Problems 148, 162.

6. Des Raj र, Emp., ALR. 1990 Lah. 781, 789 (regarding the Lahore
Conspiracy Case Ordinance 1939) (decision under section 72 of the Gover
ment of India Act, under which, in cases of “emergency”, the Governor-
General could make Ordinances for the peace and good government
.of India.).

7. Joan Prasanna v. Province of West Bengal, A.1.R. 1949 Cal. 1 (F.B.).

8. Bmp. v. Sibnath, ALR. 1945 P.C. 156.

9. Lakhinavayan, A.LR. 1950 F.C. 59.


a4

Section 86, thus, in view of the wide meaning of “emer-
gency”, may operate so as to abridge the freedom of
speech and expression for a purpose not authorised by
article 19(2), and is, to that extent, likely to conflict with
the Constitntion. .

There are no decisions as to the validit

of section 26.
In a Supreme Court case’, the validity of the ‘pre-censor-
ship on newspapers under section 144, Criminal Procedure
Code was considered, but the exact igsue that is now
being discussed was not dealt with. —

The next question is whether the section should be
amended cr. this point, It js true, that one principle of
construction of statutes is, that if the impugned provisions
of a law can come within the constitutional powers of the
Legisiatune by adopting ‘one view of the words of the im-
pugned section or Act, the court will take that view of the
section and limit its application accordingly, in preference
to a view which would make it unconstitutional on an-
other interpretation of the words in question?**,

It is possible, that, on this principle, the scope of the
expression “public emergency” in section 26(1) will be
narrowed down by the courts, and if that is done, the vali-
dity of the section (in the present context) may be saved.

Since, however, an opportunity has now atisen for
revising the Act, it seems ‘desirable that the matter be put
beyond controversy", particularly in view of the rather
wide meaning of the expression “public emergency”.

3. Rabulal +. Stats, (1961) 3 S.G.R. 4235 Tw wae कक SOR, कक AIR कक. 196

2. See inve Hinds Wosnen’s Rights 10 Property Act, कि BGR. 12

and RLM.D. Chamarbaugeals v. the Usion of India, 71957) S.C.R. 930; AT. R.

1957 S.C. 628, 633. om SCR 69, ALB. 1962
Kedar Nathv. State Bihar, (1962) mp, .2S.C.R. 769, ALR.

8.0. 528 (Validity “of ae 2 t2g4, Indian Penal Gode; uphekt}.

4. Aud see the American authorities discussed in the dissenting
jadgment of Kapur f . in ‘Amar Nath Ball v. State, A.1.R. 1951 Punjab 18,
24-26, paragraphs 36—46.

5. Bxamples of such controversies are:—

iS) En ye Bharat) Press, ALB rost Par. 12, 25, 28, paragraphs 13”
and 2 {S.B.) [section 4(1), Press Emergency Power Acts
1933).
(i) State ¥. Hariprasad, ALR. 1952 Sau. 25, 28, paragraph 6 [seo~
tion 40) (बी, Press Emergency Powers ‘Act, 7937].
(HD Bhamyhankor +. Siote, ALLR, 1952 Sau. $7 FAB. [section. 77)
Press Emergency Powers Act, 1951]. है
(iv) Pattamal v. Chief Presidency Magisrraie, ALR. 1951 Mad. 950
{rection 3(z), Press Bmergency Powers Act, 1932].
though ¢he later Supeme Gourt decisions cited —e.g. Kedar Nath—enable:
‘a Validating constructios.



95

‘The form in which the section should be amended fas:
been considered in detail. One alternative is to limit sec-
tion 26 to only two groundg (“security of the State” and
“public order"). The other alternative is to mention, in
the section, ali the grounds specified in article 19 (9) '-* On
the one hand, it is not likely that the power under the sec-
tion will be required to be exercised except in the interests
of “security of the State” or “public order”. On the other
hand it would be better to adopt the second aiternatine,
which is wider, to cover unforeseen situations.

Sub-section (2) of section 26 may now be considered.
It provides, that if any doubt arises as to the existence of
a public emergency or as to whether any act done under
section 26(1) was in the interest of public safety and tran-
quillity, a certificate of the Central Government or of the
State Government, as the case may be, shall be conclusive
Proof on that point? This hag the effect of totally barring
judicial review.

Now, if section 26 is to be modified so as to narrow
down its present width’, then sub-section (2) loses much
of its practical utility, and should be omitted. Even, if the
expression “public emergency” is retained, sub-section (९)
cannot bar judicial review, when a constitutional question
arises, and should be omitted on that ground also.

There is a provision similar to section 26(1) in section 5
of the Indian Telegraphs Act*®. There does not seem to
be a similar provision in the Wirless Telegraphy Act®, but.
there is a power under section iG (8H) of that Act regard-
ing conditions governing the issue of licence of wireless.
telegraphy apparatus under the Act,

The section in the Indian Telegraphs Act was consides-
ed in detail by the Press Commission.

The following passages from fhe Press Commission's
Report ? may be quoted :--

“1083. Indian Telegraph Act.—Bection 5 of the Act
enables Government, or any officer specially authoris-
ed ky Government, on the occurrence of any publi
emergency or in the interests of public safety {a) tw

1, Cf. section 5820), Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952).

2. Cf. also section 17(2)(8)(0)0(0)/7), Castoms Act, 1962 (32 of
1962),

3. See discission relating tc sextet 25{rj-

4, Section § of the Indian Telegraphs Act, 1885 (13 of 188s),

3. Cf. section 2, Telegraph Act, 1852 (English Act).

5. The Indian Witeless Telegraphy Act, 1933 {17 of 1933).

7. Press Commission of India Repmt, (1954), Part 1, pages 476-40;~
Paragraphs 1063~-1071.

Section 25+
2)-- हिल

comumenda~
ton,

Analogous
lawe—
Section =f
Telegra;
Act, and
provision
in Wireless
Telegraphy
Act.


of

take temporary possession of any telegraph establish-
ed, maintained or worked by any persons Tieensed under
the Act, and (9) to order that any message or class of
‘messages from any person or class of persons or relat-
ing to any particular subject brought for transmission
by or transmitted or received by any telegraph shall
not be intercepted or detained or shall be disclosed to
Government or the officer specially authorised. If
any doubt arises as to the existence of public emer-
gency or whether the act done is in the interest of
public safety, a certificate of Government shall be con-
clusive proof on the point.

2064. In so far as the provisions of this section can
some into force only on the occurrence of any emer-
gency, or in the interest of public safety, they cannot

@ to be not in consonance with the Freedom of
the Press and outside the scope of permissible legisla-
tive restrictions under Article 19(2} of the Constitu-
tion,

1065. As regards the actual operation of the Act,
the Press Laws Enquiry Committee have stated as
follows: --

“Qur recommendation in this behait is, there-
fore, that the Central and Provincial Governments
should continue to have the power of telegraphic
interception, for use on special orcasions of the
occurrence of a public emergency or in the inter-
est of the public safety provided the orders of the
Minister in charge are invariably obtained, that
delegations of this power should be the exception
rather than the rule, that delegations should be
for a specified and short period and not general
and that clear instructions should be issued by
Government.to the specially authorised officers in
order to ensure that these powers are not abused.
Sub-section (2) of section 5 makes & certificate of
the Central or Provincial Government conclusive
on the question about the existence of a public
emergency or the needs of public safety, As a
further safeguard against possible abuse of these
powers by subordinate officers we further recorm-
mend that provision showld be made in the section
itself, for exai mple by the addition of sub-section
(3) that the ०1 passed by specially authorised
officers of Government shall be reported to the
Central or Provincial Government as the case may
be in order to enable the responsible Minister to
judge the proper exercise of the powers and the
order passed in individual cases.”.


oT
1066. This recommendation of the Press Laws EBa-
guiry Commitee is supported by the Marathi Fatra-
ker Sangh, The Indian Federation of Working Jour
nalists have not indicated in what direction the law
requires amendment. The ALN.EC. have pointed out
that powers under the Act have been exercised, even
where there is no emergency, under pressure from the
local Executive. Ali the State Governments wha have
replied to our question on this subject have urged that
such powers are necessary in times of emergency and

in the interest of public safety.

1067. The emergency contemplated is not neces~
sarily wartime emergency, and the section in effect
comiemplates imposition of censorship on dissemina-
tion of news even during pence time under certain
conditions. We support ‘the Press Laws Enquiry
Committee's recommendations in this behalé.

1068. Sea Customs Act, 1878—Section 19 of the Sea
Customs Act, 1878, enables the Central Government
from time to time, by notification in the official
gazetie, to prohibit or restrict the bringing or taking
by sea or by land of goods of any specified description
into, or cus of, Endia ecrpss any Customs frontiers. This
section is not Limited in its operation to any emer
gency or in the interest of public salety. In so far
therefore as it prohibits dissemination of news, other-
wise than in relation to an emergency or public safety,
it appears not tc be in consonance with the Freedom
of the Press of Article 18{2) of the Constitution. In
vase, however, of newspapers and periodicals, which
are Hable to forfeiture under section 998 of the Crimi-
nal Procedure Code, or any other matter which is lia-
hie to affect the security of the State, this  seetion
should continue to apply. Tt would be anomalous to
ban the production of that type of Wterature in this
country, but permit its import.

1089. Sections 181A to 1810 authorise detention
and further disposal of any package suspected to con-
tain any newspaper or any document the publication
of which is punishable under section 1244, Indian
Penal Code. As we bave already stated, this section, as
it stands, appears to us to be inconsistent with the
Freedom of the Press and to-be ultra vires of the Cons.
titution, If that view is accepted these sections will
have to be repealed or the references to section 1248,
will have to be यम by references to. the, new
wection 1218, Indian’ P. Code, which is suggested
for enactment. - हे

10-61 Lew.


98

1070, Indian Post Office Act, 1898 Section 25 is.
contigent on the validity of section 19 of the Sea Cus-
toms Act or any other similar law. The remarks on
that section would also apply to section 25 of the Post
Offices Act,

1071, Section 26(1) is on a par with section 5(1)
of the Indian Telegraph Act, and our remarks under
that section would also apply to this section of the
Post Office Act.”.

The recommendations of the Press Commission may be
thus summarised :— -

(i) The Central and State Governments should
continue to have the power of telegraphic (or postal)
interception for use on special occasions of the occur-
rence of a public emergency or in the interests of public
safety, provided the orders of the Minister in charge.
are invariably obtained;

(ii) Delegations of this power should be sparingly
made;

(iit) Delegations, when made, should be for a spe-
cified and short period, and not general;

(iv) clear instructions should be issued by the
Government to specially authorised officers in order to
ensure that the powef is not absued;

(v) to prevent abuse of powers by the subordinate
officers, a provision should be made in the section to
the effect, that the orders passed by the specially autho-
rised officers of Government shall be reported to the
Centrdl or the State Government, as the case may be,
so that the responsible Minister may judge the proper
exercise of the powers and the orders passed in indivi-
dual cases.

Section 6 of the Telegraph Act has not, so far been
amended’. A Private Member's Bill to delete section
5(1)(b) was introduced in the Lok Salsha®,

It would appear’, that it has not been possible to accept
the recommendation of the Press Commission relating to
the amendment of section 5, Telegraph Act, and section 26,
Post Office Act.

x, Section 5 of the Telegraph Act has not been amended. Suitable
action can, however, be taken by making a provision in rules under
section 7(2)(b).

2. Shri Yash Pal Singh’s Bill to amend the Indian ‘Telegraph Act (Lok
Sabha, 1965).

Feb 3. See ‘the statement placed ed on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th
ruary, 1964, as to fl faetal position regarding implementation
ofthe Fete Press Commisgion’s mecomneendations (Items £7 of the Statement—
iP in Emergency”). It is an enclosure to $. No. 106, Law Com-

mission’s file No. F. 1(1)/62-L.C.


99

There is a provision for interception m rule 23 of the
Defence of India Rules, 1962, quoted below: —

“23, Power to intercept and censor postal articles,
(i) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 20
of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (6 of 1898), any
person appointed by the Central Government to be a
censor may—

{a) order that any postal article or class or
description of postal articles in course of trans-
mission by post shall be intercepted or detained or
shall be disposed of in such manner as the censor,
may direct;

(b) open and examine the contents of any
postal art Bele, and delete, destroy or remove any
part thereof which the censor considers to be pre-
judicial to the public safety or interest or to the
defence of India or ¢ivil defence or the efficient
conduct of military operations.

“(2) Any person who delivers any postal article
for transmission, either by an indirect.route or other-
wise, in such a manner as is calculated to evade exa~
mination by a censor, shall be punishable with impri-
sonment which may extend to five years, or with fine,
or with both.”,

The expression “public order” seems to have been used Position ia
in England in two Acts, namely, the Theatres Act, 18431, England,
and the Public Order Act, 19364. The former Act em-

powers the Lord Chamberlain to prohibit the performance

of any stage play whenever he has reason to believe that

such performance would go against good manners, decorum

or the preservation of public order, The latter Act was

intended to prohibit, inter alia, the use of threatening,

abusive or insulting words or behaviour in a public place,

etc. with interest to provoke a breach of the peace, etc.

__In the U.S.A., “public order” has figured in certain deci- Position in
sions’-567. The net result of these decisions seems to be U.S.A.
that the State may punish speeches and expressions of

1, Theatres Act, 1843 (6 & 7 Vict. ०. 68), section 9,

2, Public Order Act, 1936 (1 Edw. 8 & 7 Geo. 6 ०. 6).

3. Feiner v. New York, (1981) 340 U.S. 315 (Speech which violate
public peace and order).

(4: Canttell v. Connecticut, (1949) 310 U.S. 296, 308 (Statute of Con-
necticut requiring previous permission of Secretary of Public Welfare Council
before soliciting contributions for a religious cause,—held violative of 14th
and First amendments, as amounting to a previous restraint which was not
needed, to deal with any clear and present danger.

«5: Chaplineky v. New Hampshire, (1942) 315 U.S. 568 (Offensive, deri-
sive or annoying utterances).

6. Saia v. New York (1948) 334 U.S. 558.

7. Terminiello v. City of Chicago, (1949) 437 U.S. 1. (Reviews cases).


100

opinion tending fo incite an immediate breach of the peace
or riot, regulate the places and hours of public meetings
and discussions, and the use of public streets in relation to
the exercise of the right to freedom of speech, etc.

“{The] offence known as breach of the peace embraces
a great variety of conduct destroying or menacing public
vrder and tranquillity. It includes not only violent acts
and words likely to produce violance in others. No one
would have the hardihood to suggest that the principle of
freedom of speech sanctions incitement to riot....When
clear and present danger of riot, disorder, interference
with traffic upon the public streets, or other immediate
threat to public safety, peace and order appears, the
power of State to prevent or punish is obvious.”*

Most of the American cases, however; do not deal with
the aspect of interception of a communication. for reasons
of security of the State. There are a few decisions deal-
ing with previous restraint or with censorship generally.

But the rest of them relate to scandalous or obscene
matters, or to the distribution of pamphlets in public
parks?-8-4.%, ete, or seditious* and fradulent matters’,

4, Canieell v. Connecticut, (1940) 310 U.S. 296, 308.

2, Near ४. Minnesca, agg: 2) 283 U.S. 697. (Previous restraint upon
publication of malicious, s jous and defamatory nemepapers de. restraint
inthe form of court information held violative of the First Amend-
ment),

3. Lowell v. Griffin, (1938) 303 U.S. 444.

4. Nismotho v. Maryland, Lag: 51) 340 U.S. 268. (Judginent of Frank-
fucter 7. contains a summary of the previous decisions).

5. Rockwell v. Morris, (1961) शा NYS 2d 255 certiorary devied, (1961)
368 U.S. 913.

6. U.S. ४. Burleson, (1921) 255 U.S. 407 (Seditious ma:ters).

3. Donaldson ¥. Read Magazine, (1948) 333 U.S. 178 ( Fraudulent
matter),


APPENDIX VI
Emercency PROVISIONS in CENTRAL AcTS

An illustrative list of Central Acts‘ containing “provi-
sions dealing with emergency (with or without use of the
expression “emergency” or “public emergency.”),

(Prepared for a study of section 26, Indian Post Office Act,
1898).

Whether the expres-
sion “emergency”
used

Act Section Gist

t 2 3

(2 The Police Act, Section 15, . « Empowers the State Expression “Emer
1861 (5 Of 1861).

Government, by gency” not used.
Proclamation, to
declare that any
area is in a “dis-
turbed or danger-
ous”, state, The-
reupon, additional
Police force can be
employed and the
District Magistrate
may recover the
costs from the in-
habitants.

@) The Indian Tele- Section 50) and 5(2}f Empowers the Cent- Expression “public
graph At 1885 ral or State Go- emergency” is used,
of 1885). vernment or any in section 5.
03 of 188s officer authorized 5
by cither,—~
(a) to take posses.
sion of a telegraph,
or

(8) to intercept, de-
tain or disclose to
the Government
etc. telegraph mess-
ages, in case of
public emergency.
Government’s  cer-
Hifcate as to “pub-
ic emergency” j
final, ad
) Railways Act, Section ayA. . + Central Govern- Word “Emergency”
दर 1890). ment may, in the not used, लि
. Public interest di-
tect a railway to
give special prefer-
ence for transport-
ing certain goods,

—.

3. The Acts are arranged chronologically.


102

‘Whether the expres-

Act Section Gist sion “emergency”
used.
I 2 3 4

(a) The Epidemic Section 2 and 2A.. Section 2 empowers Word “Emergency
Diseases Act; 1897 the State Govern- not used.
(3 of 1897). ment, and section

2A empowers the
Central Govern-
imetit, to take (or
empower any per-
son to take) mea~
sures to prevent the
outbreak of a dan-
gerous epi
when it thinks that
the ordinary provi-
sions of the law arc
insufficient for the
urpose, (The
mtral =Govern-
ment’s power i
confined to ships,
etc.).

(5), The Land Acquisi- Section ry See Somawanti v. Expression “emer-
"Act, ‘State, ALR. 1963 gency” is used in
(1 of 1804) की. TE section. 17, See the
(Mudholkar -J.’s__case aw summarised
judgment). in Abdul Jabbar
v. State of West
Bengal, (1966) 71
C.W.N. 129, 137

Empowers the speci- Word . “Emergency”

(6)_'The Code of Section 144 « + 2
Criminal — Proce- fied Magis trates used in section 144
dure, 1898 (5 of to pass orders for (2).

1898). prevention of any
obstruction, injury

or danger to hu-
man life or pro-
erty, etc. In case

(7) The Indien Post Section26  . « Empowers the Cent- Word “public emer-
‘Office Act, 7898 Government, gency” used in sec~
(6 of 1898). State Government tion 26,

or any officer spe-



‘Whether the expres-
Act Section Gist sion “emergency”
used.
5] a 3 4
९8) The Indian Works Section 609) - + Empowers tte Cent- 6). Worl  “Emer-
fence Act, al Go.ernment gency” used in sec
1903 (7 of 1903). in case of emer tion 6(3).

gency, to declare

that all or any of (if) Also makes the
the powers confer- notification conclu
red by sub-section sive proof of emer-
(7) may be exer- gency.

cised any time

within six months

after the publica-

tion of the notice

under section 3(2),

Such notification

shall be conciusive

proof of the emer-

gency.

(9) The Indian Ports Section 68B, (read Empowers the Cent- Word “Hmergency”
Act, 1908 (15 of — with section 68A). ral Government used in section 688.
1908), to authorise any

officer to require
the authorities,
during the existence
of emergency,
perform — specified
duties for carrying
out any manoeuvres
in connection with
any scheme for the
defence of the said
port in the time of
war,

(10) The Indian Boi- Section 34(2) « Empowers the State Word “Jimergency”
lers Act, 1923 (5 Government, in used} in section 34.
1923). case of emergency,

ing)
any boilers or steam.
pipes from the ope-
Tation of all or any
of the provisions of

the
11) The Indian Offi- Section 11(2) * Empowers a Police “Emergency” used in
Act, Officer, not below section 11(2).
1923 (19 of 1923). the rank of Super-

intendent, to em-
power another po-
ice officer in the
case of great emer-
geucy or in the in-
terest of State, to



104

Section . Gist.

‘Whether the expres~
sion “emergency’*
ws

exercise the powers
of search or entry,
ete,, which norm-
ally is conferred by
the Magistrate on
a Police Officer not
below the rank of
the officer-in-charge
of a police station
under section 11(1)
of the said Act.

(12) The Indian Sol- Provisions of the Provides for suspen-
entire Act

diers (Litigation)
Act, 1925 (4 of
1925).

(13) The Indian
‘Lighthouses Act,
1927 (27 of 1927).

(74) The Criminal
Amendm:
Act, 1932 (23 of

(95) The Indian Air-
craft Act, 1934
(22 of 1934).

sion of legal pro-
ceedings or execu-
tion of decrees of
any Court of law,
where the opposite
party is a soldier
—serving uncer
ap ecial or war con-
itions.

Section 7x), Control of local
(2) and Proviso. light houses.

Section 10 ह Empowers the State
overnment to
make certain off-
ences cognizable
temporarily.

Head note to section Section 6 empowers
6. “Power of Cen- the Central Govern-
tral Government to ment, in the inte-
make orders in  restof public safety
emergency.” or tranquillity, to

oder, by a notifica-
tion in the gazette,
the cancellation of
any license or cer-
tiftcate, the regula-
tion of flights of
aircraft, erection of
aerodromes etc.

Disobedience of such
order is punishable
with three years

risunment, or
fine or both.

Expression — “Emer~

fen not used,
ise of the Act is
contemplated only:
war, etc,

Under section 7(2),
Proviso, a loca’
lighthouse authority:
may, “emer~
gency”, take suitable
action

Word “Emergency
net used, except in
headnote to section 6.

Werd  “emergency’*
used in head note ta
section 6.



Whether the expres-
Act Section Gist sion “emergency”
used
I 2 3 4
Indian Aircraft Act Section 8 B—Headnote., Power to take mea- “Emergency” used in
1934 (contd.) “Emergency powers sures tO prevent the head note,
for protecting public epidemics,
health,*

(16) The Indian Tariff Section 4A. .
Act, 1934 (32 of
1934).

17) Armed Forces Preamble, long title,
(Emergency Du- —short title, and
ties Act, 1947 (15 section 2,
of 1947).

(18) Trading with Heading, title ang
the Enemy (Con- sections (1), 72(2).
tinuance of provi-
sions) Act, 7947
G6 of 1949).

Emergency power of Expression
the Central Gov- gency” used
ernment, to increase marginal
or levy export section 4A,
duties by notifica~

tion in the Gazette,

even if the article

is not ineluded in

the Second Sche-

dule. However, the

notification is to be

laid before the Par-

liament, if sitting,

soon after, and jj

not sitting, within

7 days of, its re-

assembly.

“emer-
in the
Tote to

Under section 2, Word. “Emergency”,
the Central Gov used in preamble?
ernment may (tem- long title and short
porarily) “declare ‘title.

any specific service

to be of vital im-

Portance to the

community. There-

after, it” is the

dury of a member

of the armed forces

to obey a command

in relation to em-

ployment in. that

service.

Sccks to extend the
provisions of the
Defence of India
Rules, 1939 (made
under the “Act of dinance.
1939), relating to
the control of trad-
ing with States at
war (and persons
etc. belonging to
States at war), with
the Government of
India, and the cus-
tody of property be-
longing to them,



186
Whether the expres- ५
Act Section Gist sion “emergency”
used
I 2 3 4
even after the ex-
Piry of the Defence
of India Act, 1939
and of the Emer-
gency Provisions
(Continuance) Or-
dinance, 1946.
(19) The Factories Section 5 . . Empowers the State Theexpression Spub-
‘Act, 1948 (63 of Government to lic emergency” is

exempt (by notifi- used in section 5.
cation, etc.) any

i s factory or class of
कि seieg ACO 1937 factories from’ all
English). or any provisions

of the Act in case
of publ emergency व
for 2 specified pe-
riod not exceeding
3 months at a time.

- Section . . Empowers the Pre- “Emergency” used in
2 omos th People हे ” siding Officer to the margifial note.
Act, 198r (43 of adjourn the poll in

case of riot or vio-
lence or natural
calamity or any su-
ficient cause on
account of which it
is not possible to
hold the poil,
Rail Com- Title and section 3 . Empowers the Cen- Word “emergency”
(a2) Raley है “tral government to used in the’ short

7957).

Brvisions) ace appoint, directors title.
1951 (51 of 1951). in a Railway Com-

pany, where a situ-
ation has arisen in
the affairs of a
Railway Company
which has prejudi-
cially affected the
convenience of per-
sons using the rail-
way or has caused
serious dislocation
in any trade or in-
dustry using the
railway, or has cau-
sed serious unem-
ployment amongst
a section of the
community, or
when, in the opi-
njon of the Central
Government, it is
Necessary to

the management of
the company in the

national interest.



10t

‘Whether the expres-
Act Section Gist sion“ ‘crgagency””
w

1 2 3 4
(22) The Mines Act, Section 399) . Empowers the Gen- “Emergency” uted in
tral Government section 39(a).

1952 (35 of 1942). कि cram
(0 make rul 1to~

viding for exemp-
tion of all persons
except adolescents
from the provisions
of section 20, 30,
37५ 34 or 36(5) in
case where an emer-
gency involving se-
rious risk to the
safety of the mire
or of persons em-
ployed therein is

apprehended.

(23) ae ee teeny Insur- Preamble and title .  Provides"for taking The word “Emer-
‘ance cover, in the public gency”” used in the
Provision) Act, 1956 interest, of the short title.

(9 of 1956). management of life

insurance business
pending national-
isation thereof.

(24) The Arms Act, Section 17(9) . + Central Government Not used.

1959 (54 of 1959). may Patind
arms licences,
(25) The Defence of Preamble, and sec- Preamble refers to The “Proclamation,
Tndia Art, 1962 tion 1(3). the “Proclamation Jof Emergency” 18-
Gr of 1962). Emergency”. Sec- ferred to.
tion 10) limits the

duration of the Act
to the Emergency
and six months
thereafter.

(26) The Personal In- Preamble, title and Empowers the Cen- Word “emergency”
juries (Emergency section 2(5). + [ere Government used, in short title.
ae te 1962 fo ies a scheme
Fs for ant of re~
G9 » lief in respect of
injuries sustained
during the period
of emergency, by
certain persons.

(27) The poke Preamble, title and Makes provisions for Word “Emergency”
Risks ( In sections 70), 5(1), insurance of used in short title,
surance Act, 1962 2, 9 and 10, goods in India
(62 of 1964). against damage by

enemy action dur-
ing the period of

emergency.



108

Whether the expres~
Act Section Gist sion “emergency”
- used,
I 2 3 4

(28) The Emeegency Preamble, title & sec- Makes Provisions for Word “em:
Riske ries) tions 1(3), 2, 3, 4, insurance of certain used in short title.
Insurance Act, 4, 6, 7 and 8, Property, like fac- .

1962 (63 of 1962). tories and their
buildings, against
damage by enemy
action, during the
period of emer-

ney’

gency.
(9) The Major Port Sectiong0 . =. The Board under Used in the body of.
‘Trusts Act, 1963 the Act is empo- section 90.
(38 of 1963), wered to set apart

funds for different

cy
arising in the or-
dinary conduct of
work this



109
APPENDIX VII

STATUTORY PROVISIONS IN ENGLAND AS TO INTERCEPTION OF
POSTAL ARTICLES

The following provisions in England may be noted:-—

(1) Section 11 (1) (b) (०), Post Office Act, 1953 (1 &

2 Eliz. 2c. 36), penalising the sending of a postal packet

containing indegent or obscene prints or articles or
containing words etc., which are grossly offensive’.

(2) Section 11(3), Post Office Act, 1953 (1 & 2 ॥ 0411.
2 6. 36), empowering the making of regulations for
‘preventing sending or delivery of postal packets con-
taining words, etc., of a libellous Character.

(3) Section 17(1), Post Office Act, 1953 (1 & 2 Eliz.
2 ९. 36), regarding the Postmaster General’s power to
detain any postal packet suspected to contain goods
chargeable with customs duty.

(4) Section 58(1}, proviso, Post Office Act, 1953
(1 & 2 Eliz. 2 ०. 36), which saves power of the Secre-
tary of State to order by warrant in writing that letters
passing through the Post Office may be opened or de-
tained (extract attached).

(5) Under section 52 of the Telegraph Act, 1863
(26 & 27 Vict. c. 112), the Secretary of State can oy
warrant, authorise such persons as he thinks fit to
assume control of telegraph works where such action
is “expedient for the public service®”.

(6) Section 20, Telegraph Act, 1868 (31 & 32 Vict.
९. 110). (Punishment of an official for disclosing or
intercepting messages, contrary to his duty). ( his
legislation does not expressly cover telephones).

1. Section 11(2)(b)\e), Post Office Act, 1953 (1 & 2 Eliz. 2 ०. 36), pres
‘sumably, is not governed by the test laid down in the Obscene Publications
Aa, 1959. Sse Wade and Phillips, Constitutional Law, 1960), page

2. See Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 7, page 379, paragraph 8032).

3. The question of tapping telephones was considered in England i
‘a Report of the Privy Councillors (1957), Cmd. 3 it arn है
Philhps, Constitutional Law, 0979४: कि discussed in Wade and



110

EXTRACTS OF SECTIONS 11 (1) (b) (०), 11 (8), 17(1) anp 58 (1)
or THe EnciisH Post Orricr Act, 1953 (1 & 2 फो12, 2 ०. 36)...

Prohibition नए, (1) A sh:
od - person shall not send or attempt to send or

by post of procedure to be sent a postal packet which—

certain

articles, (8) ...०-०--०००००--००

(हे पड ite, indecent or obscere print, Baint”
ing, P toa graph, lithograph, engraving, cinematograp!
filme, ik, ae or written communication, or any
indecent or obscene article whether similar to the
akove or not; or

(०) has on the packet, or on the cover thereof, any
words, marks or.designs which are grossly ojfensive or
of an ividécent or obscene character,

(2) .... seeees

(3) Post' offide regulations may be made for preventing
the sending or delivery by post of any such articies as are-
mentioned in paragraph (0) or (c) of sub-section (1) of
this-sectién or of any postal packet having thereon, or on
the 5 cover thereof, any: ४ marks or designs ofa libellous

(4 nr
dean postal _ 17. (1) Without: prejudice to the last foregoing section,

packets thé Postmaster-General-may detain any postal packet sus-

कई, ed to contalit"any goods’ chargeable with any customs

Contraband, aiey which has not been paid or secured or any goods in
the course of importation, exportation or removal into or
out of the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands or the Isle
of Man contrary to any prohibition or restriction for the
time being in force with res) spect thereto under or by virtue
of any enactment and may ard the packet to the Com-
missioners of Customs and Excise.

(2) & (3) ..... pede ceeeeee

sarang of — 58. (1) If any officer of the Post Office, contrary to his
postal duty, opens, or procures or suffers to be opened, any postal
Packets by packet in course of transmission by post, or wilfully detains
offers oF or delays, or procures or suffers to be detained or delayed,
Office. any such postal packet, he shall be guilty of ¢ misdemeanour

and be liable to imprisonment or to a fine, or to both:

Provided that nothing in this section shall extend to the
opening, detaining or delaying of « postal packet returned
for want of 6 true direction, or returned by reason that the
person to whom it is directed has refused it, or has refused
or neglected to pay the postage thereof, or that the packet
cannot for any other reason be delivered, or to the opening,
detaining or delaying of a postal packet under the autho-
rity 0: is Act or in obedience to an express warrant im
writing under the hand of a Secretary of State,

(2) ...--- ae”



ul

» APPENDIX VII

Repokr-or Cominariag in ExGLAND REGARDING INTERCEPTION

OF COMMUNICATIONS

- In England, a Committee examined the question of inter-

ception The circumstances in which the committee was
appointed are thus steted':—

Security

Telephotie cointunications (interception).—On
June 6, 1957, ‘the Home Secretary was asked in the
House of Commons it’ what circumstances he had
authoristd thé polite to supply the Bar Council, in
cofmection with 4 desciplinary matter affecting 2 bar-
tister, with transeripts ‘of intercepted telephone con-
versations if the Lotidon area.
uc. कै. Butler replied that the material in question was
‘obtained under tha autherity of a.warrant of the Secre-
tary of State and related to the case of a notorious and
self-confessed criminal; that it was disclosed to the Bar
Countil .iz.response te a requdst from the Council for
astistaneé ip inquiries: which they were making into-
‘complaints about the professiofial conduct 6f a parti-
cular baruister; that the Member who asked-the ques-

- tion could: be assured that the Secretary of State only
acted in this;way when he realised that the public in-
terest necessitated such action; that this action would
never be used except in the interests of public order;
that he wag not prepared to go into detail in this mat-
ter, whith derived from the prerogative and which was
a power that he should exercise at his discretion; that
he considered that the circumstances of this case justi-
fied the action that was taken (571 H.C, Deb, 1469-1471;
see also 1487—1497, 1500—1501).

On June 7, 1957, the Home Secretary made a state-
ment and answered further questions. He said that.
the prerogative power of intercepting telephone: com-
munications could be used only by the personal autho-.
vity of the Secretary of State; that this power was one
which Parliament had always recognised to be essen-
tial for the protection of society; that it was used. solely
in eases involving the security of the State, or for the
purpose of detecting serious crime; that information.
from this source was jealously guarded and it was
settled principle that it was not disclosed to gersons.
outside the public service; that the circumstances of
this case were, however, wholly exceptional; that it
was represented Re) the Secretary of State that the
disclosure of this information to the Bar Council was.

1 7857) Public Law 254, 255.


monwealth
1957.

112

desirable in the interests of maintaining our high stan-
dard in the administration of justice and that the
Secretary of State felt it to be his duty to supply to
the Bar Council information which already been
obtained; that he must make clear that this case would
‘not. be treated as a precedent; that Her Majesty’s Gov-
ernment appreciated to the full the necessity of preven-
ting any abuse of this necessary but distasteful power;
that the decision was taken by his predecessor as Sec-
retary of State; that in his (Mr. Butler’s) opinion, the
general principle that this sort of information was not
disclosed to persons outside the public service should
he the line of conduct in future; that there was no gues:
tion of wsing this power to obtain information about
what pas: between a lawyer and his instructing
Solicitor or a member of the legal profession and his
client; that the power was used to detect serious crime
and would never be used for prying into confidential
‘communications between an accused person and his
legal adviser (571 H.C. Deb. 1573-1579; see also 572 H.C.
Deb. 413-424, June 27, 1957).

On June 28, 1957, it was announced that a com-
mittee composed of Sir Norman Birkett, Lord Monckton
ang Mr. Patrick Cordon Walker, would inquire into the
practice. Their terms of reference are “to consider
and report upon the exercise by the Secretary of State
of the executive power to intercept communications
and, in particular, under what authority, and to what
extent, and for what purposes this power has been put;
and to recommend whether, how, and subject to what
safeguard, this power should be exercised, and in what
circumstances information obtained by such means
should properly be used or disclosed.”

The main points made in the Report of the Committee
of Privy Councillors have been thus summarised’.

Security

Telephone communications (interception).—On
October 31, 1957, the Prime Minister stated that he had
received the Report of the Committee of Privy Coun-
cillors, that the Government accepted all recommen-
dations and that arrangements were being made to give
effect to those which called for a change in procedure
(575 ELC. Deb, 398-399).

The Committee's report stated that the origin of
the power of the Executive to intercept eommunica-
tions could only be surmised, but the power had been
exercised from very early times and had been recog-

x. See (1958) Pubile Law 7% 10 73, extracting the sninmary from com-
ey (Commonwealth Office of Information) Vol. r2,


113

nised as lawful by a succession of statutes covering
the last 200 years or more. The manner of its exercise
had from time to time been the subject of public dis-
cussion, and: in 1844 had been the subject of investi-
gation by two secret committees, one of each House
of Parliament, which inquired into the law respecting
the detaining and opening of letters at the General
Post Office, but both these committees had recognised
the power as lawful.

The committee found some difference of view on
the authority to intercept telephone messages; in one
‘view it was identical with the power to open letters;
in another, it rested on a comparatively modern statute.

It is today the invariable practice that the inter-
ception of communications is carried out only on the
authority of the Secretary of State for Home Affairs
(or, in the case of Scotland) given by warrant under
his own hand; the warrant sets out the name and
address or telephone number of the person whose com-
munications are to be intercepted. The Secretary of
State has to satisfy himself, on the facts of each parti-
cular case, that it is proper to issue his warrant. In
practice, the principle on which he acts is that the
purpose of the interception must be either to detect
serious crime or to safeguard the security of the State.

The power of interception is now almost exclu-
sively exercised, under warrant from the Secretary of
State, by the Metropolitan Police, the Board of Cus-
toms and Excise and the Securtiy Service; the Com-
mittee found that “it is used with the greatest care
and circumspection, under the strictest rules and safe-
guards.” They were satisfied that “the Secretaries of
State and all the officials concerned have taken, and
continue to take, scrupulous care to ensure the strict
observance of the purposes to which it is intended by
the Home Office that the interception of communica-
tions should be directed and confined”, that “inter.
ception is highly selective and is used only where
there is good reason to believe that a serious offence
or security interest is involved”, and that the use of
the power has been effective in detecting major erimi-
nals and preventing injury to national security.

They recommended that the exercise of the power
in these limited spheres should be allowed to continue
under the same strict rules and supervision: “the
criminal and the wrongdoer should not be allowed to
use services provided by the State for wrongful pur-
poses quite unimpeded, and the Police, the Customs,
and the Security Service ought not to be deprived of
an effective weapon in their efforts to preserve arid
maintain order for the benefit of the community.” In

61 M of Law—11.


li¢

the opinion of the committee, “the interference with
the privacy of the ordinary law-abiding citizen or with
the individual Liberty is infinitesimal and only arises
as an inevitable incident of intercepting the commu-
nications of some wrongdoer. It has produced no
harmful consequences.

The committee reached the conclusion, however,
that, in the Marrinan case, which had given rise to the
investigation, the decision of the Home Secretary,
Lord Tenby, to permit the disclosure of information
contained in telephone intercepts to the Bar Council
and the Benchers of Lincoln’s Inn was a mistaken
decision, though there could be no doubt that it was
“wholly governed by considerations of the public in-
terest”. They recommended that “in no circumstances.
should. materigl obtained by interception be made
availabie to any body or person whatever outside the
public service”.

Among other safeguards which, the committee recom-
mended, should be adopted, were:

that there should be a regular review of outstand~
ing warrants not less than once.a month;

that warrants should be valid only for a stated
period; :

that each warrant should relate only to one indivi~
dual, of whom Particulars should be specified;

that full records should be kept in the Home 026
in each -case;: पु

that there should be no extension of the powers.
of interception beyond those existing powers which
the committee has defined.

While agreeing with cther members of the committee on
their main conciusions and recommendation, Mr. Gordo
Walker made reservations on the continued use of the exist-
ing power of interception in view of public repugnance.
He considered that the power should be used for the detec-
tion of crime only in the most rare and urgent cases, such
as the apprehension of dangerous criminals or lunatics;
and for security purposes only for direct counter-espio~
nage and protection of high secrets of State, or for the
prevention of the employment of fascists or communists
on work vital to the State (the two purposes he added, for
which the Security Service at present mainly intercepts
communications) "2,

3. Even after the Committee’s Report, a contrcwerey arose in
1959. See Comment, “Interception, Partial and Impartial”, (z960)
Public Law 5, and 514 H.C. Deb. 7184, 1388, and 615 H.C. Debates
1523, 1536 et. seg.



115

As regards the 1957 Report, the following extract from
one study! would be of interest—

An important limitation on the principle in
Entick v. Carrington must, however, be noted. The
principle assumes that the action of the administrator
which has been called in question infringes some legal-
ly protected interest of the private citizen. Yet upon
investigation it may be decided by the court that no
such legally protected interest has been infringed.
This was very clearly brought out in an affair which
gave rise to much public discussion, and resulted in the
appointment of a committee whose report is entitled
“Report of the Committee of Privy Councillors ap-
pointed to inquire into the interception of communica-
tions”. Three Privy Councillors of undisputed autho-
rity, Lord Birkett, Lord Monckton and the Rt. Hen.
Patrick Gordon Walker, considered how far the prac-
tice of wire-tapping (as it is commonly known) could
be justified.

The Committee found that the power was on the
whole wisely used; warrants for interception were
sparingly granted (in 1956, 183 letters and 199 telephone
interceptions were authorised) and only when the Home
Secretary was personally satisfied that the public
interest ‘required it. The Origin and basis of the
power of intercept communications is obsure, though
it has been exercised for many years. (In_ the eight-
eenth century the Bishop of Bath and Wells was the
chief government decoder), The Committee's conclu-
sions suggest that there are two views as to the origin
and basis of the power. First, it is said that there is a
prerogative power, or a power in the nature of a pre-
rogative power, to intercept communications in the
public interest. (Prerogative, we may here interpose,
is that law for the Queen which is no law for the sub-
ject. It is the name for the common law discretionary
power of the Crown). This power is said to be ira-
pliedly recognised by a long series of statutes relating
to the Post Office from 1710 to 1953. Thus, section 58,
sub-section (1) of the Post Office Act, 1953, makes it
an offence for any officer of the Post Office to open any
communication except under the express warrant in
writing of a Secretary of State. Now it is certainly a
curious prerogative which enables one Minister of the
Crown to interfere with the statutory functions of an-
other; and it is also certainly curious that none of the
many writers on the prerogative throughout the cea-
turies has referred to this power; and it is of course
clear that long user of itself does not make legal what
is otherwise illegal. There is, therefore, much to he

1. Heuston, Essays in Constitutional Law, (1964), pages 50-32...
2, H.M.S.O. (1957) Cmd, 283.


rig

said for the second view, whien is simply tast 20 pre-
rogative power is needed ta intercept comraunications
betause no unlawful act is thereby committed. This
was the view of the Post Office down to 1937 so far as
telephonic communications were concerned, The Post
Master General's view until that year, when he was
persuaded to follow the Home Office practice, was that
anyone could tap telephone, and indeed if one looks at
the statutes it appezrs there is some justification for
this view. The Acts do not authorise the Secretary of
State to issue a warrant, presumably because anycne
may do so; they merely make it a criminal offence to
interfere with communications except under the
authority of such a warrant. This view depends upon
the fact that 6 legal power is only required if some
legally protected interest of the subject is being in-
vaded, and in the case of invereer tion of commiuninra-
tions it is hard to see just what that interest may be.
Tf we look at the recognised heads of civil liability it
is hard to see how interference with a postal packet,
or even more, a telephonic communication, can nassi
bly be fitted into any of them. Breach of contract is
out of the question, for it was re-affirmed by the Court
of Appeal in 1957 that the services which the Paost-
tmaster-General renders are nat of a contractual
character. Nor does a Post Office servant who opens
@ letter commit any tert ar breach of bailment. Tres-
pass to chattels is cut cZ the question because the
plaintiff is not in possession of the article, nor indeed
has he a right to immediate possession of it, for the
Post Office regulations provide that one who has
posted a letter is unable to retrieve it. The other torts
such as conversion or detinue seem equally inappro-
priate; in any event section 9({1) of the Crown Pro-
eeedings Act, 1947, effectually hars such actions?. The
conclusion would seem to be that it is time for Par
(arent to review the situation and place the whole
matter on a firm statutory basis.”

a. Tricfus & Co. v. Posr Office, (1957) 2 QB. 352; {1 2A. BR
387 (GAD 352; (1957)

2. The sub-section mot only relieves the Crown from Lability in
respect of all telephone messages, loss of or Gamage to al) utregistered,
postal packers, but also exempts from liability any officer of the Crown
except at the suit of the Crown itself, It secms thar one is without,
any remedy if a postmaster destroys ve’s mail before one’s eyes,
This is a remarkable, pertazs a unique. exczptinn to the prindple
that every official is individually responsible for his tts.


APPENDIX IX
(LEGAL ISSUES RAISED RY INTERCEPTION OF POSTAL ARTICLES.

The question! whether interference by way of inter-
ception of postal articles amounts to any illegality at all,
may be usefully considered. So far as tangible goods of
economic value are concerned, the following points can be
made: ---

(a) It has been held in one 285९९, that the Post.
Master General can take on the character of a_bailee,
so as to be entitled to sue a third person. In that case
it was also observed, that the Post Master Geneval
would have a good answer to an action by the baivor
for damages for loss of the thing bailed. But that was
because the Crown could not be sued. In India, in
view of section 6 (last part), the Post Office may per-
haps incur liability also qua bailee; and if that is 50,
then, by not carrying out the duty of conveying the
goods, it commits the tort of conversion, at least if the
goods are destroyed or materially interfered with,
pecause the goods were placed in the Post Office only
for the purpose of being transmitted to the
addressee,

The following discussion regarding bailment may
be cited?—

‘Bailment. is essentially a delivery on terrns,
but none of the definitions we have is exhaustive:
in view of the widely different forms a_bailment
ean take. In Terms d-e la Ley it is writtten:

“Bailment is a delivery of things whether
it be of writings, goods or stuff to another,
sometimes to be delivered back to the bailor,.
that is to him that so delivered it, sometimes
to the use of the bailee. that is to say, of him
to whom it is delivered, and sometimes also:
it is delivered to a third person.”

And in Stephen’s Digest of Criminal Law:

“When one person delivers, or causes to
be delivered, to another any movable thing
in order that it may be kept for the person
making the delivery, or that it may be used,
gratuitously or otherwise, by the person to
whom delivery is made, or that it may be

1, See the query raised in Heuston, E: ii ivutic

(196, छत 1० se » Essays in Constitutional Law
2. The Winkfield, (1902), Probate 42, 54, 60.
3. Vaines, Personal Property, (1957) pages 67—68.

7


118

kept, as a pledge by the person to whom deli-
very is made, or that it may be carried, or that
work may be done upon it by the person to
whom delivery is made gratuitously or not,
and when it is the intention of the parties
that the specific thing so delivered, or the
article into which it is to be mace, shali be
delivered either to the person making the
delivery, or to some other person appointed
by him to receive it, the person making the
delivery is said to hail the thing delivered:
the act of delivery is called a bailment; the
person making the delivery is called the
bailor, the yerson to whom it is made is
called the bailee.”+.

The above definitions avoid indentifying a bail-
Ment with a contract but until recently judges and
writers heve more or less consistently treated bail-
ment as an express or implied contract*, and it is
curious that the two cases which deny that a bailment
ment as an express or implied contract®, and it is
ts a great deal to be said for this mode of treatment
and it might well be asked whether, for practical] pur-
poses, bailment is not better regarded as a contract in
view of the importance of the contractual terms‘
which generally dominate the relationship®,

“However, it is clear that bailment is sui generis,
and modern writers adopt this view mostly without
question and the theoretical difficulties treating
bailment as a contract are apparent when one consi-
ders, in addition te the simple case of bailment by

1, These definitions are cited by Romer, L.J., in Ashby v. Talburst,
1037) 2 41 ELR. 837; (1937) 2 K.B. 242. Cj. the frst definition given by
S$. Wiliam Jones, op, cit., 1, “a delivery af goods, on a condition
express OF ‘implied, that they shall be restored by the baile to the
tailor or according to his direction as secon as the purpose foy which they
were bailed shall be answered.”

2. Sir William Jones, op. cit., defines bailment “a delivery of
goods in trust, om a contract express or implied, thet the trust shall
be duly executed, and the goods be delivered, as soon as the time
‘or use for which they were bailed shall have elapsed or be performed.” Cf.
his first definition, supra.

ca R, ४. Robson (1861), Le. & Ca. 23 3 Riv. McDonald, (1885), 15 Q.B.D.
323; holding respectively that a married woman and an infant cvald be guilty
Of larceny as a bailee. Of. Smith v. Plomer (1912), 15 East 607, See alsa
Meuz vy. Great Eastern Rat! Co., (1895) 2 Q-B-D. 387.

4, Halsbury’s Laws (grd Edn.), 96, states “Ie must be temembered ,
however, that bailment isa contract and the parties may “slweys vary the
incidents by the terms of the comtrace.”

5. For an unsuccessful attcmpt at evasion, see Elder Dempster v. Pater-
son, Zochonis & Co., (1924) AG, 522.

6, Winfield, op, cit., 975 Fifost, ap. cit. 25; Ceshire and Fifcot on Con-
tract; Goodeve, Personal Property, Chap. 2, section 3; Kenny, Outlines
of Criminal Taw, Chap. XIII; Paton, Bailment in Gomtmon Law,

29.



119

finding, the problem of discovering the consideration!
in_a gratuitous bailment (said in Coggs v. Bernard
(Barnard)? to be in fact that the owner entrusts
the gocds with the bailee), the position of & distraining
Jandlord* or the distrainer of a chattel demage feasant,
the undoubted bailment that exists when goods are not
collected from a carrier at their destination’, or the
bailment that may arise upon a misdelivery.”

Thus, it is not accurate to assume that a bailment
arises only on contract?, “Bailment is necessarily to be
dealt with by the Contract Act only so far as it is a
kind of contract. It is not to be assumed that without

an enforceable contract there cannot in any case be a
bailment,”?

If the view that the Post Office isa bailee is ac-
cepted, then such bailment would seem to fall within
the species “mandatum”—wherein gocds are deliver-
ed to some who is to carry them or te de something to
them without reward?

{b) As regards conversion, it is true, that ordinarily
only a person in possession or entitled’ to immediate
Possession can sue in conversion. He must have the
right of possession and a right of property in the goods

1. But conundrums on consideration are sterile to the modern
lawyer. Law Revision Committee’s Sixth Interim Report, Centra?
London Property Trust Ltd. v, High Trees Howse, Lid. (1947) KB. 130;
Denning, LJ. in ry MLR. 3.

2. (1703) 2 Id. Raym. 909 and see the well-known and odd case ot
Bainbridge ¥. Firmstone (0838), 8 Ad, & Ex. 743.

3.2 Elackstone’s Commentaries 482, says the distrainer - subject
to a confract implied by law, e.g. 12 restore the goods on payment
before sale. But guaere whether he is a bailee. See pase 62, ante,

4. See Mitchell v. Lancashize and Yorkshire Rail Co, (1875). L.Q. 10
Q.B.D. 256. Here the contract provided for the contingency but the ” terms
did no more than state what in fact was the common law. See’ page
34, post.

Ck दिख and Powell, Led. v. Plummer Raddis Lid. (1933)4
59 TLR. 158, with उक्त v. Bott, (1874), L.R. 9 Bech, 86, anda
Page $4, post.

SG. See Cheshire ant Fifoor, Contracts, (1964), pages 72, 73 74; Vaines,
Personal Property, (1957), page 76.

7.4 Pollock & Mulla, Indian Contrat Act, (2957), PaBe 362, criticis -
ing uhe assumption to the contrary in Ran एल v, Stare of UB, ALE.
7950 All. 206, 207,

8. «As to clessification of bailments, see Coggs ० Bernaril, (1703) 2 La,
Rayman 909; Wilshere, Common Law, (1951); pages 583, 587, ‘Vainces,
Personal Property (1957), page 62.

9, For afulldiscussion, see Paton, Builtaent in che Common Lat, (7052),
pages 29, 37.


120

at the time of the conversion or detention’--*-*. It is
also true, that the sender of goods by post cannot
retrieve the goods sent by mail, without the orders of
the competent authority’, But that provision seems to
be intended only to ensure that the process of trans-
mission is not affected, and not to regulate the pro-
prietory rights of the parties concerned.

(c) Moreover, as has been observed", sometimes
the owner’s right to immediate possession is remitted
by the very act of conversion, so as to entitle him to
sue in trover. Thus, it has been held, that if goods
have been placed in the hands of a bailee for a limited
purpose, and he deals with them in a manner inconsist-
ent with the terms of the bailment, (as by selling
them), the right to possession revests in the owner, who
can forthwith sue the bailee for conversion’,

(d) Further, an owner has, in any case, a right to
sue for goods if he is deprived of possession even if he
is not entitled to immediate possession, for an injury
to his reversionary interest’ io, and this head of liabi-
lity (action on the case for damage to his interest in
the goods) would seem to be appropriate at least where
the articles in question are destroyed.

(e) If the property in the goods has passed to the
addressee”, then certainly the addressee can sue for
the goods, either as owner or as a person entitled to get
immediate possession,

So far as goods having no economic value, or goods
having a value besides an economig one, are concerned,
these points can be made: —

(i) The sender or the addressee—whoever is re-
garded as entitled to the immediate possession of

I. Halsbury, 3rd Bdn., Vol. 38, page 783, paragraph 1297.
2. Jarvis v. Williams, (1955) 1 AILE.R. 108, गा (GA).
& Commercial Banking Co. v. Mann, (1961) A.C. 15 (1960) 3 Al. E.R.

482 (P.C.).

4. Generally, see Warren, “Qualifying as Plaintiff ir. an action for
a conversion” (1936) 49 Harvard L. Rev. 1084.

5. Section 18 of the Indian Post Office Act, read with rule 201, Indian
Post Office Rules, 1933.

6. Fleming, Torts, (1965), page 64.

7. North General Wagon Co. v. Graham (1950) 2 K.B. 73 (1950) 1 Alt
E. R. 780, as explained in Reliance Car Htc. v. Roding Motors, (19§2) 2 Alt

E.R. 1933(0.2.)-
8, See Salmond, Torts, (1961), page 278.
9. Sec also Paton, Bailment in the Common Law (1952), page

385.

10. Street, Torts, (1959), page 59.

11. Mears v. L.S.W. Rly. Co., (1862) 11 C.B.N. 85०.

12. As between the sender and the addressee, the answer to the
question whether Property has passed to the addressee depends on
many other factors, e.g., whose agent the Post Office is. See I.T.C. v. Ogale

glass Worrs, ATR: 1954 S.C. 429.


121

goods—can sue in detinue’. It is not the economic loss
that is significant in the case of such goods (for exarn-
ple, letters), but another kind of loss, i.e. loss of the.
literary matter of information or views in question. The
sender or addressee would like to have the goods in
Specie—which is possible in detinue alone®-*-*.

Detinue is the form of action which lies when one
person wrongfully detains the goods of another. The
gist of the action is unlawful failure to return the
goods, when the goods are demanded'.

Thus, wrongful taking is redressed by trespass;
wrongful detention is redressed by detinue; and wrong-
ful destruction or disposal is redressed by conversion.
This applies to papers also’. In fact, any chattel can.
be the subject-matter of conversion’.

“The standard remedy of a person who has been
deprived of goods is conversion; and detinue is the
standard remedy against a person who fails to return
the goods”. In detinue, the suit is primarily for the-
return of the chattal?.

The gist of the action of detinue is unlawful de-
tainer, and it is an action of tort. It is no longer neces-
sary to allege “delivery” (detinue sur bailment) or
“finding” (detinue sur trover), and it can be brought
against any one who unlawfully detains goods from a
person entitled to immediate possession, without re-
gerd to the means by which possession is obtained-°.

‘or wrongful deprivation of use and possession of the
plaintiff's goods, conversion is the recognised legal ex-
pression”, The action of detinue, on the other hand, is:
based upon a wrongful detention of plaintiff's chat-
tels4,

1. As to detinue, see Salmond, Torts, (961), page 290, afticles
48; Snell, Equity, (1960), page 53%, paragraph 4 Paton, Bailment in
the Common Law (1952), page 379.

2. Street, Torts, (1959), page 57.

3. As to specific restitution, see Keeton, Equity, (1955), 28 ५.
128-519; Samond Torts (asst), page aga, BAN (4955) एक

4. See Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 38, page 77. et seq.

5. See Ballett v. Mingay, (1943), 1 All. E.R. 143, 145 (0.4.).
3 & M’Leod v. M’Ghie, (1841) 2 Man & G, 326 ‘(mutilating a guarantee), .
cited in Fleming, Torts, (1965), page 60.

62, 7. See definition of conversion in Salmond, Torts (1961), page

262.
8, 1.8. Weir, Note—“Tort, Contract and Bailment”. (November, 1965),
Camb. L.J. 186, 190.

9. See Sinnan Chetty v. Aiabigi Aiyer, (1923) LL.R. 45 Mat.
852, 861,

10. Wilshere, Common Law, (1957), pages 324, 325.

11, Clerk & Lindsell, Torts (1961), paragraph 899.

12, Clerk & Lindsell, Torts, (1961), paragraph 934.

13. For damage by negligence, see Simpson, Action on the for -
Conversion (1959) 75 LOR 364 ° ome SF


122

Gi) ,The recipient of a letter acquire the property
in the paper". But the property in the contents is in
the sender, at least so far private matters are con-
cerned*5.6_

(iii) A letter is an “original literary work”, and
the writer has copyright therein, and can restrain any
publication of copies of his letter as an infringement?-3.

Would not the destrucion of a literary work
amount to destruction of a recognished literary pro-
perty, and thus be actionable?

(iv) The writer of a confidential work ean, in cer-
tain cases, prevent its publication®10,

Opening of such letters may, perhaps therefore.
constitute an injury, though this has not yet been
decided.

In a case before the House of Lords", publication of
unpublished lectures of a university professor was res-
trained, and this was on the ground that stich publice-
tion was in the nature of a breach of confidence which
fell within the ordinary scope of equitable ves-
traint??-18,

An English case'* relating to photographers may
be cited in this connection. In that case. a photogra-
pher had, by arrangement, taken and sold to the plain-
tiff some photographs of herself, (i.e. the plaintiff). The
photographer, then, at a subsequent date, -without the
plaintiffs knowledge, used the negative to have her
likeness inserted in Christmas cards. The plaintiff

1. Paton, Jurisprudence (1946), Page 128,

.2. Gf. section 10, Illustration (c), Specific Relief Act, 1377 (1 of 1877)
(repealed); now section 8, Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963).

3. See also Oliver vy. Oliver, (1861) Ir C.B. (NLS.) 1393 132 RR.
505; 31 LJ. CP. 4. 373

4. Cf. section 54, illustration {y), and  scction 58, illustration
(५, ‘Specific Relief “Act, 1877 (1 of '1877) (repealed); "now sections
39-39, Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963).

5. Halsbury, 3rd Edn,, Vol. 8, peges 437-438.

6. Copinger, Copyright, (1958), page 28,

7. Copinger on Copyright (1958), page 27.

8. British Oxygen Co, v. Liquid Air Co., (1925) 1 Ch. 383.
9. Halsbury, 3rd Edn, Vol. 8, page 438.

10. For a full discussion, see Gopingar, Copyright (1958), pow
37 to 38.

11, Caird v. Sime, (1887) 12 App. Cas. 326,

12, See Hanbury, Modern Equity, (1957), page 5st.

13. See also Snell, Equity, (1966), pages 721, 722. See also 7.1,,
Mathieson, in (196r) 39 Cenadian Bar Review 409.

14, Pollard v. Photographic Co. (1888) 40 Ch, D. 345.


123

applied for an injunction to restrain this. She had not
ee was the necessary) registered any copyright in the
negative, but she contended that there was an implied
condition in her contract that the negative should net
‘be used for any other purpose than to supply photc-
graphs to herself. The court held that, a photographer
was not justified in striking off copies of a photograpa
for his own use unless, expressly or implied, he had
authority from his client. “I say expressly or impliec-
ly", the Court stated, “because a photographer is fre-
quently allowed, on his own request, to take a photc-
graph of a person under circumstances in which a suk-
sequent sale by him must have been in contemplatioa
of both parties, though not actually mentioned.”

The court considered that an abuse of a confidence--
analogous to the misuse of information obtained in
-confidential employment—arose in this case, and grani-
ed the injunction prayed for. It was said that, thet.
though failure to register the copyright barred the
plaintiff from enforcing a remedy for breach of cony-
right, she was still entitled to relief on the grounds of
breach of a contract.

Injury to feelings may justifiably enhance the
‘damages. Thus, in one case’, the Court of Appeal, wi
reference to an unauthorised publication of the photv-
graph of a murdered man along with his daughter ard
son-in-law, observed, “It was an intrusion into his
life, deeper and graver than an intrusion into a man’s
property”.

(v) Interception of letters, moreover, may raise
many questions, for example, whether it is legally open
to a post office official (apart from a valid — statutcry
provision) to read and (thus interfere with) lette
between a husband and wife, letter conveying business
secrets, letters containing confidential communications,
and the like. The last words of section 6 of the Indian
Post Gffice Act show, that the Act gives no protection
in case of wilful acts. If the law recognises (or, ‘n
future, is likely to recognise), the interest of the sender
or addressee in these matters, then such interception
is, or is likely to become, actionable,

It is likely, that courts would be inclined to extend
the protection which has so far becn extended to tangi-
ble goods, (or intangible goods with a pecuniary valua)
to communications and similar interests also.

1, As to injunctions to prevent breaches of confiden 5. Equi
(1966) page 721. ce, see Suiell, Equity

2. Cf, William V. Settle, (1960), 2 All. ER. 806, 812 (C.A.).


124

(vi) The question is not of a physical object only;
if may also be of the personal interest’. If the lan-
guage of property fails to meet the object of protect-
ing this personal interest, the law may, in future.
evolve other methods. The uncertainty that has exist-
ed so far on the subject is due to the fact that the
interest sought to be protected has remained 11] defined
and unidentified. It is for this reason that statute may
have to intervene, to define the position.

(vii) The matter is, however, not very important
in India, because, even if there is no breach of any right
recognised at ordinary law, the fundamental right
under article 19(1){a) is violated, and the remedy
under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution is always
open,

The position resulting from this discussion can be thus
summarised :

(1) The relationship between the Post Office and
the sender is either of a bailor and bailee, or akin to
that of a bailor or bailee. At the worst, the Post
Office is a stranger, and the owner has all rights.
against the Post Office that he has against any other
person.

(2) Whatever be the relationship, the proprie-
tary remedy of conversion or of injury to reversionary
interests is available to the owner—(who may be the
sender or addressee) if the articles have a pecuniary
value.

(3) The remedy of detinue is available to the
owner (who may be the sender or addressee), for all
articles.

(4) Further, in the case of articles having mainly
literary or sentimental value, destruction of the article
[under section 23(3), for example] would perhaps
amount to interference with literary property; opening
of the article would often amount to a breach of conti-
dente; and even where no question of literary pro-
perty or confidence is involved, the law may in future
recognise and protect other interests, so that interter-
ence may become actionable.

1. See Paton, Jurisprudence, (1946), page 128, as to personol’
st.


125

Regarding literary property, it may be noted that
while destruction of a literary work does not seem to
hhave so far figured in any reported case, this is because
there is only a partial understanding of literary pro-
perty. As has been observed'—

“Much of the difficulty surrounding the con-
cept of copyright arises from the fact that while
it protects economic rights, the concept of proper-
ty involves rights other than economic righis.
Copyright is unique because it is special form of
intangible property and should be Limited to eco-
nomic rights. But it is a derivative right, being
derived from the larger property interest an
author has in his works. As it exists today, the
derived right destroys the larger property in-
terest, but if the larger interest is recognised, the
result is that literary property has two compo-
nent parts—a commercial right and a creative
right. Since one is primarily economic in nature
and the other primarily personal in nature, they
provide both a basis for delineating problems of
literary property, and a framework for resolving
the problems in terms of purpose without resort
to technicalities.”

_K. Patterson, “Sratute of Anne”, (1966) 3 Harvard Juornal of Legis-
Aation 223, 252, (February, 1966).



‘Uniawfal
use
mails.

Prohibitory
Order
Notice,

APPENDIX X

Position IN CANADA REGARDING INTERCEPTION OF POSTAL
ARTICLES

In Canada, the following statutory provisions seer to
be relevant regarding interception.

Section 7, (Canada) Post Office Act, 1951.

Section 6(f) and 6(g) (Canada) Post, Office Act,
1951--empowers the making of regulations regarding the
conditions under which mailable matter may be sent, and
for excluding non-mailable matter from mails.

Section 59. (Canada) Post Office Act, 1961, punishes a
person sending any explosive, dangerous, etc., substance.

Section ¢i. (Canada) Post Office Act, 1951—“‘Notwith-
standing anything in any other Act or Jaws, nothing is
liable to demand, seizure or detention while in the course
of post except as provided in this Act or the regulations.”

EXTRACT of SECTION 7, CANADIAN Post OFFICE Act, 1951.
Use of Mails for Unlowjul purposes

67. (1) Whenever the Post-master General believes on
reasonable grounds that any person—
(a) is, by means of the mails,

(i) committing or attempting to cormmit an
offence, or

(ii) aiding, counselling or procuring any per-
son to commit an offence, or

(b) with intent to commit an offence. is using
the mails for the purpose of accomplishing his object,
the Post-master General may make an interim order (in.
this section called an “interim prohibitory order”) prohi-
biting the delivery of all mail directed to that person (in
this section called the “person affected”) or deposited by
that person in a2 post office.

(2४) Within five days after the making of an interim
prohibitory order the Post-master General shall send to
the person affected a registered letter at his last known
address informing him of the order and the reasons there-
for and notifying him that he may within ten days of the
date of registered letter was sent, or such longer period
as the Post-master General may specify in the letter, re-
quest that the order be inquired into, and upon receipt
within the said ten days or longer period of a written re-
quest by the person affected that the order be inquired
into, the Post-master General shall refer the matter, toge-
ther with the material and evidence considered by him in
making the order, to Board of Review consisting of three
persons nominated by the Post-master General one of
whom shall be a member of the legal profession.

126


127

(3) The Board of Review shall inquire into the facts Board of
and circumstances surrounding the interim prohibitory Review.
order and shall give the person affected a reasonable op-
portunity of appearing before the Board of Review,
making representation to the Board and presenting evi-
dence.

(4) The Board of Review has all the powers of a Com- Powers of
missioner under Part I of the Inquiries Act, and, in_addi- Board.
tion to the material and evidence referred to the Board
by the Post-master General, may consider such further
evidence, oral or written, as it deems advisable.

(5) Any mail detained by the Post-master General Opening of
pursuant to sub-section (8) may be delivered to the Board mail by
of Revenue, and, with the consent of the person affected, consent,
may be opened and examined by the Board.

(6) The Board of Review, shall, after considering the Report of
matter referred to it, submit a report with its recommen- card,
dation to the Post-master General, together with all evi-
dence and other material that was before the Board, and
upon receipt of the report of the Board, the Post-master
General shall reconsider the interim prohibitory order and
he may revoke it or declare it to be a final prohibitory
order, as he sees fit,

(7) The Post-master General may revoke an interim Revocation
or final prohibitory order when he is satisfied that the of order.
person affected will not use the mails for any of the pur-
poses prescribed in sub-section (1), and the Post-master
General may require an undertaking to that effect from
the person affected before revoking the order.

(8) Upon the making of an interim or final prohibitory Effect of
order and until it is revoked by the Post-master General, order.

(a) no postal employee shall without the permis-
sion of the Post-master General

(i) deliver any mail directed to the person
affected, or

(i) accept any mailable matter offered by
the person affected for transmission by post,

(b) the Post-master General may detain or re-
turn to the sender any mail directed to the person
affected and anything deposited at a post office by the
person affected, and

(०0 the Post-master General may declare any mail
detained pursuant to paragraph (b) to be undeliver-


128

able mail, and any mail so declared to be undeliver-
able mail shall be dealt with under the regulations
relating thereto.

“Interim (9) Where no request that an interim prohibitory
onder deem- order be inquired into is received by the Post-master
order, General within the period mentioned in sub-section (2),
the order shall, at the expiration of the said period, be
deemed to be a final prohibitory order [(1951) ०. 57 s. 7]’.


APPENDIX XI

AUSTRALIA—POSITION REGARDING INTERCEPTION OF POSTAL

ARTICLES. Books, etc.
issued by un-
Extract of section 30-E, Australian Crimes Act, 1950—1960, lawful ase
sociation

“20E. (1) No book, periodical, pamphlet, handbill, pos- not trans-
ter or newspaper issued by or on behalf or in the interests missible by

of any unlawful association shall—
Inserted by

(a) if posted in Australia, be transmitted through No.9, 1926,
the post; or 817

(b) in the case of a newspaper, be registered as
a newspaper under the provisions of the Post and
Telegraph Act 1901—1923,

(2) Any newspaper registered under that Act, which Deregistra-
is issued by or on behalf or in the interest of any unlawful tion of news-
association, shall be removed from the register. धान

* by No.30,

(3) Any book, periodical, pamphlet, handbill, poster or 1932, s. 5.
newspaper posted in Australia. the transmission of which Amended
would be contravention of this Act, shall be forwarded by No, 84,
to the General Post Office of the State in which it was 1960, 8. 63
posted, and shall be forfeited to the Commonwealth and देश,
shall be destroyed or disposed of as the Post-master

General directs.”

Sections 3, 29, 40-44, 57, 96, 107 of the (Australian)
Posts and Telegraph Act, 1904—1950, prohibit the sending
of obscene and certain other objectionable matter by post.
(No provision for interception is, however, contained in
these sections).

12—61 Law.
129


Detention of
suspected
postal
articles,

Cf. 1928,
No. 12 5.
36.

Opening of
suspected
postal
articles.
CF. 1928,
No, 12
3.37.

Notification
to addressee
or sender of
detained
postal
articles.
& . 1928,
fo. Tz
8. 39(2).
Disposal of
articles
opened
under this
Act.
छः 3928,
*. 12,
section 39
@), 4०.

articles

Opening of
postal
acticles
under
Governor
General's
Warrant.

APPENDIX XII

New ZEALAND—-POSITION REGARDING INTERCEPTION OF POSTAL
ARTICLES,

Extract of section 30 to 34, 44 and 84, New Zealand Post
Office Act, 1959

“30. Where the Post-master General or Post-master has
reason to suspect that any postal article contains any en-
closure in fraud or violation of this Act, or of the Customs
Acts, or of any enactment prohibiting or controlling the
transfer of money or valuable securities by post, he shall
detain the postal article for opening and examining in
accordance with section 31 of this Act.

31, Every postal article which is detained under section
30 of this Act may be opened and examined at post office
by two officers of the Post Office specially nominated for
that purpose by the Post-master General, or by one such
officer nominated as aforesaid in the presence of another
officer or in the presence of an officer of the Customs who,
before the opening of the articles, shall make the declara-
tion set forth in the First Schedule to this Act and shall
not be opened or examined otherwise.

32. Where it is intended to open a postal article under
section 31 of this Act, the Post-master General shall cause
notice thereof to be sent to the addressee if he is known
or otherwise to the sender thereof if he is unknown.

33. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, if any
postal article opened or examined under this Act is found
to be in fraud or violation, or to have been posted in fraud
or violation, of this Act or of any enactment prohibiting
er controlling the transfer of money or valuable securities
by post, the Post-master General may direct that the postal
article be forfeited; and any such article shall be destroyed
or otherwise disposed of in accordance with this direction.

(2) If any postal article opened under this Act is found
to be fraud or violation, or to have been posted in fraud or
violation, of the Customs Acts, it shall be handed over to
the Customs Department to be dealt with in accordance
with the Customs Act.

(3) Every postal article opened under this Act and
found to contain any valuable or saleable enclosure shall
together with its contents be safely kept pending its dis-
position under this section, and a list of any such postal
articles together with a memorandum of the contents
thereor shall be made and preserved.

34. (1) The Governor-General may, by Warrant under
his hand, direct the Postmaster-General or any officer to
detain or open any postal article for any purpose mention-
ed in the Warrant.

130 }


131

(2) If any postal article opened under this section is रू , 1928,
found to contain any money or enclosure belonging to the Waren
New Zealand Government, the officer opening the article Xi; oS 3.4
may extract the money or enclosure therefrom and dispose
of it im such manner as the Postmaster-General directs.

44, If the Postmaster-General has at any time reason- अं
able ground to suspect any person in New Zealand or articles for
elsewhere to be engaged in— certain

(a) Any business or undertaking relating to ille- gf, 1928,

gal betting, or to the conduct of an illegal letter, or to > 42
fortune telling; or *

(b) Any obscene, immoral, or unlawful business
or undertaking; or

(c) Advertising in direct or indirect terms regard-
ing sexual matters in a manner likely to be offensive—
the Postmaster-General may by notice in the Gazette
order that no postal article addressed to that person
(whether by his own or any fictitious or assumed
name) or to his address without a name shall be for-
warded or delivered under this Act.
84. (1) The Governor-General may from time to time, Wartime
by Order in Council, make regulations for the control or cgntrol of
prohibition of telegraph messages in time of war or when cf 028,

war is reasonably to be apprehended, No. 12,
3. 16166),

(2) Every person who commits a breach of any regu- (7).
lation made under sub-section 1 of this section commits
an offence and shall be liable to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or to a fine not exceeding one
hundred pounds, or to both.”


APPENDIX हा

U.S.A—POSITION REGARDING INTERCEPTION OF POSTAL
ARTICLES

It would seem!, that in the U.S.A. there are three instru-
mentalities? employed by the post office for the restraint
of mail. The first is confiscation and destruction, used
primarily against obscene matters and foreign political
propaganda.

Since 1957, certain procedural rights for persons whose
material was non-mailable on the ground of obscenity have
been provided for, namely, written notice of the reasons
for barring the mail, hearing before a Post Office examiner,
and decision after two days of the hearing in case of a
periodical’.

Authority for barring from the mail papers containing
foreign political propaganda jis said to be derived from the
Espionage Act, 1917, and the Foreign Agents Registration
Act, 1938. The 1938 Act required agents for foreign prin-
cipals within the United States to register, and failure to
do so was a crime. The 1917 Act punishes the possession
of papers in aid of a foreign Government which violate
any penal statute, and also makes such material non-
maitable. a

The second instrumentality is what is known as “stop
order”. This was first authorised against persons found
to be using the mails io defraud, and the effect of the order
was that all mail addressed to the person or company
concerned was intercepted, stamped “fraudulent”, end
returned to the sender. The validity of such order in
relation to fraudulent mail has been upheld, though not
without strong dissent#-*,

This power was later authorised in relation to mails
dealing with obscenity alse. It can be used, however,
only against mails addressed to the company ccncerned
which is directly connected with the specific issue of its
periodicals which is found to be obscene*, This authority

as later been extended ta mails suspected of promoting
fraud, obscenity or gambling’.

1. See Pritchett, Americal Constitution (959), page qo4.
2. (i) Confiscation and destruction,
(i) Stop onder, and
(ii) Refusal of second class permit.
_ 3.39 Code of Federal Regulations 203 (November 9, 1959), cited in
Pritchett, Amercial Constiturion (1959), page 404.

4. Leach v. Carlile, (1922) 258 U.S. 138.

5, Donaldson v. Read Magazine, (194%), 333 U.S. 178.

6, Sunwnerfield y. Sunshine Book Go., (1955), 349 U-S. 925.
7. (956) 70 Stat. 699.

132


133

The third type of restraint is refusal te grant “second
class mailing privileges.” This power has been used,
though not wtihout dissent!, against matter not mailable
under the Espionage Act. The validity of this power in
fields unreleated to national security, is doubtful?, and one
case® the attempt of the Post Master General to withdraw
the second class mail privilege from a magazine, on the
ground that the material was so close to obscene that it
was morally improper and not for the public welfare and
the public good, was invalidated.

What is and what is not obscene is always a matter
difficult to decide. Thus, a post office ban on the mailing
of nudist magazines was, in one case, reversed by the
Supreme Court. On the other hand, in a very recent
ease*, the ban imposed by the Post Master General against:
one Magazine was upheld,

(1) Article 1, section 8, Clause 7 of the Constitution
of the U.S.A. says, ‘that “The Congress shall have power
beens to establish post offices and post roads”. This pos-
tal power embraces all measures necessary to ensure the
safe and speedy transit and prompt delivery of the mails.

(2) The postal power also includes the power to ex-
clude from the mails publications designed to defraud the
public or corrupt its morals, such as lotteries* and
fraudulent matter’.

It may be noted, that in the Donaldson case® what was
sustained was a court order forbidding the delivery of a
mail and money orders to a magazine for conducting a
puzzle contest which the Post Master General had found
to be fraudulent.

But there is some doubt as to whether a power to ex-
clude ftom second class mail can be exercised arbitrarily,
or whether that power is subject to some limitation.
While the second class mail need not be kept open to pub-
lications of all types®, this does not imply that the power
can be exercised arbitrarily.

1, Milwaukee Publishing Co. v. Burleson, (1921) 255 US. 407.

2. See Hannegan v. Esquire, (1946) 327 U.S. 146.

3. Hannegan v. Esquire, (1946) 327 US. 146.

4. The Sunshine Book Co. v. Summerfield, (1958) 355 U.S. 372.

s.Case against Ginzberg, regarding the Eros Magazine (Time
Magazine, rst April, 1966) (Supreme Court of U,8.A,). ‘

6. Bx parte Jackson, (1878) 96 U.S. 727, 732.

7. Donaldson v. Read Magazine, (1948), 333 U.S. 178.

8. Donaldson v. Read Magazine, (5948) 333 U.S. 178.

9, Hannegon v, Esquire, (1946) 327 U.S. 146, 15$, (per Douglas

Jn
oi टी Publishing Co. v. Morgan, (1913) 229 U.S, 228 (per White

Power to
protect the
mails.

Power ta
prevent
armful
use of the
postal
facilities,


Excluding
power gene-
tally 23 an
adjunct to
other
powers,

Fourth
Amend-
ment.

134

(3) Apart from the power to close the mails, to parti-
cular types of publications. which are harmful, a much
broader power of exclusion was asserted in one Act of
19351, whereunder to induce compliance with the regu-
Jatory requirements of that Act, Congress denied the
privilege of using the mails for any purpose to holding
companies which failed to obey that law, irrespective of
the character of the matericl to be carried. The Supreme
Court, treating this as a penalty, held the statute to be
constitutionally valid, because the regulations whose in-
fractions were thus penalised were themselves valid, but
it declared, that Congress couid not exerc:se its control
over the mails to enforce requirement which lay outside
its constitutional province*-,

By virtue of the Fourth Amendment, a sealed letter
deposited may not be opened by the postal authorities
without the sanction of a Magistrate‘. The Fourth
Amendment, however, is confined to material things, and
hence its language cannot be extended to telephone
messages’-*,

_ The following statutory provisions in force in the
U.S.A. are relevant’:

(a) 18 US. Code, Article 1717—Letters ete. which
are non-mailable “shall not be conveyed in the mails
or delivered from any post office etc.” These include
matter advoesting or urging treason, insurrection, or
forcible resistance to any law of U.S., aad matter in
Rojation of certain sections of Title 18, of the U.S.

‘ode.
[These sections of Title 18, U.S. Code, are—

499—Forgery of military etc. passes.
506—Forging of seals.

7. The Public Utitity Holding Company Act, 1935: sez (1946) 15 U.S.
Code 794, 798.

2, Electric Bond & Share Co, v. Securities Exchange Commission,
(1938), 303 U.S. 419.

See alo American (Poteer and Light) Co, v. S.B.C. (7१46) 329 U.S

3, Electric Band & Share Co. v. Securities Exchange Comnnission, (1938),
393 US. 459 422.

4. B. parte Fackson, (1878), 96 U.S. 727, 733,

Ey Olmstead v. U.S. (2928) 277 U.S. 4385 72 L. Bd. 944 (Majority judg~
ment).

हु, On Lee v. U.S. (1952) 343 U.S. 747, 753 (Majority judgment).

7. These refer to the edition of the U.S, Code before 1964.
In the 1964 edition of the U.S, Code, some changes have been made
but not in substance. See, now, Title 39 U.S.C. section 4001, (1964)
read with Title 18, sections 1302, 1341, 13425 1661, 1463, 1774, 7775, LTLE
1717, E718 (1964 edition).



135

793—Gathering etc. or losing defence information.

794—Gathering or delivering defence information
to Government.

915—(Personation of) foreign diplomats.
954—False statements influencing foreign Govern-
ment,

956—Conspiracy to injure property of foreign Gov-
ernment.

957—Possession of property in sid of foreign Gov-
ernment. .

960—Expedition against friendly nation.

964—Delivering armed vessel to belligerents.

1017—Wrongtully using Government seals.

1542—False statement for passport.

1543-—Forgery and false use of passport,

1544—Misuse of passport.

2388—Activities affecting armed forces during war.

(b) 18, U.S. Code, article 1341 (Fraudulent mat-
ter) (Delivery may be withheld).

(c) 18, U.S, Code, articles 1461 and 1463 (Obscene
matter, information about contraceptives, and incite-
ment to heinous crimes) (Delivery may be withheld).

{indecent matter can be withdrawn from the

mails under regulations to be made by the Post Master
General].

(d) 39, U.S. Code (1960 Revision) Articles 4251,
4351, 4352, 4451, 4551 deal with “second class mail”!.
Where any publication has been accorded second class
mail privileges, the same shall not be suspended or

annulled until a hearing is granted to the parties
interested,

We may discuss the procedure regarding second class

mail in the U.S.A. A “second class mailing” permit can
be denied to a publication by the Post Office. When this

is done, publication through the mails becomes prohibi-
tively costly. To be eligible for a second-class permit,

a publication must—

(i). be issued at stated intervals;
(ii) have a known office;
(iii) be printed;

_ 3, As to second class’ priviteges, see—

Hamegan v, Esquire, (1948) 327 U.S. 146, which seems to limit the
auchority of Milmawhee Leader casz, (1921) 255 U.S. 407,



136

{iv} be for the dissemination of information of a
public character or devoted ta literature, the sciences,
arts or some special industry;

{v) have a legitimate list of subscribers;
(vi) be designed primarily for non-advertising
purposes),

The second class permit cannot. however, be denied
on the ground that the publication does not contribute to
the public welfare. The Post, Office Department denied a
second class mailing to the Esquire magazine, on the
ground that the publication did not contribute to the pub-
fic good and to the public welfare, but the Supreme Court*
did not uphold this standard, and pointed aut, that to
withdraw this privilege from 3 publication. simply because
its contents seemed to one official not good for the public
would sanction withdrawal ‘of the second-class rate
tomorrow from another periodical whose social or ९९०10-
mic views seemed harmful ta another official.

(९) 39, U.S.C, (1960 Revision) Articte 4005—Where
the Past Master General finds any person conducting
lotteries or frauduient schemes through the mail, he
can stop such mail matter of those persons.

6) Vol, 39, U.S.C. (1960 Revision)" Articles 4006—
4007 empower the Post Master General to exclude the
letters and mail matter of any person obtaining
through mail, money for obscene, lewd, etc., articles,
or depositing in mails information as to where such
articles can be obtained. He can make an interim
order for 20 days, and get it confirmed by the U.S.
District Court.

Nore:—The power to authorise temporary deten-
tion af mail does not apply to mail addressed to pub-
lishers of publications which have entry as second
class matter, or to mail addressed to the agents of

those publishers.
&) Vol, 39 U.S.C, (1960 Revision),

Seetion 4008— (added in 1962)—Mail matters,
except sealed letters, originating, ete, in a
foreign country and determined by the Secretary
to the Treasury to be “Communist political pro-
paganda” shall be detained by the Post Master
General, and the addressee notified. If the ad-
dressee does not desire delivery within a Teason-

Wee Wiggins, Freedom. or Secrecy (Oxford University J ew
youd, 1155), sen ar (Oxford | ‘sity Press, New
2. Hannegan v. Heguire, (1945) 327 US, 146, 153, 1580
3. For the law before 1960, tee Gellhorn & By ste Administeativs Law
(960), pages 771—77%


137

able time (not exceeding 60 days), it is disposed
of as the Post Master General directs,

(6) Vol. 39, U.S.C. (1960 Revision)—

Section 4001—(1)Matcer the deposit of which
in mails is punishable under the following sec-
tions of Title 18 of U.S.C. is non-mailable.

(2) Nonanailable matter is to be disposed of
ag the Post Master General directs.

[The sections of Title 18 of referred to are--

Title 18 U.S.C. Provisions referred to

48 1302. ~~. Lotteries.

18 पडा... Brauds & spindies

1s 1342 . Fictitious name or eddeess for unlawful
businesa.

18 1462. . Obscenity inciting abortion and filthy, vile
and indecent thing, etc.

18 148% « Obscene, ele, mater of envelope.

18 Wyo. » Poreign divorce information.

18 wg... Firearms.

we 6 . Tnjurious articles (pvisons, reptites, etc.).

38 1717. ५ Many matters, including matier_adyo-

cating treason, insurrection or forcitle
resistance to any U.S, law.

8 1718 . Libellous matters on wrappers. etc.

Nore: —Under 18 US.C., section 1716, no person
other than an authorised officer of the Dead Letter
Office or acting under a search-warrant can open a
Setter without the addressee’s consent.

(j) It is stated-*, that in the U.S.A. publications,
{particularly those received from foreign countries)
have been held up, if in the opinien of the officials
concerned the publications showed a subversive intent.

(k) Mails sent from abroad to persons not regis-
tered under the Foreign Agents’ Registration Act,
1938 (as amended) can be forfeited.

4, Wiggins, Freadom or Secrecy (Oxford University Press, New York),
(1956); Page 187,

2. See also Castherg, Freedom of Speech in the West (1960), (Allen
& Unwin) page 145, referring to Bolte, “Security through Book Buening”
(1955)s Page 99.


138
(1) In times of war, special restrictions. under the
Espionage Act, 1917 come into play!-",

(m) There is a provision prohibiting interception
of telephonic communications*. But that is not rele-
vant for the present purpose.

1. Masses Publishing Co. v. Pattem, (1917) 244 Fed. 536 (August. 1917
issue of a magazine excluded from the mails, being of a revolurronary end
anti-war character).

2. Milwaukee etr. v. Burleson, (1921) 255 U.S. 407.
3. Sections sor, and 605, and 1308, Federal Communications Act

(1934, 47 USO 151 ३ See “Electronic Eavesdropping” (1964) Am. Bar
Ass, Journal 540, 542 and 543.



APPENDIX XIV

Liability for registered articles in England

Under the (English) Post Office Act, 1953 (1 & 2 Eliz.
2 ९, 36), section 8(1)(b), Post Office Regulations may make
provisions (inter alta) as to the “registration” of postal
packets. Under section 8(2) of the (English) Post Office
Act, 1953, the “registration” of a postal packet shall not
render the Crown in any manner liable for the loss of the
packets or contents thereof, save as provided in section 9
of the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947. Under section 9(2)
of the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947, the Crown is liable to
the extent specified in that section.

Relevant portions of these provisions are extracted
below :—

Extract of section 8 of the Post Office Act, 1953
(1 & 2 Eliz. 2 ९. 36).

“BLY .......--«
(2) Save as provided in section 9 of the Crown
Proceedings Act, 1947, the registration of or giving of
a receipt for a postal packet, or the giving cr obtain-
ing of a certificate of posting or delivery of a postal
acket, shall not ren der the Crown in any manner
Fable for the loss of the packet or the contents
thereof.”
Extract from section 9(2) and section 9(5) of the Crown
Proceedings Act, 1947 (10 & 11 Geo. 6 ८. 44).

9, “(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of section
13 of the Post Office Act, 1908, proceedings shall lie
against the Crown under this sub-section in respect ०1
loss of or damage to a registered inland postal packet,
not being a telegram, in so far as the loss or damage
is due to any wrongful act done or any neglect or
default committed by a person employed as a servant
or agent of the Crown while performing or purport-
ing to perform his functions as such in relation to the
receipt, carriage, delivery or other dealing with the
packets:

Provided that......

(c) the amount recoverable in any such pro-
ceedings shall not in any event exceed the maxi-
mum amount which, under regulations made
under section 81 of the Post Office Act, 1953 is
available for compensating the persons aggrieved
having regard to the fee paid in respect of the
registration of the packet; and

~ 139 .

Conditions
of transit
of Postal
Packers.

Liapilit: Toot
consecti

with postal
Packets.


140

(d) the Crown shall not be liable under this

: -sub-section in respect of any packet unless such

* - ‘conditions as are prescribed by virtue of sub-

- section (5) of this section in relation to registered

inland postal packets have been complied with in
relation to that packet.

For the purposes of any proceedings under this
sub-section, it shall be presumed, until the contrary
is shown on behalf of the Crown, that the loss of or
damage to the packet was due to some wrongful act
done, or some neglect or default committed, by a per-
son employed as a servant or agent of the Crown
while performing or purporting to perform his func-
tions as such in relation to the receipt, delivery or
other dealing with the packet.

(5) Regulations may be made under section 81 of
the Post Office Act, 1953, for prescribing the condi-
tions to be observed for the purpose of this section in
relation to registered under postal packets.”

Thus, it appears that—

(a) the quantum of liability for “registered” posta!
packets in England would depend on the amount of
fee paid, by virtue of section 9(2) (c) of the Crown
Proceedings Act, 1947, which speaks of the “maximum
amount”.

(०) Further, the fee for “registration” in England
is not a fixed one (as in India), but a varying one.

(c) “Registration” of a postal packet in England.
therefore, corresponds more to what is known as
“insurance”! under the Indian Post Office 82९४, then
to “registration” under the Indian Act*.

1. There appears to be no separate provision for “inguratice * in the

English Act,

2, Section 30 to 33, Indian Post Office Act, 1898.
3. Section 28. Indian Post Office Act, 1898,

GMGIPND—TSS—61 Law—25-2-1970—1,75¢