LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

THIRTY-NINTH REPORT

REPORT ON THE PUNISHMENT OF IMPRISONMENT
FOR LIFE UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.

July, 1968

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW


Shri P. Govinda Menon, CHAIRMAN,

Minister of Law, Law Commission,
New Delhi. 5, Jorbagh, New Delhi-3.
July 15, 1968.

My Dear Minister,

1 have pleasure in forwarding herewith the Thirty-ninth
Report of the Law Commission on the subject of the
Punishment of imprisonment for life under the Indian Penal

‘ode.

2. The question whether the punishment of imprisonment
for life ought to be simple or rigorous was referred by the
Ministry of Home Affairs to the Law Commission some time
ago. The reference was made in view of the fact that
several State Governments had sought for clarification on the
subject, and because the Indian Penal Code and the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898 were under revision. The subject,
being of urgent and practical importance, was taken up last
year for separate consideration by the Commission.

3. As usual, a Press note was issued inviting suggestions
from the general public interested in the subject.
question was considered by the present Commnissicn first at a
meeting on the 16th April, 1968 and later on the 1st, 2nd and
3rd July, 1968 when the Report was finally approved.

Yours sincerely,
K. V. छू, SUNDARAM.


REPORT ON THE PUNISHMENT OF IMPRI-
SONMENT FOR LIFE iN THE INDIAN
PENAL CODE

1. This Report deals with the nature of the punishment Introduc

called imprisonment for life in the Indian Penal Code, and 0१५

in particular, with the question whether, when such a
sentence is passed on an offender the imprisonment he
undergoes has to be rigorous or may be simple, This ques-

tion is of urgent practical importance and several State
Governments have sought a clarification of the law. It

was accordingly taken up for separate consideration ky

the Law Commission.

2, Imprisonment for life, as a distinct punishment for imptison-_
certain grave offences under the Indian Penal Code, was ment for life
authorised by law with effect from the Ist January, 1954, °° 1955.
when the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act,

1955, came into force. Though this Act was mainly cori-
cerned with making extensive amendments in the Code of
Criminal Procedure for diverse purposes, it also amended
Indian Penal Code in one important respect. The punish-
ment of transportation was abolished altogether, and the
old punishment of “transportation for life’ was replaced

by the punishment of “imprisonment for life”.

3. Section 53 of the Indian Penal Code, as enacted ia Punishment
1860, provided for six, or rather seven, kinds of punish- Uder _the

८ Indian Pena}

ment, as follows:— Code as en-
“Pj adi
“First.—Death; 1865.

1869.
Secondly.—Transportation;
Thirdly.—Penal servitude;

Fourthiy—Imprisonment, which is of two descrip-
tions, namely:—
(1) Rigorous, that is, with
hard labour;

(2) Simpie;
Fifthly—Forfeiture of property;
Stathly,—Fine.”.

Tt will be noticed, that while the section indicated the
nature of the different punishments permissible under the
Code, the term of the punishments mentioned in the
second, third and fourth items, as also the quantum of the
punishments mentioned in the last two items, was left tc
be specified in the relevant sections of the Code with re-
ference to each offence.


2

Macaulay's 4. The penology of transportation for life was expound-
exposition of ed by Macaulay, the author of the Draft Penal Code, in
Pen trenchant terms as follows: —

“The pain which is caused by punishment is un-
mixed evil. It is by the terror which it inspires that it
produces good; and perhaps no punishment inspires so
much terror in proportion to the actual pain which it
causes as the punishment of transportation in this
country. Prolonged imprisonment may be more pain-
ful in the actual endurance; but it is act so much
dreaded beforehand; nor does a sentence of imprison-
ment strike either the offender or the bystanders with
so much horror as a sentence of exile beyond what
they call the Black Water. This feeling, we believe,
arises chiefly from the mystery which overhangs the
fate of the transported convict. The separation resem-
bles that which takes place at the moment of death.
The criminal is taken for ever from the society of all
who are acquainted with him, and conveyed by means
of which the natives have but an indistinct notion,
ever an element which they regard with extreme awe,
to a distant country of which they know nothing, and
from which he is never to return. It is natural that
his fate should impress them with a deep feeling ot
terror. It is on this feeling that the efficacy of the
punishment depends and this feeling would be greatly
weakened if transported convicts should frequently
return, after an exile of seven or fourteen years, to the
scene of their offences, and to the society of their
former friends.”.

Transporta- 5. An analysis of the relevant sections of the Indian
ek generale Penal Code shows that the punishment of transportation
tee excep- was, in all except two instances, for life. Only two sec-
tions. tions provided for a sentence of transportation for a
shorter term, namely section 121A dealing with conspiracy
7 to commit offences punishable under section 121, and sec-
tion 124A dealing with sedition. These two sections were
inserted by an Amending Act of 1870, Under section 121A,
the offender could be punished with transportation for
life or for “any shorter term”. Under section 124A, the
offender could be punished with transportation for life or
for “any term”.
Classification 6. The various offences under the Indian Penal Code,
oF ides’ for which transportation for life was the only punishment
Pih trans. था जाए of the permissible punishments, may be classified as
portation follaws: —
for life. (a) offences punishable only with transportation
for life, like being a thug (section 311) and extortion
by रिक्त of accusation of unnatural offence (section
88) 5
1, Section 226 (repealed in 1965)
weansoortation was punishable with
was Hable also to rigorous imprisonine:
portation.

rovided that unlawful return frem
portation for life and the offender
pto three vears before such trans-



3

(b) offences punishable with death or transporta-
tion for life, like murder (section 302) and waging war
against the Government of India (section 121);

(c) offences punishable with death or transporta-
tion for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term
(usually up 10 10 years), like dacoity with murder
(section 396) and fabricating false evidence with in-
tent to procure conviction of a capital offence if an
innocent person is convicted and executed in conse-
quence thereof (section 194);

(१) offences punishable with death or transporta-
tion for life or imprisonment of either description of
aterm (usually up to 10 years), like attempt to
murder by life convicts (section 307) and abetment
‘of suicide of a child or insane person (section 395);

(०) offences punishable with transportation for
life or rigorous imprisonment for a term (usually up
to 10 years), like kidnapping in order to murder (sec-
tion 364), dacoity (section 395) and house trespass in
order to commit an offence punishable with death
(section 449);

(0) offences punishable with transportation for
life or imprisonment of either description for a term,
like intentional omission by a public servant to appre-
hend a person under sentence of death (section 222)
and rape (section 376).

7. Certain other provisions in the Indian Penal Code (as

it stood before the Amending Act of 1955) relating to trans- visions

Other

Pro~

portation require to be noticed. Section 55 provided that (ransporta-

in every case in which a sentence of transportation for
life had been passed, the Government of India or the Gov-
ernment of the place in which the offender had been sen-
tenced may commute the punishment for imprisonment
of either description for a term not exceeding 14 years.
Section 57 provided that in calculating fractions of terms of
punishment, transportation for life should be reckoned as
equivalent to transportation for 20 years. Under section
58, in every case in which a sentence of transportation was
passed, the offender, until he was transported, was to be
dealt with in the same manner as if sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment and was held to have been undergoing his
sentenee of transportation during the term of such
imprisonment. Under section 59, in every case in which
an offence was punishable with imprisonment for a term
of 7 years or upwards, the Court could, instead of award-
ing the sentence of imprisonment, sentence the offender to
transportation for a term not less than 7 years and not ex-
ceeding the term for which he was liable to imprisonment.

tien,

8. In regard to the punishment of imprisonment, it Duration 9¢

should be noticed that none of the sections of the Indian



‘Transporta-
tion how
carried out.

Legal pro-
visions re-
lating 10
transporta-
tion.

Treatment
of persons
sentenced 16
transposta-
tion before

1956.

4

Penal Code, as enacted in 1860 or subsequently, made any
offence punishable with imprisonment for life. In fact,
wherever rigorous imprisonment is prescribed in the Code
as the punishment, the maximum term is 14 years or less.
Even in the case of consecutive sentences, section 35 (2)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure limits the total period
of imprisonment to a maximum of 14 years.

9, Apart from section 58 of the Indian Penal Code to
which reference has already been made, there was no in-
dication either in that Code or in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure as to how & sentence of transportation was to be
carried out and what exactly it involved. There is, how-
ever, no doubt that when the Indian Penal Code was
enacted, transportation meant transportation beyond the
seas to the penal settlement in the Andaman Islands, and
transportation for life meant transportation for the remain-
ing period of the convicted person’s natural life. Subse-
quently, with changing notions of penology, treatment of
prisoners and management of penal establishmer.ts, the
sentence of transportation ceased necessarily fo involve
convicts being sent overseas or even outside the Provinces
wherein they were convicted.

10. First, it was enacted in section 868 (2) of the Code
oi Criminal Procedure, 1898, that no sentence of trans-
portation should specify the place to which the person
sentenced was to be transported. Then, section 29 of the
Prisoners Act, 1900, provided that the Governor-Genersi-
in-Council may, by general or special order, provide for
the removal of any person confined in a prison under, or
in licu of, a sentence of transportation or imprisonment
to any other prison in British India and the Local Gov-
ernment may similarly provide for such remova) from
one prison to another within the province. Under section
31 of the Prisoners Act, 1900, the Governor-General-in-Coun-
सा could order the removal of a person sentenced to trans-
portation from: ihe prison in which he was corifined to any
other prison in British India. Finally, section 32 of the
Prisoners Act, as amended in 1920, empowered the Local
Government to appoint places within the Province to
which persons sentenced to transportation should be sent.

11. There was, thus, no statutory obligation imposed
on the Government of India or a Locel Government ta
provide any place overseas for the reception of such pri-
soners. The only place to which they were in fact sent
wag the Andaman Islands. There were administrative
orders of the Government to regulate what prisoners
should, and what prisoners should not, be regarded as fit
persons for being sent there, and latterly, only such of
them as volunteered were sent. As observed by the


5

qydieial Committee of the Privy Council in a judgment" of
iy
. “No doubt, therefore, the sentence [of transpor-
tation] has been preserved for its deterrent effect
and because, in certain cases, it may be both useful
and desirable to send convicts.to the Islands, but at
the present day transportation is, in truth, but a name
given in India to a sentence for life and in a few spe-
cjal cases for a lesser period, just as in England the
term imprisonment is applied to all sentences which
do not exceed two years and penal servitude to those
of three years or upwards.*** So, in India, 8. pri-
soner sentenced to transportation may be sent to the
Andamans or may be kept in one of the jails in India
appointed for transportation prisoners where he will
be dealt with in the same manner us a prisoner sen-
tenced to rigorous imprisonment.”.

12. This was the position when the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955, was passed, formally
abolishing the punishment of transportation mentioned in
section 53 of the Indian Penal Code, Besides making tex-
tual amendments in all sections of both the Codes which
referred to transportation, this Act inserted in the Indian
Penal Code a new section 53A, in the following terms: —

“3A. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(2) and sub-section (3), any reference to “transporta-
tion for life’ in any other law for the time being
in force or in any instrument or order having effect
by virtue of any such law or of any enactment repeal-
ed shali be construed as a reference to “imprisonment
for life”.

(2) In every case in which a sentence of trans-
portation for a term has been passed before the com-
mencement of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1955, the offender shall be dealt
with in the same manner as if sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment for the same term.

(3) Any reference to transportation for a term
or to transportation for any shorter term (by what-
ever name called) in any other law for the time being
in force shall be deemed to have been omitted.

(4) Any reference to “transportation” in any
other law for the time being in force shall—

(a) if the expression means transportation
for life, be construed as a reference to imprison-
ment for life;

1. Pandit Kishori Lal y.Xine Emperor. (1944) L.R., 22 LA. 1; ALR.
1945 P.C. 64.

Amendment
of 1955 abo-
lishing trans-
vortation,


‘Bitect of
‘Section $34,
explained by
Supreme
Court.

6

(b) if the expression means transportation
for any shorter term, be deemed to have been
omitted”.

13, The question whether a person sentenced t S-
portation for life in 1949 could Jeually be imprisoned a
one of the jails in India and, if so, what was the term for
which he could be so imprisoned, came up before the
Supreme Court after the passing of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955, on a petition for
habeas corpus filed by Gopal Vinayak Godse. Agreeing
with the decision of the Privy Council in Pandit Kishurt
Lal v. King Emperor’, and referring particularly to sub-
section (2) of section 583A of the Indian Penal Code, the
Court held?:—

“Whatever justification there might have been
for the contention that a person sentenced to trans-
portation could not be legally made 10 undergo rigor-
ous imprisonment in a jail in India except temporari-
ly till he was so transported, subsequent to the said
amendment there is none. Under that section, a per-
son transported for life or any other term before the
enactment of the said section would be treated as a
person sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for life or
jor the said term.”.

The legal position was further explained as follows: —

“Before Act XXVI of 1955 a sentence of transpor-
tation for life could be undergone by a prisoner by
way of rigorous imprisonment for life in a designated
prison in India. After the said Act, such a convict
shall be dealt with in the same manner as one sen-
tenced to rigorous imprisonment for the same term.
Unless the said sentence is commuted or remitted by
appropriate authority under the relevant provisions
of the Indian Penal Code or the Code of Criminal
Procedure, a prisoner sentenced to life imprisonment
is bound in law to serve the life term in prison. The
rules framed under the Prisons Act enable such 8
prisoner to earn remissions—ordinary, special and
State—and the said remissions will be given credit
towards his term of imprisonment. For the purpose
of working out the remissions, the sentence of trans-
portation for life is ordinarily equated with a defi-
nite period, but it is only for that particular purpose
and not for any other purpose. As the sentence of
transportation for life or its prison equivalent, the
life imprisonment, is one of indefinite duration, the
yemissions so earned do not in practice help such a

Gogg) LR 72 DA. 15 ALR, 3945 PC. 64.
2. GV. Godte V. State of Maharashtra, ALR, 196 5.0, 600.


7

convict as it is not possible tc predicate the time of
his death. That is why the rules provide for a proce-
dure to enable the appropriate Government to remit
the sentence under secticn 401 of the Code of Crimi-
hal Procedure on a consideration of the relevant fac-
tors, including the period of remissions earned.”.

14, While the legal position hag thus been fully clarifi-
edinregard to persons sentenced to transportation for
life before 1954, the question still remains as to how persons
sentenced to imprisonment for life under any of the
amended sections of the Indian Penal Code should be
dealt with under the law as it now stands. Is such a sen-
tence exactly the same as a sentence of rigorous imprison-
ment for life or as a sentence of simple imprisonment for
life? Or is it a punishment different in quality, besides
being different in duration, from a sentence of imprison-
ment of either description for 2 specified term? Is it
legally permissible for the Court passing the sentence to
lay down that the imprisonment shall be rigorous or shail
be simple? Is it obligatory under the law to do so? If,
following the insissima verba of the penal provision, the
Court simply passes a sentence of imprisonment for life,
is it or is it not open to the prison authorities to subject
the prisoner to hard labour? These are the various ques-
tions of practical importance that arise out of the amend-
ments made in 1955.

15. In this connection, the views of the Joint Com-
mittee which reported on the Code of Criminal Procedure
{Amendment) Bill, 1954, may be quoted':—

‘The Committee note that the expression “trans-
portation for life? has not been defined nor expla‘n-
ed in the Criminal Procedure Code. In the Indian
Penal Code, in section 53, “transportation” has been
prescribed as one form of punishment. But even in
the Indian Penal Code the term has not been defined
and there is nothing to show what is the duration of
transportation for life. As a matter of fact, this ex-
pression has not been defined in any Act. Transporta-
tion may be either for life or for a shorter term.
Therefore, the mere substitution of the expression
“imprisonment for life” for “transportation for life”
should not change the neture of punishment. As a
form of punishment, imprisonment for life must re-
main distinct from rigorous or simple imprisonment.
Where, however, a sentence for transportation for a
term only has been passed before the commencement
of this Act, the offender should be dealt with in the
same manner as if he was sentenced to rigorous imi-
prisonment for the same term and ali references ‘co

1. Report ofthe Taint Committee, paragraph 8, under clause 2 of the
Bill.

Questions
ro be sone
sidered.

Views of
the Joint
Committee,


8

transportation for a term should be omitted.*** The

intentions of the Committee have been clarified by

ee insertion of a new section 53A in the Indian Penal
le.

No change 16. From the above citation it woul न

intended | in lament did not intend 10 make any maton ent किक,

punishment. 16 Nature of the punishment formerly known as irans-
portation for life by calling it imprisonment for life. We
have already noticed the judgments of the Privy Council
and of the Supreme Court which make it clear that even
before the formal abolition of transportation to the
Andamans, persons sentenced to transportation for life
were, and could lawfully be, dealt with in the same
manner as persons sentenced to rigorous imprisonment.
If this position was neither changed, nor intended to be
changed, by the Act of 1955, the statement of the Joint
Committee that “as a form of punishment, imprisonment
for iife must remain distinct from rigorous or siraple im-
prisonment” is difficult to follow. In what way is it dis-
tinct, apart from its duration? It cannot, im practice, be
distinguished from a sentence of rigorous imprisonment.

Omission of 17. Reference has already been made to section 58

Section $8. which formerly was sufficient statutory authority tor deal-
ing with persons sentenced tc rigorous imprisonment. Al-
though the section was intended to be a temporary hold-
ing provision authorising such treatment oniy until the
prisoner was transported beyond the seas, it appeared to
have served the purpose even in regard to prisoners who
were actually never transported. It was logical to omit
section 58, since with the abolition of transportation,
there would be no need in future for the special prevision,
but the Act of 1955 did not make any other provision to
indicate how exactly persons sentenced to imprisonment
for lite should be dealt with.

Prisons Act 18. Naturally, the Prisons Act, 1894, and the Prisoners

and Prisoners Act, 1900, are also silent on this point. Their provisions

Act. are not sufficient for the purpose of determining the
character of imprisonment for life. As pointed out by a
State Government, if imprisonment for life is distinct
from rigorous imprisonment, there is no provision any-
where under which prisoners sentenced to life imprison-
ment can be treated as having been sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment and it is doubtful whether a rule can be
made under section 50 of the Prisons Act authorising
such treatment.

References 19. Section 53 of the Indian Penal Code, which lists the

ioe punishments to which offenders are liable, has now two
nn Supreme items reading—

Court de- . .

cisions, “Secondly.—Imprisonment for life;


9

Fourthly.—Imprisonment, which is of two des-
criptions, namely: —

(1) Rigorous, that is with hard labour;
(2) Simpie.”.

Juxtaposed in this fashion, the two items immediately
give rise to the question to which description, rigorous
or simple, does imprisonment for life belong or is it of a
different third description. The question has not been
raised in a direct form before the Supreme Court. In one
case,’ while setting aside an acquittal on a murder charge
by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, the Supreme Court
decided—

‘We consider that the ends of justice would be met
if we sentence the accused to rigorous imprisonment
for life.”.

In another case? where the High Court of Bombay had
sentenced the accused to rigorous imprisonment for life,
the Supreme Court, dismissing his appeal said: —

“The conviction of the accused under section 302
of the Indian Penal Code and the sentence of impri-
sonment for life passed on him by the High Court are
correct.”.

In a third case* from Punjab, the Supreme Court converted
the sentence of death into one of imprisonment for life.
But the question before us has not been considered by the
Supteme Court in any reported case

20. It appears to have been raised for the first time in Kerala High
Kerala soon after the amendment of the Code came into Court's view.
force. In Methammeal Saraswethi v. The State,* the Kerala
High Court observed : — a

“In passing the sentence for the three murders, the
lower ‘court has not chosen to say whether the
imprisonment the appellant is io undergo should be
simple or rigorous. Section 302 as amended by the
Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amend-
ment) Act, 1955 (Central Act XXVI of 1955) only states
that the alternative punishment for murder shall be
“imprisonment for life”, and not rigorous imprisonment
for life or simple imprisonmeni fer life the court
passing the sentence has, however, to keep in view the
provisions of section 60 of the Penal Code and choose
one or the other form in view of all the circumstances.

(Swale of Madiya Pradesh v. Ahamaduilah. ALR. 1961 S.C. 998.1002-

2K, M. Nanavativ. The State of Maharashtra, A.LR. 1962 8.C. 605,
GoR (paragraph 3), 630 (paragraph 87).

3. fai Dev v. The State of Pana, ALR. 1963 8.C. 613, 621 (paragraph

24).
4. ALR. 1987 Kerala 102.


Section 60.

Orissa High
Coust's view,

40

___“Revently we had another instance where the Ses-
sone J udge had failed to specify whether imprisonment
for life awarded by him was rigorous ot simple. In
that case the Inspector General of Prisons had scught
our direction as to what description of imprisonment
the prisoner should be made [0 tmdergo. Here, we
clarify the position by stating that the imprisonment
for life in this case shall be simple imprisonment, and
not rigorous,”

21. Now, aection 60 of the Indian Petal Code yrovides
that “In every case in which an offender is punishable with
imprisomment which may he of either description, it shall
be competent to the Court which sentences such offender
to direct in the sentence that such imprisonment shal! be
wholly rigorous or that such imprisonment shall be wholly
simple or that any part of such imprisonment shall
rigorous and the rest simple.”, Since in the tase of a con~
viction under section 382, the offender is punishable with
imprisonment for life, and not with imprisonment which
mey be of sither description (as, for instance, in the case
of a conviction under section 3048), section 60 does not
seem to us to be applicable. An argument might possibly
be based on the definition of “imprisonment? in section
3(27) of the General Clauses Act, 1897, but it is doubtful
whether in the context of section 53 or section 302 of the
Inéianm Penal Cade, that definitien coud apply.

23. Dissenting {vom the view taken by the Kerala High
Court, the 00555 High Court has held’ that “imprisonment
for life’ means “rigorous imprisonment for life’. The
main grounds on which this decision is based are—

(i) the proposition laid down by the Privy Coun-
cif’ and reaffirmed by the Supreme Court’, that a pet
gon sentenced to traneportation could be treated as a
person sentenced to rigorous imprisonment;

(i) the diseussion* of the question in the Report of
the Joint Committee which considered the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure (Amendment) Bill of 1954. particu-
Jarly the observation that substitution of “imprison-
ment” for “transportation” should not change the
nature of the punishment;

(iii) the use of the expression “rigorous imprison-
ment for life” in some jucgm: of the Susreme
Court;

(iv) the non-applicability of section (0 ty the
sentence of imprisonment for lite.

rUrlikia v. The State, ALR. 1964, Orissa 149.

2.Kisheri Lale. Emperor, 72 Ind. App. 1; AJR. 1945 P.C. 64.
के. लि, Gudse ॥ The State, ATR. 1961 S.C. 60.

3 supra.

4.See paragraph


lh

None of these grounds, however, appears to us to leaa
definitely to the conclusion that imprisonment for life must
be rigorous.

23. Adverting now to the questions posed in*paragraph
14 above, it appears to us that they cannot be answered with

any degree of certainty or assurance. We are inclined to ”

think that, as the law stands at present, a sentence of
imprisonment for life cannot be equated either with
rigorous imprisonment or with simple imprisonment for
life, and the law does not authorise the Courts which find
it necessary to pass that sentence, to direct that it shall be
one or the other. There is also no direct provision in the
Jaw which enables the executive authorities to regulate the
manner in which such sentences are to be carried out. This
unsatisfactory state of affairs can only be remedied by
suitable legislation.

24. As regards the direction in which the law should be
clarified, there are the two alternatives indicated respec-
tively by the judgments of the Kerala and Orissa High
Courts discussed above. According to the Kerala High
Court, imprisonment for life, like imprisonment for a spe-
cified period, may be of either description and the court
awarding the sentence should have the discretion—and the
duty—to direct in the sentence that such imprisonment
shall be wholly rigorous, or wholly simple, or partly rigo-
rous and partly simple, as provided in section 60 of the
Code. If the Orissa view is to prevail, the clarificatory
legislation will take the simple form of stating in the
appropriate place that “imprisonment for life shall be
rigorous.” A third possible course may be to clarify that,
as a kind of punishment, this is distinct from rigorous or
simple imprisonment, and to make provision in the prisons
Act, 1894, the Prisoners Act, 1900, or elsewhere for the
manner in which the life sentence is to be carried out.

25. In favour of the first alternative it can be said that
vases occasionally arise where a capital offence has been
committed but the circumstances are such that the offender
does not merit the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for
life, ie., imprisonment with hard labour, and that the court
trying the case should have the power to give a direction
under section 60 of the Penal Code that, having regard to
those circumstances, the imprisonment should be simple
and not rigorous. The case of Mathammal Saraswathi (op.
cit.) which came up before the Kerala High Court (where
a pregnant woman who found life in her husband's house
intolerable decided to put an end to herself and also her
three children, but, as fate would have it, succeeded only in
regard to the latter) was undoubtedly of this character.
But then, such hard cases are rare, and when they do occur,
they can be readily, and perhaps mcre adequately, dealt
with by the Government exercising the powers of commu-
tation and remission vested in them. Section 55 of the

Uncertainty
of present

Clarification
of the law—
possible

alternatives.

First alter-
native not
suitable.


‘Third alter-
mative mot
Suitable.

Recommen-
dation.

n

Penal Code would seem to be very relevant and specially
designed for this purpose.

26. It hes to be borne in mind that, as analysed in para-
graph 6 above, the offences for which the sentence of
imprisonment for life is prescribed in the Fenal Code are
of a grave and heinous character. Where it is prescribed
as the sole punishment or as an alternative to a sentence
of death, there would be little scope in the general run of
cases for the court to make the imprisonment simple and
not rigorous. Some slightly less serious offences are made
punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of
either description for a term. If in such cases the circum-
stances are such that a lenient view should be taken of the
offence, the court has already the power to impose simple
or rigorous imprisonment for a suitable period and would
not have to impose a sentence of imprisonment for life. It
does not therefore seem to us either necessary or desirable
that under the law the punishment of imprisonment for
life should be declared tc we either rigorous or simple and
that the court shold have the discretion to direct in the
sentence which kind it would be.

27. The adoption of the third alternative, namely, that
of keeping the sentence of imprisonment for life a distinct
punishment, would involve the working out of details as
to the manner in which the sentence is to be carried out.
When convicts were transported overseas to the Andamans,
the conditions of their incarceration were totally different
from the conditions attaching to rigorous or simple impri-
sonment undergone in the Indian jails, and were regulated
by rules and orders applicable only to the Andamans penal
settlement. In regard to life imprisonment, the questions
would naturally arise whether it should be milder or
severer than rigorous imprisonment, whether life convicts
should be kept in a separate category and, if so, how. We
do not think there is anything to be gained by raising, and
then attempting to solve, these problems.

28. We are accordingly of the view that the best course
will be to provide categorically in the Indian Penal Code
that “imprisonment for life shall be rigorous”. As indicat-
ed by the transitional provisions made in section 583A and
the statement in the Joint Committee’s Report. the inten-
tion of Parliament was not to make any material change
in the pre-existing position which was to treat persons
sentenced to transportation for life as if they had been
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment. We recommend that,
after section 55A of the Code, the following section be
inserted: —


18

“56. Imprisonment for life shall be rigorous.”.

29. Finally, while our present proposal is limited to the
immediate problem of resolving the doubts that have arisen
as regards the nature of this punishment, we have noted
for future consideration the question whether it is at all
necessary even in regard to capital offences and whether
it should be retained without modification in regard to the
numerous other offences now so punishable. It strikes one
as extremely anomalous that an offence like sedition should
be punishable with either imprisonment for life or with
rigorous or simple imprisonment which may extend to

Tmprison-
meat for life
to be rigo-
TOUS.

three years, but not more. These questions will have to”

be considered when the Indian Penal Code is taken up for
revision.

1. छू. V. छू, Sundaram—Chairman.

2. 8. 8. Dulat, 1
3. BN. Lokur, } Members.
4, Mrs. Anna Chandi, _ हि]
tga
5. 8. Balakrishnan, “ 3
P. M. BAKSHI,

Joint Secretary and
Legislative Counsel.

New Deut,
The 4th July, 1988,

GMGIPND—TSW—4 Law 811-69—1,800.