/ Vv
CONFIDENTIAL—Not for Publication”. Uth cfirt

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FOURTH REPORT

(ON THE PROPOSAL THAT HIGH COURTS
SHOULD SIT IN BENCHES AT DIFFERENT
PLACES IN A STATE)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW


CHAIRMAN,
Law Commission.
New Delhi, August 1, 1956

Shri C. C. Biswas,
Minister of Law
& Minority Affairs,
New Delhi,
My Dear Minister,

व्‌ have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Fourth Report
of the Law Commission dealing with the proposal that the High
Court of a State should sit in Benches at different places in view of
the proposed re-organisation of the States.

2. As the proposal is embodied in the States Re-organisation Bill
which is pending before Parliament, the matter was considered at
a meeting of both the sections of the Commission held on the 2lst
July, 1956. The unanimous opinion of the Members present was that
jt was not in the interest of the administration of justice that the
High Courts be split up and made to sit in Benches and it was decid-
ed that a Report should immediately be made to the Government
giving expression to the Commission’s view.

3. In view of the proposal being under the active consideration of
Parliament and the urgency of the matter the Report is being for-
warded though it has not yet been formally signed. The Report
has, however, the concurrence of all the Members except that of
Dr. N. C. Sen Gupta who was not present at the meeting and
Shri 8. M. Sikri who is abroad. The Report will be signed at the
next meeting of the Commission. .

4. As decisions on the subject-matter of the Report are likely to

be taken very soon, I shall thank you to forward it to the appro-
priate authorities so that due consideration may be given to it.

पु Yours sincerely,
_M. C. Seratvap,

67 M of Law



REPORT

1. The question of the High Courts sitting in Benches at different
places in a State has come to the forefront owing to the proposed.
re-organisalion of the States. At present there are five High Courts
in India that sit in Benches—the High Court of Punjab which has a
Bench at Delhi, the High Court of Rajasthan which sits at Jodhpur
and Jaipur, the High Court of Uttar Pradesh which has a Bench at
Lucknow, the High Court of Travancore-Cochin which sits at
Trivandrum and Ernakulam, and the High Court of Madhya Bharat
which sits at Gwalior and Indore. It will be found that in all these
instances ihe reason for the departure from the accepted principle

. that the High Court should be situated at the Capital of the State
was owing to historical and political considerations. There |
is now a suggestion that this principle should be extended and
that in some of the new States the High Court should sit in different
Benches situated at different places. There is a provision in the
States Re-organisation Bill (Clause 53) that the High Court for a
new State and the judges and Division Courts shall sit at such place
or places as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the
Governor, appoint. As the provision stood, the initiative for the
formation of a Bench at a particular place would have come from
the Chief Justice. This provision has been altered by the Joint
Select Committee and the initiative for the formation of a Bench at
a particular place has been transferred to the President. In other
words, more emphasis has been put upon the political considerations
that may necessitate the setting up of a Bench at a particular place.

2. In our opinion the question whether the High Court should
sit as a whole at one place or in Benches at different places has to
be considered solely from the point of view of the administration of
justice—and political and sentimental considerations have as far
as possible to be excluded. We are firmly of opinion that in order

«to maintain the highest standards of administration of Justice and
sto preserve the character and quality of the work at present being
yGone by the High Courts, it is essential that the High Court should

function as a whole and only at one place in the State, /
: :

cs 3. The High Court is the highest Court of Appeal in the State an j
“it is necessary that it should have the assistance of the best lega:
talent and the best equipped law library. IE is also necessary that


2

it should work in a proper atmosphere and should be constantly con-

‘scious of the traditions built up ‘by the Chief Justices and Judges in
the past. With regard to the new High Courts the Chief Justice
and Judges should be equally anxious to build up traditions similar
to those of the older High Courts. This, in our ¢onsidered view, is
only possible if the Chief Justice and Judges sit at the same place
and administer justice as a team, .

4, If the High Court works in Benches it will be difficult if not
impossible for the Chief Justice to have proper administrative con-
trol gyer the working of the Benches or the doings of his colleagues
who will constitute the Benches. The cohesion and the unity of
purpose that should exist among all the Judges of a High Court will
necessarily be absent when some Judges sit at places far away from
the principal seat of the High Court. Every court has an atmosphere
and traditions. A new Judge coming to the Court becomes con-
scious of these and tries to act in conformity with them. These
operate as a salutary corrective to the personal idiosyneracies of

-the Judge. This corrective will be completely absent in a Bench.

5. The High Court Bar acquires a justifiable reputation by
appearing before the Judges of the High Court, by arguing import-
ant cases,and by helping the Court finally to settle the law at the
highest level. A Bench of the High Court can never expect to get
assistance from such a Bar. A District or Taluka Bar, however
competent it may be, cannot be compared to the High Court Bar.
The litigant, therefore, appearing before a Bench will have to be
satisfied with less competent advocacy or will have to spend much
more by getting the services of some one from the High Court Bar.

6. A well stocked and well equipped library is essential to the
proper working of the Court. Such libraries only exist in the High
Courts. At other places where the Bench sits both the lawyer and
the Judge will be considerably handicapped by the absence of this
important and essential convenience.

7. In the High Court Judges are familiar with the judgments
delivered by their colleagues from day to day. Being constantly in
touch with each other they are in a position to consult with each
other on points of practice so that there should be uniformity in
the decisions given and certainty in the minds of the litigants as to
how the Court will decide. If there are different Benches it is
quite possible that one Bench may come to a decision contrary to
the one given by another Bench a few days before. The High


3

Court will have to be frequently constituting Full Benches to re-
Solve these conflicts.

8, As against these serious disadvantages are there any counter-
vailing conveniences which the litigant will receive by, the constitu-
tion of these Benches? It is said that in the India of today justice
should be taken to the door of the litigant and therefore the litigant
should not be compelled to go long distances to the High Court.
This argument is based upon a complete misapprehension of the,
working of the High Court and the system of administration of
justice in our country. In the trial of cases, both civil and criminal,
undoubtedly the Court, functioning as a court of first instance, must”

* be easily accessible to the litigant and his witnesses. The civil and
criminal courts in the Talukas or Tehsils and at District-
headquarters, Subordinate Judge’s and the District and Sessions
Courts in the District satisfy these needs. When the argument is
put forward that in England the High Court Judge gocs on cireuit,

+ it is forgotten that he goes as a court of first instance and never as
an appellate court and under our system the Subordinate Judge
and the District and Sessions Judge fulfil this role. As pointed out

by the Civil Justice Committee of 1924-25: “The appellate side of
~the High Court does work which in England is done by the Court
‘of Appeal”. The presence of the litigant is not really necessary at
the hearing of the appeal. He is not called upon either to give

‘evidence or to help the court in any way by his presence. The

appeal is decided on the record before the Court which has already
been prepared by the court of first instance. Undoubtedly there
are litigants who like to be present when their appeals are heard,

४ but the expense involved is trifling. Therefore, the litigant will in

४10 way be benefited by the setting up of different Benches of the.
-High Court.

9. If the liberty of the citizen is to be safeguarded and the rule
of law to be ensured, it is of paramount importance that the High
Courts all over India should be strengthened. It was, it seems to,

“us, unwise to have created so many High Courts after Independence.
But that perhaps was also due to historical reasons. There are
‘welcome signs now of a reversal’ of that policy. There are proposals
for a common High Court for more than one State and in some of
0६ new States one High Court will take the place of the High
which existed in the merging States. If the object of this
a is to strengthen the High Courts, then that object will
‘tofally defeated by the idea of setting up Benches. In effect the



4

High Court will be divided into severat High Courts sitting at
different places. The Benches will be nothing more than glorified
District Courts.

10. It may be pointed out that a very large majority of those
who have answered the Questionnaire issued by the Commission
including the Judges ‘of the Supreme Court who have answered il
have expressed a view against the formation of Benches. Informed
opinion is thus decisively against the proposed course.

11, As the re-organisation of the States is imminent and as the
* policy of constituting Benches may be given effect to in the very
7 near future we have thought it our duty to make this Report in,
order to apprise’ the Government of India in time of the serious
dangers underlying this policy. The efficiency of the administra-
tion of justice should, in our view, be the paramount consideration
governing this matter. The structure and constitution of the
Courts should not be permitted to be influenced by political consi-
derations. That this has happened in the past in certain cases can
be no valid ground for the extension of that policy. The Com-
mission is of the view that we should firmly set our face against
steps which would lead to the impairment of the High Courts with
the inevitable consequence of the lowering of the standards cf
administration of justice.

M. ९, SETALVAD,
(Chairman)

M. C. CHAGLA,

. N. WANCHOO,

G. N. DAS,

P. SATYANARAYANA RAO,

V. K. T. CHARI,

D. NARSA RAJU,

G. S. PATHAK,

G. N. JOSHI.

n

(Members)

K. SRINIVASAN,
DURGA DAS 77050.
Joint Secretaries.

New ऐडामा,
The 22nd September 1956.