LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FORTIETH REPORT

(LAW RELATING TO ATTENDANCE OF PRISONERS
IN COURTS)

February, 1969

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA @ MINISTRY OF LAW


LAW COMMISSION,
K. V. K. Sundaram, Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi,
Chairman March 10, 1960.

Shri P. Govinda Menon,
Minister of Law,
Government of India,
New Delhi.

12848 Law MINISTER,

I have pleasure in sending herewith the Fortieth Report of
the Law Commission on the law relating to the Attendance of
Prisoners in Courts, Revision of the law on the subject was
undertaken in view of the suggestion relating to section 3 of
the Prisoners (Attendance in Courts) Act, 1955, made by a State
Government, which was forwarded to the Commission by the
Ministry of Home Affairs for the Commission’s consideration.

The previous Commission decided to take up the considera-
tion of the subject in November, 1967, and issued a press com-
munique, inviting the opinions of individuals and bodies inter-
ested in the subject. That Commission, at its meeting held on
20th February, 1968, considered a draft Report for circulation
to State Governments.

After the re-constitution of the Commission in March, 1968,
the various amendments required in the existing law were dis-
cussed at several meetings held in April, 1968. Tentative pro-
posals (alongwith draft amendments) on the subject were then
circulated to State Governments, High Courts, leading Bar
Associations and other interested persons and bodies in July,
1968, for their comments. The comments received were consi-
dered by the Commission at its meetings held on 29th Novem-
ber, 1968, and 13th and 14th January, 1969. The Report was
then prepared and finally approved on 4th February, 1969.

Yours sincerely,
K. ए. K. SUNDARAM.


CONTENTS

com

Paracaari SUBJECT-Mic
INTRODUCTORY
t Genesis ef the Report. -
2. Procedure followed पु पु + पु +
PRESENT LAW AND ITS HISTORY
3 Existing laws onthe sugject ५.“
4  Thelaw before ross. *«
5 Need for special provisions
6 Provisions in Code of Criminal Procedure a> originally
7 «Scope of section gor widered im 1929 -
3 Inconsistency between Code and Prisoners’ Act
9 Cumbersome provisions in Prisoners’ Act . पु
10 Legislation of rass—Corstitutional angle .
Ir Extension 9 Part B States
12 Extension to persons under preventive detention -
१ Salient features Cf the igss-Act . . .
“TRANSFER OF PROVISIONS To THE Two cOnFs

t4 Transfer Of provisions 10 the two Codes recommended .
15 Proposed analysis

PROVISIONS RELATING TO CIVIL COURTS
16 Section 1—Eatent . . न : -
37 Section 2—Definitions
व (2) Section 3—Gnidance for issuing Order instead of

mission 2. ee :
(३) Counter-signature by district judge unnecessary
{iif} Price deposit Of expenses by party

ig Section ge
20 «Sections ts
21 Section 6
22 Sections and 8. पु न : - पु न

3

wow

aoe

10

ro

Ir


Gi)

‘PakacrarH SupJecr-MATTER PAGE
23, Scction 5 an
2g Fist Schedles) -/| -+ Ir
25 Provisions to be made in Civil Procedure Code Ir
26 Draft amendments appended . . . + . . ar

PROVISIONS RELATING TO CRIMINAL COURTS

27 Power of High Courts under section 491{1\(¢), Criminal Procedure
Gode. : पु पु पु . न . . पु पु IL
28 Suggestions ta retain power comsidered © se 12
29. Power of High Courts under section 497(1i(d) ५ foe aa
३०. Power Of High Courts under section zor(1}(e} . 14
३1. Repeal Of section 542 recommended Soe 15
32  Povisions of the 19ss-Act concerning criminal courts 1s
a3 Section 1 . पु . . . पु + . qs
ag Setion2 2 ५ ५. «|. | | | +- - जड़
35 @) Section 3—application to security proceedings qs

Gi) Counter-signing by Sessions Fudge or Chief Jud:
trate Wstead Of District Magistrate. . . 16
(मं) Counter-signing Necessiry . . . . . 18
(iv) Procedure for counter-signing . . . . ‘ 16
36. Sectionsgands . we wy
37 Section6 . . - Wy
BB Setiong 2s कप
39 Section 8 . . . पु . . . . . . 7
go Setiong 2 9. el 7
41 Schedule . . पु 4 पु . . . . 7
42 Amensments 10 Criminal Procedure Code recommended . . यह
APPENDICES

AprenDix [.—~Droft amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure,

1908. . . + . . पं . . . 18

APPENDIX. का ऋण to the Code of Criminal Procedure,

soe Be + 45४ +- ल,. न शव



REPORT ON THE REVISION OF THE LAW RELATING
TO ATTENDANCE OF PRISONERS IN COURTS

INTRODUCIORY

1. Revision of the law relating to the attendance of Genesis ct
prisoners in courts was taken up by the Law Commission (५ epost.
in the following circumstances. The Government of Bom-
bay brought tc the notice of the Government of Indie a
minor difficulty’ felt in the administration of the Prisoners
{Attendance in Courts) Act, 1955, in consequence of the
separation of the executive from the judiciary in that
State, and the matter was referred by the Government of
India to the Law Commission. Though the point raised
by the State Government related to a single provision in
the Act, the Law Commission considered it desirable to
examine the entire law on the subject.

2. A note discussing various sections of the Act and Proscdure
the English law on the subject, and analysing section 491 followed.
of the Code of Criminal Procedure and other analogous
provisions, was prepared. The matter was considered by
the Commission and tentative proposals on the subject
were formulated and circulated te the State Governments,

High Courts and leading Bar Associations for opinion.
Most of the comments that we have received have favour-
ed the proposed changes.

PRESENT LAW AND ITS HISTORY

3. The law on the subject is to be found mainly in the Existing
Prismers (Atiendance in Courts) Act, 1953. This Act con- BS OE ct
tains provisions authorising the removal of prisoners to recs
a civil or criminal court for giving evidence or for answer-
ing to the charge of an offence. Sections 491 & 542 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, also deal with the same
subject. Similar provisions authorising the removal of
prisoners from the place where they are confined are con-
tained im section 29 of the Prisoners Act, 1900, and in sec-
tion 3 of the Transfer of Prisoners Act, 1950.

4, Before 1955, the law relating to the attendance of The law
prisoners in courts, whether for the purpose of giving evi- before 1955-
denee in regard to matters pending before them or for
the purpose of answering to a crimimal charge, was con-
tained mainly in the last part of the Prisoners Act, 1900.

As a consolidating and revising measure, this Act incor-
porated in itself the provisions of the Prisoners’ Testimoay
Acc, 1863, which previously dealt with the above subject.

1 See paragraph 35 4) dnjra.


Need for
special
provisions,

Provisions
in Code of
Criminal
Procedure

as origi,
nally enacted,

Scope of
section

491 widen-
ed int 1923.

2

5. The basic provision of the Prisoners Act, 1900, viz.,
section 3, requires every officer in charge cf a prison to
receive and detain all prisoners duly committed to his
custody by any court according to the exigency of any
writ, warrant or order by which such person has been com-
mitted or until such person is discharged or removed, in
due course of law. Specific statutory provisions were ac-
cordingly necessary to secure the temporary removal ct
a prisoner in custody to a civil or eriminal court which
happened to require his attendance and these provisions
were made with elaborate care in sections 84 to 52 of the
Act. The various details naturally differed in respect of
civil and criminal courts, superior and subordinate courts,
and courts in presidency towns and courts elsewhere

6. Despite the fact that it was a consolidating measure,
the Prisoners Act left untouched two important provisions
on the same subject contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898. Clauses (c), (0) and fe) of section 491(1)
of the Code as originally enacted empowered each of the
presidency High Courts to direct—

“(c) that a prisoner detained in any jail situate
within its ordinary original civil jurisdiction be
brought before the Court to be there examined as a
witness in any matter pending or to be inquired into
in such court;

(व) that a prisoner detained as aforesaid be
brought before a court-martial or any commissioner
acting under the authority of any comraission from
the Governor-General in Council for trial or to be exa-
mined touching any matter pending before such court-
martial cr commissioners respectively;

(2) that a prisoner within such limits be removed
from one custody to another for the purpose of trial.”

Section 542 of the Code similarly empowered! any Presj-
dency Magistrate to issue an order to the officer in charge
of a jail within the presidency town requiring him to bring
a prisoner confined in jail before the Magistrate for ex-
amination as a witness or as accused person.

7. The scope and ambit of section 491 of the Code was
considerably widened by the Criminal Law Amendment
Act, 1923. Instead of only the three High Courts at Cal-
eutta, Madras and Bombay, all the High Courts in British
India were conferred the power of issuing directions of the
nature of habeas corpus. And furthermore, instead of
being restricted in territorial extent to the limits of the
ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court, the
power was made exercisable within the limits of its ap-
pellate criminal jurisdiction, i.e., the Province or Provinces
over which the High Court had authority.


3

8. As far as the High Courts qua criminal courts were Inconsisien-
concerned, there was an overlap and an inconsistency be- CY petween
tween the provisions of the Code and the provisions of the and Pri
Prisoners Act. While the power under section 491 of the soners Act.
Code ta direct the production of any prisoner for being
examined as a witness was unfettered, the identical power
under section 37 of the Prisoners Act was jimited by the
power of the Provincial Government to exclude any pri-
soners or class of prisoners from the obligation and by the
power of the jailer te abstain from complying with the
direction of the court for one or other of the reasons spe-
cified in section 42 of the Act. Since, however, the occa-
sion for calling up a prisoner to give evidence in a pending
matter before any High Court was extremely rare, “his
inconsistency in the legal provisions did not give rise to
any practical, or even perceptible, difficulty. In regard
to the three Presidency Magistrates’ Courts, there was a
similar overlap and inconsistency between section 542 of
the Code and Part IX of the Prisoners Act, but this too
appeared to have passed unnoticed.

9. Some of the provisions of the Act for securing the Cumber

attendance of a prisoner in court to give evidence or to some pro-
stand his trial for an offence were found to be cumber- ae in
some, The observance cf these provisions resulted in ga
avoidable delay in the trial of criminal cases and in need-
less detention of prisoners who were already under trial.
To mention a few examples, under section 38, where the
prisoner was confined in a district other than that in which
the court was situate, the order of the court had to be
routed through the District Magistrate or the Sub-divi-
sional Magistrate, within whose jurisdiction the prisoner
was confined. Under section 39, where the prisoner was
in a presideney town or in a prison more than 100 m.les
away, a subordinate court requiring his attendance had to
apply to the High Court for making the order, and this
order again had to be sent to the officer in charge of the
prison through the District Magistrate or Sub-divisional
Magistrate concerned. Under section 40. a criminal court
(including a High Court) in one province requiring the
attendance of a prisoner confined in another province had
to approach the Government of that province which could,
if it thought fit, direct the temporary removal of the pri-
soner for the purpose in view,

10. Legislation was consequently undertaken in 195% Legislaicn
to simplify the unduly complicated and dilatory proced ire % 1955—
laid down in Part IX of the Prisoners Act, 1900, to repeal Gonstte-
that Part and to re-enact its provisions with suitable madi- angle.
fications as a separate law. As a matter of constitutional
interest, it should be noted that, apart from sections 34 to
52 comprising the said Part IX, the Prisoners Act was a
law relating to entry 4 of the State List in the Seventh
Schedule, which reads “Prisoners, reformatories, Borstal
institutions and ofber institutions of a like nature, and


Extension
20 Part B
States.

ventive
detention,

Salient
features
of the
1955-Act.

4

persons detained therein, ete.”. The specified sections of
this Act were, in pith and substance, provisions relating
te eriminal procedure and civil procedure covcred by en-
teics 2 and 13, respectively, in the Concurrent List. This
separation of the Concurrent List matters from an existing
law relating in the main to a State subject was desirable
from the constitutional point of view.

11. The re-codification was also necessary from the legis-
lative angle, since the Prisoners Act only exterded to the
former British Indian Provinces, i.¢., to the Part A States
and Part C States of India, and not to the Part B States.
It was felt that there should be a single law on the subject
exiending to the whole of India (except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir).

12, During the pendency of the Prisoners (Attendance
in Courts) Bill before Parliament, it was apparently de-

ded to extend the scope of the new law to persons under
preventive detention. Relying on the preamble to the Pri-
soners Act, 1900, the Bombay High Court had held! its pro-
visions inapplicable to persons detained in prisons by ex-
ecutive authority. Apart from the fact that section 4 of
tho Preventive Detention Act, 1950, relating to the removal
of dstenus from one place to another, was hardly appro-
priate for authorising such removal for a purpose uncon-
nected with the object of their detention, several High
Courts? had emphasised that the power of preventive de-
tention could not be used to help investigation 07 an offence
alleged to have been committed by a detenu. Accord-
ingly, while the long title of the Prisoners (Attendance in
Courts) Act, 1955, refers to “persons confined in prisons”,
the definition in clause (a) of section 2 states shat “refer-
ences to confinement jin a prison, by whatever form of
words, include references to confinement or detention in
a prison under any law providing for preventive deten-
tion”. In passing, it may be noted that this definition ex-
cludes from the scope of the Act those persons who are
kept under detention in places other than “prisons” as
defined in clause (b) of section 2.

13. While the Prisoners (Attendance in Courts) Act,
1955, (hereinafter referred to as the 1955-Act) enlarged the
territorial extent, amplified the scope, and generally sim-
plified the provisions of Part IX of the Prisoners Act, 1900,
the salient features of the law remained the same. Despite
the fact that the provisions applicable to civil courts dif-
fered in detail from the provisions applicable to criminal
courts, as indeed in the nature of things they had to, they

1 Taherally v. Chanabasappa, 1.L.R. 1944 Bom. 724.
3 Dithagh Singh ४. Emp... ALR. 1944 Lah, 373 3 Labarama y. State,

55 CN. 13: Malsdath Af ivali v. Commissioner. of Police, ALR, 1950
Hom. 202 ३ Narayanamma मे. Hyderatad State, ALR. 1959 Hyd. 68.



5

were brought together—one could even say, jumbled to-
gether—io a greater extent than in the Prisoners Act, sacri-
ficing clarity for the sake of brevity.

TRANSFER OF PROVISIONS TO THE TWO CODES

14. When the law relating to prisoners was revised and
consolidated in 1900, there was perhaps some advantage
in ineluding in that Act the previsions contained in tre
Prisoners’ Testimony Act, 1869. Officers in charge of pri-
sons might have found it convenient to be provided with
a single vade-mecum, but from the point of view of the
civil and criminal courts and of the liligant public it would
have been desirable to separate the provisions concerning
civil courts from those concerning criminal! courts and put
them in appropriate niches in the two procedural Codes.
The contrary view has been expressed in one of the com-
ments! received by us. It is said that there are other in-
stances of special provisions relating to civil and criminal
courts being found in the same Act and special Acts (९.२५
the Indian Soldiers Litigation Act, 1925) regulating civil
porated in a separate Act, which would make re: ference
comment, there is an “advantage, not merely for prison olli-
cers but for the courts and the litigant public, in having
the provisions relating to a special class of persons incor-
porated in a separate Act. which would make reference
to them easier and which, not having to be read with other
provisions of the vast Act like either of the two Codes,
would be easier to follow and interpret”. We have already
noticed that connected and slightly inconsistent provisions
on the subject exist in the Code of Criminal Proceduze.
In substance, the provisions of the 1955-Act modify or sup-
plement the ordinary rules regulating the procedure of
civil and criminal courts whenever they have to issue pro-
cess compelling the attendance of free individuals. We
are of the view that the special provisions, which are
doubtless required in the case of prisoners and detenus,
could conveniently be incorporated in the two Codes.

15. It is accordingly proposed, in what follows, to ana-
lyse the 1955-Act, first from the point of view of the civil
courts and see how best the provisions concerning them
can be placed in the Code of Civil Procedure, and then
to do a similar analysis from the point of view of the cri-
minal courts,

PROVISIONS RELATING TO CIVIL COURTS

16. The 1955-Act does not extend to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir. Since the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, also does not at present extend to this State the p:o-
posal to include in the Code the provisions in the Act re-
lating to civil courts will not affect the status quo.

1 Comment of the West Bengal Law Commission.

‘Transfer Ot
provisions
10 the two
Codes re-
commended.

Proposed
analysis.

Section 1—
Extent.


Section 2—
Definitions,

Section 3—
Guidance
for issuing
Order in-
stead Of
commis-
sion.

6

17. (i) As already mentioned’, the object of the defi-
nition of “confinement in a prison” in clause (a) of sec-
tion 2 is to bring within the scope of the Act persons
detained in a prison, and not elsewhere, under the Preven-
tive Detention Act, 1950, or any other Jaw providing for
preventive detention. With this definition, or rather rule
of coustruction, the subsequent sections apply in relation
to persons so detained in prisons as they apply to persons
confined in prisons under the orders of a court. The defi-
nition, however, is not aptly worded. It would be clearer
and more appropriate to use the phrase “confined or de-
tained in a prison” instead of the phrase “confined in a
prison” in the six or seven places where it occurs, and to
define “detained” as including detained under any law
providing for preventive detention.

In this connection, we have considered whether courts
should have the power to require the production of per-
sons who for special! reasons are detained in places other
than prisons. We are of the view that it is nerther neces-
sary nor desirable to extend the scope of the existing Act
to such persons,

(ii) In the definition of “prison”, the expression “refor-
matory, Borstal institution or other institutior. of a like
nature” has apparently been taken from entry 4 of the
State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
Though the Reformatory Schools Act, 1897, refers to re-
formatory schools, and not to refermatories, it is likely
that in future reformatories other than reformatory schagls
may come into existence. Hence, no change in the langu-
age is suggested.

(iii) There would be no need for a definition of “State
Government’ in the Code of Civil Procedure. Since, in
relation to a Union territory, it would mean the Central
Government under the General Clauses Act, it would only
be necessary to formally delegate its powers and func-
tions under the new provisions to the Administrator under
article 239 of the Constitution.

18. (i) So far as civil courts are concerned, sub-section
(1) of section 3 provides that any such court may require
the attendance of a prisoner by issuing an orcer to the
officer in charge of the prison, but only if it is within the
State. While it appears from the wording that whenever a
civil court thinks that the evidence of a prisoner within the
State is material, the court will normally issue an erder
under thig section for the production of the prisoner, clause
(0) of section 7 shows that the court has the option of
issuing a cormmission for examining the witness in prison
if the prison is more than 50 miles distant from the court-
house. Considering the inconvenience, expense and risks

1 Paragraph 12, supra.


7

involved in the production of prisoners in court, the Com-
mission is of the view that if the prison is within easy
reach of the court-house, the civil court may normally
require the attendance of the prisoner for giving evidence
in person. Otherwise, the civil court will normally con-
sider it sufficient to issue a commission for examining him
in person, but if it thinks that, in the circumstances of
the particular case, examination on commission will not
be adequate, it may order the production of the prisoner
in court. If the prison is in another State, examination
on commission will, as at present, be the only procedure
available to the civil court.

As regards the limit of distance to be specified in the
rule we think it should be such as to enable the prisoner
being brought to the court-house in the morning and taken
back to the prison in the evening. We propose 25 Kms.
(about 16 miles) for this purpose. In practice this would
mean that the prison would be within the town, in which
the civil court holds its sitting.

In suggesting this provision we have taken into account
the fact that Order 16, rule 19(b), precludes the court
from summoning a witness residing at a place more than
200 miles away from the court-house. This rule would,
of course, be no bar to the production of a prisoner in
eourt under the proposed new rule even if the prison in
which he was confined was more than 200 miles from the
court-house. For a prisoner, it is immaterial whether he
is less than 200 miles or more than 200 miles away from
the court-house, since adequate arrangements will be made
for his escort and conveyance and for looking after him
while in transit.

Gi) Under sub-section (2) of section 3, where an order Counter-

under sub-section (1) is made by a civil court subordinate डिक
toa district judge, it will not have effect unless it is coun- jie un
tersigned by the district judge. We are of the view that necessary.
this restriction is not necessary and that the subordinate
civil judiciary may be trusted to exercise their powers
under this section with discretion and care. If magistrates
of the first class can be so trusted, there is no reason why
the judges of civil courts, some of whom are higher in rank
than those magistrates, cannot be entrusted with this
power. It should also be noted that after the separation
of the judiciary from the executive, many officers are civil
judges and magistrates of the first class at the same time.
It is certainly anomalous that while an officer functioning
as magistrate of the first class can make an effective order
under section 3 without having to submit it to a higher
authority, he cannot do so while functioning as a civil
court. In practice also, the procedure of submitting the
order to the district judge for countersignature does not
appear to be anything more than formal routine, and may
be safely dispensed with.


Prior
deposit of

B

(ili) Before a civil cuuirt makes an order under section

expenses by 3 for securing the attendance of a prisoner in court, it is

Party.

desirable that it should require the party concerned to
deposit the costs and expenses involved in the execation
of the order, including the expenses that will have to be
incurred by the State in providing escort. Under the 1955-
Act, this is left to be prescribed by rules under section
9(2)(£). We recommend an express rule in the Code of
Civil Procedure for the purpose. In drawing it up, the
provisions of Order 16, rule 2, have been kept in mind.

One of the comments! on this proposal has drawn atten-
tion to section 50 of the Prisoners Act of 1900, which after
Jaying down that no order shalt be made by a civil court
for the attendance of a prisoner unless the costs and char-
ges of the execution of such order were first deposited,
provided as follows :—

“Provided that, if, upon any application for such
order, it appears to the Court to which the application
is made that the applicant has not sufficient means to
meet the said costs and charges, the Court may pay
the same out of any fund applicable to the contingent
expenses of such Court, and every sum sa expended
may be recovered by the Provincial Government [rom
any person ordered by the Court to pay the same, as
if it were costs in a suit recoverable under the Code
of Civil Procedure.”.

It is suggested that as a provision for legal aid to indigent
persons it deserved to be retained. The comment further
states that when Part IX of the Act of 1900 was re-enacted
as the Prisoners (Attendance in Courts) Act, 1955, “the
above provision was eliminated which perhaps is not a
change of which independent India may fee] proud. if
the law is now amended, the authorities mav consider
whether the provision contained in the Act of 1900 shculd
not be restored.”

In our view, however, the general scheme of the Code
does not contemplate any such concession regarding ex-
penses of witnesses in civil litigation. Under Order 16,
even a pauper has to pay the expenses of witnesses, and
all that the Code provides is that under section 35, the
court can award costs of the suit including those expenses
to the pauper. It wili not, therefore, be in order to put
in the Code a special provision giving a temporary con-
cession for expenses simply because the witness is a priso-
ner, when the main provisions of the Code as 10 witnesses
do not give any such facility to an indigent party,

(iv) It has been suggested” that in the proposed rules
provision should also be made for the production of a
prisoner before a civil court when his appearance is re-

1 Comment of the West Benge!
2 Commont of the District and

४ ए mmission.
ion Jadgé, Ardamass.


9

quired for purposes other than giving evidence’, e-g. as
a party. We do not consider any such widening of the
scope of the existing Act is necessary. Such cases weuld
be of very rare occurrence.

19. Section 4 empowers the State Government to ex-
clude by general or special order any person or class of
persons trom the operation of section 3, and lays down
that “so long as any such order remains in force, the
provisions of section 3 shall not apply to such person or
class of persons”. The question may arise whether the
State Government is competent to make such an order
in regard to a person for whose attendance a civil (or cri-
minal) court has earlier issued an order under section 3,
and if it does, which order will prevail. Having regard to
the considerations underlying section 4, the Commission
is of the view that the State Government should have
power to make an order under section 4 prevailing even
over an earlier order of the court, and this should be made
clear in the corresponding provision in the Code,

We have for this purpose, proposed that the words
whether “before or after the order of the State Govern-
ment” should be added in the provision corresponding to
section 4.

In one of the comments’? which we received on our
ientative proposals, it was stated that these words invelve
“avoidable conflict of decisions by the court and the Gov-
ernment”, and are also likely to cause delay in the pro-
gress of the case. When the Government arrests a perzon,
it is stated, it must have means to know whether such per-
son should or should not be produced before the court,
and there is no reason why precisely at that moment the
Government should not take the appropriate decision in
the matter. Moreover, if the question of excmption is
taken up by the Executive after the Civil Court hag ordcr-
ed the production of a prisoner, it may cause delay, which
may turn out to be absolutely unjustified if ultimately
the Government does not agree to pass an arder of ex-
emption.

We do not agree with this view of the matter. At the
time when a person is arrested, the Government would
hardly apply its mind to the question whether his preduc-
tion in court should or should not be barred. In our view,
no serious delay is involved or likely to be involved in the
change which we have suggested. In any case, the matter
is one of policy, relating to the maintenance of Jaw and
order, and we think it proper that the State Government's
order, whether made earlier or later, should prevail.

1. Order ६, rate 3, and Order ro, rule 4, Cade OF Civil Procedure, 1908,
have been referred 10, in this connection, °

2 Comment of the District a1] Seeions Jwige. Andamans

Section 4-


Section 5.

Section 6.

10

20. Section 5 requires the officer in charge of a prison
to comply with an order passed under section 3 and deli-
vered to him in due course, and indicates the manner in
which the order is to be carried out. In the application of
this section to a person under preventive detention, the
question might be raised whether the order ठ the court
under section 3 is sufficient authority for reraoving the
person from the place of detention, or whethe: a supple-
menting order of the State Government made under sec-
tion 4 of the Preventive Detention Act, 1950, is necessary.
We are of the opinion that the former is the correct ans-
wer, and accordingly do not consider that any clarifica-
tory amendment is required.

21, (i) Section 6 authorises the officers in charge of a
prison to abstain from complying with a court’s order in
certain specified circumstances. Civil Courts are not con-
cerned with the proviso, which is applicable only where
“the order has been made by a criminal] court”.

(ii) Although the implication of section 4 is fairly
clear that! the officer in charge of a prison must abstain
from carrying out a court's order if it had inadvertently
been made in respect of an exempted person, it is desir-
able to mention this expressly along with the four grounds
specified in section 6.

(iii) Clause (a) of section 6 appears to be unduly cum-
brous. Declaration of unfitness by a prescribed authority
in the prescribed manner is unnecessary. It should be
sufficient if the medical officer attached to the prison cer-
tifies that the prisoner is by reason of sickness or infirmity
unfit to be removed. In such cases, the officer in charge
cannot be expected to comply with the court’s order. The
clause may be simplified and shortened as above.

(iv) With reference to clause (0०) of sectioa 6, one of
the comments” is that there should not be an absolute bar
against removing prisoners who are under commitial for
trial or under a remand pending trial or pending an in-
vestigation. It is stated :-—

“A prisoner cannot certainly be removed te ano-
ther Court for the purpose of giving cvidence thcre
when his own trial ig going on. But apart from that
one case, it is no easy to see why he cannot be removed
when he is simply awaiting trial under commitment
or otherwise or when an investigation concerning some
alleged offence committed by him is proceeding, It
appears that in the corresponding provisions of
the English Act, such as the Criminal Procedure
Act, 1953, and the County Courts Act, 1934 there
is no such bar, but, on the other hand, prisoners under

a As tO section 4, see paragraph 19, supra.
2 Comment of the West Bengal Law Commission.



YW

commitment are expressly mentioned amongst priso-

ners, against whom an order for their attendance ¢an

be made.”

We, however, find that this clause has heen there at
Jeast since 1900 and im the absence of serious practical
difficulty we do not think it should be omitted or modified.

22. Sections 7 and 8, which provide for the issue of com- Sectio
missions for the examination of prisoners and the proce- 2 बाण
dure for the execution of such cemmissions, do not call .
for any comments. When a corresponding provision is
made in the Code of Civil Procedure, it will naturally take
a simplified form,

23. Section 9 empowers the State Government to make section 9,
rules for carrying cut the purposes of the Act. A perusal
of the existing rules in one or two States shows that
almost ai] the matters dealt with by the rules can be
adequately covered by executive instructions and a rule-
making power is practically unnecessary.

24. The First Schedule gives the form in which am pisse
order under sub-section (1) of section 3 is to be made. So Schedule.
far as the officer in charge of the prison (to whom the
order is addressed) is concerned, the indication in the
order that the attendance of the specified prisoner in court
is required “to give evidence in a matter now pending
before the said court’ is doubtless sufficient, but there is
no good reason why the prisoner should be kept in the
dark as to the nature of the pending matter. the name of
the party who has cited him as a witness and other suc’
broad details. It is desirable that the form of the order
should be revised so as to give this information at least
to the extent to which it is the practice to give in an ordi-
nary summons to a witness.

25, It will be ciear from the above detailed conside:- Provisions
ation of the provisions of the 1955-Act concerning the civil {° be made
courts that these could appropriately and with advantage की Be
be made in a separate Order in the First Schedule to the
Code of Civi] Procedure, 1908. The most suitable place
will be immediately after Order XVI which deals with
summoning and attendance of witnesses. In order that the
proposed new Order may apply to the courts of small
causes in the presidency towns, rule 1 of Order LI will
require an amendment. The form of order requiring the
production of the prisoner for giving evidence may be
given in Appendix B of the First Schedule to the Code.

26, We have given in tne Appendix to this Report a Dratt
draft of the amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure, Amendments
1908, recommended by us. appended.

PROVISIONS RELATING TO CRIMINAL COURTS

27, We have already noticed! that, in addition to the Power of
1955-Act, there are two sections in the Code of Criminal High Courms
under sec-
— - जज ता ~ ton pun
1 Paragraphs 6 (0 8, supra. icon 6१%. .



Suggestions
to retain
power con-
sidored.

12

Procedure, viz., sections 491 and 542, which also provide
for the bringing up of prisoners before criminal courts
either for giving evidence or for answering to a criminal
charge. Under clause (c) of the former section, the High
Court for any State or Union territory has the power to
direct! that a prisoner detained in any jail within the State
or Unign territory be brought before the Court to be exa-
gined ‘as a witness in any matter pending or to be_in-
quired into in that Court. Asa criminal court, every High
Court has the same power conferred on it by the 1953-Act
in respect of prisoners as well 48 persons kept in prisons
under preventive detention, whether within the State or
in another State. While ihe High Court’s power under
the Code is not limited in any way, its power under the
1955-Act is subject to the State Government’s power to
exclude individual prisoners and class of prisoners and to
other Umitations laid down in the Act. It is desirable
that the discrepancies between these two statutory powers
should be removed, We recommend that clause (c} of
section 491(1) of the Code be omitted, and that the High
Court’s power to issue directions for this purpose be 7९-
gulated by the new section which we are proposing below.

28. One of the comments’ received by us suggests thai
the position under section 491 (0) should be preserved. We
think, however, that there is no need to do so. The posi-
tion that exists in this respect appears to be fortuitous
and not the result of any policy deliberately adopted in the
matter. In another comment’, it is stated: —

“The ordinary power of requiring the attendance
of a prisoner for the purpose of giving evidence in a
pending proceeding is a power shared in common by
all inferior and superior courts; but the power of re-
quiring the production of a prisoner by a writ of habeas
corpus belongs to the superior Courts alone. In the
language of the English law, the first is the power of
issuing ordinary judicial writs, and the second is the
power of issuing high prerogative writs. ‘The superior
Courts have both the powers, and they use the one
normally and the other on extraordinary occasions,
when it becomes necessary to bring out the most
potent weapon in their armoury. 8 two powers
are certainly not the same, and if provisions for the
exercise of the power of the first kind by all Courts
are made in ६ certain statute and provisicns for the
exercise of power’ of the second kind by superior
Courts are made in another Statute, it is a clear mis-
take to say that there is a discrepancy between the
two sets of provisions.”.

1 This 3 corresponds 10 the writ known in England as, Ad पड

लि मदन gland as, eas corpus ad
z Comment cf the Bar Association of India.
3 Comment of the West Bengal Law Commission.


wB

It is difficult to understand why it is a clear mistake to
call a spade a spade, The above comment recognises
the patent fact that the power conferred on the High
Courts by section 49] (1) (०) of tae Code is not exactly the
same as the power confezred on all crimiral courts (includ-
ing the High Courts when taey exercise criminal jurisdic-
tion) by the 1955-52... We have consequently to consider
whether the existence side by side of two such slightly
different powers in regard to the same matter should be
allowed to continue. The direction of a High Court is
equally potent to achieve its object irom whichever part
of its armoury of powers, whether it be the part labelled
“High Prerogative? or the one marked “Statutory”, 1
takes out the weapon. Since :t is declared in article 226
of the Constitution that every High Court shall have
power to issue to any authority directions, orders or
writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, for
any purpose, the special gleam, if any, on the power de-
rived from the Code provisions—a gleam perhaps attr:but-
able to its chapter heading which reads “directions of the
nature of a habecs corpus’—has practically faded away.
In fact, the question arises whether section 441 of the Code
serves any purpose at all and whcther in view of ihe com-
prehensive wording of article 226, there is any longer any
justification of keeping the said section in the Cade’.
While leaving this question for further consideration, we
need only mention that the power under clause (c) of
section 491(1) is no less statutory than the power under the
1955-02, and when the provisions of this Act are trans-
ferred to the Code the said clause will have to be omicted.

29. Clause (d) of section 431(1) empowers a High Court Power of
to direct? that a prisoner detained in the State or Union High
territory be brought before a court-martial or any com- outs co
missioners for trial or to be examined touching any matter ten 491)
before such court-martial or commissioners. respectively. (व).
While the reference to a court-martial is readily under-
standable, the reference to “commissioners” requires ex-
planation. In the Code as enacted in 1898, the reference*

व S23 Biyw’s Com nentary on the Constitution of India, sth Ed. Vol. 3,
PP. 443--444.

2 [पा cterespoads ६० the weit kio"a in Boyland as kaheas corpas
af repordendea, The oiginal object of this writ wa: 1 bring up a prisioaer
confined by the y OF an jnferior court and to charge him Ga any 2
Of action in che superior court, At preset, however, it is aied tc sring
up prisoners who are detained in custody uader civil Or criminal process:
before magistrates 0 courts OF recOrd for triel Or examimarion on any other
charge.

3 Pals छा 19, :
tioas Of the provisi3a im che Habeas
which 2 npovers a cJurt OF record *
for bot 1zidg any priz?tee OF एयक्सय:
cn mnissiers OF bankruptcy,

a share aad single ajaptation for Tadian condi-
Carpus Act, 1303 [43 Geo. 3 ०. 43),
+ award a writ Or writs Of labeas corpus

fore aay cuct-martial, Or before aby
ssioners for atiditing the public ac-
2u013 of Other C) Wnisziaters acting virtue Or uMder rhe suthogity of any
ep ANIA Or Weerant 1007 Hs Mussty, his heirs or successors for trial
ort be examiaed उपाय any mutter peating before such court-martial
or comnissioners respectively”.



section
497(1)(०.

14

was to any commissioners’ “acting under the authority of
any commission from the Governor General-in-Council”.
These words were omitted by the Government of India
(Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, for reasons
which are not easy to appreciate. The result was to leave
the words “any commissioners” completely unqualified,
and to make it impossible to understand what sort of
“commissioners” were intended to be benefited by the
provision. It is doubtful whether in recent years any High
Court had occasion to issue a direction under clause (d)
to facilitate a trial or inquiry before “any commissioners”.
Tf at all the power is needed for a commission set up under
the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, or similar statutory
commissions, the matter can be provided for by the rele-
vant Act. It is unnecesary to retain it in section 491.
After omission of this portion of section 491 (1) (व) , it will
apply only to courts-martial, for which section 549 of the
Cade of Criminal Procedure is the more appropriate place.
Therefore, we recommend that clause (d) of section 491 (1)
may be omitted, and in section 549 of the Code, a sub-
section on the lines of section 491(1}{d), modified as
above, may be added.

We do not consider it necessary from the practical
point of view that this clause should apply in relation to
persons under preventive detention, or to prisoners de-
tained in prisons outside the jurisdiction of the High
Court.

30. The next clause of section 491(1)—clause (e)-—
empowers a High Court to direct’ “that a prisoner within
such limits be removed from one custody to another for
the purpose of trial”, Under this widely worded clause,
there is no limitation as to the kind of custody—civil, cri-
minal, military or other—from which a prisoner may be
transferred or as to the kind of custody to which he may
be iransferred, so long as the transfer is for the purpose
of trial. In a Patna case’, a person who was tried by a
special court which had no jurisdiction was, on an appli-
cation for habeas corpus, not discharged but ordered to
be removed to another jail and to be produced in the
court of the sub-divisional magistrate to take his trial.
The order was made under clause (e) of section 491 (1).
This appears to be the only reported reliance on this
clause. It may well be regarded as chsolete and omitted,

1 See par-graph 6, supra.

2 This corresponds’ 10 the writ kuswm as Habeas Corpus ad deliteran-
dumetreceipiendam, Tt has, for instatce. कला grav ted it: El gles d 10701 0७४६
@ person in custody iN one country for contempt to take his trial for perjury
in another courtcy. The writ is obsolcte, as modern Iegislatics adcquately
provides for the removal of prisoners from one custedy 10 another fer varius
purposes.

3 Sukhdeo y. Emp,, ALR. 1943 Putra 288.


15

31. Section 542 of the Code which has not been amend- Repeal of
ed subsequently, reads as follows: — San ree
0) nded.
“542, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained © ed

in the Prisoners’ Testimony Act, 1869, any Presidency
Magistrate desirous of examining, as a witness or an
accused person, in any case pending before him. any
person confined in any jail within the local limits of
his jurisdiction, may issue an order to the officer in
charge of the said jail requiring him to bring such
prisoner in proper custody, at a time to be therein
named, to the Magistrate for examination,

(2) The officer so in charge, on receipt of such
order, shall act im accordance therewith and_ shall
provide for the safe custody of the prisoner during
his absence from the jail for the purpose aforesa:d.”.

As already noted}, this section is slightly different in
scope and effect from the 1955-Act, although the latter
applies equally to the courts of presidency magistrates.
There js no point in having two different provisions for
the same purpose. We recommend that section 542 should
be repealed.

32. We now turn to the provisions of the 1955-Act in its Provisions
application to criminal courts, including the High Courts of 1955-
and Presidency Magistrates’ Courts, and consider what Act owe
modifications are necessary or desirable in those provisions nal courts.
before they are incorporated in the Code.

33. Ia as much as the Code also does not extend to the Section 1.
State of Jammu & Kashmir, the territorial extent of the
provisions of the 1955-Act will remain unaltered. We
would, however, recommend that the Jammu & Kashmir
Code of Criminal Procedure should be brought into line
with the Indian Code by making similar amendments.

34, For the reasons already indicated?, the defirition Section 2.

of “confinement in a prison” will be replaced by a defini-
tion of “detained”, the definition of “prison” will be
slightly modified and the definition of “State Government”
will be omitted. Here again, a formal delegation of powers
and functions under the new provisions to the Adminis-
trators of all the Union territories under article 239 of the
Constitution will be necessary’.

35. 0) Under section 3, any criminal court in a State Section 3—
may issue an order to the officer in charge of a prison, application
whether within the same or another State, requiring him proceedings.

1 Paragraph है, supra.
2 Paragraph 17, supra.
3 Cf. Paragraph 17, supra.


Counter-
signing by
Sessions
Judge or
Chisf Judi-
cial Magis-
trate
instead

of District
‘Magistrate.

‘Counter-
signing
necessary.

Procedure
for counter
signing.

16

to produce before the court any prisoner or detenu cither
for the purpose of giving evidence in a matter pending
before the court or fer the purpose of answering to a
charge of an offence which has been made, or is pending,
before it. Since sub-section (2) refers to “charge of an
offence”, it does not enable a criminal court to direct the
production of a prisoner for the purpose of defending him-
self in proceedings under sections 107 to 110 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure. As there could hardly be any such
eases, we do not consider that the provision should be
modified to cover them,

(ii) Sub-section (3) provides that no order made under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) by a criminal court
which is inferior to the Court of a frst class magistrate
shall have effect unless it is countersigned by the District
Magistrate to whom that court is subordinate or within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction that court is situate.
This provision gave rise to a slight difficulty .n States
where the separation of the judiciary from the executive
had taken place and the judicial magistrates of the second
or third class were not subordinate to the District Magis-
trate. In Punjab, the difficulty was surmounted by an
amendment of the 1955-Act substituting “Chief Judicial
Magistrate” for “District Magistrate” in sub-section (3)
of section 3. In Bombay, where judicial magistrates are
subordinate only to the Sessions Judge, the position is that
a judicial magistrate of the second or third class making
an order under section 3 has to submit it to the District
Magistrate of the distriet for countersignature. Although
this may not ke a serious difficulty, it is certainly ano-
malous to bring in the head of the executive administra-
tion of the district into an essentially judicial matter. It
would be more appropriate to previde for the submission
af such cases to the Sessions Judge or Chief Judicial
Magistrate to whom the court making the order is sub-
ordinate. ‘

(7) We have, in this connection, considered whether
the procedure of countersignature could be dispensed
with (as recommended above in the case of suordinate
civil courts)!, but come to the conclusion that scrutiny
by a higher authority is desirable in the case of lower
ranking magistrates.

{iv} In order to enable the countersigning officer to
decide the matter expeditiously, it is desirable that the
magistrate should submit the case with a statement of
facts indicating why he considers it necessary to secure
the personal attendance of the prisoner. The 1955-Act
leaves the procedure in this respect to be prescribed by

1 Paragraph 18 (8), supra.


17

rules vide section 9(2) (a), whereas section 36(2) of the
Prisoners Act, 1900, contained the necessary direction to
the inferior court and also expressly provided that the
District Judge or Magistrate could, after considering the
inferior court’s statement, decline to countersign the
order, We recommend that a provision on those lines
should be made in the Code.

36. The comments above! on sections 4 and 8 apply Scctions 4
equally in regard to criminal courts. 5

37. (i) As to section 6, so far as criminal courts are Section 6.
concerned (and the proviso only applies to them), clauses
(ii) and (iii) of the proviso are obscurely and cumbrously
worded. The intention appears to be that when the prison
is near enough to the court-house where the evidence is to
be taken, the prisoner should not be kept away on the
ground that he is under committal for trial or under re-
mand. It should be quite practicable to take him to the
court in the morning and bring him back to prison in the
evening after giving evidence. The distance of 5 miles
mentioned in clause (iti) of the proviso could, however, be
safely increased to 25 Kms. (roughly 15 miles), without
causing any inconvenience to the prison authorities.

(ii) The comments above* on section 6 apply equally
in relation to criminal courts, and the section should be
ve-drafted accordingly.

38. Section 7 has no application to criminal courts. Section 7.

39, Section 8 will require formal re-drafting from the Section 8.
point of view of the criminal courts.

40. As in the case of the civil courts’, there will be Section 9.
practically no need for a rule-making power vested in the
State Government for supplementing the provisions of
the Code. Executive instructions to prison authorities
will be sufficient “for carrying out the purposes” of the
new provisions.

41. The forms given in the two Schedules should he Schedule
revised so that the prisoner may obtain before-hand an
idea of the purpose for which he is being taken to the
criminal court, whether it be for answering to a criminal
charge or for giving evidence in a case, The officer in
charge of the prison should be required to give the
prisoner a copy of the order.

1 Paragraph 19—20, supra.
2 Paragraph 21 (i) and (ii), supra.
3. Cf. Paragraph 23, supra.


Amendments
to Criminal
Procedure
Code 76-
commended,

Definitions.

Power 10
require
attendance
of prisoner
10 give
evidence,

18

42, We have given in the Appendix to this Report 8
draft of the amendments to the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1898, recommended by us.

1. K. V. K. SUNDARAM—Chairman.
2. 8. छ. DULAT. 7
3. MRS. ANNA CHANDI. | 1

+ Members.
4. मे. L. NARASIMHAM. |
5. 5. BALAKRISHNAN. J

P. M. BAKSHI,

Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser,
New Dewi;
The 20th February, 1969.

APPENDICES

Appenpix I.—Draft amendments to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908,

(1) In the First Schedule to the Code, after Order
XVI, the following Order shall be inserted: —

“ORDER XVIA
Attendance of witnesses confined or detained in prisons
1. In this Order, —

(a) ‘detained’ includes detained under any law
providing for preventive detention;

(b) ‘prison’ includes—
(i) any place which has been declared by
the State Government, by genera. or special
order, to be a subsidiary jail; and

(ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution
or other institution of a like nature.

2. Where it appears to a Court that the evidence
of a person confined or detained in a prison within
the State is material in a suit, the Court may make
an order requiring the officer in charge of the prison
to produce that person before the Court tc. give evi-
dence:

Provided that, if the distance from the prison to
the court-house is more than twenty-five kilometres,
no such order shall be made unless the Court is satis-
fied that the examination of such person on commis-
sion will not be adequate.


19

3. (1) Before making any order under rule 2, the Expenses to
Court Aan require the party at whose instance or Pe Paid into
for whose benefit the order is to be issued, to pay into .
Court such sum as appears to the Court to be suffi-
cient to defray the expenses of the execution of the
order, including the travelling and other expenses of
the escort provided for the witness.

(2) Where the Court is subordinate to a High
Court, regard shall be had, in fixing the scale of such
expenses, to any rules made in that behalf.

4, (1) The State Government may, at any time, Power ot
having regard to the matters specified in sub-rule State
(2), by general or special order, direct that any per- Government
son or class of persons shall noi be removed from the certain
prison in which he or they may be confined or detain- persons
ed, and thereupon, so long as the order remaing in fom ppera
force, no order made under rule 2, whether before or ० ०
after the order of the State Government, shal] have
effect in respect of such person or class of persons.

(2) Before making an order under sub-rule (1),
the State Government shall have regard to the fol-
lowing matters, namely: —

(a) the nature of the offence for which, or
the grounds on which, the person or class of
persons have been ordered to be confined or de-
tained in prison;

(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of
public order if the person or class of persons is
allowed to be removed from the prison; and

(c) the public interest, generally.

5. Where the person in respect of whom an order Officer in
is made under rule 2— charge of

(a) is certified by the medical officer attached ein

to the prison as unfit to be removed from the from carry-

prison by reason of sickness or infirmity; or when
; . वि certain
(b) is under committal for trial or under re- cares.
mand pending trial or pending a preliminary in-
vestigation; or

(c) is in custody for a period which would
expire before the expiration of the time required
for complying with the order and for taking him
back to the prison in which he is confined or de-
tained; or

(d) is a person to whom an order made by
the State Government under rule 4 applies;


Prisoner to
be brought
to Court in
custody,

Power 10
issue com-
mission fOr
examination
of witness
in prison.

20

the officer in charge of the prisoo shell abstain from
carrying out the Court's orcer and shall send to the
Court a statement of reasons for so abstaining.

6. In any other case, the officer in charge of the
prison shall, upon delivery of the Court's order,
cause the person named therein to be taken to the
Court so as to be present at the time mentioned in
such order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody
in or near the Court until he has been examined or
unti] the Court authorises him to be taken back to
the prison in which he was confined or detained.

7. (1) Where it appears to the Court that the
evidence of a person confined or detained in a prison,
whether within the State or elsewhere in India, in
material in a suit but the attendance of such person
cannot be secured under the preceding provisions of
this Order, the court may issue a commission for the
examination of that person in the prison in which he
is confined or detained.

(2) The provisions of Order XXVI shall, so far
as may be, apply jn relation to the examination on
commission of such person in prison as they apply in
relation io the examination on cormmission of any
other person.”.

(2) In the First Schedule to the Code, in rule 1 of
Order LY, after the word and letter “Order V”, the word
and. letters “Order KVIA” shall be inserted.

(3) In the First Schedule to the Code, in Appendix B,
after form No. 18, the following form shall be mserted:—
“No. 20

ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURY OF PERSON 1N PRISON
FOR GIVING EVIDENCE (ORpER 168, RULE 1)

in the Court of .......- Dee ee esa e teens neeee vee

(Full title of suit)

To
The Officer in charge of the .

‘Wuereas the attendance of ....... 0s. er sere ees (mame
of prisoner) , at present con-
fined/detained in the above-mentioned prison, is required

(name of prison)



21

on behalf of the plaintiff/defendant in the above-mentioned
suit for giving evidence;

You are hereby required to produce the said ...,.....-
नल नल under safe and sure
conduct before this Court at न
on the ........--०००० day of ... - 149 by. _
am, there to give evidence in a matter now pending
before this Court and alter this Court has dispensed
with his further attendance, cause him to be conveyed
under safe and sure conduct back to the prison.

You are further required to inform the said ..........

ene eee te ee ener cnet ee of the contents of this order and
deliver to him the attached copy thereof.

The ....... cece eee eee day of wo... cee, 19
Judge.”,

_ APPENDIx II.—Draft amendments to the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898,

(1) In sub-section (1) of section 491, clauses (c), (०)
and (e) shall be omitted,

(2) After section 491, the following section shall be
inserted, namely: —

“491A.(1) Whenever, in the course of an inquiry,
trial or other proceeding under this Code, it appears
to a Criminal Court,—

(०) that a person confined or detained in a
prison should be brought before the Court for
answering to a charge of an offence, or

(8) that it is necessary for the ends of justice
to examine such person as a witness,

the Court may make an order requiring the officer in
charge of the prison to produce such person before the
Court for answering to the charge or, as the case may
be, for giving evidence.

(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made
by a Criminal Court which is inferior to the Court
of a Magistrate of the first class, it shall not be for-
warded to, or acted upon by, the officer in charge of
the prison unless it is countersigned by the Sessions
Judge, District Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magis-
trate, as the case may be, to whom that Court is sub-
ordinate.

(3) Every order submitted for countersigning
under sub-section (2) shall be accompanied by a
statement of the facts which, in the opinion of ‘the

Power to
secure
attendance
Of prisoners.


22

Court, render the order necessary, and the authority
to whom it is submitted may, after considering such
statement, decline to countersign the order.

(4) The State Government may, at any time,
having regard to the matters specified in sub-section
(5), by general or special order, direct that any per-
son or class of persons shall not be removed from the
prison in which he or they may be confined or de-
tained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains
in force, no order made under sub-section (1), whether
before or after the order of the State Government,
shall have effect in respect of such person or class of
persons.

(5) Before making an order undey sub-section
(4), the State Government shall have regard to the
following matters, namely:-~

{a) the nature of the offence for which, or
the grounds on which, the person or class of
persons has been ordered to be confined or de-
tained in prison;

(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of
public order if the person or class of persons is
allowed to be removed from the prison; and

(०) the public interest, generally.

(6) Where the person in respect of whom an order
is made under sub-section (1)—

(a) is certified by the medical officer attach-
ed to the prison as unfit to be removed from the
prison by reason of sickness or infirmity; or

(b) is under committal for trial or under re-
mand pending trial or pending a preliminary in-
vestigation; or

(c) is in custody for a period which would
expire before the expiration of the time required
for complying with the order and for taking him
back to the prison in which he was confined or
detained; or

(व) is a person to whom an order made by the
State Government under sub-secticn (4) applies;

the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from
carrying out the Court’s order and shall send to the
Court a statement of reasons for so abstaining;

Provided that where the attendance of such per-
son is required for giving evidence at a place not
more than twenty-five kilometres distant from the
prison, the officer in charge of the prison shall not so
abstain for the reason mentioned in claise (b).


23

{7) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6),
the officer in charge of the prison shall, upon delivery
of an order made under sub-section (1) and duly
counter-signed, where necessary, under sub-section
(2), cause the person named in the order to be
taken to the Court in which his attendance is 76५
quired, so as to be present there at the time mention-
ed in the order, and shall cause him to be kept in
custody in or near the Court until he has been exa~
mined or until the Court authorises him to be taken

back to the prison in which he was confined or
detained.

(8) The provisions of this section shall be with-
out prejudice to the power of the Court to issue under
section 503 a commission for the examination, as a
witness, of any person confined or detained in a
prison; and the provisions of Chapter XL shall apply
in relation to the examination on commission of any
such person in the prison as they apply in relation to
the examination on commission cf any other person.

(9) In this section—
(4) ‘detained’ includes detained under any
law providing for preventive detention;
(9) ‘prison’ includes—
(8) any place which has been declared by

the State Government, by general or special
order to be a subsidiary jail; and

(४8) any reformatory, Borstal institution
or other institution of a like nature.”,

(8) Section 542 shall be omitted,

(4) In section 549, the following sub-section shall be
PRISON FOR ANSWERING TO CHARGE OF OFFENCE.

“(3) Any High Court may, whenever it thinks fit,
direct that a prisoner within the limits of its appellate
criminal jurisdiction be brought before a court-martial,
for trial or to be examined touching any matter pend-
ing before such court-martial.”.

(5) In Schedule V, after form XLI, the following forms
shall be inserted, namely:—
XLIA.—ORvER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN
PRISON FOR ANSWERING TO CHARGE OF OFFENCE.
(See section 491A.)
To
The Officer in charge of the............. ..
(name of prison)


24

Wuereas the attendance of.......-.+ vaneee
Giame of prisoner)

at present confined/detained in the above-mentioned
prison, is required in this Court to answer to a charge
of..

(state shortly the affence charged)

You are hereby required to produce the said ..........
under safe and sure
on the

. am, there to enswer to the
Court has dispensed with
further attendance, cause him to be conveyed under
and sure conduct back to the said prison.

And you are further required ta inform the said......
en eer of the contents of
this order and deliver fo him the attached ecpy thereol.

Given under my hand and seal of the rt, this
न्ज्ब्ल्ल्लननललल नल नल day of HS,
(Seal) (Signature.)

Countersigued.
(Seal) (Signature.)

XMLIB—ORpER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PRRSON IN
PRISON FOR GIVING EVIDENCE,

(See section 491A.)

To
The Officer in charge of the..

(name of prison)

Wuereas complaint has been made before 1: Court
that 26... cee eee of

(name of accused)
has committed the offence of.....--....:.s.eee cee ee eee
(state offence concisely with
time and place)
and it appears that .....-.6.- 0. sees eene eee ee es at present
(name of prisoner)

contined/detained in the above-mentioned prison, is likely
to give material evidence for the prosecution/defence:


23
You are hereby required to produce the said........-..-

. under safe and sure
.. on the

19...., by... a.m. there to give evidence in the
matter now p g before this Court, and after this
Court has dispensed with his further attendance, cause
him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to
the said prison.

And you are further required to inform the said......
wee of the contents of
this order and deliver to him the attached copy thereof.

Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this
oe dD,

eect e renee eect nent हू 5 day of
(Seal) {Signoture.)
Countersigned.
(Seal)
(Signature,)

GMGIPND—TSW—116 M of Law—12-8-1970-—-3,000