ww

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FORTY-FIRST REPORT
(THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1898)

SEPTEMBER, 1969
(Vol. 1)

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY. OF LAW


CHAPTER

Ww
a
1४

VE
vit
vil
IX
x

x

xi
१५॥॥।
xiv

xv
XVI

ज़्णा
XVI
XIX

XX

XXI
XK
XXUE
XXIV
XXV

XXVE
XXVIT
XXVHT
XX1X
XXX
XXXI
XXXU
XXXHIE
XXXIV
XXXV

XXXVI
XXXVIE

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION
Preliminary ..
Constitution of Criminal Courts and Offices -.
Powers of Courts .- oe न
Aid and Information to the Magistrates and the Police
Asrest, Escape and Retaking न
Processes to Compel Appearance : ces
Processes to Compel Production of Things

Security for Keeping the Peace and for Good Behaviour

Unlawful Assemblies

Public Nuisances .. . . न हु जन ”
Temporary Orders in Urgent Cases of Nuisancejor Apprehen-
ded Danger पु जल न oe
Disputes as to Immovable Property

Preventive Action by the Police. पु ae
Yoformation to the Police and their Powers to Investigate
Jurisdiction of Criminal Courts in Inquiries and Trials
Complaints to Magistrates न न .
Commencement of Proceedings before Magistrates

Inquiry into cases triable by the Court of Session or High Court
‘The Charge . . - न
‘Trial of Summons Cases by Magistrates

Trial of Warrant Cases by Magistrates’ . .

Summary Trials. .

Trials before High Courts and Courts of Session

General Provisions as w Inquiries and Trials .

Mode of Taking and Recording Evidence in Inquiries and
Trials

Sudgment

Submission of Sentences for Confirmation

Execution

Suspensions, Remissions and Commutation of Sentence
Previous Acquittals or Convictions

Appeals बन जन . न : oe
Reference and Revision ae a
Repealed alreaty

Lunatics .

Proceedings in the case of certain Offences affecting the
Administration of Justice . oe o जन
Maintenance of Wives and Children a we
Directions in the Nature of 2 Habeas Corpus .. बन

Paces

vit
1-13
14-28
29-35
36
37-39
40-43

48-53
54-55
56-58

59-60
61-65
66
$1280
81-13!
132-136
137~141
142-154
155-163
164-169
170-177
178-183
184-187
188-221

221-228
229-236
237~240
241-247
248-253
254-256
257-283
284-289

290-293
294-302

303-306
307-310


(iv)

XXXVHI The Public Prosecutor
XX Bail
XL Commis
NLU Spociat Rules of Evidence
XLIL Bonds be
XLUT Disposal of Property ......... #॥#..  “#त
XLIV Transfer of Criminal Cases ae
XLV fregular Proceedings 6. #॥...  #॥# #+
XLVI
XEVIE
XLVI Conclusion

ons for the Examination of Witnesses

Note of Dissent regarding the propesed Amendments
to sections 1613) and 162 Crin Procedure
Codes 09 Members Shri Ro b.  Narwimbam and
Shri S. Balakrishnan

Volume 2

Draft Bill See contents of tbe Bill given before the Bill)
Comparative Table No. J- Corresponding Chapters
Comparative Table No, 2 Corresponding Sections



New Decurl,

September 24, 1969.

DEAR Law MINISTER,

I have pleasure in sending herewith the forty-first Report of the
Law Commission on the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. This
brings to a conclusion one of the major tasks of revision undertaken
by the Conimission.

2. A detailed examination of the Code with a view to its complete
revision was undertaken in the Commission some time in 1961. The
previous Commission under the chairmanship of Shri J. L. Kapur sub-
juitted, between 1963 and 1968, four Reports (thirty-second, thicy-
third, thirty-fifth and thirty-sixth) on problems arising out of. or in
connection with, certain specific provisions of the Code. In February,
1968. it submitted a comprehensive Report (thirty-seventh) on the
first fourteen Chapters comprising sections 1 to 176 of the Code.

3. When the present Commission was constituted in March, 1968,
with four whole-time Members and the fifth Member from the Law
Ministry, it was possible to meet much more frequently and devote
greater time and attention to the revision of the Cade than before.

4, Towards the end of the study. the Commission felt that it
would be desirable to have personal discussions with Judges of High
Courts, representatives of the Bar and officers of the State Govern-
ments on the more important genera] questions which had come up
before us for consideration. Between January 15 and March 15 of
this year, one or more Members of the Commission visited eight High
Courts for these discussions which were of great value to us.

5. While this last Report on the Code has naturally to be read
along with the thirty-seventh, which deals in detail with roughly one-
third of the Code, and also with the other four Reports of the Commis-
sion mentioned above, we have endeavoured to make the present
Report a comprehensive one, and to include in it the Commission’s
recommendations for the revision of the Code in a consolidated form.


(vi)
6. Finally, we wish to express our appreciation of Whe immense
amount of work put in by our Secretary, Shri P. M. Bakshi, in coilect-

ing and analysing the material for our discussions and the untiring and
diligent manner in which he assisted the Commission right through.

Yours sincerely

K. V. छू, SUNDARAM

Hon’ble Shri P. Govinda Menon,
Minister of Law & Social Welfare,
Government of India,

New Delhi.


INTRODUCTION

Some time after the Law Commission, as first constituted, had
submitted its report! on the Reform of Judicial Administration, the
Commission was reconstituted and it was asked by the Government
of India to undertake a detailed examination of the Code of Criminal
Procedure with a view to its general revision. The work was started
immediately and has been going on continuously since 1961.

While this intensive study of the Code was in progress, the Com-
mission found it necessary tO consider a few specitic problems arising
out of certain provisions of the Code and report separately thereon to
the Government. In chronological order these were -—

(1) Report on the Evidence of Officers of the Mint and of the
Indian Security Press regarding forged stamps, currency
notes etc., (connected with section 510 of the Code)*;

(ii) Report on section 9 of the Code regarding the appointment
of Sessions Judges, Additional Sessions Judges and Assist-
ant Sessions Judges;

(iii) Report on section 44 of the Code and a suggestion to add
a provision relating to the reporting of, and the disclosure
19 evidence about, offence relating to bribery*; and

(iv) Report on sections 497, 498 and 499 of the Code with
reference to the question of granting of bail with condi-
tions.*

‘Thereafter the Commission gave its comprehensive Report® on the
first fourteen chapters comprising sections 1 to 176, of the Code.

The Commission was then re-constituted in March, 1968, with the
following Members :—
(1) Shri K. ५. K. Sundaram, retired Chief Election Commis-
sioner of India, (Chairman);
(2) Shri $. S. Dulat, retired Judge of the Punjab High Court;

114th Report: given on September 26, 1953.

225th Report: given on September 27, 1963.

33296 Report: given oe May 29. 1967.

433rd Report: given oo December 15. 1967.

536th Report: given on January 9, 1968.

6३7४ Report, given 00 February 19, 1968, was signed by Sbri J, L.
Kapur (Chairman) and Sarvasbri KG. Datar, S. S. Dulat, T, K. Tope
and R. P. Mookerjee (Members). Shri R. P. Mookerjee signed tho Report
subject to a dissenting note.


(vii)

(3) Shri B. N. Lokur, tormesly Law Secretary to the Geovemn-
meni of India;

4) Shrimati Anna Chandi. retired Judge of the Kerala High
Court; and

(5) Shri S, Balakrishnan. Joint Secretary and Legal Ads ‘er
to the Government of India.

Shri 8. N. Lokur, however, was with the Commission only fe: a
short period from March 20 to July 4, 1968, when he was appoizted
a Judge of the Allahabad High Court. His place was taken by Shri
R. L. Narasimham, retired Chief Justice of the Pama High Court, on
August 5, 1968

After reconstitution, the Commission took up a detailed study cf
the Code from where the previous Commission had ended its Repx ri.
viz., section 177. One matter which particularly engaged the attention
of the Commission was the scheme of commital proceedings, एज as
it operated before the amendment of the Code in 1955 and as 1; has
been operating since that amendment. The opinions received by the
Commission from qualified and well-informed persons were highly
critical of the changes made jn 1955. Many of them were of the view
that commital proceedings, us now held under section 207A o! the
Code, served no useful purpose. There were also suggestions that
commital proceedings in any form were unnecessary and should be
totally abolished and that all cases triable by a Court of Session should
be brought directly before it instead of being committed to it for trial
after a preliminary inquiry by a Magistrate. As this was obviously a
very important matter, it was decided to obtain the views of the High
Courts, the Bar Council and the State Governments and a detailed
letter was addressed to them in August 1968 soliciting their views.

Towards the end of its study of the Code. the Commission felt that,
before coming to final conclusions, it would be desirable to consult the
Bench and the Bar on the more important general questions which had
come up for discussion and that their views could be ascertained more
quickly and satisfactorily by Members of the Commission going round
the High Courts, meeting the Judges and representatives of the Bar
interested in criminal procedure and informally discussing with them
the questions we had in mind. The Commission accordingly started
these discussions in the first week of January, 1969, in Dethi itself,
meeting first the Judges of the High Court for Delhi and Himachal
Pradesh and then representatives of the High Court Bar Association
and of the District Bar Association. Between January 15 and March
15, one or more Members of the Commission visited the High Courts


2

‘ Gx)

at Allahabad, Bangalore. Bombay. Calcutta. Chandigarh, Jabary
Madras ind Patna and held discussions. At all these centres We
the opportunity of discussing with the concerned officers of the S
Governments and police chiefs various problems connected with
constitution of criminal courts, separation of the executive from che
judiciary. the organisation of public prosecutors and the Code provi-
sions relating to police jnvestigation.

“These discussions have been of invaluable assistance 0. ४६ in
clarifying our ideas and formulating our recommendations for revis-Dg
the Code. We would, in particular, record our grateful thanks to she
Judges of High Courts for readily sparing time for the meetings and
giving us the benefit of their individual views on the topics discussed.

Although the first fourteen chapters of the Code have been
exhaustively analysed in the previous Report of the Law Commission
and a number of amendments have been proposed, we have found it
unavoidably necessary to review their recommendations, to modify or
alter them here and there, and to suggest in places # different line of
revisions. A finely integrated and comprehensive law like the Code of
Criminal Procedure cannot possibly be revised piecemeal since amend-
ments suggested in one part of the Code naturally affect provisions in
other parts to a greater or lesser extent, We. therefore, propose in this
final Report on the Code to consider it chapter by chapter starting from
the beginning and to present the Commission’s recommendations in a
consolidated form.


CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY

1.1. The Code, as enacted in 1898, provided in section 1(2)
that it extended to the whole of British India. This seemingly
comprehensive extent clause had, however, to be read in the
light of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874, which remained on
the statute book till the Government of India Act, 1935, came
into force. The Scheduled Districts Act listed in a Schedule a
large number of backward areas in different parts of India and
gave them the common name of scheduled districts. By sections
3, 4 and 5 of the Act, the Local Government was enabled, with
the sanction of the Governor-General in Council, to notify what
enactments were in force and what enactments were not in force
in any of the scheduled districts and to extend to the scheduied
districts aay Act in force in British India. Section 6 of the Act
enable the Local Government, inter alia, to appoint officers ६0
administer criminal justice within a scheduled district, to regulate
the procedure of such officers but not so as to restrict the operation
of any enactment in force in the district, and to direct by what
authorities any jurisdiction, powers or duties incidental to the
operation of any such enactment shall be exercised or performed

1.2. After the passing of the Code in 1898, the Local Gov-
crament acting under the Scheduled Districts Act declared the
Code to be in force in some scheduled districts and not to be in
force in some others, with the result that in spite of the clear-cut
extent clause in that first section of the Code, it required research
into old notifications and directions to find out whether the Code
was actually in force in a scheduled district and, if so, in what
form. When the Government of India Act, 1935, was brought
into force on the Ist April, 1937, the Scheduled Districts Act,
1874, was repealed by Adaptation of Indian Laws Order-in-
Council but “without prejudice to the continued validity of any
notification, appointment, regulation, direction or determination
made thereunder before” that date. The Order-in-Council
further provided that the appropriate Government, Central or
Provincial, may within six months of that date adapt any enact-
ment in force in a scheduled district by virtue of a notification
under the Scheduled Districts Act in order to bring the enactment
into accord with the Government of India Act, 1935.

1.3. The extent clause in the Code was modified thrice
between 1947 and 1951 in consequence of the constitutional
changes that took place during those eventful years. First the
expression “whole of Britsh India” was changed to “all the
Provinces of India” by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of
Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948, meaning thereby all
the provinces of the Dominion of India. Then it was changed by
the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, to read “the whole of India
except Part B States”. Thirdly, the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1951, which came into force on the ist April,
1951, substituted “the State of Jammu and Kashmir and Masipur”

Territorial extent
of the Code.

Net in, force in
some “scheduled
districts”.

Changes in ex-
tent clause after
independence.


Code does

apply

tand-Decision of

not

(0. Naga-

Supreme Court.

Code does

bot

apply to Assan

tribal areas,

No excluded
areas in other
‘States.

for “Part B States” thereby enlarging the territorial extent of the
Code to the whole of India except these two named States ; (Mani-
pur was then a Part C State). Finally in 1956 the Union Terri-
tory Laws (Amendment) Act. 1956. omitted the reference 0
Manigur in the extent clause.

1.4. While by virtue of the two Acts of Parliament 1.50 men-
tioncd the Code ostensibly extends to the whole of India except
the State of Jammu and Kashmir, it mn fact, not in force in the
Staie ७. Nagaland nor in the avtononous districts and the North
Hast Frontier Tract of Assam. ‘The question whether the Code
is in force in N up before the Supreme Cour: for
consideration i Nagaland १. Ratan Singh.’ The Court
held that the Code did not apply to the State but certain rules made
hy the Governor of Assam under section 6 of the Scheduled Dis-
tricts Act, 1874, on March 25, 1937, in supersession of all
previous orders on the subject continued to be in force and govern-
cd the triat of offenders in the State. The Court concluded its
judgment with the following obse: 1015 :--

“We muy. however. say that it would be better if, as soon
as tt is found to be expedient. all Rules are cancelled and
फट unitern set of Rules is made tor the whole of this area

is would obviate having to find out through the mazes of
ristary and the congeries of rules, noiifications and regulations
what law is applicable. If any difficulty is felt in making, new
roles, recour.c may easily be taken to the Provisions of sectior
3! of the State of Nagaland Act which enables the President.
by order. to remove any difficulty to give effect to the provi-
wions of the State of Nagaland Act. The history of this area
shows thar there have been difficulties in the past in ascertain-
ing Iaws which were applicable at any point of time in anv
particular area and Jed to the of many Acts of British
Parlament and of the Governer-7 "यश in Council to Ten
such difficulties. We do not thi“. that such a state of aff
should continue indefinitely

Ne state of Nagaland Act
itself gives sufficient power (6 remove difficulties.”?

1.5. The Commission is informed by the Government of
Axsam that each of the autonomous districts of Assam has its ow2
10105 for the administration of justice made under the Schedilled
Districts Act. 1874, and subsequently modified by the Assam
Autonomous Districts (Administration of Justice) Regulation.
1952, and the Code of Criminal Procedure is not as such in force
in these districts. Tt is also not in force in the four frontier tracts
which comprise the North East Frontier Agency. According 16
the Government of Assam, some small portions of these tracts
falline in the plains were transferred to the districts of Darrang
and Lakhimpur ia February, 1951, but the Code has even now
not been made applicable to these areas.

1.6. So far as the other States and Union Territories are
covcerned, no area appears to be excluded from the operation of
the Code either because it was a scheduled district before 1937 or

3 (1966) 3 S.CR. 830.
2 Ibid pp. 854-55


3

bevauey it is a scheduicd area uadee the Fifth Schedule to the
Constitution.

1.7. it seems to us desirable that the extent clause in the Code
d’state the factual position, obviating, as the Supreme Court
ae put it, a need “to find out through the mazes of history and
congerics of rules, notifications and regulations” whether the
Cody is applicable or not in a particular area. We propose that
should be amended 10 read :--

“It extends to the whole of india except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir, the State of Nagaland and the tribal areas’ within
the State of Assam; ete..”

1.8. While there appears to be good justification for Nagaland
wad the tribal areas of Assam having their own simple ruics for
the administration of criminal justice and for not introducing the
complicated provisions of the Code which are apparently not
suitable tor the social conditions prevailing thercin, it seems to us
highly enomalous that Jammu and Kashmir should be excluded
from the operation of the Code. This is due to the fact that
under ibe Cunstitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir)
(तरस, the power of Parliament to legislate for this State in
respeet of matters mentioned in the Concurrent List is limited to
a tew entries and the entry relating to criminal procedure (catry
2 in List 11) is not one of them. As regards criminal law also,
the power of Parhament to legislate for Jammu & Kashmir is
very limited. Neither the India nPenal Code nor the Code of
Crimiaal Procedure, 1898. is in force in the State. 10 has two
ryparats Codes. the Ranbir Penal Code and the Jammu and
Kashmir Criminal Procedure Code. which are practically the
same in wording and arrangement of sections as the Codes in
force in the rest of India.

1.9. dt will be noticed that by virtue of the definition of “India”
in section 4(1)(j) of the Code. any ptace in the State of Jammu
and Kasbmir is outside “India™ for the purposes of the Code.
his gives rise to an anomalous situation under section 188 of
the Code. Ha citizen of India, whether he is a resident of that
80 or of some other State in India, commits in Jammu an
offence punishable under the Indian Penal Code, he may be dealt
with at any place in any other State of India where be may be
found, but before the charge is inquired into at the latter place,
the sanction of the State verament wilf be required (there
being no “Political Agent” for the State of Jammu and Kashmir).
{t iy wnomalous that alt offences punishable under the Indian Penal
Code. when committed in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, siould
be triable in any place in the rest of India where the offenders may
be found, without any reference to the venue rules for inquiry and
trial contained in sections 177 to 183 of the Criminal Procedure
Code. This curious situation is duc to the fact that these two
Codes do not extend to the State. and even Parliament's power to
legislate for the State does not extend to criminal law and criminal

3 80९ para. 2041} of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution,

tate v. Om Parkash. (1966) Cr.L.J. 366 (Punjab). {a this case
ibe accused was alleged to have committed bigamy ia Jammu and
returned to his ordinary place of residence in Punjab.

Amendment of

extent

clause

recommended.

Position
Jammu
Kashmir.

Anomaly
section

in
and

under

188,


4

procedure. We recommend that the anomaly should be removed,
by first suitably amending the Constitution (Application to Jammu
and Kashmir) Order, 1950, under article 370, and then by
extending the two Codes to the State. _—

Code extends also 1.10, Another point that requires consideration with reteredee

10 ers territorial tg the exten! clause in the Code is the exercise of criminal juri
diction in and in relation to the territorial waters of India. e
Code extends to the whole of the territory of India except the
territory of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Notwithstanding
the use of the word “territory” which etymologically has a land
significance, there ts of course 70 doubt that the territory of India,
as of any sovereign State. includes its territorial waters. This
internationally accepted principle has recently been formulated in
the Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone,
1958, in the following terms? :~-

“The sovereignty of a State extends, beyond its jand
territory and its internal waters, to 8 belt of sea adjacent to
its coast, described as the territorial sea.

The sovereignty of a coastal State extends also to the air
space over the territorial sea as well as to its bed and subsoil.”

A Presidential Proclamation announced on the 30th September,
1967, that the territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a
distance of 12 nautical miles measuring from the appropriate base
line. The Code accordingly extends to the land territory of India
(excluding Jammu ‘and Kashmir) and to the belt of sea, 12 nautical
miles wide, adjacent to the coast.

Refercnces to 3.11. ‘The earliest reference in Indian legislation to territorial

territorial water waters is to be found in section 4 of the Indian Fisheries Act,

inCentral Act. 1897... This Act originally extended to the whole of British
India; now it extends to the whole of India excluding the territories
which were formerly comprised jn Part B States. Sub-section
(1) of section 4 makes it an Offence for any person to usc dyna-
mite or other explosive substance in any “water” with intent
thereby to catch or destroy any fish that may be therein; and
sub-section (2) exptains—

“In sub-section (1), the word ‘water’ includes the sea
within a distance of one marine league of the sea coast; and
an offence committed under that sub-section in such sea may
be tried, punisbed and in all respects dealt with as if it had
heen conunitted on the land abutting on such coast.”

According to British concepts of those days, the territorial
waters of a State were only one marine league, or three nautical
miles. wide; but presumably because of difficulties arising out of
the Territorial Waters Jurisdiction Act (41 and 42 Vict. 73),
it was considered necessary to make the position clear by means
of this explanation.

In recent legislation, section 2(2) of the Merchant Shipping
Act, 1958, provides for the applicability of the Act to any foreign
ship while it is’ “within “Ind, HS while it is\ “within India, including the territorial waters

1 86० Articles t and 2 ‘of the Convention.


5

thereof’. The Customs Act of 1962 contains in section 2(27)
a definition ~f India as including the territorial waters of India.
Section 23 wf, and item 14 in the Second Schedule to, the Extra-
dition Acs; 1962, refer to any offence “committed on board aay
vesse}] -vn the high seas, or any aircraft while in the air outside
Indsa of the Indian territorial waters, which comes into any
port or aerodrome of India.”

1.12. Since the territory of India comprises the territories of
the Stat nd the Union Territories—vide article 1(3) of the
Constitution—the territory of cach of the States and Union
Territories abutting on or surrounded by the sea must include
the territorial wa‘ers adjacent to its coast. By the same reason-
ing, where the local jurisdicuon of a court covers a sessions
division, district or sub-division which bas a sea-coast, it must be
regarded as covering not only the land and internal waters of the
sessions division, district or sub-division, but also the stretch of
territorial sea adjacent to its coast. We think it is desirable to
make this clear in an appropriate place in order to avoid any
doubt or dispute over jurisdiction.t

1.13. We notice in this convection that section 20 of the Code
defines the local Limits of a Presidency Magistrate’s jurisdiction
in the following terms :—

“Every Presidency Magistrate shall exercise jurisdiction in
all places within the presidency-town for which he is appoint-
ed, und within the limits of the port of such town and of any
navigable river or channe! !cading thereto, as such fimits are
defined under the law for the time being in force for the
Tegutation of ports and port-dues.”

In the case of the presidency-towns of Bombay and Madras, both
of which have a sea coast, it would appear that the local juris-

. diction of a Presidency Magistrate extends only to that part of
the territorial sea adjacent to the presidency-town which is witbin
the limits of the port. The rest of the territorial sea, of which
there must be a considerable extent both in Bombay and in
Madras, would be outside the jurisdiction of the Presidency
Magistrates and of any other Magistrat (This difficulty does
not arise in the case of Calcutta, as it is not om the sea coast).
Sinoe the establishment of the City Sessions Courts in Bombay
and Madras, the local jurisdiction of a Presidency Magistrate in
cither of these presidency-towns is co-extensive with that of the
City Sessions Court. There is no reason why, as in the case of
any other coastal district, this should not extend to the whole of
the territorial sea pertaining to the “district”? of Greater Bombay
or aS.

1.14. The existing extent clause also contains two kinds of
saving provisions. The first saves the operation of any special
or local law and any special jurisdiction or power conferred and
any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other jaw. The
second excepts three categories of officials from the application

3 See para. 1.27 below.

2 See section 7(4) of the Code, which provides: that “every presi-
dency-town shall for the purposes of the Code be deemed to a dis
trict”.

Territory of coas-
tal State, district
or sub-division
includes its terri-
torial waters.

Difficulty regurd-
ing presidency-
towns-section 20.

Saving provisions
in section 102).



Piet gp of
i perseas,

Omiss’ ६ of
clause 150 recom
amends:

Secon! group of
excepizd persons,

68

of the Code, with a rider to the effect that the Stare Goverament
may by notification extend any provisions of the Cude to any of
these categories.

1.15. The first group of excepted persons consistect. af the
Commi ners and Deputy Commissioners of Police’ ie the
aheee tawny of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay and the
whole police force in the towns of Calcutta and Bombay. The
Bombay Police Act, 1951, however, amended this provision by
deleting the references to Bombay with the result that, since then,
the Code applies to the police in that town, including the Com-
missioner of Police in the same way as it does to the police in
fhe other parts of the State. As regards the police in Catcutta,
a number of notifications have been issued from time to time by
the State Government under the proviso to section 1(2). apphy-
ing a number of important sections of the Code, some with modi-
fications and some without, to the Commissioner of Police and
to the police force o: the State. Among the sections so extended
are sections 47 to 51, 53, 58, 102, 103, 151, 154, 156, 161 ta 165,
167, 172, 173. 550 and 551. In Madras white the Code applies to
the cily police who are governed by the Madras City Police Act,
1888, it docs not apply to the Commissioner and Deputy Com-
missioners of Police who are also governed by the same Act. No
notification seems to have been issued under the proviso to section
1(2) of the Code extending any of its provisions to these police
officers,

1.16. There does not seem to be any real or sufficient reason
for this exception. It would be more logical and appropriate to
Jeave the Code generally applicable to all police forces. Tf_any
special provisions inconsistent with the provisions of the Code
are required for the police in the town of Calcutta or for the
Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners of Police in Madras.
they could be made in the relevant State Act. We would recom-
mend the omission of clause (a) of section [(2).

1.17. The second category of excepted persons was “heads
of villages in the Presidency of Fort St. George”. This territorial
reference was changed by the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1951, to the State of Madras, ignoring — the
fact that certain parts of the former Presidency had been trans-
ferred to the Province of Orissa when the faiter was formed in
1936. ‘The reference was further changed by the Adaptation of
Laws (Number 2) Order, 1956, to “the State of Madras as it
existed immediately before the Ist November, 1956”, the date
of the large-scale reorganisation of States. The effect of this
amendment was to take out of the purview of the saving provision,
heads of villages in the territories transferred from the State of
Andhra and Mysore in 1953. But heads of villages in the terri-
tories transferred from the State of Madras to Andhra Pradesh,
Mysore and Kerala in 1956 and subscquently are apparently
still excepted from the application of the Code.

1.18, The reason for this exception appears to be that heads
of villages in the arcas where the Madras Village-Police Regu-
lations of 1816 and 1821 (11 of 1816 and 4 of 1821) are in

३ See definition of Commissioner of Police in section 4(1)(8).


7

force have the power to try cases of a trivial nature and impose
a mild punishment and also have certain police-powers under
those Regulations. These being special and local laws, their
provisions are already saved by section 1(2) of the Code and it
appears unnecessary to except headmen of villages again from
the general application of the Code. Clause (b) of the section
could also be omitted without affecting the existing position.

1.19. The third category of excepted persons was “village
police-officers in the Presidency of Bombay”, and is at present
“village police-officers in the State of Bombay as it existed imme-
diately before the Ist November, 1956”. This description covers
all those parts of the States of Maharashtra, Gujarat and Mysore
which went to make up the former State of Bombay. These
village police officers are all governed by the Bombay Village
Police Act, 1867, which is clearly a special law and a local law.
There seems to be no real need for providing in clause (c) that
nothing in the Code shall apply to these village police officers.

1.20. We accordingly propose that section 1(2) should be
amended to read :—

“(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State
of Jammu and Kashmir, the State of Nagaland and the tribal
areas in the State of Assam; but, in the absence of any specific
provision to the contrary, nothing herein contained shall affect
any special or focal law now ip force, or any special jurisdiction
or power conferred, or any specia) form of procedure pres-
cribed, by any other Jaw for the time being in force... हा

1.21, Sub-section (1) of section 3 provides for the construc-
tion of references to the old Codes and other enactments repealed
by the Code of 1898. The general rule in section 8 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897, regarding the construction of refer-
ences to repealed enactments, would have taken care of the
matter, but for the fact that enactments passed before the passing
of that Act are not governed by that Act. Such references can-
not at present be many and sub-section (1) may be omitted as
being hardly of any practical importance. Sub-section (2)
contains rules for the construction of certain expressions which
are used in old enactments, being expressions which refer to
Magistrates or Judges under the phraseology used in the pre-1898
Codes. These rules of construction also may be regarded as
Practically spent, and sub-section (2) can be safely omitted.

1.22. In the earlier Report,t it was proposed to insert in sec-
tion 3 a provision for the construction of expressions used in the
existing enactments where those expressions refer to Magistrates
by their present nomenclature. This provision was as follows :

“In every enactment passed on or after the first day of Ji uly,
1898 and before the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Act, 197. .comes into force, —

(8) references to a Magistrate of the first, second or
third class shall be construed as references to a

137th Report, paragraph 74.

Third Frou of
excepted persons,

Section 1 (2)
revised.

Section 3 prac
tically spent,

Proposed rule of
construction in.
earlier Report,


Proposed rale in
Union Territories
Bil.y

8

Judicial Magistrate of the first, second or third class
respectively;

(9) references to any other Magistrates, not being refe-
rences to a Presidency Magistrate, shall be construed
as references to the corresponding Judicial or Execu-
tive Magistrate as the nature of the case may require.”

On further consideration we feel that the latter rule of con-
struction is too vague and umprecise to be of any practical
assistance.

1.23. We notice that the Union Territories (Separation of
Judicial and Executive Functions) Bill, 1968, as introduced in
Parliament contains the following clause :—

Functions gree “5, Where under any law, the functions exercisable by a
Gsable by Judie Magistrate relate to matters which involve the appre-
tive Magistrates. ciation or sifting of evidence or the formulation of any

decision which exposes any person to any punish-
ment, or penalty, detention in custody pending investi-
gation, inquiry or trial or would have the effect of
sending him for trial before any court, such func-
tions shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, as amended
by this Act, be exercisable by a Judicial Magistrate;

where such functions relate to matters which are
administrative or executive in nature, such as the
grant of a licence, the suspension or cancellation of a
licence, sanctioning a prosecution, or withdrawin;
from a prosecution, they shall, subject as aforesai
be exercisable by an Executive Magistrate.”

As a broad classification of the functions of judicial and execu-
tive magistrates and as a guide to the authorities in Union Terri-
tories when faced with the task of interpreting other laws in force
in these Territories, this provision may have some use. But on the
other hand they may not find it easy to interpret and apply this
clause to border-line cases where the nature of the functions is
either not very clear or partly executive and partly judicial. If
any such provision is included in the Code itself and made appli-
cable, not only to laws in the central and concurrent field, but also
to laws in the State field, the constitutional question can be raised
whether Parliament is competent to legislate in this indirect
fashion affecting State laws. In our opinion, such a provision is
more likely to raise technical difficulties and problems of interpre-
tation than help to solve them.

1.24. We are proposing in the next chapter that every district
should have on the judicial side a Chief Judicial Magistrate, one
or more Judicial Magistrates of the first class and one or more
Judicial Magistrates of the second class, but need not have any
Sub-divisional Magistrates or Magistrates of the third class as at
present. On the executive side it should have a District Magistrate,
Sub-divisional Magistrates and other executive Magistrates with-
‘out class distinction, Presidency Magistrates will be replaced by
Metropolitan Magistrates. When the amended Code comes into
force in any State and the magistracy is reorganised on this


9

Pattem, we do not apprehend that any grave difficulty will imme-
diately arise in administering other Acts—State or Central—which
contain references 10 magistrates. The definition of “Magistrate”?
in the various General Clauses Acts as including every person
exercising all or any of the powers of a Magistrate under the Code
of Criminal Procedure for the time being in force will continue to
apply unless there is something repugnant, in the subject or con-
text. Thus a reference to a magistrate without any qualification
may be taken to be a reference to any judicial or executive
magistrate and, until it is clarified by a specific amendment made
by the competent legislature, there can be legal no cujection to
either type of Magistrate performing the function, Reference to
District Magistrates and Sub-divisional Magistrates are normally
to be found in connection with the discharge of executive func-
tions and since these functionaries will be found in each district,
uo difficulty can arise.

1.25. We therefore consider that the following rule of construc-
tion will be sufficient from the practical point of view :—

3. In every enactment passed before the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 197.., comes into force,—

(a) any reference to a Magistrate of the first class shall be
gonstrued as meaning a Judicial Magistrate of the
st Class;

(b) any reference to a Magistrate of the second class or
of the third class shall be construed as meaning a
Judicial Magistrate of the second class;

(०) any reference to a Presidency Magistrate or Chief
Presidency Magistrate shall be construed as mean-
ing a Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate respectively.

1.26. (i) The expression “Advocate General” occurs only in
sections 194 and 333 both of which are proposed to be omitted.
Clause (a) may accordingly be omitted.

(ii) The expression “Clerk of the State” Occurs in one or two
sections relating to original trials before the High Court which
are proposed to be omitted, Clause (e) also may be omitted.

(iii) In clause (f) which defines “cognizable offence”, the
words “within or without the presidency-towns” may be omitted
as the Code will extend also to the police in presidency-towns,

(iv) Clause (g) which defines “Commissioner of Police” may

omitted in view of the proposal to remove all special provisions
in the Code applicable to Commissioners of Police in the presi-
dency-towns,

(२) The definition of “complaint” in clause (४) was discussed
in detail in the previous Report In view of the conflicting deci-
sions and uncertainty in regard to this definition and the connected
Provisions in sections 173, 190, 207A and 251A of the Code, the

1See eg, 8. 3(32) of the General Clauses Act, 1897.
237th Report, para, 75 and Appendix II.

Construction of
teferences to
Magistrai

other enactments.

Section 4

tions considered
and amended,


io

ion recommended that the definition should make it clear
५ report made by the police on an unauthorised investiga
tion of a non-cognizable case is 2 complaint. We agree with this
recommendation and propose to substitute for the words “the
repert of a police officer” in clause (h) the words “a_ police
report”. A definition of police report will have to be added in this
section.”

(si) The definition of “High Court” in clause (i) is comp-
Jetely out of date. For every State, there is a High Court under the
Constitution which is the highest court of criminal appeal other
than the Supreme Court. As regards the U Territories, the
position is that the jurisdiction of a State High Court has been
extended by Parliament by law to some of them,” and in others, a
High Court? or a Judicial Commissioner's Court* established by
law is the highest court of criminal appeal. The definition may
accordingly be as follows :—

Gi) “High Court” means-—-

(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State
under the Constitution:

(ii) in relation to a Union Territory to which the jurisdic-
tion of the High Court for a State has been extended
by law, that High Court; and

Gii) im relation to any other Union Tertitory, the highest
court of criminal appeal for that Territory, other than
the Supreme Court.

(vii) In clause (k) which defines “inquiry”, the previous
Commission recommended a minor amendment to remove | an
ambiguity, namely, to place the words “other than a trial” within
brackets.

(viii) In clause (n) which defines “non-cognizable offence”
and “non-cognizable case”, the specific reference to ptesidency-
towns is unnecessary. The words “within or without a presidency-
town” which now occur in the definition may be omitted.

(ix) In regard to the definition of “officer in charge of a
police-station” contained in clause (9), the Commission considered
in the earlier Report® a suggestion that the definition should be
amended to provide that a sub-inspector in charge, even when
out on duty in the interior, should continue to be regarded as the
officer in charge of the police station for the purposes of the Code.
The Commission. however, felt that such a change in the defini-
tion would not be suitable, since the scheme of the Code is that
at any given time there is only one officer in charge of a police

1See para. 1.27 below.

2Juriediction of the Calcutta High Court has been extended to the
‘Andaman and Nicobar Islands; of the Kerala High Court to the Lacca-
dive, Minicov and Amindivi Yslands; of the Gujarat High Court to Dadra

Haveli: of the Madras High Court to Pondicherry, and of
Court for Puojab and Haryana to Chandigarh.

$Hieh Court for Dethi and Himachal Pradesh.

4 There is a Judicial Commissioner's Court for Goa, Daman and Diu,
for Manipur and for Tripura.

537th Report, para. 83.



di

station. We agree with this view and consider that the definition
does not require any amendment.

(x) Clause (q) defines a “place” as including a house, build-
ing, tent and vessel. In tne cartier Report? reference was made
to a decision of the Supreme Court? that a motor vehicle is not 8
“place” within the meaning of sections 102 and 103 of the Code,
50 that the formalities laid down by those sections need not be
observed when #2 motor vehicle is to be searched. The Commis-
sien was of the opinion, that the judgment of the Supreme Court
algd a kicuna in the definit
motor vehicle is a place. the powers of search under
other sections of the Code which authorise searches of a “place”,
would not authorise searches of motor vehicles. The Commission
considered it desirabic expressly to include vehicles in the defini-
tion which would then read :-—

“(q) “place includes also a house, building, tent, vehicle
and vessel;”

We agree with this recommendation.

(xi) With reference to clause (r) which defines the expres-
sion “pleader”. the Commission observed* that it was unnecessary
to enumerate the various classes of practitioners and suggested
that the definition should be simplified as follows :—

“(r) ‘pleader’ used with reference to any proceeding in
any Court, means a person authorised under any law
for the time being in force to practise in such Court

>> and include les any other person appointed with
the permission of the Court to act in such proceed-
ing.”

(xii) Clause (w) defines a “warrant case” as a case relating
to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for lile or
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year. Cases relating to
other offences are summions cases. In the Report’ on the Re form
of Judicial Administration, the Commission recommended the
substitution of “three vears” for “one year” in this definition, in
order that, as a general rule, all offences which do not carry a
punishment of imprisonment for more than three years might be
triable under the summons case procedure, The main reasons for
this recommendation were that it would lead to the expeditious
disposal of a large number of cases particularly those relating to
statutory offences which are for the most_part of a technical
nature; that even under the Indian Penal Code. there are several
offences of the same kind. but differing in degree. which at present
have different modes of trial: that the distinction between sum~-
mons-cases and warrant-cases is arbitrary, e.g. offences under
sections 168 and 169. or offences under section 342 on the one
hand and sections 343 and 344 on the other; and that the expan-
sion of the category of summons cases as recommended woula
not be prejudicial to the accused.

137th Report, para शिव,

2 Bhagwanbhat v. State. (1963) 3 S.C.R. 386, 392 (Search under the
Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949).

2 For example, sections 98(1) and 165(1).

437th Report, para. 86.

514th Report, Vol. 2, pages 723-724.



Additional defi-
nittons,

Rule ¢ of _cons-
truction for refe-
rences,to Ma:
trates.

12

The Commission, however, reached a different conclusion in
the 37th Report for the following reasons :—
“Tn the first place, expansion of the category of summons-
“cases, as recommended in the earlier Report, would
bring in numerous offences, of which some are ically
serious,—for example, offences under sections 136,
153A, 295A, 419, 465 etc., Indian Penal Code; and
we are not convinced that there will be no prejudice
to the accused in such cases. Secondly, the objection
that the division is at present arbitrary would survive
even if the limit is raised to three years, because the
dividing line will still be dependent on an arbitrary
period (period of maximum imprisonment). Thirdly,
some of the offence—such as those under sections
153A, 295A and 465, Indian Penal Code—involve
nice questions of intention or interpretation of facts,
and the warrant-case procedure, whereunder a precise
charge is to be formulated, is, in our view, preferable
for such offences. We are not, therefore, carrying out
the recommendation made in the earlier Report.”

We also agree that no change is necessary in clause (w).

1.27. (i) With a view to shortening the language of some
sections, we propose to add in section 4(1) a definition of “local
jurisdiction” as follows :—

“(mm) ‘local jurisdiction’ in relation to a Court or
Magistrate, means the local area within which the
Court or Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or
his powers under this Code, and, where such local
area adjoins the sea, includes the territorial waters
extending into the sea to a distance of twelve nauticat
miles measured from the coast.”

Normally, the Code refers to “a Court within the local limits
of whose jurisdiction the offence was committed” (vide sections
177 to 183): it would be simpler to refer to “a Court within whose
local jurisdiction the offence was committed”.

(ii) As indicated in the previous paragraph, sub-para. (v), &
clause will be necessary defining “police report” as follows :—

“(rr) ‘police report’? means a report by a police officer to
a Magistrate under sub-section (1) of section 173.”

1.28. In the next chapter we are proposing the replacement of

presidency-towns by metropolitan areas and the appointment of

gis- metropolitan magistrates in those areas. The powers of the Chief

Metropolitan Magistrate amd of the Metropolitan Magistrate will
however, with a few exceptions, be the same as those of the Chief
Judicial Magistrate and of Judiciat Magistrates of the first class
respectively. In order to avoid repetitive references to the two
categories of magistrates, we may have a rule of construction in

section 4 as follows :—
“(€LA) Except in Chapter If and unless the context otherwise

Tequires—

(3) any reference without qualifying words to 8
Magistrate includes an Executive Magistrate as well


18

as a Judicial Magistrate and a Metropolitan
Magistrate;

(b) any reference to a Magistrate of the second class
maeans a Judicial Magistrate of the second class;

(c) any reference to a Magistrate of the first class means a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class, and includes in
relation to a metropolitan area a Metropolitan
Magistrate:

(9) any reference to the Chief Judicial Magistrate
includes, in relation to a metropolitan area, the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate for that area.

1.29. As noted by the Commission in the previous Report, the
first part of section 4(2) stating that “words which refer to acts
done extend also to illegal omissions” is superfluous in view of
section 3(2) of the General Clauses Act, 1897, and may be
omitted. The second part, however, may remain, for the time
being.

1.30. Section 5 does not require any modification.

Section 4(2).

Section 5.


Separation of
executive from
judiciary by
parliamentary
legislation,
Present position
9. States.

Present, Position

in Union
tories.

terci-

CHAPTER U
CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES

2.1. The problem of separating the executive from the judi-
ciary las been fully discussed’ in the previous Report. The
Commission recommended? that this separation should be effect-
ed by centrai iegislation and we entirely agree with this recom-
mendation. It is very desirable that the uniform Code of Cri-
minal Procedure which has been evolved in the course of a
century, should not be allowed to take different forms in dif-
ferent States. The set-up of criminal courts, the distinction
between judicial and executive magistrates and their respective
functions under the Code should, in our view, be the same in
all the States and should be clearly laid down in the Code itself
instead of being regulated as at present by executive orders in
some States and special State legislation in others.

2.2. Madras was the first State to work out a comprehen.
sive scheme of separation of the judiciary from the executive and
to initiate the reform even before the passing of the Constitu-
tion.* Pursuant to the directive principle of state policy laid
down in article 50 of the Constitution, the States have been taking
steps to form separate cadres of judicial magistrates. place them
under the control of the High Court and make them independent
of the executive. In as many as seven States, viz, Maharash-
tra, Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, Mysore, Punjab, Haryana and
West Bengal, the separation of the judicial magistrates from
the executive magistrates has been brought about by amending the
Code. In West Bengal, however, the recently passed Separa-
tion of Judicial and Executive Functions Act, 1968, has so far
been brought into force only in the presidency-town of Calcutta
and in Hog hly District. In the other States (except Nagaland
where the Code itself is not operative), separation of functions
has been effected to a yarying extent by executive orders on the
Hines originally adopted in Madras. It appears to be complete
in Andhra Pradesh, Assam (excluding the autonomous districts
and the North East Frontier Tracts, where again the Code is
Not operative}, Bibar, Kerala, Madras, Orissa and Rajasthan.
The scheme is in operation in the greater part of Uttar Pradesh
and Madhya Pradesh and it is only a question of time and of
finding the requisite number of qualified judicial officers before
it is brought into operation throughout these two States.

2.3. As regards the Union territories, Chandigarh and a
good part of Himachal Pradesh are covered by the Punjab Act.
Executive orders. similar to those passed in Madras, are in
force in Pondicherry. A bill to provide for the separation of
executive and judicial functions in the Union territories other
than Chandigarh has been recently passed by Parliament, and

137th Report paras. 32 to 62.
237th Report para. 49.
3 See 14th Report, Vol. वा, page 851.



15

the Act is expected to be brought into foree and implemented in
ull the territories fairly soon.

2.4. We do not apprenend any serious practical difficulty in

giving effect to the scheme of separation on a uniform basis by
a central amendment of the Code. Jn areas where separation of
the executive has not been efiected, steps should be taken to
do »0 by means of executive orders as in Madras. ia anticipa-
tion of “uch central amendment.
2.5. The previous Report recommended? that this ameadinent
should provide for a broad classification of, Courts of Magistrates
into Courts of Judicial Magistrates and Courts of Executive
Magistrates, for a further classification of Judicial Magistrates
as Presidency Magistrates, Chicf Judicial Magistrates. Judicial
Magistrates of the first class, Judicial Magistrates of the second
class, Judicial Magistrates of the third class and Specia! Judicial
Magistrates, and for a parallel classification of Executive Magis-
trates as District Magistrates, Sub-divisional Magistrates. Execu-
tive Magistrates of the first class, Executive Magistrates of the
second class, Presidency Magistrates especially empowered by
the State Government and Special Executive Magistrates. We
consider that any such elaborate classification is unnecessary and
that a simpler scheme for the sct-up of Courts in all the States
is both desirable and feasible.

2.6. As regards the Executive Magistrates, we do not sce
any point in maintaining the distinction of first. and second
class. The functions to be performed by Executive Magistrates
under the Code are very few and they hardly admit of being
divided into more important functions that will have to 0६
performed by Exccutive Magistrates of the first class and less
important ones that could be left to junior magistrates put in
the second class. In fact, the day-to-day, routine work of an
-executive magistrate under the Code arising in any sub-division
may not require more than one officer to handle. We notice
that in Bombay, according to the amendment of the Code made
in 1951, executive magistrates are not divided into those of the
first class and of the second class nor is there a division of func-
tions between scnior and junior magistrates. Provision is
made for a category designated Taluka Magistrates who are

Rresumably subordinate revenue officers in charge of talukas

‘e propose that there necd be only one class of executive
magistrates under the Code. that the chief officer in charge of
the administration of the district (whether known as District
Collector, District Officer or Deputy Commissioner) should
continue, as at present, to be the District Magistrate. and that
the institution of Sub-divisional Magistrates on the executive
side should also be retained. If there is need for an executive
magistrate at the taluka or tahsil level in any State, an executive
or revenue officer of the Government can be appointed simply
as Executive Magistrate to exercise functions under the Code.

2.7. As regards the classes of Judicial Magistrates, the view
was expressed in the previous Report? that the institaten of
third class magistrates might be necessary for purposes _ of
training and its retention was recommended. We. however. find

737th Report peras. 94 ७ 103, new Section 6A. ~
2 hid, para. 93.

No practical difft-
culty in central
amendment of
Code,

Classification of
Magistrate in
previous Report
too elaborate,

Executive Magis-
trates.

Judicial Magis-
trates — abolition
of third — class
recommened


Chief Judicial
Magistrate for
every district.

No need for Sub-
divisional Magis-
trates (Judicial)

Proposed set-up
of Magistrates’
Courts in districts.

16

that in many States there are no magistrates of the third class
at all. In the States where separation of the executive from
the judiciary has been effected, civil judicial functions and
magisterial functions ate ordinarily combined in the same Officer
and, even for purposes of initial taining it is hardly necessary
that a civil judge or munsif should start with the very limited
jurisdiction and powers now available to a magistrate of the
third class under the Code. We are of the opinion that this
class could be safely abolished.

2.8. In the previous Report! it is recommended that in
every district there should be a Chief Judicial Magistrate, mainly
to take the place of the District Magistrate on the judicial side
and to exercise proper supervision and control over the work
of all other judicial magistrates in the district. This bas been
provided for in the Punjab Act and we have no doubt that this
is a better system than the Bombay system under which alt
judicial magistrates are directly subordinate to the Sessions
Judge. Because of the diverse and important nature of the work
which the District and Sessions Judge has to do, he has litde
time to spare for inspecting magistrates’ courts and giving guid-
ance to them in their work. We are of the opinion that this
important task can be performed best by a Chief Judicial Magis-
trate who will naturally be in closer touch with the judicial
magistrates in the district than the Sessions Judge.

2.9, There, however, appears to be no need for a special
category of Sub-divisional Magistrates on the judicial side, We
notice that in the eastern States, Particularly Bihar and West
Bengal, where the revenue districts are large and the Sub-
divisional system of administration is of long standing, the Sub-
divisional Magistrate coordinates and distributes the work among
the other magistrates working in the sub-division and exercises
a certain measure of superintendence over them. In these States
wherever considered necessary, an Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate may be posted at sub-divisional Headquarters. Provi-
sion for the appointment of one or more Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrates in a district has been recommended in the previous
Report and we think that this category of senior and experienced
magistrates could be utilised to serve the same purpose as Sub-
divisional Magistrates do at Present in these States.

2.10. We accordingly propose that in every district (outside
the presidency-towns) it is sufficient to have three categories of
Magistrates, namely, Judicial Magistrates of the first class, Judi-
cial Magistrates of the second class and Executive Magistrates.
Every district will have a Chief Judicial Magistrate who will
have all the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class
and certain additional powers which we shall discuss in the next
chapter. Where found necessary, one or more Judicial Magis-
trates of the first class may be appointed as Additional Chief
Judicial Magistrates. On the executive side there will continue
to be the District Magistrate at the head, Additional District
Magistrates to the extent found necessary in large districts and
Sub-divisional Magistrates as at present.

237th Report, para. 99.


17

2.11. [8 the previous Report! as well as in the earlier Presidency magis-
Fourteeath Report, the Law Commission has recommended the trates.
continuance of the special class of judicial magistrates known

as Presidency Magistrates functioning in the three presidency-
towns. At the same time, the Commission stressed* that only
persons of special merit should be appointed as Presidency
Magistrates. The high standard for recruitment to this cadre
which prevailed until not very long ago is apparently not being
maintained, which is unfortunate. However, we agree that the
administration of criminal justice in large cities requires @
measure of special treatment. The magistrates there ought to

be better qualified and more competent to deal expeditiously

with sophisticated crimes, particularly in the socio-economic

field, which are more common in the cities. Apparently from

this point of view, Gujarat found jt necessary to have special
magistrates for the city of Ahmedabad and enacted the Ahmeda-

bad City Courts Act, 1961, under which the City Magistrates

were equated in all respects with the Presidency Magistrate of
Bombay. Other large cities like Delhi, Bangalore and Hydera-

bad might hereafter feel the same need.

2.12. We therefore propose that the institution of Presidency
Magistrates should be maintained in the Code. Presidencies
having disappeared from the political map of India more than
30 years ago, it is archaic to refer to Calcutta, Bombay and
Madras as “presidency-towns”, and it will be a misnomer to
call other large cities by that name. These areas may more
appropriately be referred to as “metropolitan areas” and the
special class of magistrates functioning therein as “Metropolitan
Magistrates”.

2.13, It should be provided in the Code that a State Gov- Power to declare

ermment may by notification declare any area in the State com- eas mad setup
prising a city whose population exceeds one million to be @ Metropolitan
metropolitan area, and then set up as many Courts of Metro- Magistrates’
politan Magistrates for that area as it thinks fit. The State Courts.
Government should have the power to extend, reduce or alter
the boundaries of the area from time to time as changed circums-
tances may require, but not in such manner as to reduce its
population to less than one million. The three presidency-
towns and the city of Ahmedabad would automatically become
metropolitan areas under the proposed amendment. As regards
the city of Calcutta, we have pointed out the anomaly that exists
at present purely on account of historical reasons. The original
limits of this “presidency-town” still form the limits of the jocal
jurisdiction of the City Sessions Court and of the Presidency
Magistrates’ Courts despite the enormous growth of the city.
Tt would be open to the State Government to extend the limits
of the “metropolitan area” of Calcutta by a notification under
the new provision and thereby to remove the anomaly, either
completely, or to such extent as may appear to be desirable.

2.13a. In the presidency-towns there are at present mo Executive Magis-
officers corresponding to District Magistrates and Sub-divisional ries me Metro-
Magistrates, although under section 7(4) every presidency-town areas.

Name“ to be
changed. .

137th Report, paras. 69 and 101.
214th Report. Vol. If, page 801.
237th Report, para. 69.


Territorial divi-
sions.

Sub-divisions in
metropolitan
areas.

Revised section 6,
Tand 8,

Classes of crimi-
nal courts.

18

is deemed to be a district for the purpose of the Code. Ia
Bombay, some presidency magistrates ate specially invested with
the powers of an executive magistrate under the Code. There
seems to be no good reason for making this distinction ix regard
te metropolitan arcas. As every such area will be a separate
district, R may have the same set-up on the executive side as
any other district, and the functions of the Metropolitan Magis-
trates under the Code may be exactly the same as those of Judi-
cial Magistrates in other district.

2d

'प T and S deal with the territorial divisions of
a State (which term includes a Union territory) for the purposes
of administe criminal justice. Alther sub-section (1) of
section 7 provides that “every State (excluding the presidency-
towns) shall be a sessions division, or shall consist of sessions
divisions”. the exclusion has become meaningless after the esta-
blishment of City Sessions Courts under special State Acts.
Each of the presidency-towns is now a sessions division for the
purposes of the Code and the State Acts have made the requisite
amendment in the sub-section. For instance, as amended by
Bombay Act 23 of 1951. the sub-section reads, “The State of
Bombay shall consist of sessions divisions; and every sessions
division shall, for the purposes of this Code. be a district or
consist of districts.” Sub-section (4) of section 7 already pro-
vides that every presidency-town shall be deemed to be a dis-
trict. with the result that at present every presidency-town is a
district as well as a sessions division, and the rest of the State
in which the presidency-town is situated has to be divided by
the State Government, into one or more sessions divisions and
each sessions division into one or more districts.

et

é

2.15. Under sub-section (1) of section 8, a presidency-town
may not be divided into sub-divisions, but the State Government
is authorised to divide other districts into sub-divisions. There
appears to be no good reason for this special exclusion of
presidency-towns in regard to a purely discretionary power. It
is quite conccivable that in an area declared to be a “metro-
politan area” in future, the State Government may find it con-
venient to create sub-divisions and to appoint Executive
Magistrates separately for such sub-divisions.

2.16. We propose, in the light of the foregoing discussion,
the following revised provisions in place of the existing sections
6, 7 and 8 of the Code :—

“6. Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted
under any special law. there shali be in every State the following
classes of Criminal Courts. namely :--

(i) Courts of Session;

Gi) Judicial Magistrates of the first class;

(iii) Tudicial Magistrates of the second class:
and

(iv) Executive Magistrates,

and in addition. in every State having a metropolitan area,
Metropolitan Magistrates.


19

(1) Every State shall be # sessions division oF shalt
con: af sessions divisions; and every sessions division shail,
for the purposes of this Code, be a district or consist of dis-

Previled that every metropolitan arca shall, for the said
purposes, be a separate sessions division and district.

(2: 1050 State Government. in consultation with the High
Court. say alter the limits or the number of such divisions and
district

(2) The State Gesernment may divide any district into
sub-disisions and may alter the limits or the number of such
sub-dn 5०१६,

(4) The sessions divisions, districts and sub-divisions exist-
ing in ५ State when the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amend-
ment} Act. 197... comes into force therein shall be deemed
to hive been formed under this section.

8. 41) The State Government may. by notification in the
Officizi Gazette, declare that, as from such date as may be
specified in the sotification, any area in the State comprising
a city whose population exceeds one million shall be a metro-
politan areca for the purposes of this Code.

(2) As from the commencement of this Code, cach of the
presidency-towns of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras and the city
of Ahmedabad shall be deemed to be an area notified under
sub-section (1) to be a metropolitan arca.

(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Off-
cial Gazette, extend, reduce or alter the limits o!, 8 metro-
politan area, but not in such manner as to reduce its population
to Jess than one million.”

2.17. Section 9 provides for the cstablishment of a Court
of Session for every sessions division and for the appointment
of judges to that Court. As the section stands at present, it is
the duty of the State Government to establish the Court of
Session and to appoint the Sessions Judge. The State Govern-
ment ix further empowered to appoint Additional and Assistant
Sessions Judges to exercise jurisdiction in the Court, to appoint
the Sessions Judge of one sessions division to be at the same
time and Additional Sessions Judge of another sessions division
and to direct at what place or places the Court shail ordinarily
hold its sittings.

2.18. In the State of Assam ४. Ranga Muhammad} the
Supreme Court decided that the transfer of “district judges”
already in the cadre from one district to another in the State
must he regarded as part of the “control over district courts”
referred to in article 235 of the Constitution and as such, the
power te direct such transfers is vested exclusively in the High
Court. Such transfers and the “postings” involved therein are
outside the scope of the power conferred on the Governor of

3 11967) 1 SCR. 454: ALR. 1967 5.0. 903.

Territeriat divi-
sions.

Metropolitan
areas.

Appointment of

Sessions Judges.

Constitutional
position.


Commission's
Ptevious recom-
mendation.

Connotation of
“appoint" in sec
tion 9.

20

the State by article 233. The word “posting” may mean either
the stationing of an employee at a particular place or the
assignment of an appointee to a particular position or job.
According to the Supreme Court, the word “posting”, occurring
as it does in association with the words “appointment” and
“promotion”, cicarly bears the second meaning. “These words
indicate the stage when a person first gets a position or job and
‘posting’ by association means the assignment of an appointee
or promotee to a position in the cadre of district judge."

2.19. In view of this decision, the Law Commission took
up for urgent consideration the question whether section 9
required to be modified in order to bring it into line with the
Constitution and made its recommendation in the 32nd Report.
Briefly put, the Commission took the view that all the functions
in relation to a Court of Session, except its initial establishment,
and in relation to the Judges of the Court mentioned in section 9,
are functions of “control over the district courts” and conse~
gucntly the relevant powers must be vested in the High Court.
Wt recommended that sub-section (1) of section 9 should be
split into two parts, the first stating that “the State Government
shall establish a Court of Session for every sessions division”,
and the second stating that “the High Court shal} appoint a
Judge of such Court”. In the other sub-sections of section 9,
“High Court” should be substituted for “State Government”.

2.20. We have considered the awkwardness involved in
making the High Court the competent authority for “appointing”
the Sessions Judges, Additional Sessions Judges and Assistant
Sessions Judges under sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 9.
The two sub-sections when so worded, will strike one as being
inconsistent with article 233, but the inconsistency is more
apparent than real. We have to understand the “appointments”
referred to in section 9 of the Code, not as the first appoint-
ment to the cadre of Sessions Judges, Additional Sessions
Judges or Assistant Sessions Judges, but as the process of assign-
ing or posting officers already in the cadre to a specified Sessions
Court. It is not easy to find a more appropriate expression
than “appoint” for the purposes of section 9, and since the
section will have to be read and construed in the light of
article 233, no practical or legal difficulty can arise by using
the word “appoint”,

2.20a. It has been brought to our notice that occasionally,
owing to the sudden transfer or demise of the Sessions Judge
and delay in the choosing and posting of his successor, the
sessions division remains without a Judge for a considerable
period causing great hardship and inconvenience to the public.
Section 17(4) which enable the Sessions Judge to make provi-
sion for the disposal of urgent applications “when he himself
is unavoidably absent or incapable of acting” cannot obviously
be pressed into service in this contingency as the previous
incumbent has ceased to be the Sessions Judge and there is no
one in the sessions division to make the necessary formal order.
Jt appears desirable that an express provision should be included

1 Siate of Assam ४. Ranga Muhammad, (1967) 1 SOR, 454; AER.
1967 S.C, $03, .


21

in section 9 enabling the High Court to take action in such a
contingency.

2.21. We accordingly propose that section 9 be revised to
read as follows :—

“9. (1) For every sessions division, there shall be a Court
of Session, the Judge of which shall be appointed by the High
Court

(2) The Court of Session shall ordinarily hold its sitting at
such place or places as the High Court may by notified order
specify; but if, in any particular case, the Court of Session is
of opinion that it will tend to the general convenience of the
parties and witnesses to hold its sitting at any other place in the
session division, it may, with the consent of the prosecution and
the accused, sit at that place for the disposal of the case or the
examination of any witness or witnesses therein.

(3) The High Court may also appoint Additional Sessions
Judges and Assistant Sessions Judges to exercise jurisdiction in
a Court of Session.

(3) The Sessions Judge of one sessions division may be
appointed by the High Court to be also aa Additional Sessions
Judge of another division, and in such case he may sit for the
disposal of cases at such place or places in either division as
the High Court may direct.

1(5) Where the office of the Sessions Judge is vacant, the
High Court may make provision for the disposal of any urgent
application by an Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge,
of, if there be no Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, by a
Chief Judicial Magistrate, in the sessions division; and such
Judge or Magistrate shall have jurisdiction to deal with any such
application.”

2.22. Sections 10 to 13 provide for the apr pointment in each
district of the District Magistrate, Additional District Magistrates,
Sub-divisional Magistrates and other Subordinate Magistrates and
for defining the local limits of their jurisdiction. In order to imple-
ment the scheme of separation of executive magistrates from the
Judicial Magistrates, the provisions for the appointment of these
two distinct categories of magistrates will have to be separate.
Those relating to judicial magistrates may be as follows :—

“10. (1) In every district (not being a metropolitan.
area), there shall be established as many Courts of Judicial
Magistrates of the first class and of the second class, and
at such places, as the State Government may, in consultation
with the High Courts, notify in the Official Gazette.

(2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be
appointed by the High Court.

11. (1) In every district (not being a metropolitan area),
the High Court shall appoint a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class to be the Chief Judicial Magistrate.

2 Bxisting sub-section (5) of section 9 has been omitted as being spent
and no longer necessary

Court of session.

Section 10 to 13—
Provisions — for
appointment of
Judicial Magis-
trates separated.

Courts of Judicial
Magistrates.

Chief —_ Judiciat
Magistrate and
Ad ditional Chief
Judicial ~Magis+
trate.


Application
articles 233 to 235
to Judicial Magis-

trates recommen- ,

ded.

Number and Jo-
cation of courts
to be determined
by State Govern-
Ment in consul-
tation with High
Court.

Section 14-Speciat
Executive Magis-
trates not ree
quired.

Speci Judicial
Magistrates.

i Court may appoint any Judicial Magis-
trate of the J to be an Additional Chief Judicial
trate and such Magistrate shali have all or any of the
Chit Judicial Magiswate under this Code or
law for the time being in force as the High

wet.

(21

jons also, the word "“०एएजाए' will bear
ihe same connotation us in section 9 namely, the assiznment of
judicial officers in the cadre of magistraies to particular districts
and invest n with the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of
eeond class or with the powers of a Chief Judicial
rile. as the case may be.

He separation of the executive from the judiciary will
ive valy when the judicial magistrates arc brought under
High Court and this can he readily achieved
ar 237 of the Constitution. ‘The provisions
234 and 235 should be made applicable by a
public ne on of the Governor to all judicial magistrates in
the Staic. We note that this action has already been taken in
some Stules.

2.24. It will be viserved that in the revised section 10 above,
the power (o determine the number of courts of Judicial Magis-
trates of cither class and their location is Icft to the State
Government since it will have to take into account various
administrative and financial considerations. The State Govern-
ment, however. is required to exercise this power in consultation
with the High Court in order that an adequate number of
Magistrates’ courts is established in all districts and at suitable
places.

2.25. With regard to Special Magistrates dealt with in section
14 of the Code, the previous Report of the Commission recom-
mended! that there might be two categories, Special Judicial
Magistrates and Special Executive Magistrates. On reconsidera-
tion, we do not think that there is likely to be any need for the
latter. since the functions devolving on the Executive Magistrates
under the revised Code are going to be very limited and, in any
event, the State Government wil! have the power to appoint as
many Executive Magistrates as it finds necessary for performing
those functions. As recommended? in the previous Report, the
Hish Court should be the only authority to appoint Special Jadi-
cial Magistrates in any district or Special Metropolitan Magis-
trates in any metropolitan area, and with this transfer of power
to the Hizh Court. sub-sections (3) and (4) of the existing
section 14 are not necessary. The section may accordingly
revised follows and placed after the revised  secti 11

above :—

“12. (1) The High Court mav confer upon any person
who holds er has held any judicial post under the Union or
al State or possesses suck other qualifications as may be pre=
scribed by the High Court in this behalf थी or any of the
powers conferred or conferrable by er under this Code on a

137th Report.



23

Judicial Magistrate of the first class OF of the second class,
in re-pect to particular cases OF to particular classes of cases
or to cases generally, in any district not being a metropolitan
areca.

(2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Judicial
Magistrates and shall be appointed for such term as the High
Court may by general or special order direct.”

2.26. Under section 12 the focal Jimits of the jurisdiction of
subordinate magistrates ate defined by the State Government, cr,
subject to its control, by the District Magistrate. So far as Judi-
cial Magistrates, including Special Judicial Magistrates, are con-
cerned, this power may be given to the Chief Judicial Magis-
trates subject to the controt of the High Court. The revised sec-
tion may be as follows :--

©13. (1) Subject to the contro! of the High Court, ihe
Chief Judicial Magistrate may from time to time define the
local areas within which the Magistrates appointed under
section 10 or under section 12 may exercise all or any of the
powers with which they may be invested under this Code.

(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition,
the jurisdiction and powers of such Magistrates shall extend
throughout the district.”

2.27. Section 15 provides for the formation and functioning
of Benches of magistrates in a very general way. In practice,
however. Benches are only formed ‘of Honorary Magistrates. i.c.,
persons who are appointed as Special Magistrates under section
14, and Stipendiary Magistrates are never asked to sit together
2५ 9 Bench. As an institution, Benches of Honorary Magistrates
are not much in favour but, provided the right type of educated
and public-spirited persons come forward for rendering this ser-
vice to the community and are chosen and appointed by the High
Court, they can certainly sive much valuable assistance to the
hard-worked Stipendiary Magistrates. We would, therefore,
retain the section in a simplified form. The power to form
benches may be vested in the Chief Judicial Magistrate subject
to the control of the High Court. It is hardly necessary to
provide for the formation of a bench consisting of some Special
Magistrates invested with first class powers and some othcrs with
second class powers. Looking at it from the practical point of
view, such a Bench is not usually formed; and in fact it does not
appear to be very desirable that it should be formed and invest-
ed with the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.

2.28. Under section 16 the power to frame rules for the
guidance of Benches is conferred on the State Government as
well as on the District Magistrate subject to the control of the
State Government. It is proposed that this power should be
with the Chief Judicial Magistrate subject to the contro] of the
High Court

2.29. Sections 15 and 16 may accordingly be combined and
simplified as follows :—

“14. (1) Subject to the control of the High Court, the
Chief Judicial Magistrate may direct any two or more Special

Section 12—Local
jurisdiction of
Judicial 5 Magis-
ates.

Locat jurisdiction
of Magistrates.

Section 15—Ben-
ches of Judicial
Magistrates,

Section 16.

Section 15 and 16
combined and
simplified.

Benches of Judi-
cial Magistrates,


24

istrates of the same class to sit together as 3
alt, for the
aL Magis-

Judicial M:
Bench for trying cases. and every such Bench
purposes of this Code. be deemed to be 2 Judi
tate of that class.

Court, the Chie!

(23
guidance of such

cL to the control or the Hig
Magistrate may meke rules for th

ches us respects —

ses of c:

$ othe Umes and pi

constitution oF th net trials:

for Metropolitan
Ma: ates”

3 ivave reece
the three

Presidency Masistea
Mauistrates’ Court should be known as Courts
aeapotiten Magistrates. At present articles 234 and
235 of the Constitution apply only in ion to the Chief Pre-
sidency Ma: ete and the Addition: f Presidency i
trate (vide definition of “district judge” in_clause (a) ov articles
236). and not in relation to the other Presidency Magistrates
nd their Courts (even if the latter could be regarded as Courts
diff from the Court of the Chicf Presidency Magistrate or
the Court of an Addit strate), When
the Cady is revised and Presidency Mj ve replaced by
Metropolitan Magistrates, it will naivrally be necessary for the
Governor to issue a public notification under article 237 direct-

apolication of articles 233, 234 and 235 to all Metropo-

21 ला aby Code. the
inunestiately after’

1 dict of existing section TR to
may be put in this Ci
ton [4 proposed above :—-

1०६१-९८ Sections,

cas uM (13 Tn every Metropelitan area ther

tats. लहर s many Courts of Metropolizan Magistrates, and
ut St ६, 8: 2 State Government & nsultation
with the His J netfy in the O

2) Yio presiding aff Courts shall be

appointed by the Hi

(0५: Meivapoi है ||

fan Magisine ar the

ty Court may appoint
2 to be an Additional Chief M:
r such Magistrate shall Rave alt |!
of a (मल Metropolitan Magistrate under this Code or under
any other law for the time being in force as the High Court
may direct.



25

17. (1) The High Court may confer upon any person
who holds or has held any judicial post under the Union or 2
State or possesses such other qualifications as may be pres-
cribed by the High Court in this behalf, all or any of the
powers conferred oF conferrable by or under this le on 2
Metropolitan Magistrate in respect to particular casts or to
particular classes of cases or to cases generally, in any metro-
politan area.

(2) Such Mavistrates shalt be calcd Special Metropo-
litan Mavistrates and shall be appointed for s term as the
ct.

High Court may by general or special order

ix. (4) Subject to the control of the High Court, the
i istrate may direct any two or more
Metrop istrates to sit together as a Bench
in cases and every such Bench shall, for the purpose~
Gade. be deemed to be a Mctropolitan Magistrate.

(2) Subject to the control of the High Court, the Chiet,
Metropolitan Magistrate may make rules for the guidance of
such Borchts as respects—

fa) the classes of cases to be tried:

(>) the times and places of sitt

(०) the constitution of the Bench for conducting trials:

vd) the mode of settling differences of opinion which
may arise between the Magistrates in session.”

2.32. The appointment of Executive Magistrates and the
definition of their local jurisdiction may be provided for scepa-
rately in two sections as follows :—

“19, (1) In every district, the State Government may
appoint as many persons as it thinks fit to be Executive
Manistrates and shall appoint one of them to be the District
gussrate.

(2) The State Government may appoint any Executive
Magistrate to be an Additional District Magistrate, and such
Additional District. Magistrate shal] have alf or any 00 the
powers of a District Magistrate under this Code or under
any other law ‘or the time being in force as the State Gov-
ermment may direct.

The State Government may place an Executive
Marisiratc in charge of a sub-division and relieve him of the
६ oecasion requires. Such Mavistrate shall be called
sional Magistrates.

ct to the control of the State Government,

n which Executive Magistrates may exercise all or
ure pewers with which they may be invested under
Cade.

(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition.
the jurisdiction and powers of such Magistrates shall extend
throughout the district.”

trate may from time to time define loca) E:

112
politen
trates.

Metro-
Magis-

Benches of
Metropotitan

Magist:

tates.

sates,

Provisions for
Executive Magive

Execviive Magis:

arates.

Load

Hon,

limits of
ve Magis-
Jurisdic-


Section 11 omit-
ted.

Section 17 re-
placed by four
new sections.

Subordination of
Assistant Ses-
sions Judges.

Subordination of
Judicial Magis-
arates,

Subordination of
Metropolitan
Magistrates.

Subordination of
Executive Magis-
trates.

26

2.33. We do not think that a provision similar to section i
is practically necessary. Even if a temporary hiatus in the
office of a District Magistrate is aliowed by the State Gov-
ernment to occur, which itself is unlikely, it will not be very
material so far as his functions under the Code are concerned

2.34. Reverting to existing section 17 of the Code wich
deals with the subordination of Courts, it is proposed, for the
sake of greater clarity, to replace it by four sections as
follows :—

“24. (1) All Assistant Sessions Judges shall be subordi-
nate to the Sessions Judge in whose Court they exercise
jurisdiction.

(2) The Sessions Judge may, from time to time, make
rules consistent with this Code as to the distribution of busi-
ness among such Assistant Sessions Judges.

(3) The Sessions Judge may also make provision for the
disposal of any urgent application, in the event of his absence
or inability to act, by an Additional or Assistant Sessions
Judge, or, #f there be no Additional or Assistant Sessions
Judge, by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and such Judge or
Magistrate shal! have jurisdiction to deal with any such
application.

22. (1) Chief Judicial Magistrates shall be subordinate
to the Sessions Judge; and all Judicial Magistrates shall,
subject to the general contro} of the Sessions Judge, be sub-
ordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.

(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to
time, make rules or give special orders consistent with this
Code as to the distribution of business among such Magis-
trates and Benches.

23. (1) All Metropolitan Magistrates, other than the
‘Additional Chief Mctropolitan Magistrates, shall be subordi-
nate to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.

(2) The High Court may, for the purposes of this Code,
define the extent of the subordination, if any, of the Addi-
tional Chief Metropolitan Magistrates to the Chief Metro-
politan Magistrate.

(3) The Chief Metropolitan Magistrates may, from time
to time, make rules or give special orders consistent with this
Code as to the distribution of business among Metropolitan
Magistrates and as to allocation of business to Additional
Chief Metropolitan Magistrates.

24. (1) All Executive Magistrates, other than Addi-
tional District Magistrates, shall be subordinate to the
District. Magistrate, and every Executive Magistrate
(other than a Sub-divisional Magistrate) exercising powers
in a sub-division shall also be subordinate to the Sub-
divisional Magistrate, subject, however, to the general con-
trol of the District Magistrate.

(2) The District Magistrate may, from time to time,
makes rules or give special orders consistent with this Code



27

as to the distribution of business among the Executive Magis-
trates subordinate to him and as to allocation of business to

an Additional District Magistrate.”

2.35. Section 22 empowers the State Government to appoint
Tustices of the Peace and section 25 declares the Judges of High
Courts, Sessions Judges, District Magistrates and ~ Presidency
Magistrate to be Justices of the Peace ex-officio. In the previous
Report, the Commission recommended! that the appointment of
Justices of the Peace under section 22 should be made in con-
sultation with the High Court and that such Justices should be
citizens of India. While we agree with the latter recommenda-
tion, we do not think it necessary that the High Court should be
consulted in regard to appointments to an office the functions of
which are not essentially, or even mainly, of a judicial character.

AL present, except in Bombay and West Be . the powers
and duties of a Justice of the Peace are not defined by Jaw. We
agree that this lacuna in the Code should be filled as recom-
mended? in the previous Report.

Under section 25, Judges of the High Court are, at present.
ex-officio Justices of the Peace for the while of India. We
think that it is not necessary to retain this part of the section.
as being Justices of the Peace does not add to the dignity of
Judges of the High Court. We do not think it necessary to add
to the list of ex-officio Justices of the Peace as recommended

in the previous Report?

In licu of sections 22 and 25, the following sections may be
included in this Chapter :—

“25. (1) 10 virtue of their respective offices, Sessions
Judges, Chicf Metropolitan Magistrates, Chief Judicial
Magistrates and District Magistrates are Justices of the Peace
within and for the whole of the State in which they are

serving.

(2) The State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint any person resident in the State,
being a citizen of India, to be a Justice of the Peace within
and for the local area specified in the notification.

26. (1) A Justice of the Peace shali have, within the
area for which he is such Justice, the power of arrest confer-
red on a police officer by section 54 and on an officer-in-
charge of a police station by section 55.

(2) A Justice of the Peace making an arrest in exercise
of any such power shall forthwith take or cause to be taken
the person arrested before the officer-in-charge of the nearest
police station and furnish such officer with a report as to the
circumstances of the arrest; and such officer shall thereupon
re-arrest the person.
137th Report, para. 138.
237th Report, paras. 139 and 140.
337th Report. para. 142.

Section 22 and
25-Justices of the
Peace.

Justices of the
Peace.

Powers of Justices
of the Peace.


28

(3) A Justice of the Peace shall have, within such area,
power to call upon any police officer to aid him—

{a} in taking 07 preventing the escape of any person
who has participated in the commission of any cog-
nizable offence or against whom a reasonable com-
plaint has been made or credible informaiion has
been received or a reasonable suspicion vusts of
his having so participated;

(6) in the prevention of crime in general and, ia paru-
cular, in the prevention of a breach of the peace or
a disturbance of the public tranquility

(4) Where a police officer has been called upon by a
Justice of the Peace to render aid under sub-se. fon 3),
‘such call shail be deemed to have been made by an author ity
competent to make the call.

(5) Subject to such rules as may be made by the State
Government, a Justice of the Peace for a local area may,
when so requested in writing by a police officer investigating
an offence committed within that area, record ar (लाला
made by a person in respect of whom an offence affecting
the human body is believed to have been committed, being a
statement relating to the circumstances of the offeace or vi
ihe transaction which resulted in the offence. Such state-
ment shall be recorded in the manner hercinafter prescribed
for recording the evidence of a witness in the trial of a
warrant case.

(6) A Justice of the Peace for any Jocal area, not being
a legal practitioner. may, in accordance with such rules as
may be made by the State Government—

(a

issue a certificate as to the identity of any person
residing within such arca, or

(७) verify any document brought before him by any
such person, or

{c) attest any such document required by or under any
law for the time being in force to be attested by a
Magistrate;

and until the contrary is proved, any certificate so issued
shall be presumed to be correct, any document so verifies
shall be deemed to be duly verified, and any document so
attested shall be deemed to have been attested by a Magis-
trate.”


CHAPTER 11
POWERS OF COURTS

3.1. Under section 28, any offence under the Indian Penal
Code may be tried by the High Court, and under section 29, any
oifence wader any ether law which contains no special provision
ns to the trying courts, may be tried by the High Court. Section
194 provides that the High Court may take cognizance of any
offence upon a commitment made to it in the manner provided
in Chapter XVIIE of the Code. Detailed provisions are then
made in Chapter XNIIf with regard to the procedure of High
Courts in trying cases. Although these provisions apply to all
High Courts in India. only those af Caleutta. Madras and Bom-
bay exercised ordinary original criminal jurisdiction at any time
snd this jurisdiction was limited by the Letters Patent establish-
lay these High Courts to the three presidency-tows - With we
tablishment of City Sessions Courts in Bomb: 1948 and
in Madras in 1956, the High Courts at these छ० places ullo-
gether ceased to wy criminal cases.

3.2, 10 Calcutta. however, althouh a City Sessieas Court
was estublished in 187 with jurisdiction over the presidency-
town cl Caleutta, it was precluded from uying offences punish-
able under sections 131 to 134, 302, 307, 396, 468 and 477A of
the Indian Penu! Code. These offences, when committed within
the presidency-towns. were retained within the ordinary original
jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court and continued to be
triable with the aid of a jury. In this connection it may be men-
tioned tat the area of this presidency-town jg only a part, and
the smatler part at that, of the area comprised within the Munici-
pal Corporation of Calcutta. The other part of the city is with-
in the jurisdiction of the Sossions Judge of the 24-Parganas
District who holds Court in Alipore.

3.3. Tie Law Commission, in its 14th Report, considered
that this division of original criminal jurisdiction between _ the
Calcutta High Court und the City Sessions Court | foil of
anomalies. For example, whereas an offence under section 302
L.P.C. for which the Court may impose a sentence of death or
imprisonment for life, is exclusively triable by the High Court, an
offence under section 303 for which the cn y is the sen-
tence of death. is triable by the City Sessions Court.” The Com-
on further said’, “The City Sessions Courts in Bembay and
as Which have been established much earlier than the
Calcutta Court possess all the powers which the High Court did
in the respective States in exercise of its ordinary original crimi-
nal jurisdiction. ‘The evidence given before us revealed that the
City Sessioas Courts in those States were functioning efficiently.
There is no reason why the Court should not be able to deal with
these matters in Calcutta. We, therefore, recommend that the
ions Court be given exclusive and the ordinary original

h Report, Vol UW. 9. 1201.

High
original
tion,

Present

in Calcutta,

1.0७

dation
Report.

Courts?
iurisdic-

position

हर Commis-
sion’s recommen-

in

14th


Law = Commis-
sion’s  recom-
mendation—37th
Report,

Earlier recom.
mendation pre-
ferred.

Section 28 and
29 combined and
revised,

Courts by which
offences are
triable.

30

criminal jurisdiction of the High Court be abolished. This will
result in a substantial saving of the judge time in the High Court.

3.4. In the 37th Report, however, the Law Commission took
a different view’. They thought it was better to have justice from
the court of superior jurisdiction than from a court of interior
jurisdiction and where justice from a superior court was avail-
able under the existing law (as in Calcutta}, strong reasons
should be needed to disturb the jaw. They further pointed out
that the judgment of the High Court on the original side _had
enriched not only our civil law but also our criminal law. They
thought that there were cogent reasons for not disturbing the
existing position and that it would be too big a price to pay for

uniformity.

3.5. We have again considered the matter and come to _ the
conclusion that the earlier recommendation made by the Law
Commission in its 14th Report is definitely to be preferred. We
were struck by the fact that original trials in the Calcutta High
Court are held up for an_unduly long time as compared to trials
before the City Sessions Court. Apart from that fact, we are un-
able to see any reason for treating a small part of the city of
Caleutta on a different footing from the rest of the country, There
can hardly be any doubt that the City Sessions Court at Calcutta
is as competent to deal with murder, dacoity, forgery and account
falsification cases as the Sessions Court sitting and functioning in
Alipore. The iransfer of this work from the Calcutta High Court
to the City Sessions Court would relieve the former of a con-
siderable work load which should be welcome in the present state
of heavy arrears in that High Court. We therefore_recommend
that this vestigial jurisdiction of the Calcutta High Court should
be abolished and the City Sessions Court should have the same
complete jurisdiction with regard to criminal cases as all other
Courts of Session in the country.

3.6. This proposal does not require the deletion of the refe-
rences to High Courts in sections 28 and 29 of the Code since
these will continue to be relevant for the extremely rare, but
possible, exercise of the extraordinary original criminal jurisdic.
tion vested in them. We. however, recommend that the two sec-
tions may be combined and formally re-drafted as follows :--

“28. Subject to the other provisions of this Code,—

(a) any offence under the Indian Penal Code may be
tried by the High Court or by the Court of Session
or by any other Court by which such offence is
shown in the Second Schedule to be triable; and

(0) any offence under anv other law shall, when any
Court is mentioned in this behalf in such law. be
tried by such Court, and when no Court is so men-
tioned, it may be tried by the High Court or by any
Court by which such offence is shown in the Second
Schedule to be triable.”

137th Report, para. 145,



31

The jjlustration to the existing section 28 may be omitted in
view of our proposal to do away with commitment proceedings
and, even otherwise, as not being very necessary for elucidating
the section.

3.7. In the previous Report, various suggestions were COR-
sidered in regard to section 36, such as, whether it should be re-
tained at all, whether it should be modified by increasing or re-
ducing the range of offences triable by Magistrates empowered
under the section, whether it would not be preferable to have all
the fesser Sessions cascs tricd by Assistant Sessions Judges ins-
tead of such Magistrates, ctc. Finally, however, the Report re-
commended that the section should be retained with one or two
mincr amendments leaving the position flexible.

3.8, It appears that only in’ four States, viz. Punjab,
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir, Magistrates
have been empowered under section 30 and even in these States,
except Jammu & Kashmir, the number so empowered is vCrY
small, There are four such Magistrates in Punjab, three in
Haryana and only one in Madhva Pradesh. Five Presidency
Magistrates have been empowered under section 30 in Bombay,
but none in Calcutta, Madras or Ahmedabad.

3.9. The object of the section is. of course, to reduce the
volume of work before Courts of Session and to 2० the less im-
portant sessions cases disposed of more expeditiously by ex-
perienced Magistrates. We have recommended in the previous
chapter that there should be a Chief Judicial Magistrate for each
district. He would naturally be a senior and experienced Magis-
trate who could be safely entrusted with the powcr to impose
punistiment up to seven vears’ imprisonment. In the hierarchy of
Judges and Magistrates in a district, the Chief Judicial Magistrate
would normally bold the same rank as an Assistant Sessions Judge
and be equally competent from the professional point of view.
‘After the separation of the executive from the judiciary, there
would not be any objection to such a Magistrate trying serious
cases and awarding sentences up to seven years simply because he
is designated a Magistrate. It is further more desirable that, in
addition to the administrative control and supervision which he
would be expected to exercise over other Magistrates in the
district, he should also be made responsible for the trial of tm-
portant criminal cases. The vesting of the Chief Judicial Magis-
trate in cach district (and of the Chief Mctropolitan Magistrate
in each metropolitan arca) with enhanced powers of punishment
will give the necessary relief to the Sessions Courts and will, in
our opinion, be advantageous from every point of view. Tf in
any metropolitan arca or other large district the number of cases
which ought to be tried by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate
or the Chief Judicial Magistrate is large. one or more Additional
Chief Metropolitan Magistrates or Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrates may be appointed? and investeds by the High C
with the power ta impose a sentence up to seven years’ IMmprison-
ment."

137th Report, para. 151.
2Section 11, above.
RSection 16, above.
4 Section 32, below.

Section 30 re-
commendation in
the previous Re-
port.

Few Magistrates
empowered under
the section.

Chief Judciat
Magistrates to
have enhanced
powers of punishy
ment,


Retention of Sec-
tion 30 not neces-
sary in view of
revised Second
Schedule.

Section 31.

Sections 32 and
34 combined and
revised,

Sentences which
Magistrates may
Pass,

32

3.10. It is, however, unnecessary to retain section 30 in its
present form or in a modified form. We propose to revise the
Second Schedule drastically, enlarging the number of offences
triable by Magistrates of the first class and pro tanto reducing,
the number of offences triable exclusively by the Court of
Session. Broadly speaking, offences punishable with imprisoa-
ment for 7 years or less will be within the jurisdiction of Magis-
trates. Offences in respect of which only the Court of Session
is mentioned in the Second Schedule as revised will al be offences
which, by reason of their nature, should be tried only by that
Court. Even where the punishment does not exceed 7 years’
imprisonment as is tae case with e few of these offences’, they
should be triable only by the Court of Session and it is not neces-
sary to confer a special jurisdiction on the Chief Judicial Magis-
trate to try such offences, Some offences triable by a Magistrate
of the first class under the Second Schedule are punishable with
more than 7 years’ imprisonment. The Chief Judicial Magistrates,
being himself a Magistrate of the First Class, will be competent
to try all these offences. A provision on the lines of section 30
empowering him to try as a magistrate al} offences not punish-
able with death or imprisonment for life or with imprisonment
for a term exceeding seven years is therefore not required.
Section 30 is accordingly proposed to be omitted

3.11. No change is required in section 31,

3.12. Section 32 and 34 189 down the maximum sentences
which Magistrates of different categories may pass. In view of
the omission of section 30 proposed above, it would be desirable
to combine the two sections. We have in the previous chapter
recommended the abolition of third class Magistrates. When
the separation of the executive from the judiciary is fully effect-
ed. a great majority of Magistrates will be legally qualified and
trained members of the judiciary who can be entrusted with
somewhat higher sentencing powers than they now have under
section 32. We propose that a Magistrate of the second class
may pass a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding one year or
of fine not exceeding rupecs one thousand or both. Similarly, the
powers of a Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Magistrate of the
first class may be enhanced to three years as respects imprison-
ment and rupecs five thousand as respects fine. The revised
section 32 may be as follows :—

*32. (1) A Chief Judicial Magistrate may pass any sen-
tence authorised by law except a sentence of death or of im-
prisonment for Jife or of imprisonment for a term exceeding,
seven years.

(2) A Magistrate of the first class may pass a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not excecding three years, including
such solitary confinement as is authorised by law, or of fine
not exceeding five thousand rupees, or of both.

हि (3) A Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, includiog
such solitary confinement as is authorised by law, or of fine
not exceeding one thousand rupees, or of both.”

‘Sections 124. 201. 211. 234, 308, 376, 402. .
502(a) of the Indian Penal Code. 2. 4896. 30009) and


33

3.13. Sections 33 and 35 de not require any change of sub-
stance.

3.14. Section 36 describes what are calicd the ordinary
powers of District Magistrates. Sub-divisional Magistrates and
Magistrates of the first, second and third class. These powers
which accrue to these different categories of Magistrates directly
from the provisions of the Code are catalogued in five different
parts of the Third Schedule. Similarly, the Fourth Schedule sets
out in a sizeable chart, the additional powers with which a Sub-
divisional Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first, second or third
class may be invested by the State Goveroment or by the District
Magistrate, as provided in particular sections of the Code. While
these two Schedules micht have had some utility in the past for
reference purposes, they are, from the statutory point of vicw,
an unnecessary duplication. The nature and extent of the ordi-
nary powers or of the additional powers have in every case to
be ascertained from the particular section of the Code and the
orders of the appropriate authority empowering the Magistrates
either individually or as a class. There appears to be no point in
maintaining sections 36 and 37 and carefully revising the Third
and the Fourth Schedules after taking into account all the changes
which are being proposed in the relevant sections and in the cate-
gories of Magistrates. We consider that these two scctions and
Schedules, and consequentially section 38 also, should be
omitted.

3.15. In the last three sections of this Chapter which deal
with the conferment, continuance and cancellation of powers, a
reference to the High Court will have to be made in addition to
the reference to the State Government, since in many places the
High Court is being made the authority for conferring powers in
judicial matters, Similarly, sud-section (2) of section 41, should
be amended to include the Chief Judicial Magistrate besides the
District Magistrate.”

ANNEXURE
(As proposed to be revised)
CHAPTER गा
Powers of Courts
28. Subject to the other provisions of this Code,—

(a) any offence under the Indian Penal Code may be tried
by the High Court or by the Court of Sessions or by any other
Court by which such offence is shown in the Second Schedule to
be triable; and

(0) any offence under any other law shall, when any Court
is mentioned in this behalf in such law, be tried by such Court,
and when ni Court is so mentioned, it may be tried by the High
Ciurt or by any Court by which such offence is shown in the
Second Shedule to be triable.

29B. Any offence not punishable with death or imprisonment
for life, committed by 209 person who at the date when he

Sections 33 and
35.

Sections 36 to 38
and 3rd and 4th
Schedules omis-
sion tecommend-
ed.

Section 39 to 41.

Courts by which
offences are tria~
able,

Jurisdiction in
the case of juveni+
tes.


34

appears or is brought before the Court is under the age of fifteen
years, may be tried—
(3) by a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial
Magistrate, or
(0) by a Metropolitan Magistrate or Magistrate of the
first class specially empowered under sub-section (1)
of section 8 of the Reformatory Schools Act, 1897,
or under other similar law providing for the custody,
trial or punishment of youthful offenders.

Jurisdiction of 30, Notwithstanding anything contained in section 28, a Chief
Chief Magis- Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate may try all

trates. offences not punishable with death or with imprisonment for life
or with imprisonment exceeding seven years.
Sentence — which 31. (1) A High Court may pass any sentence authorised by

High Courts and jaw.
Sessions Judges

may pass. (2) A Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass

any sentence authorised by law; but any sentence of death passed
by him shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court.

(3) An Assistant Sessions Judge may pass any sentence
authorised by law except a sentence of death or of imprisonment
for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding ten years.

Sentences ६ which 32. (1) A Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial

Magistrates’ may Magistrate may pass any sentence authorised by law except a

pass, sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment
for a term exceeding seven years.

(2) A Metropolitan Magistrate or Magistrate of the first
class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceed-
ing three years, including such solitary confinement as is autho-
tised by law, or of fine not exceeding five thousand rupees, or of

oth.

(3) A Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, including such
solitary confinement as is authorised by law, or of fine not exceed-
ing one thousand rupees, or of both.

Sentence of im- 33. (1) A Magistrate may award such term of imprisonment

risonment in de- jn defauit of payment of fine as is authorised by law :

Riuit of fine,

Provided that the term—

(a) is not in excess of the Magistrate's powers under
section 32; and

(b) where imprisonment has been awarded as part of
the substantive sentence, shall not exceed one-fourth
of the term of imprisonment which the Magistrate
is competent to inflict as punishment for the offence
otherwise than as imprisonment in default of pay-
ment of the fine.

_ (2) The imprisonment awarded under this section may be
in addition to a substantive sentence of imprisonment for the
maximum term awardable by the Magistrate under section 32.

34. (Omitted).


35

पु When a person is convicted at one trial of two or
more aflenees the tourt may, subject to the provisions of sec-
tion 71 of the Indian Penai Code, sentence him for such offences,
to the several punishments prescribed therefor which such Court
is competent to inflict; such punishments when consisting of im-
prisonment to commence the one after the expiration of the
other in such order as the Court may direct, unless the Court
directs that such punishments shall run concurrently.

(2) In the case of consecutive sentences, it shall not be neces-
sary for the Court, by reason only of the aggregate punishment

for the several offences being in excess of the punishment which

it is competent to inflict on conviction ‘of a single offence to send
the offender for trial before a higher Court :

Provided that—

(a) in no case shal such person be sentenced to imprison-
ment for a longer period than fourteen years; and

(b) the ageregate punishment shall not. exceed twice the
amount of punishment which the Court is competent
to inflict for a single offence.

(3) For the purpose of appeal by 8 convicted person, the
aggregate of consecutive sentence passed against him under this
section shall be deemed to be a single sentence.

36, 37, 38, (Omitted).

39. (1) In conferring powers under this Code, the High
Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may, by
order, empower persons specially by name or in virtue of their
office. or classes of officials generally by their official titles.

५. _ (2) Every such order shall take effect from the date on which
it is communicated to the person so empowered.

40, Whenever any person holding an office in the service of
Government who has been invested by the High Court or the
State Government with any powers under this Code throughout
any local area is appointed to an equal or higher office of the
same nature within a like local acca under the same State Gov-
ernment, he shall, unless the High Court or the State Govern-
ment, as the case may be, otherwise directs or has otherwise
directed, exercise the same powers in the local area in which he
is so appointed.

41. (1) The High Court or the State Government, as_ the
case may be, may withdraw all or any of the powers conferred

under this Code on any person by it or by any officer subordinate
0 it.

(2) Any powers conferred by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or
by the District Magistrate may be withdrawn by him.

Sentence in cases
of conviction of
several offences at

one trial,

Mode of confer-

ring powers,

Powers of officers

appointed,

Withdrawal
powers.

of


Previous Reports.

Section 42.

Section 44.

Section 45,

Amendments re-
commended.

CHAPTER IV

AID AND INFORMATION TO THE MAGISTRATES
AND THE POLICE

4.1. In this short chapter which consists of only four sections,
no major changes of substance were recommended in the previous
Report. The Law Commission in its 33rd Report considered
@ suggestion to insert a provision in this chapter under which a
duty would be cast on public servants to give information about
the commission of offences under sections 161 to 165A of the
Indian Panel Code and section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption
Act. 1947, but advised against the proposed measure.

4.2. The words “whether within or without the presidency
towns” may be omitted from section 42 as being superfluous.

4.3. Under section 44, every person aware of the commis-
sion of, or of the intention to commit, certain specified offences
is bound to give information to the nearest magistrate or police
officer. Amongst the sections mentioned at present are sections
435 and 436 of the Indian Penal Code, relating to mischief by
fire. With the object of encouraging the detection of similar
offences in respect of roads, bridges, embankments, light-houses,
vessels ctc., the previous Report! recommended the addition of
sections 431 to 434 and 437 to 439 of the Indian Penal Code.
We agree with this recommendation. In this section also the
words “whether within or withouot the presidency towns” are
superfluous and may be omitted.

4.4. While in the main paragraph of section 45(1), certain
words were added in 1955 to cover members of village pancha-
yats, consequential amendment was not made in clause (a) of the
section, A recommendation to make this amendment was made
in the previors Report.2

4.5. The following amendments may. accordingly. be made
in this chapter—

(1) In section 42, the words “whether within or without the
presidency towns” shall be omitted;

(2) In sub-section (1) of section 44,—

(i) the words “whether within or without the presidency
towns” shall be omitted; and

(i) for the figures “435, 436”, the figures and words “431
to 439”, shall be substituted; and

(3) In section 45, sub-section (1), clause (a), after the words
“or police-officer”, the words “or of the panchayat of which he is
a member” shall be inserted.

137th Report, para. 176 (v).
237th Report, para. 180.


CHAPTER V
ARREST, ESCAPE AND RETAKING

5.1. Chapter V is divided into two parts, patt A deating with
“arrest generally” and part B with “arrest without warrant”. In
regard to part A consisting of sections 46 to 53, no amendments
have been suggested in the previous Report; But the Commission
considered? at length the question as to how far the physical
examination of the arrested person is legally and constitutionally
permissible and what provision, if any, should be made in the
Code for this purpose. It came to the conclusion that a provi-
sion on the subject was necded and recommended a new section
authorizing, in certain circumstances and subject to certain safe-
guards, the examination of the person of the accused by a quali-
fied medical practitioner. We agree that such a provision is
nece:sary for effective investigation and will not offend against
article 20(3) of the Constitution. A new section S3A may be
inserted after section 53 as follows :

“53A. (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of
committing an offence of such a nature and alleged to have
been committed under such circumstances that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that an cxamination of his
person will afford evidence as to the commission of the
offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner
acting at the request of a police officer not below the rank
of sub-inspector, and for any person acting in good faith in
his aid and under his direction, to make such an cxumination
of the person arrested as is reasonably necessary in order
to ascertain the facts which may afford such evidence, and
to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.

(2) Whenever the person of a woman is to be examined
under this section, the examination shall be made only by.
or under the supervision of, a female registered medical
practitioner.”

5.2. In part B of this chapter the previous Report recom-
mended a few amendments and two new provisions to which we
shall briefly refer. In regard to section 54(1). clause ninthly,
there has been a sharp controversy as to whether the “requisition”
received from the other police-officer must be in writing before
it can be acted upon, We agree that it should be set at rest.
The clause should refer to “any person for whose arrest any
regu: . whether written or oral, has been received from
another police officer.”

5.3. Two minor amendments are proposed in section 55.
First, in clause (a) of sub-section (1), the reference should be
to “any person within the limits of such station who is found
takine precautions to conceal his presence under circumstances
etc.”

237th Report, para, 183 and Appendix 6.

Sections 46 to 53.
—Physical exami-
nation of arres~
ted person.

Examination of
person by medical
Practitioner,

Section 54

Section 55.


Section 56,

Section 57.

Section 59.

38

Secondly, in clause (c), the phrase “in fear for injury” should be
replaced by “in fear of injury”.

5.4. For the avoidance of any controversy, it is proposed to
insert a sub-section (1A) in section 56 reading :——

“(JA) Nothing in sub-section (1) shail affect the power
of a police-officer to arrest 4 person under section 54.”

5.5. Where a person committing oF accused of committing 3
non-cognizabie offence refuses, on mand by a police officer, to
give his name and residence, or gives a false name or residence,
he can be arrested by the police officer, under sec-
tion 57(1). Under section 57(2), when the true name
and residence is ascertained such person is to be
teleased on his executing a bond to appear before a magis~
teate if so required. In the previous Report, the words “having
jurisdiction” were proposed to be added aiter the words “a
‘magistrate’, (following the Bombay and Punjab amendments).
We are, however, of the view that this amendment is unnecessary.
जा strictly interpreted, it would throw upon the police officer the
burden of finding out which magistrate would have jurisdiction
to deal with the case and entering the name of that magistrate
jn the bond, which in the circumstances would be quite impractic-

able.

5.6. Section 59 deals with the right of a private person to
arrest any person who “in his view” commits a non-bailable and
cognizable offence. Two points pertaining to this section were
considered in the previous Report. ‘The first point? was whether
it is necessary to replace the words “in his view” by the words
“in his sight” or by the words “in bis presence”. The case law
on the subject was examined, but 1६ was considered unnecessary
to make any change. The matter was raised again before us, and
it was stressed that a verbal alteration was fesirable, since the
word “view” might also mean “opinion”. As this point has pro-
voked considerable discussion,> we think that the opportunity may
be taken to clarify it. Both in section 57 and in section 64, the
words “in his presence”, are used to express the same idea. We
propose that the words “in his presence” may be substituted for
the words “in his view” in section 59(1) also. The second pointt
was that the section should expressly enable the private person
not only to arrest the offender himself, but also “to cause him
to be arrested.” Sub-section (1) of section 59 may accordingly
be amended to read as follows :—

“(1) Any private person may arrest or cause to be
arrested any person who in his presence commits a non-bail-
able and cognizable offence, or any proclaimed offender, and,
without unnecessary delay, shall make over or cause to
made over any person So arrested to a police-officer, or in
the absence of a police-officer, take such person or cause him
to be taken in custody to the nearest police-station.””

137th Report, para. 198.
237th Report, para. 20060).
३ 566 Nazir v. Rex. ALR. 1951, All, 3 (Full Bench).

437th Report, para. 20001).


39

5.7. The previous Report? recommended the insertion of two New Sections 5%
new sections after sections 59 as follows :-—

“9A. Every police officer or'éther person arresting apy Person arrested to
person without warrant shall communicate to him full parti- be informed ee
culars of thé offence for Which he is-atrested or other grounds &0Unss of ar
for such arrest. 7

B. ‘Where a_ police-officet ~ arrests: | Rithout warrant any Police-officer to
person other than a person accused’ of a” non-bailable. inform | एटब
“offence, he shalt inform the’ person’ ‘grrested’ that’ hé 18 हेड of righ
entitled to be released on did’ that fe ‘may arrange ‘for "
sureties’ to offer ‘bail op his behalf? “~~ है

"5.8. In section 61, the previous Report recommended? a एटरैडॉ Section 61.
change in the- opening part making it' read “No person who has’
been arrested without warrant shall be detained in ‘custody fort
larger period ete.” ‘On recohsiddration we @o not think: that this:
change from a clear and mandatory direction to the police-officet
making the arrest which is in conformity with article 22(2) of the’
Constitution is necessary or even desirable.

137th Report, paras, 201 and 202, 316 .ereq oq ATE
237th Report, para. 204, wold OLDS of FS cored 5७०१


Introductory.

Section 68.

Section 69,

CHAPTER VI
PROCESSES FO COMPEL APPEARANCE

6.1. It is a standing complaint that there is a great deal of
avoidable delay in the service of summonses and that the execu-
tion of coercive processes is often unsatisfactory. improvements
in this regard can only be effected by administrative action and
there is little that can be achieved by amendment of the law.
Most of the changes recommended in Chapter VI by the previous
Report are of a formal character. Reference should however be
made to one important recommendation regarding the service of
summonses to witnesses by registered post for which the Commis-
sion has proposed a new section. The other changes proposed
in this Chapter relate to matters of detail and are briefly review-
ed below.

6.2, In sub-section (1) of section 68, an addition is suggested!
to bring it into line with section 75 in respect of summonses issued
by a Bench of Magistrates. The sub-section will read :—

+(1) Every summons issued by a Court under this Code
shall be in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding
officer of such Court (or, in the case of a Bench of Magis-
trates, by any Member of such Bench) or by such other offi-
cer as the High Court may, from time to time, by rule direct,
and shall beat the seal of the Court.”

The previous Report has recommended the addition of a sub-
section (4) to the effect that “nothing in this section shall affect
the provisions of section 174A", which is the new section propos-
ed for service of summons by post. Since other modes of service
ate provided for in detail also in sections 69 to 74, we do not
think it will be desirable to include such a sub-section only in
section 68. Since issue of summons by post is to be in addition
to, and not in lieu of, any other mode of service adopted by the
Court in the particular case there is really nothing in section
68(2) or in the other sections to affect the new section. It would
be sufficient to say expressly in section 74A that its provisions
operate notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding
sections.

6.3. No change was recommended in section 69 in the previous
Report. With reference to sub-section (3), however, it was noted
that the procedure to be followed after service on a body cor-
porate pertained to the chapter on general provisions in inquiries
and trials. This subject is considered? in detail under Chapter
XXIV but it may be noted here that societies registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860, although not formally in-
corporated, possess some of the attributes of a corporation and
it is desirable that such societies should be treated on a par with
corporation in criminal proceedings. While section 69 deals with

137th Report, pare. 216.
® See paras, 24.1 te 24.10 below.

a


41

service of summonses on individuals and incorporated companies,
it is silent as to service of summonses on registered societies. ‘To
remove this lacuna, it is desirable to add a sub-section (4) ४०
section 69 reading as follows :--

“(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall apply to a
societies registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860, as they apply to an incorporated company.”

6.4. In regard to section 70, the previous Report has recom~
mended! that the special provision regarding service of summons
oa a person in a presidency town through a servant residing with
him should be omitted, and instead, an explanation should be
added that a servant is not a member of the family of the person
to be summoned within the meaning of this section, whether it be
in a presidency town or outside. This section will accordingly
be amended to read as follows :—

“70, Where the person summoned cannot by the exer
cise of due diligence be found, the summons may be served
by leaving one of the duplicate for him with some adult male
member of his family residing with him; and the person with
whom the summons is so left shall, if 90 required by the
serving officer, sign an receipt therefor on the back of the
other duplicate.

Explanation.2—-A servant is not a member of the family
within the meaning of this section.”

6.5. As regards section 71, it is recommended® in the previous
Report that it should be amended to bring it into line with the
corresponding provision in the Code of Civil Procedure. For the
words “and thereupon the summons shail be deemed to have been
daly served” there should be substituted the following words! :—

“and the Court, after making such inquiries as it thinks
fit, may either declare that the summons has been duly served
or order fresh service in such manner as it considers proper.”

6.6. We bave already referred* to the recommendation made
im the previous Report for the insertion of a new, section relating
to service of summons on a witness by post. This section may
be as follows :---

“74७. (1) Notwithstanding anythin, bg contained in the
preceding sections of this Chapter, a issuing a sum-
mons to a witness under any of the said sections may, in
addition to and simultaneously with the issue of such sum-
mons, direct a copy of the summons to be served by regis-
tered post addressed to the witness at the place wh ere he
ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works

for gain.

137th Report, para. 218.

2 See Order 5. Rule 15. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
€37th Report, para. 219. पु
4566 Order 5. Rule 19, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. -
8 See paras, 6.1 and 62 above. i t

Section 70.

Service when

Person
cannot be found.

Section 71.

Service of sumr
mons of witness
by post.


Section 77.

Section 78.

Section 87.

42

a 2 Whee 25 eokdoniad gest gerporting 40176 sigaed by pote
ile 8p srdlusemenegumporting to de-matic कक
employes that the witness sefused:to take ‘deli pecy has: beow re:
ceived, the Court issuing the summons:niinf declare that the sum
mons has been duly served.1” .

4.7. In séction 77, the apecal provision उद्धव to, Presidency
Magistrates will; have to. he, omitted. Sub-eectont ६) may be
revised to read as foil

“() A iwartant ‘oF attlst shall ordinarity be. directed, to
one 6 more’ pobcelbice fs; but ‘the Court issaing suck “2
> warrant mdy, ‘Eetijediate executior is necessary yates 0
immediately available, direct it to any voter

police-officér रू i
person ‘or persons, anid
the same.” 3 ©:

such Person or persons shall execiit ;
हु vi
6.8. Section 78 at present confers a power on the District
Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate to issue a special of
“watrant to a land-hokdet;fatther or manager of land within his
district or snb-divistén’ fr ‘the Btrest of an escaped convict, pro-
clakaed ‘offender OF ipersgn! Who ‘has ‘been accused of a non-bail-
able offeites and-who Pee ape 4 pursuit”. Although the power is
infveqdently ‘oxercised, pears to be 16 objection to con-
ferring it on dif Magistrates of the first class and all Executive
Magistrates? It is not very clear whether the two clauses “who
has been accused of a non-bailable offence and who has eluded
pursuit” are inténded to oyatty ‘only persons other than escaped
convicts and proclaimed offeliders. "The words “cluded Pursuit”
are also not very apt in, the context. It is accordingly proposed
that’ this sub-section thay. De. reviged as follows.:-— 1
“78. (BA M ag Strath of the first class ‘or an’ Executive’
Magistrate may) ditettdy oRumust to any’ lahd-Holder, f ante

Of manager of Tend ‘withid iy Joeal Suttebiction for fhe
of any esca| Vict oF. i offender oh Of any per-
te fon who % Ranke € Table Difence arid 18 evading

* arrede: 07 dea 2 aan

i a .

6.9, In sub-section peste of section 87, which prescribes the
mode: of publisiing kaination ' regarding ant absconding
offender, tthe: previous ९ ‘Yecomnivnded® win’ additiohal!
provision: to the ‘effedt’ that™ The ‘Court tnay ‘also, if it thinks ‘fil an
direct a copy ‘of the Proclamation to be published in-d da pe news-

al

Paper circulating in the, place in which such ,person ordinarily
12९७. ४४७४

6:30. Section 88:62: Withy the ४ 98९01026( Of property of an
absoonding कलश हम Net tie est intion of el: id Objec-
tions maéd. to such} attavhoment and other’ Gonsequieint iat ‘matters.
In'ths-previowi Reports av) fornil sinérdeit 450 hay teen sug-
gested in'sub-sections: (BY,3¢ 6B) "ait 1 6CY.“ Whe eft ४ ‘OF hich
will be to empower the Chief Judicial Magistrate in adfiffer'¢6 the
District Magistrate and Chief Presidency Magistrate mentioned

ig ee ८८

2 Cf. Order Sy rule Sons Colts Se छत Proehatite 1308:

2८1. 37th Report, para, 225, 0६ nse ,2०प३आ थ

837th RepomyYaraygsoerd livid Yo ३७०० 01 slut 2 1:010 ५

*37th Report, paras, 231 233 and उ847? ५.0 brs 1.8 ence 9:25



43

in the sub-section. On reconsidering the matter it appears to us
that the power to endorse an attachment order under sub-section

(2) should be with the Chief J. uaigigl 1031 Magistrate within whose
I district the attached property is situdté, and not with the District
Magistrate of that district. . amen greats to be made in sec-

tion’ 88 may dccordibgly bé A follows S—

“(). In sub-section (2). and in sub-section (6B), for the
words “District Magistrate of Chief Presidency Magistrate”,
~ oe words “Chief पूछ Magistrate” shall be 1fubstituted;
* “(iD In sub-section ), for the, proviso, following, pro-
viso sHall be substituted, or mss oo P
‘Provided that, if it is preferted or made ia the Court of
a Chief Judicial Magistrate, he ney m make it over for
disposal to any Magistrate: shbordiate to him’.”

6.11. As regards séction 91, the: Prefious Report! has recom-
mended the addition of the following words at the end, namely,
“om any other Court to which; the cgs¢. may be transferred for

237th Report, pare. 238.

Section 91.

ae


Section 94(1).

Section 94(3),

Sections 95 and
96.

Section 98(1).

CHAPTER शा
PROCESSES TO COMPEL PRODUCTION OF THINGS

7.1. Section 94 empowers any Court or, in any Place beyond
the limits of the towns of Calcutta and Bombay, any officer iz.
charge of a police-station, to issue a summons for the production
of any document or thing required for the purposes of any inves-
tigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding. The exclusion of the
town of Bombay from the purview of this section, so far as the
Police are concemed, has been removed by a local amendment?
of the section. The exclusion of Calcutta also may be removed
by omitting the words “in any place beyond the limits of the
towns of Calcutta and Bombay” from sub-section (1).

7.2. In the earlier Report? the Commission examined the
effect of section 94 vis-a-vis the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act,
1891, and recommended that a reference to this Act should be
included in sub-section (3) if section 94 so that it may be clear
that the provisions of this Act override the general provisions of
the Code. It also recommended that the Act should be amended
to cover investigations besides inquiries and trials. We agree
with both the recommendation. Sub-section (3) of section 94
of the Code may be amended to read—

“(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed—

(a) to affect sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence
fet 1872, or the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act,
1 » or

(09) to apply to any letter, postcard, telegram or other
documents or any parcel or thing in the custody of
the postal or telegraph authority.”

7.3. No amendment of substance is required in sections 95 and
96, but the references to “Chief Presidency Magistrate” in both
these sections may be replaced by “Chief Judicial Mag istrate”,
which expression ‘will, in a metropolitan area, mean the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate.

7.4. In section 98(1), first paragraph, the words “Presidency
Magistrate” may be omitted, In the fourth Paragraph, power to
issue a search-warrant for obscene objects is conferred only on
the District Magistrate and Sub-divisional Magistrates in a district
and on Presidency Magistrates in a Presidency-town. We see no
objection to the power being conferred on all Judicial Magistrates
of the first class as in the first paragraph, We, therefore, propose
that for the words “or a Presidency Magistrate” in the fourth
Paragraph, the words “or Magistrate of the first class” be sub-
stituted,

Bombay Act 20 af 1956
3370 Report. pared. 242, 243,

ai



45

7.5. In section 98(2), the reference to section 19 of the Sea
Customs Act, 1878, should be changed to section 11 of the
Customs Act, 1962,

7.6. In the earlier Repos rt, the Commission recommended
that newspapers, books and documents containing obscene matter
should also be brought within the scope of section 9986. We
endorse this recommendation. Sub-section (1) of section 99A is,
at present, cumbrously worded and can be shortened by omitting
the description of the offences under the specified sections of the
Indian Penal Code as being redundant. The section may be revis-
ed as follows :—

“99A. (1) Where it appears to the State Government that a
newspaper, book or document, wherever printed, contains any
matter the publication of which is punishable under section 124A,
153A, 292 or 295A of the Indian Penal Code, the State Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, stating the
grounds of its opinion, declare every copy of the issue of the
Rewspaper containing such matter, or, as the case may be, every
copy of such book or document, to be forfeited to Government;
and thereupon—

(a) any police-officer may seize the same wherever found
in India, and

(b) any Magistrate may by warrant authorise any police-
officer not below the rank of sub-inspector to enter
upon and search for the same in any premises where
any copy of such issue or any such book or docu-
tment may be or may be reasonably suspected to be.

(2) In sub-section (1),--

{a) ‘newspaper’ and ‘book’ have the same meanings as
in the Press and Registration of Book Act, 1867;

(&) ‘document’ includes any painting, drawing or photo-
graph or other visible representation.”

7.7. Under section 990, an application under section 99B
to set aside an order of forfeiture made under section 99A has
to be heard and determined by a Special Bench of the High Court
composed of three Judges. As pointed out in the earlier Report,
this will not be possible in the case of the three Judicial Com-
missioners’ Courts which are the High Courts for Goa, Manipur
and Tripura. No practica? difficulty appears to have arisen, per-
haps because no such order was ever passed in these Union
Territories. It seems desirable, however, to restrict the section
to High Courts which have three or more Judges so that the law
does not lay down an impossible procedure for any area. Section
99C may be amended to read :—

“99C. Every such application shall, where the High Court
consists of three or more Judges, be heard and determined
by a Special Bench composed of three Judges.”

137th Report, para. 254.
237th Report, para, 257.

Section 98(2).

Section 99A,

Power to declare *
certain

cations 1 corte
and to iespe
search-1

for the same,

Section 99८.

Hearing by Spe
cial Bench


Section 108;

New section
100A same as
section 552.

जा
20#७३७ compel
retttationr: of

Section 105A.

ie 0 be gat £2| ae i
Bahay ही aet

«7:8. Under section 100, pawen is:confered on. any Presidency
gistrate, Magistrate Of uiveifirst'ciaks: or Subvdivisioual, Magia
trate to issue a warrant to search for a perséa‘wrangfully..con>
fined. It is suggested that, as in section 98, the power may be
conferred on the District Mapistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or
Magistrate of the fiest class.’ 188 latter expression. will: be‘sudl-
cient to ifcitde Met : tes in any metropolicun
area. ° a

7.9. .The analogou 0 conferring powers on a. Pregi-
deney Magistrate or ict Magistrate to Compe! the restoration
of abducted females is tucked away in the last Chapter of the
Code as section 552. We propose that this provision with a
slight modification be added in Chapter VII immediately after

seotion:200, thus+- a 2
“100A. pe n complaint madé on oath of the abdiictiog’ ४:
_  .Unlawfi कप मद woman, or of a female child undet
the age’ of eighteen y gare, for any unlawful purposé, ‘a
District Magisttate, डी Magistrate or Magis-
trate of the first class pay make an order for fe >
diate restorat fet of such woman to her liberty, OF OF १;
female child to her husband, parent, guardian of ofticr
person having the Jawful. charge of such child, and may
compel compliance with such order, using such force as

may be necessary.”

7.19. No changes ap réquired in other sections of this
Chapter. pea tet

‘We, notice tat among the’seall lly miscellaneous provisions col-
lected i thé last CHidptet 0 the * is section 550. The police
power to seize property suspected to be stolen or found in suspi~
cious circumstances is analogous to the powers mentioned in
Chapter. Vil. It would be: appropriate to wansfer section 550
to thidChapter,.and put it after stction 104 as section 104A,

‘7.1L. Section 105Ainprovides fot:sootual:aid bebween “courts
in the territories 10: whickotke Chidecoxtends” on the one hand, and
“courts in ae rh of Jammu and Ka shnir and. courts established
67 continue: the ar ‘of 'the Céntral eriment in am
3868 ‘outside’ ‘the sid coo ४४९७" ond tHe 0167; in the matter oe

stiVing “dbinohoriés 74 nest Warkant§ of artest aid search]
ser 0000 ate i he nase
ABU 1DMIC er hee uo Satis: enist: at-preseon ‘in’ 06% ated

Oufdide’ 16818, there 49: 105 nel 26 'telerto thet. We का ve ु
OGt dsceiston UE section B 07105 688" amtendment tw thee;
Oadle? ४61 thit HOt oflly THE State Ok Taran sod Kaihmis Bat bd
thie Stité of Nabaladd wed? tite “eribhl- areas “within tHe Stite Of
Aaitiee will Be onuislly was Torti the operation: of the Codd,
The following consequential amrni@itients «wilt! te: y thy
pole ay and the tribal areas of
1,’ as Courts ip’ Jatimu and

Mac

1 ee | oa - पु .
“Jn sub-sections (1) "and (2), for the words ‘a in the

___Siate of Jamin and Kashmir or, ३ court established or of Jammu and Kashmir or a court estal

2 See para. 1. 7. P22 sian ,1०१७/ AY



47

continued by the authority of the Central Government
in any area outside the said territories’ the words ‘a court
in any State or area in India outside the said territories”
be substituted.” pot


Introductory.

Section 106(1)
and section 149,
EPC.

CHAPTER Vil

SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD
BEHAVIOUR

8.1. The main sections of this Chapter are sections 106 to
110. They empower Courts and Magistrates to take security
from persons in certain circumstances in order to ensure that
they keep the peace and are of good behaviour for a specified
period. The remaining sections lay down in detail the proce-
dure to be followed by the Magistrates before ordering anyone
to furnish security and the action to be taken after passing such
orders. Security proceedings under section 106 are basicaly
different from those under the other four sections in that the
demand for security under the first section may be made only by
a Court convicting the person of certain types of offences. The
order for executing a bond to keep the peace has to be passed
by the Court at the time of passing sentence on the convicted
person. Proceedings under section 107, 108, 109 or 110, on
the other hand, are independent proceedings initiated either by
the police or by private individuals and partake of some of the
characteristics of a regular trial.

8.2. The scope of section 106(1) has been discussed in
detail in the earlier Report.t Noting the uncertainty that exists
as to how far a person constructively liable under section 149 of
the Indian Penal Code could be ordered to give security under
this section, the Commission suggested the addition of a lengthy
explanation as follows :—

“Where any offence specified in this sub-section is com-
mitted by a member of an unlawful assembly, in prosecution
of the common object of the assembly, or is committed by
@ member of an unlawful assembly and the offence is one
which the member of the assembly knew to be likely to be
committed in prosecution of the common object. of the
assembly, then an order under this section may be passed
against every person who is a member of the assembl y when
the offence is committed, whether or not he has himeelf
committed the offence.”

On a further consideration of this point we think that the simn-
pler and better course would be to omit the exception regard-
ing section 149 of the Indian Penal Code which is now to be
found in section 106(1). The controversy has arisen because
of the specific exception of section 149. If the reference to
section 149 is omitted from section 106, the Court may, no
doubt, in their discretion demand security from a person con-
victed under section 149 whatever be the nature of the offence
committed by the other member or members of the unlawfal
assembly. This slight extension of the scope of section 106'
of the Code will not, in our opinion, be harmful in any way.

237th Report, paras, 279 to 282.

|


42

8.3. Another point on which an amendment was suggested
in the earlier Report! refers to the words “assault or other
offence involving a breach of the peace”. Judicial decisions are
conflicting in regard to what is an offence involving a breach of
the peace. So far as the offence of assault is concerned, we
think that it should be made clear that a person convicted of
the offence could be called upon to furnish security for keeping
the peace and it would not be necessary to inquire whether the
assault was inside a house or in a public place or was otherwise
accompanied by circumstances to show an intended, actual or
likely breach of the peace. Similar considerations should, in
our opinion, apply also to any offente which consists of, or in-
cludes, using criminal force or committing mischief. The latter
appears to be specially desirable in order to check violent
demonstrations involving deliberate destruction of property which
are unfortunately becoming common.

8.4, As to the categories of Courts which may take action,
the section enumerates “a High Court, a Court of Session or the
Court of a Presidency Magistrate, a District Magistrate, a Sub-
divisional Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class”. It should
be quite sufficient to mention a Court of Session and the Court
of a Magistrate of the first class, since District Magistrates and
Sub-divisional Magistrates will not be trying cases and a Magis-
trate of the first class will include a Metropolitan Magistrate.

8.5. Section 106 may be revised as follows :—

“106. (1) When a Court of Session or the Court of a
Magistrate of the first class convicts a person of any of
the offences specified in sub-section (1A) or of abetting
any such offence and is of opinion that it is necessary to
take security from such person for kecping the peace,
the Court may, at the time of passing sentence on such
person, order him to execute a bond, with or without
sureties, for keeping the peace during such period, not
exceeding three years, as it thinks fit.

(1A) The offences referred to in sub-section (1)
are—

(a) any offence punishable under Chapter भा of
the Indian Penal Code, other than an offence
punishable under section 143, 153A or 154
thereof;

(0) any offence which consists of, or includes,
assault or using criminal force or committing
mischief;

(९) any offence of criminal intimidation; and

(d) any other offence which caused, or was intend-
ed or known to be likely to cause, a breach of
the peace.

. (2) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or other-
wise, the bond so executed shall become void.

(3) An order under this section may also be made

by an Appellate Court or by the High it when ex~
ercising its powers of revision.”

137th Report, para. 282.

of the peace’.

Courts mentioned
in section 106(2).

Section 106 re-
vised.


50

Section 107 iseces- 8.6. Sccurity proceedings ‘wider section «407 ty be taker

ee मय by 2 Presidency Magistrate,’ District’ Magittate, ional

tein Magistrate or Magistrate ofthe’ fitst class agaitist ‘aby (pei
who is likely to commit reach’ of the peace or disturb the एलेशार
tranquillity or to ‘do any wrengful act that’ may probably ;
occasion a breach of the peace: or ee turb the public tranquillity.
A private member's Bill! introduced in Parkamment in 1967 ‘
sought to repeal this section atid section 109 on the ground that
these sections “have been imstrhments of oppression in the hands
of the local police”. We: are’ unable to agree with this view.
We understand that most oe the State Governments have exprés®
ed themselves strongly against the proposed repeal of sections
107 and 109. A provisiori of this nature is,’in ovr opinion, very
necessary for maintaining peace and order in any area. हा

Power should be 8.7. In all States where sep sefaration of the judiciary has been

seated in exe introduced in some form or other, powers under this ‘section are

exercisable ‘exclusively by executive magistrates. Jn order to be

effective, proceedings under the section have to be taken urgent-
ly, and as they are immediately concerned with the ‘maintenance .
of peace and order, the functions should, if: ‘our: opinion, be ae
assigned to executive magistrates: We do mot:-hewever, think
it necessary to restrict the power to take action under subsection
(1) to District Magistrates and::Sub-divisional: Magistcates. “A
District Magistrate who is the administrative heat of the district
will not in practice have any time, to.look to. such proceedings.
It is therefore proposed that 819 executive magistrate may be
vested with the power ‘to take’ security proceedings “under this
section. It is not necessary to invest judicial magistrates with
concurrent powers. eh ५ 5 en

Subsections @) 8.8. With this change ia oe ection’ 14): Ce will be no
and 6) ००७ प्र need for the provisions contal 10 47000. (3) and (4)
. which at présent enable a magistrate of the ‘seat of third class

to take action in an emergency, issue a warrant of Arrest for the 3
person proceeded oa ‘inst an nd isend chim to, the -.syb-divisional
magistrate or a magistrate of the first class fot bélhg “dealt with
under sub-section (1). Sub-sections’ (3) 890 (4) ' may be

omitted.
Section 107 re- 8.9. Section 107 may, accatdingly, be revised’ as follows :—
Secutiry for “107. (1) When at Executive Magistrate receives
keeping the peace information that any person is likely-¥6 commit a breach
in other casca. of the peace ‘or disturbithe publit’ tranquillity or to do

any wrongful act that may-probably:occasion a breach

of the peace or disturb the pubfici‘tranquillity and is of

opinion that there: t aufficfent grstoad far proceeding, he

may, in manaex , herei: sates 100५9; 158 su

Person to show cae why he,.s nid ot 66 ordered to *

execute a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the

peace for such period not xceéding. year as the

Magistrate’ thinks fie. . 1६ wo :
(2) Proceedings ‘undér this sec sit

Befors amps Breteatval Maghasnte- Rett fe:

where the brddch lop tha pence ov 'anapanté. i! appre-

hended is within his.*oeel ferlodicdP be tage 918 within

2 Bill No. 41 of 1966 by Shri Madhu 17196 Moa .noash nits €



5a

» नमक jurisdiction a ,person who ig. likely to commit a

U2 breach of the peace or distariy the. public tranguillity or
to do apy weongful act a. afargsaid beyond such, jurisdic-
tion.” : ४, 1 1 : हि

दा rhe a

8.10, Sections 108, 109 and 110 provide for taking security
for good behaviour from péfsotis disseminating seditious matters
of matters amounting to intimidation or defamation of a Judge,
from vagrants and suspected persons, and from habitual offend-
ors, respectively. The question aris¢s.wligther this power which
is now vested in all senior Magistrates, judicial and executive,
should be vested only in Judicial हे Magishcise or in Executive
Magistrates or. concurrently in poth. . The present position in
the States whefe separation of the judiciary from the cxecutive
has been effected to some extent, is not uniform. In the earlier
Report,’ emphasis was laid on the Preventive nature of these
security proceedings and on their vital impact on the mainten-
ance of law and order and the recommendation was to the effect
that the powers under ail the three sections should be vested
exclusively in Executive Magistrates.

8.11. This mattcr was again discussed jn detail before us.
We are of the view that, having’ regard gah the fact that the final
order to be passed in these proceedings ts the liberty of the
Person against whom the proceedings aré instituted and that
sitting of evidence in a judicial manner is required before an
order demanding security can justifiably be passed, it is desir-
able to vest these powers exchisivels in: Judicial Magistrates,
Inquiry under any of these three: sections partakes of the charac-
ter ofa trial, though technically ‘the‘ipetbom against whom the
Proceedings are. taken is not’ an. ‘accused: iperson, there is no
offence 10 be. inguited: into-or tried: and the ordinary rules of
evitiénoe: aid relaxed! to-sothe éxtedt: “All Magistrates of the
first class ‘may, in ‘our opinion, ‘be given powers under these three
sections. At tlie same timd, wé 00:10: think that the powers
under these sections need be vested concurrently in both Judicial
and Executive Magistrates although this is the Position in. some
States at present. Under a statutory scheme of. separation, such
a oes stem is likely to create confusion and even otherwise has

nothing to commend it. _

8.12. Sub-section (1) of section 108 may accordingly be
revised as follows :---

st ..

2 OY .When a Magistzate ha ee cl |
* igtmation tay ‘hese phi किक पी ee OS
; rosa who, within’.or paola Jurisdiction, eather.
or;

y.Or.i writing or in any. offer manner, intemtionally
lisseminates jor attempts 9 कील oe aon the dis-
SOMINALOR Of 0 व जे ey mi ts ४
* Ifa) catty moatioe tbe nputdidationcoé which 18 1 |) व
ah oy, ocabke wader sectiba HBA BESSA OF the: 1 कद
.., Penal Code, or yan
11९ a bart bee. 2 हे ee ये भर $ amounts
£ ia) t apa es a J [2 jaicl
. हि 1879309॥ de:
"ie दीया be ee a Seanetin under

137th Report, para. 286, “ROE cig आ०्कत्न dite F

Secutiry for good
under

bebaviour

sections 108, 109

and 110,

aA

Power to vest

exclusively in

judicial ~ magis-
trates of the first

class.

Section 108
tevised,

“

an

ay


Section 109 re-
vised.

Security for
bebavioar

S

52

and the Magistrate is of opinion that there is sufficient
ground for proceeding, the Magistrate may, in the man-
ner hereinafter provided, require such person to show
cause why he should not be ‘ordered to execute a bond,
with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for such
period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks
fit.”

8.13. As regards section 109, clause (a), the Commission
referred! in the earlier Report to the controversy as to. whether
the person procecded against should be concealing his presence
within the Magistrate’s jurisdiction or whether it is sufficient
if the person, being within Magistrate’s jurisdiction, is taking
precautions to conceal his preseace with a view to committing
भा offence. The following re-draft of the section will make the
intention clear :—

“109, When a Magistrate of the first class receives
information—

vagrants aad sus-
pected persons.

Section 110
amended.

Sections 118 and
1233).

(a) that there is within his local jurisdiction a per-
son taking precautions to conceal his presence
and that there is reason to believe that he is
doing so with a view to committing an offence,
or

(७) that there is within his local jurisdiction a
person who has no ostensible means of subsis-
tence or cannot give a satisfactory account of
himself, the Magistrate may, in the manner
hereinafter provided, require such person to
show cause why he should not be ordered to
execute a bond, with sureties, for his good be-
haviour for such period, not exceeding one
year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.”

8.14. In section 110, the opening paragraph may be amend-
ed as follows :—

“When a Magistrate of the first class receives infor-
mation that there is within his local jurisdiction a person
who—”.

8.15. In regard to sections 118 and 123, we notice that it is
provided in section 367(6) that an order under section 118 or
section 123(3) shall be deemed to be a judgment. The object
of this provision (inserted by the Amendment Act of 1923) is
apparently to ensure that reasons are given separately and in
sufficient detail as to each person proceeded against under this
Chapter. It would, in our opinion, be more’ appropriate to lay
down this requirement (which in practice is observed by Magis-
trates) in section 118 itself by adding a sub-section as follows :—

“(2) Every order made under this section shall con-
tain the point or points for determination, the decision
thereon and the reasons for the decision.”

137th Report, para. 299.


I

$3

Order under section 123(3) are passed by Sessions Judges
who may be expected to give reasons without a saute re tequire-
ment. We do not consider it necessary to add a similar pro-

cial Magistrate, as recommended by the Commission in the
earlier Report Since our scheme visualises a District Magis-
trate in metropolitan areas, we Propose to omit all references to
Chief Presidency Magistrate in section 124.

8.17. In section 125 also, the reference to the Chief Presi-
dency Magistrate may be omitted and the words “not superior
to his Court” may be replaced by the words “other than the
High Court or the Coun of Session”.

8.18. As recommended in the earlier Report,? esction 126
requires to be amended so that the power to discharge sureties
vests in the Court which ordered the bond to be te n. The
section may be revised as follows :-—

“126. (1) Any Surety for the peaceable conduct or
good behaviour of another Person ordered to execute a
bond under this Chapter May at any time apply to the
Court making such order to cancel the bond,

(2) On such application being made, the Court shall
issue a summons or warrant, as it thinks fit, Tequiring the
person for whom such surety is bound, to appear or to
be brought before it,”

8.19. In view of the amendment made in section 126, section
1264 will Tequire @ consequential amendment, viz. the addition
of “or Court” after “Magistrate”.

137th Report, para. 317.
237th Report, para. 321,

Section 124,

Section 125,

Section 126,

Discharge of

Suretics,

Section 126A.


Introductory.

Power to disperse
for executive ma-
gistrates only.

Provisions should
remain in the
Code,

Sections 132 and
132A,

Amendments
proposed

CHAPTER IX =~ af
UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES _

9.1. Sections 127 to 130A deal with the dispersal of unlawful;
assemblies. Powers in this respect are copferred primarily on,.
any Magistrate or Officer in charge of a police-station. When.)
the public security is manifestly endangered and’ when.po Magis-
trate can be communicated with, any commissioned officer of ,
the armed forces may disperse the assembly with the -help of
the forces under his comntand.

9.2. In the earlier Report the question whether powers”
should be with Executive Magistrates or with both Judicial and,
Executive Magistrates was examined and the Commission came
to the conclusion! that it would be better to confine these powers
to Executive Magistrates. We. are also of the same view. पु

9.3. The Commission considered 80 01006 suggestion made”
by the Madras Bar Council that Magistrates should not have j
anything to do with'the dispersal of unlawful assemblies and: ‘it’,
should be left to the’ police and the armed forces to tackle them.
The Commission did not agree with the suggestion and saw no
need to disturb ‘the structure of the Code by putting the provi-
sions in a separate law. fe share this view. sos

9.4. Section 132--clauses (b) and (4)—provides that no
officer acting under section 131 in good faith and no inferior
officer, or soldier, sailor gr. ajmag: in the ;armed forces doing:
any act in obedience to any order which. he was bound to obey,
shall be deemed to have thereby ‘commit 4 ian, Offence. The,
expression “officer” is defined in section 132A as meaning a
person commissioned or gazetted:; Pay as amiOfficer of the
armed forces and inching. @-jenior dommissioged ‘officer, a
warrant officer, @ petty officerrand:.:a ‘Ypn-commiissioned® officer.
Though the expressson: “inferior officer” ‘is not défined, it is fairly
clear that this expression as used in section 132(d), covers all
officers other ‘thaw’ te ‘one eee Conimdnd ‘in’ a certain
situation and जि RAVE to abt in! Obedience fo, that offices orders.
In every arthed force of the! Union, other fe ‘Army, the
Air Force and the Navy, there is a division between’ officers and
men, but the latter may pot strictly come within the description
of “soldier, saitok or: aipmidin’s”’ og टी FertioVe this sya,
lacuna, we propose! that 68656 (A) of section 132 shonld
generally to “officer or member df the’ armed forces” ‘and a”
definition of “member” added in section 132A.

9.5. No other amendments of substance are required in this
Chapter. The following amendments may be carried out :—

(i) In sections 127 to 132, for the word “Magistrate”
wherever it occurs, the words “Executive Magistrate”

be substituted;
oot rege it
237th Report, paras. 323 and 324. ASE eg .noqe® हार ६

2m — mercer

é


55

Gi) In section 127, sub-section (2) be omitted;

(iii) In section 128, the words “whether within or with-
out the presidency towns” be omitted;

(iv) Im section 132, clause (d), for the words “inferior
officer, or soldier, sailor or airman in the armed
forces”, the words “officer or member of the armed
forces” be substituted; and in the proviso, for the
words “soldier, sailor or airman in the armed forces”,
the words “member of the armed forces” shall be
substituted;

(२) In section 132A, the following clause be added,
namely :—

“(c) ‘member’, in relation to armed forces, means
a person in the armed forces other than an
officer.”

M33MofHA/69


Section 133.

Sections 135 to
139-—jury_ provi-
sions unneces-
sary.

CHAPTER X
PUBLIC NUISANCES

10.1. Under section 133, a District Magistrate, a Sub-divi-
sional Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class may take
action for the removal of any such public nuisance as is described
ja the section on receiving a police report or other information
and on taking such evidence (if any) as he thinks fit. In the
earlier Report,! the Commission considered that this function
should be with the Executive Magistrates and further that it
need not be confined to District Magistrates and Sub-divisional
Magistrates. We agree that Judicial Magistrates nced not be
brought in to adjudicate on these matters and to pass orders
for the removal of nuisances and, accordingly, the reference to
a “Magistrate of the first class” in sub-section (1) will have to
be omitted. We, however, consider that instead of empowering
any Executive Magistrate to take action under the section, the
State Government should specially empower an Executive Magis-
trate if and when considered necessary.

In view of the definition? we are proposing for the expres-
sion “police report” which will not be applicable in this context,
it is better to refer to “the report of a police officer” instead of
“a police report”.

The first four lines of section 133(1) may accordingly be re-
vised to read :-—

“(1) When a District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional
Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate specially empower-
ed in this behalf by the State Government, on receiving
the report of a police officer or other information and on
taking such evidence (if any) as he thinks fit.”

Conscquentially, the last paragraph of section 133(1) may be
amended to read :—

“to appear before himself or some other Executive
Magistrate subordinate to him, at a time and place to
be fixed by the order and show cause why the order should
not be made absolute in the manner hereinafter provided.”

10.2. Sections 135 to 139 contemplate the appointment of
a jury consisting of not less than five members who will practi-
cally decide whether the conditional order made by the Magis-
trate under section 133 is reasonable and proper or whether it
should be modified in any way or whether it should be made
absolute. In the earlier Report? the Commission did not agree
with the concurrent suggestion of a State Government and of a
High Court Judge that the provision for the appointment of a
jury in these proceedings is not necessary. The Commission
expressed the view that the function of the jury is to decide

137th Report, para. 33068).
2 See para. 1.27 above.
337th Report, paras. 133, 141.



37

whether the measures directed by the Magistrate are reasonable
afd proper and as the powers given to the Magistrate are of an
exceptional nature, the jury provisions which are intended to
operate as a check on the exercise of the summary and arbitrary
dealing with the right of property may be retained.

On considering the matter further, we are unable to agrec
with this view. We notice that the Committee set up in Uttar
Pradesh for investigating causes of corruption in subordinate
courts stated that, “experience over the years bad shown that
very rarely did a party ask for the appointment of a jury, further
whenever « party did ask for the appointment of a jury, the re-
quest was not made in order to have a proper decision of the
case but was made mainly for the purpose of delaying the pro-
ceedings.” Even in regard to sessions trials, we are proposing
the abolition of the jury system since it has not worked satis-
factorily in practice. A jury of the type provided for in section
138 (the foreman and one-half of the remaining members being
nominated by the Magistrate and the other members by the pre-
son concerned) is, in our opinion, most unlikely to be helpful
in reaching a proper decision. It will be difficult for the Magis-
trate to find person in the locality imbued with a strong civic
sense, and capable of resisting extraneous pressure, to serve as
jutors in such proceedings.

10.3. Sections 135 and 136 may accordingly be revised as
follows :—

“135, The person against whom such order is made
shall—

(a) perform, within the time and in the manner
specified in the order, the act directed thereby;
or

(9) appear in accordance with such order and

show cause against the same . . .

“136. If such person does not perform such act or
appear and show cause . . ., he shall be liable to the
penalty prescribed in that behalf in section 188 of the
indian Penal Code, and the order shall be made abso-
ute.

Sections 138 and 139 which provided for the appoint |
jury and the further procedure aay be omitted. ppointment 0!

10.4. Section 139A lays down the procedure before the
Magistrate when the person against whom a conditional order

Revision of sece
tions 135 and 136
and omission of
section 138 and
139.

Person to whom
order is addressed
to obey or show
cause or claim
jury.

Consequence of
his failing to do
$0.

Section 139A,
should be placed

before section

is made under section 133 denies in a relevant case the exist- 137,

ence of a public right. No amendments of substance are re-
quired in this section, but it should obviously precede section
137 and not come after it. As section 138 is to be omitted, the
following consequential amendments will be required in section

(i) in sub-section (1), omit “or section 138”;

(ii) in sub-section (2) omit “or section 138”, as the
caso may require”; and


Section 137. ree
vised.

Procedure where

he appears to
show cause,

New section for
local investiga-
tion and expert
evidence.

Power of Magis-
trate to direct
local — investiga-
tion and exami-
nation of an ex-
pert.

Section 140 to
143,

(iii) in sub-section (3), omit “ner shall any question
in respect of the existence of any such public right
be {aavired into by any jury appointed under section
1387,

10.5. As pointed out by the Commission in the earlier
Report,’ it has to be made clear in section 137 that the Magis-
trate has the power to modify the conditional order on the basis
of the inquiry made by him and then make it absolute. Section
137 may be revised as follows :

437. (1) If he appears and shows cause against the
order the Magistrate shalt take evidence in the matter as in
3 summons case.

(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the order, either as
originally made or subject to such modification as he considers
necessary, is reasonable and proper, the order shall be made
absolute without modification or, as the case may be, with
such modification.

(3) 16 the Magistrate is not so satisfied, no further pro-
ceedings shall be taken in the case.”

10.6. In the earlier Report?, the Commission bas suggested
an udditional provision enabling the Magistrate to direct local
investigation and the examination of experts. The provision
which should be useful is as follows :—

“137A. (1) The Magistrate may, for the purpose of an
inquiry under this Chapter—

(a) direct a local investigation to be made by such per-

son as he thinks fit; or

(0) summon and examine an expert.

(2) Where the Magistrate directs a local investigation by
any person under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may—

(a) furnish such person with such written instructions as

may seem necessary for his guidance; and

(b) declare by whom the whole or any part of the neces-

sary expenses of the local investigation shall be
paid.

(3) The report of such person may be read as evidence
in the case;

(4) Where the Magistrate summons and examines an
expert under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may direct by
whom the costs of such summoning and examination shall be
paid.”

10.7. The reference to section 139 in section 140(1) and the
whole section 141 will have to be omitted. No amendment is
required in section 142. In section 143, the reference to “any
other Magistrate” may be changed to “any other Executive
Magistrate”.

137th Report, para 339(i).
237th Report, para. 340,



CHAPTER XI

TEMPORARY ORDERS IN URGENT CASES OF NUISANCE
AND APPREHENDED DANGER

11.1. Chapter XI consists of a single, weil-known and fre-
quently used section—section 144. This confers an omnibus
power on senior Magistrates to issue, what the marginal heading
of the section pithily describes as “order absolute at once in
urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger.” The wide
range of situations in which Magistrates may resort to this power
in the public interest will be apparent from a reading of the
second paragraph of sub-section (1). Neither the usefuiness of
the section nor its validity under the Constitution has been
seriously questions. In the earlier Report}, the Commission
proposed only a formal amendment in sub-section (1), an
amendment of substance in sub-section (3) and an additional
sub-section with reference to sub-section (6).

11.2. Sub-section (1) of section 144 now confers power on
“a District Magistrate, a Chief Presidency Magistrate, a Sub-
divisional Magistrate or any other Magistrate, (not being a
Magistrate of third class) specially empowered by the State
Government or the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District
Magistrate to act under this section.” It should, in our opinion,
be quite sufficient to confer power on “a District Magistrate, a
Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate
specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf.”
{t will be recalled that in matropolitan areas also, there will be
Executive Magistrates appointed by the State Government for
performing functions under the Code.

11.3. As regards sub-section (3), the Commission noticed in
the earlier Report? the limitations of the expression “to the public
generally when frequenting or visiting a particular place” and
suggested that there should be a reference to area in addition
to place and a reference to people residing in 2 place or atca in
ad dition to people frequenting or visiting a place or area. In
view of the different opinions expressed in judicial decisions,
gub-scction (3) of section 144 requires to be amplified as

WS :---

“(3) An order under this section may be directed to
a particular individual, or to persons residing in 4 parti-
cular place or area, or to the public generally frequenting
or visiting 4 particular place or area.”

11.4. Under sub-section (6), an order made under section
144 will not remain in force for more than two months “unless,
in cases of danger to human life, health or safety, or a likelihood
of a riot of an affray, the State Government otherwise directs.”
This loosely worded sub-section appears to confer a very wide

137th Report, paras. 353 to 355.
237th Report, para. 354 and Appendix 9.

Introductory.

Section 144(1).

Section 144

Section 144(6).


Redraft sugges
ted.

60

power on the State Government to extend temporary orders made
by Magistrates for an indefinite period in certain cases. The sub-
section has come in for criticism from the constitutional angle
in the High Courts. In the earlier Report’, the Commission,
after discussing these decisions at length, considered it unneces-
sary to lay down any maximum period ior the State Government's
directions, but proposed that persons affected by the order should
be given a right of representation to the State Government.

11.5. We also agree that it is not necessary to specify any
maximum period in sub-section (6), but we propose that it
should be re-drafted as follows and placed immediately after
sub-section (3) :—

“(3A) No order under this section shall remain in force
for more than two months from the making thereof :

Provided that, if the State Government considers it
necessary so to do for preventing danger to human life,
health or safety or for preventing a riot or an affray, the
State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, direct that an order under this section shall remain
in force for such longer period as it may specify.”

The provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5) will then apply to
an order the duration of which has been extended by the State
Government under this proviso, as they apply to the original
order of the Magistrate. There should be no need for a pro-
vision enabling the persons concerned to represent to the State
Government.

No amendments are required in the other sub-sections of
section 144.

237th Report, Appendix 10,


CHAPTER XH
DISPUTES AS TO EMMOVABLE PROPERTY

12.1, Since disputes over land and water, crops and other
produce of land and rights of user in respect of immovable
property often result in breach of the peace, violence
bloodshed, Chapter XII (sections 145 to 148} arms the magis-
tracy with powers to intervene at an incipient stage of the dis-
pute and compel the disputants to have recourse to legal re-
medics. Experience over the years has proved the usfulness
of the provisions contained in this Chapter of the Code.

12.2, At present only District Magistrates, Sub-divisional
Magistrates and Magistrates of the first class are com-
petent to take actin under section 145 or section 147.
In Bombay this power is vested by a local amendment in the
Chief Presidency Magistrate, District Magistrates, Sub-divisional
Magistrates or other Executive Magistrates specially empowered
by the State Government in this behalf. We agree with the re-
commendation of the Commission in the earlier Report! that
Judicial Magistrates need not deal with cases of this type. Since
in the scheme we are proposing, there will be no Executive
Magistrates of the second or third class and metropolitan areas
also will have separate Executive Magistrates, it is proposed
that all Executive Magistrates may be vested with the power
to take action under this Chapter.

12.3. When the Code was amended in 1955, important

changes were made in sub-section (1) and (4) of section 145 ¢

with the object of curtailing the proceedings before the Magis-
trate and expediting the completion of the inquiry as to which
party was in possession of the property. Before 1955 the parties
were only required to put in written statements of their claims
as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute
and it was for the Magistrate to record at the inquiry all such
evidence, oral and documentary, as may be produced by the
parties. After the amendment of 1955, the parties are required
under sub-section (1) to put in such documents or to adduce,
by putting in affidavits, the evidence of such persons as they
zely upon in support of their claims; and under sub-section (4),
the Magistrate is normally expected to complete the inquiry
and reach a conclusion on the basis of these documents and
affidavits. The first proviso to sub-section (4) gives him a
discretion to summon and examine any person whose affidavits
has been put in by a party.

12.4. The revised procedure does not appear to have worked
satisfactorily in practice, It is said that stereotyped affidavits
prepared by lawyers on the same lines as the written statements
are put in by both sides and these do not help the Magistrate
very much in reaching a sound decision. Examination of wit-
nesses under the first proviso cannot in most_cases be avoided
and consequently there is no saving of the Court’s time. The

137th Report, para. 357.

Introductory.

Powers to be exer-
cised by Executive
Magistrates only.

Revised proce-
dure not satisfac-
tory.


Date for counting
period of two
months — under
section 145 (4).

Sub-sections (1)
and (4) revised.

62

main object of the amendment, which is to get the inquiry com~
pleted rapidly, has not been achieved. On principle also, it is
better that the Magistrate is required to decide the important
fact of possession on the basis of oral evidence given belore him
and tested by cross-examination in the presence of parties. We
therefore recommend that the procedure as it existed before
i955 should be restored.

12.5. At the completion of the inquiry under sub-section
(4), it is the duty of the Magistrate to decide whether any, and
if so which, of the parties was at the date of the order made by
him under sub-section (1) in actual possession of the property
which is the subject of dispute. If, however, it appears to the
Magistrate that any party has, within two months next before
the date of this order, been forcibly and wrongfully dispossessed,
he may treat that party as if be had been in possession on the
date of the order. Sometimes it happens that the Magistrate
passes his first order under sub-section (1) some appreciable
time after recciving the police-report or other information about
the dispute with the result that the two months’ limit specified
in the proviso does not assist the party wrongfully dispossessed.
In the earlier Report! the Commission, after examining the case
Jaw on the subject, recommended that the period of two months
should be counted backwards from the date of receipt of the
police-report or other information, instead of the date of making.
the order under sub-section (1) on the basis of that report or
information.

12.6. Sub-sections (1) and (4) of section 145 may accord-
ingly be revised as follows :--

“(1) When an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from
the report of a police officer or upon other information
that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists
concerning any land or water or the boundaries thereof
within his local jurisdiction he shall make an order in
writing, stating the grounds of his being so satisfied, and
requiring the parties concerned in such dispute to attend
his Court in person or by pleader on a specified date and
time and to put in written statements of their respective
claims as to the fact of actual possession of the subject of
dispute.

“(4) The Magistrate shall than, without reference to
the merits or the claims of any of the parties to a right
to possess the subject of dispute, peruse the statements
so put in, hear the parties, receive all such evidence as
may be produced by them, take such further evidenas, if
any, as he thinks necessary, and, if possible, decide whether
any and which of the parties was, at the date of the order
made by him under sub-section (1), in possession of the
subject of dispute :

Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that any
party has been forcibly and wrongfully dispossessed with-
in two months next before the date on which the report of
the police officer or other information was received by the

137th Report. paras. 358 to 362 and 374.


63

Magistrate, or after that datz and before the date of his
order under sub-section (1), he may treat the party so
dispossessed as if that party bad been in pessession on the
date of his order under sub-section {1}.”

12.7. The third proviso to the existing section 145(4) en-
ables the Magistrate to attach the property if he considers the
case to be one of emergency. In the earlier Report! the Com-
mission recommended that it should be made clear that the order
of attachment could be passed at any time after the main order
under sub-section (1) had been passed. It further recom~-
mended two new sub-sections providing for matters consequen-
tial to attachment. We agree that these provisions are neces-
sary but they may be made in one sub-section as follows :-—

“(SA) Jf the Magistrate, at any time after making the
order under sub-section (1), considers the case to be one
of emergency, he may attach the property which is the
subject of dispute, pending his decision under this section,
and make such arrangements as he considers proper for
looking after the property. The Magistrate may, if be
thinks fit, appoint a receiver who, subject to his control,
shall have all the powers of a receiver appointed under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and if in any such
casé the order of the Magistrate under sub-section (1) is
cancelled under sub-section (5), the Magistrate shall with-
draw the attachment and make such consequential or inci-
dental orders as may be just.”

12.8. With reference to sub-section (6) of section 145, the
Commission recommended in the earlier Report? a specific pro-
vision to the cffect that the order made under sub-section (6)
shall be served and published in the manner laid down in sub-
section (3). A sentence to this effect may be added to sub-
section (6).

14 No other amendments of substance are required in section
5.

12.9, Belore 1955. the procedure under section 146 was
short ahd simple. If the Magistrate decided that none of the
parties was in possession, or if he was unable to satisfy himself
as to which party was in possession, then he had the power to
attach the property “until a competent court has determined
the rights of the parties thereto, or the person entiticd to pos-
session thereof’. The amendment of 1955 introduced a novel
scheme, whereunder in such cases, besides attaching the pro-
perty, the Magistrate has to draw up a statement of the facts
of the case and to forward the record of the proceedines to a
competent civil court, for deciding the question of possession.
Further. the Magistrate has to direct the parties to anvear be-
fore a civil court on a date to be fixed by the Magistrate. The
object of this amendment was to shorten the overall time taken
in the criminal proceedings and the subsequent civil proceedings.
The new proccdure was examined in the earlier Report.* and
both theoretical and vractical objections were raised. Theoreti-
cally the procedure was anomalous, since it contemplated a

137th Report. para. 375.
237th Report. para. 387.
337th Report. paras. 392 to 394.

New sub-section
(SA).

Sub-section (6).

Section 146—re-
version to pre-
1955 position re-
commended.


Power 10 attach
subject of dispute.

Section 147—sub-
section (1) re-
vised.

64

reference to a civil court as a part of the proceedings in a crimi-
nai court. The main object of the proceedings under this
Chapter was to take steps for immediately preventing a breach of
the peace, and once those steps were taken, the proceedings in
the criminal court should come to an end. As regards the practi-
cal working of the amendment of 1955, dissatisfaction had been
expressed in several quarters. The earlier Report, therefore,
Tecommended restoration of the former position. We are also of
the same view.

The section may be revised as follows :—

“146. (1) ig the Magistrate decides that none of the
partizs was then in such possession, or is unable to satisfy
himself as to which of them was then in such possession
of the subject of dispute, he may attach it until ४ compe-
tent Court has determined the rights of the parties thereto,
or the person entitled to possession thereof :

Provided that the District Magistrate or the Magistrate
who has attached the subject of dispute may withdraw the
attachment at any time if Jie is satisfied that there is no
longer any likelihood of a breach of the peace in regard
to the subject of dispute.

(2) When the Magistrate attaches the subject of dispute,
he may, if he thinks fit, and if no receiver of property, the
subject of dispute, has been appointed by any Civil Court
appoint a receiver theréof, who, subject to the control of
the Magistrate, shall have all the powers of a receiver
appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 :

Provided that in the event of a receiver of the property,
the subject of dispute, being subsequently appointed by
any Civil Court, the Magistrate—

(a) shall order that the receiver appointed by bim shall
hand over possession to such receiver and shall there-
upon be discharged, and

(b) may make such other consequential or incidental
orders as may be just.”

12.10. Section 147 deals with the power of Magistrates to
intervene in cases where the dispute is in regard to right of
user of any land or water, whether such right 1s claimed as an
easement or otherwise.

Sub-section (1) of section 147 may be revised on the same
lines? as sub-section (1) of section 145 to read as follows :—

“(1) When an Executive Magistrate is satisfied, from
the report of a police officer or other information, that a
dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists regard-
ing any alleged right of user of any land or water...
within Ais local jurisdiction, whether such right be claimed
as an easement of otherwise, he जी] make an order in
writing, stating the grounds of his being so satisfied and
requiring the parties concerned in such dispute to attead

1See para. 22.6 above.


65

his Court in person or by pleader on a specified date and
time and to put in written statements of their respective
claims...

Explanation—The expression “land or water’ has the
meaning given to it in sub-section (2) of section 145.”

12.11. In regard to sub-section (2), there is 8 conflict of
decisions as to the scope of the words “prohibiting any inter-
fereuce with the exercise of such right”. The Commission, after
noting this conflict in the earlier Report,* recommended that the
position should be clarified so as to empower the Court to order
in a proper case, the removal of any obstruction ia the exercise
of any such right. In the proviso to this sub-section, it was
recommended that instead of “three months next beiore the
jnstitution of the inquiry”, it should be “three months next be-
fore the receipt under sub-section (1) of the report of a police
officer or other information.” We agree with both these amend-
ments.

12.12. It was noted in the earlier Report? that there was a
controversy as to whether a proceeding brought under section
145 could be converted into one under section 147, and vice
versa. ‘Lhe Commission considered it desirable to empower the
jstrate to proceed under whichever section be found to be

pplicadle, irrespective of the view taken at the stage of initiat-
ing proceedings. The following new section may be added for this
(purpose :--

“147A. When in any proceedings commenced under
sub-section (1) of section 145 the Magistrate finds that the
dispute is as regards an alleged right of user of land or
water, he may, after recording his reasons, continue with
the proceedings as if they had been commenced under sub-
section (1) of section 147,

and when in any proceedings commenced under sub-
section (1) of section 147 the Magistrate finds that the
dispute should be dealt with under section 145, he may,
alter recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings
as if they bad been commenced under sub-section (1) of
section ”

12.13. In the earlier Report,? the Commission recommended
‘the addition of a reference to the Chief Presidency Magistrate
in section 148(1) on the assumption that in presidency-towns,
the Chief Presidency Magistrate will also function as the Chief
Executive Magistrate. Since in the scheme now proposed for
metropolitan areas, there will be District Magistrates and Sub-
divisional Magistrates as in other districts, no amendment is

required in this section.

137th Report, para. 398.
237th Report, para. 401.
237th Report, para. 402.

Subsection (2)
amended,

New section
147A,

Convertibility of
pr under
section 145 and
147,

Section 3480).


CHAPTER हा
PREVENTIVE ACTION BY THE POLICE

No amendment Chapter XIII (sections 149 to 153) contains provisions em-

necessary. powering the police to take action in various ways to prevent the
commission of cognizable offences and the causing of injury to
any public property, moveable or immovable. Section 153 em-
powers a station house officer to inspect weights and measures,
and if he finds any of them to be false, to seize them,

No changes appear to be necessary in this Chapter.


CHAPTER XIV

INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS
TO INVESTIGATE

14.1, Chapter XIV deals with police investigation in all its
aspects from the moment when the information about the com-
mission of an offence is received at the station-house to the stage
when the police complete the investigation and send a final report
to the Magistrate. A sharp distinction is drawn right at the
beginning of the Chapter between cognizable cases and non-cog-
nigable cases, The latter may be investigated by the police only
on the orders of a Magistrate. ff a person goes to the station-
house with a report about a non-cognizable offence, the police-
officer has to advise him to lodge a complaint before a Magistrate.
If the information indicates the commission of a cognizable offence,
investigation can commence without the orders of a Magistrate,
but the investigation officer has to send a report about it to the
Magistrate. If the offence does not appear to be serious and
if the station-house-officer thinks there is no sufficient ground
for starting an investigation, he need not investigate but, here
again, he bas to send a report to the Magistrate who can direct
the police to investigate, or if the Magistrate thinks fit, hold an
inquiry himsclf.

During investigation, the police-officer has the power to require
the attendance of witnesses before him and to put questions to
them which they are bound to answer. He has also the power
to send any witness he likes before a Magis istrate and have his
statement recorded on oath. The police-officer has the power to
search any place and seize anything material found at the place.
Jn such a case he must prepare on the spot a list of the articles
seized and send a copy of the list to the Magistrate. If as a
result of his investigation the police-officer arrests any person, he
must have that person presented before a Magistrate within
24 hours and thereafter the custody of the arrested person will be
under the control of the Magistrate.

14.2. A noticcable feature of the scheme as outlined above is

that a Magistrate is kept in the picture at all stages of the police #

investigation, but he is not authorised to interfere with the actual
investigation or to direct the police how that investigation is to
be conducted, This demarcation of functions between the police
and the magistracy at the investigation stage has been clearly laid
down by the Privy Council in Khwaja Nazir Ahmed’s case. it
would appear that the power to “direct an investigation” under
section 159 should be resorted to by a Magistrate only when be
found that the police had desisted from investigation on insufli-
cient grounds and felt that further investigation was likely to pro-
duce results. Following the decision of the Privy Council just
cited, it has been held by the Supreme Court? “that the formation

YALR. 1945 PC. 18.

2 Abhinandan Jha v. Dinesh Mishra, (1967) 3 S.C.R, 668, 678.

Scheme of
Chapter.

Function of Ma-
jatrate ie ation
investigation.


Section 154~copy
of first informa-
tion report to be
given to infor-
meant.

Section 155(1
Bo ameadonent
needed,

Case relating to
@ cognizable and
a_non-cognizable

offence, ;

Case cognizable
when it relates to
cognizable — and
non-cognizable
offences,

Sections 157 to
159.

68

of the opinion as to whether or not there is a case to place the
accused for trial is that of the officer-in-charge of the police station
and that opinion determines whether the report (on completion of
investigation) is to be under section 170, being a ‘charge-sheet’ or
under section 169, a ‘final report’.” This arrangement seems to
us to be basically sound and we do not think there is anything to
be gained by giving the Magistrate further powers of supervision
and control over the police during investigation.

14.3. Section 154 regulates the manner of recording the first
information relating to the commission of a cognizabte offence.
‘After the information has been reduced into writing by the station-
house-officer, it has to be read over to the informant and his
signature obtained on it, Under the law however the informant is
not entitled to get a copy of the report then and there. In some
of the States, police rules require a copy of the first information
report to be given to the informant. We consider this a healthy
practice and propose that it should be placed on a statutory basis
by adding the following sub-section to section 154 :—

“(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-
section (1) shall be given forthwith, free of cost, to the
informant.”

14.4. Section 155(1) requires that if the information given to
a police-officer is about a non-cognizable offence, he must enter
the substance of such information in a book and “refer the infor-
mant to the Magistrate”. In the earlier Report,! the Commission
recommended that the words “having jurisdiction” should be add-
ed after the word “Magistrate”. We feel, however, that this addi-
tion is not necessary and the amendment will not be of any
practical assistance to the informant who will, in any event, have
to find out for himself which particular Magistrate has jurisdiction
to deal with his complaint.

14.5. A non-cognizable offence can be investigated by the
police on the orders of a Magistrate, and once such an order is
given a police officer has in that investigation the same powers
as he has while investigating a cognizable offence. Cases often
occur when during the investigation of a cognizable offence it
appears that a non-cognizable offence also has been committed
and the question then arises whether the investigation can proceed
without a Magistrate’s order. The Commission recommended in
the earlier Report? that it should be made clear that the investiga-
tion can proceed in respect of both offences and Suggested adding
an explanation to section 155. We entirely agree with this recom-
mendation, but propose a separate section 156A for this purpose
as being more suitable. The section may be as follows :—~

“156A. Where a case relates to two or more offences of
which at least one is cognizable, the case shall, for the purposes
of section 154, 155 and 156, be deemed to be 4 cognizable
case, notwithstanding that the rest of the offences are none
cognizable.”

14.6. Sections 157, 158 and 159 do not call for any comments
or amendments,

137th Report, para, 413.
237th Report, para. 415.



69

14.63. Under section 160 the investigating police-officer may
require the attendance of witnesses before himself. In the earlier
Report,) the Commission recommended that a witness summoned
by the police should be paid his reasonable expenses. We agree
and propose the addition of the following sub-section :—

“(2) Subject to any rules made by the State Govern-
ment, the reasonable expenses of any person attending in
compliance with an order under sub-section (1) at a place
other than his residence shall be paid to him by the police.

14.7, Sections 161 and 162, dealing with the oral examination
of witnesses by the police, the record to be made of their state-
ments and the use to which it may be put subsequently, form
the crux of this Chapter. They have attracted a variety of com-
ments and a varicty of suggestions. We regret that, in spite of
earnest and prolonged discussion, we have not been able to agree

among ourselves as to how best these sections could be modified
or altered,

Section 161 empowers an investigation officer to examine oral-
ly any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the
case, That person is bound to answer all questions concerning the
case except those which tend to incriminate himself. The investi-
gating officer is permitted, but not obliged, to reduce into writing
any statement made to him; and if he does so, he must make a
separate record of the statement of each witness. Section 162
then says that the recorded statement must not be signed by the
witness, and the statement so recorded cannot be used for any
purpose other than contradicting the person making it if he appears
to give evidence as a prosecution witness,

14.8. In a previous Report,? the Commission expressed the
view that the discretion allowed to a police-officer to record or not
to record the statement of a witness orally examined by him is in
such unrestricted terms that the whole purpose of section 173
(which requires copies of such recorded statements to be given
to the accused) could be defeated by a ne; ligent or a dishonest
Police-officer. It therefore recommended that the police-officer
should be obliged by law to reduce to writing the statement of
every witness whom the prosecution propose to examine at the
trial. This view was accepted in the 37th Report of the Com-
‘mission,’ but its recommendation went further to suggest that the

statement of every witness questioned by the police under section
161 must be recorded.

14.9. It is of course true that the discretion allowed to a police-
officer to record, or not to record, any statement made to him
during investigation is expressed in absolute terms. Such wide
discretion naturally attracts suspicion, We can therefore readily
understand why the previous Reports suggested some limitation
which would help to guide the exercise of this discretion. When,
however, we come to consider the concrete situation with which
the law here seeks to deal, we find that there is for practical

137th Report, nara, 425,

2 14th Report Vol. 2. page 755. para, 47.
*37th Report, para. 437(b).

Section 160,

Sections 161
162—General.

Discretion to re-
cord examination
of witness—Com-
mission’s former
views,

Present view of
Commission that
discretion should
not bo fettered,


Section 161(2)—
witness bound to
answer truly?

70

uEposes no point in imposing a restriction on the judgment of the
Havestigating ‘officer. The reason is this, A police-officer investi-
gating a crime has to question, and then to examine orally, a large
number of persons, many of whom may have no useful informa-
tion to give and much of the information is later found to be
pointless. It would be too great a burden on him if he should be
required by law to reduce into writing every statement made to
him; nor would it serve any purpose apart from distracting atten-
tion from the main task.

It was for this reason, we think, that the Law Commission
suggested, in the carlier Report’, that the statement of only those
persons whom the prosecution proposed to produce at the trial
need be recorded. Even this requirement seems to us to be un-
workable. The investigator does not always know what the result
of his investigation is going to be; nor does he necessarily kaow
who will be produced at the trial. The proposed guide line is not
therefore a helpful guide, and we would hesitate to suggest it
ws such. Our view is that there is no need to place any fetter
on the discretion of the police-officer at the stage of investiga-
tion.

This discretion is, in practice, not capable of being abused,
nor have we heard any complaint that it is being abused. There
has been no lack of compiaint that the record prepared by the
investigating officer is not accurate, but no scrious complaint that
the statements of material witnesses are not recorded. Here again,
we think the reason is simple. A police-officer can, without con-
travening the law, omit to record the statement of every important
witness orally cxamined by him, but such an officer will not, we
think, stay long in the police force. His superior officers will,
in every case, sec to it that his reports are informative enough
for them to judge how the investigation is proceeding. Any appre-
hension, therefore, that because of negligence or dishonesty a
police-officer may misuse his discretion in this connection, does
not appear well-founded in practice, however plausible it may
appear on theoretical considerations. We feel it is better to leave
it to the investigating officer to record only what, in his judg-
ment, is worth recording and leave the rest to departmental ins-
tructions and supervision. The permissive and discretion: pro-
visions now contained is section 161 (“may examine oral ly” in
sub-section (1) and “may reduce into writing” in sub-section (2)]
should not be fettcred down in any way.

14.10. Sub-section (2) of section 161 requires every person
examined by the police-officer to answer every question put to
him. The sub-section, however, avoids saying that the person
examined must answer those questions “truly”. There is, thus,
at that stage, no Jegal obligation to speak the truth 1५ there is
later in Court. The reason for this curious attitude of the law
in this respect was explained by the Sclect Committee in 1898
in these words:

“We have amended that clause by reverting to the law
as it stood under the Codes of 1861 and 1872. Under these
Codes a person examined by a police-officer was bound to
114th Report, Vol. 2, page 755, para, 47.

2 Report of the Select Committee dated 16-2-1898.



72

answer all material questions, but! was not liable to be
prosecuted for giving false evidence in respect of his ans-
wers under sections 193 of the Indian Penal Code. it seems
to us unfair that a man should be liable to be convicted of
giving false evidence on the strength, or by the aid, of a
statement supposed to have been given to 3 police-officer,
but which is not given on oath, which he has not signed and
which he has had no opportunity of verifying. Such state-
ments may be hurriedly taken down as rough notes, as the
police-officer is pot uained in taking evidence, and the notes
are often faired out by another officer. They bear no resem-
biance to depositions and ought to have no weight as such
attached to them. We are aware that there are inconveniences
in abolishing the direct liability for giving false evidence to
the police, but the balance of expediency seems to us to be
in favour of the old Jaw. The provisions of sections 202 and
203, Indian Penal Code, appear to us to afford a sufficient
safeguard against false information.”

The Law Commission dealt with this matter in a previous
Report? and, although feeling that the absence of the word “truly”
virtually suggests that the “version of the witnesses need not be
the true one”, still thought that going back to the position as in
1882 was not wholly desirable as it might lead to pumerous
prosecutions of witnesses for making false statements to the police.
whe same view was accepted by the Commission in the 37th

eport®,

We recognise that a legal obligation to speak the truth carries
with it the liability to punishment if the truth is not spoken.
We think, however, that this is how it should be. If it is neces-
sary to provide that isformation must be sy, pplied by every
person questioned by the police, the law must Bhs require that
the information is not false or misleading. There seems no point
in saying to every citizen in clear terms that he must answer
cvery question put to him by the police but need not tell the
truth.

We are, in this connection, not unmindful of the practical
aspect of the matter. In the Legislature’s mind in 1 698 the
apprehension was that prosecutions for making a false statement
to the police might be numerous and they would be unfair if
based mainly on the police record of the statement, which record
will not have been prepared with great care. We do not know
if this had actually happened during the years 1882 and 1898;
but we have no reason to think that it would happen in 1969.
Prosecutions for giving false evidence in Court are rare enough,
and their successful termination rarer still. The same reasons will
operate more effectively to inhibit prosecutions for making false
statements to the police,

The Delhi Police Commission headed by a retired Chief Jus-
tice has suggested* that the word “trully” should be put back

1See Kassim Ali, (1879) LL.R. 7 Cal. 121 and EL.R. 10 Cal. 405.

"44th Report, Vol. 2. Page 752, para. 44.

337th Report, para. 435 and Appendix Il. -

4 Report of the Delhi Police Commission, (1968), Vol. 1, page 175,
paras, 27-28,


72

in section 161. Similarly, a recent Seminar! on Criminal Law
which, although organised by a wing of the police, was attended _
by a number of judges and jurists from all over the country,
made the same recommendation. We strongly feel that the law
should not be so framed as to give the impression that a person
appearing before a competent authority is free to tell lies. We,
therefore, propose that in section 161(2), the word “truly” be
inserted after the words “bound to answer.”

Section 162 (1)— 14.11, Section 162(1) first lays down the prohibition that “no

seed by पं statement made by any person to a police-officer in the course

witness. of an investigation under this Chapter shail, if reduced into
writing, be signed by the person making it.” In the 14th Re-
port?, the Law Commission recommended that literate witnesses
should be required to sign their statements. In the 37th Report’,
the Commission did not favour such a change. We fecl, as did
the earlier Law Commission, that such a provision would be a
step in the right direction. There is no reason why a witness able
to read the record of bis statement should not sign it in token
of its accuracy and we recommend, therefore, that a witness who
can read his statement as recorded by the police should be re-
quired to sign it.

Section 162(1)— 14.12. The second part of section 162(1) is controversial and

use of statements has been so for a long time‘. It provides that no statement of

in evidence. a witness to the police, or any record thereof whether in a
police-diary or otherwise, or any part of such statement or re-
cord, shall be used for any purpose (save as hereinafter provided)
at any inquiry or trial in respect of the offence under investiga-
tion, but when that witness is called for the prosecution in such
inquiry or trial, any part of the statement if duly proved, may
be used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court,
by the Prosecution, to contradict such wiwess in the manner
provided by section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

It is this provision that is freely used during criminal trials.
A prosecution witness is confronted with his police statement
and if the two are contradictory, the witness is discredited unless
the contradiction is explained. In principle, the procedure is
sound, We have, however, heard complaints that the police
record of a witness’s statement is often inaccurate and that a
dishonest police-officer can write anything he likes, The real
remedy for that, we think, lies in improving the calibre of the
investigating officer. We have heard it said that subordinate
police-officers who investigate most of the cases are universaily
corrupt, and there is little chance of t imp) roving them in this res-
pect. A suggestion has even been le that the police should
be relieved of the task of investigation which should be entrusted
to some other agency®. We can find nothing practical about this
suggestion, Any agency working under conditions similar to the
police will be subject to the same temptations and will develop

1Scminar on Criminat Law and Contemporary Social Change (8th
to 10th May, 1969—New Delhi) Report of Study Group D.

214th Report, Vol. 2, pages 752 to 755, paras. 45 to 47.

837th Report, para. 437(c).

4See 37th Report, Appendix 11 which traces history of section 162.

3 The suggestion was put forth befere us during eur contideration of
the subject by one ef the Members.


33

the same weaknesses. Nor need we despair of any improvement
ia the police force. We should, on the other hand, hope that
with advance of literacy and improvement in the general standard
of living, a public opinion will be created wholly intolerant of
corruption, and with improvement in the working conditions of
the subordinate police, corruption will gradually disappear.

"14.13, Except for the purpose mentioned in the proviso, sec-

tion 162(1) prohibils the use oi a statement made to the police gard

during investigation. Two rival suggestions have been made in
this connection. One is that the ban imposed by section 162
should be removed and the police record made available for all
purposes, subject to the rules in the Evidence Act. In other
words, the suggestion is that the statement should be available
not only for contradicting the witness, but also for corroborating
him'. The rival suggestion is that statements to the police should
be totally unusable ior any purpose and the proviso to section 162
should be deleted?.

It seems to us that there are serious difficulties in the way
of accepting either suggestion and neither offers any substantial
improvement in the existing situation, A total ban on the use of
police statements would deprive the defence of an opportunity
to discover what a particular witness said at the earliest oppor-
tunity. To get over the difficulty, it is suggested that the state-
ment of every “material witness” should be recorded by a Magis-
trate under section 164, and that this statement would be avail-
able to the prosecution as well as defence, It is clear, however,
that the statement before a Magistrate would not be the earliest
statement, but made some time after the witness had been exa-
mined by, and made a statement to, the police. The time lag bet-
ween the two statements may sometimes be considerable and
is liable to be used for improving. upon the first statement. It
seems to us that the statement under section 164 would not be a
good substitute for the statement before the police.

Secondly, the practical difficulties of getting the statement of
every material witness recorded by a Magistrate would be consi-
derab le. A police-officer would have to interrupt his investiga-
tion every time he came across a materiat witness in order to
take him to a magistrate; or else, he would have to wait till the
end of the investigation and produce all the material witnesses
before a magistrate, possibly several days after some of the
witnesses actually appeared before the police. Neither situation
strikes us as Satisfactory . Our courts have steadily discouraged
the use of section 164 for recording statements of some witnesses
during investigation. We doubt if, by making its use comp ul-
sory in ali cases or in a certain class of cases, we wo be
waking any improvement.

The alternative suggestion seems, at first sight, less difficult.
Police statements are, at present, available for contradicting a
witness, and to make them available for corroborating the same
witness seems merely to complete the picture, Actually, how-

2 Seminar on Criminal Law and Contemporary Social Changes. (8th
to 10th May. 1969—-New Dcihi) Report of Study Group D.

* This is linked with the suggestion’ that the statements should be
‘ecorded under 5. 164, See note appended to this Report.

Suggestions re~
ing section
162 considered,


74

ever, there is a material difference between contradiction and
corroboration; and what is good enough for contradicting a wit-
ness is not always good cnough for corroborating him. It is
obvious that if a witness says one thing at one time and another
at another time, it is prima facie good ground for distrusting
him; but if a witness says the same thing every time he is ques-
tioned, the reason for trusting him is not so obvious: many Lars
are consistent, The policy of !aw in permitting a witness to be
contradicted by a police statement and not permitting him to be
corroborated by the same statement is basically sound and sen-
sible, On the other hand, there seems to be considerable risk
(in the existing circumstances) in extending the scope of the
proviso along the suggested lines,

We are, therefore, not attracted by either proposal; and,
apart from the change we have suggested above in regard to the
first part of section 162(1), we are content, like the previous
Law Commission’, to leave the substance of the second part and
proviso uachanged?.

Section 162(1)-- 14.14. Before 1955, the statement of a witness to the police
Contradiction by could be used for contradicting him only by the defence and
Prosecution of its only if he appeared for the prosecution. ‘The section was amend-
7 ed in 1955 by adding that a witness appearing for the prosecution
could also be confronted with his statement to the police at the
instance of the prosecution, but only with the permission of the
Court, The intention is that, if a prosecution witness is won over
by the other side, it can be shown that he is not trustworthy as
he had earlier made a different statement. In the Fourteenth
Report®, the Law Commission commented on this change and
said that it could not serve any useful purpose. The Commission,
however, did not then recommend any change, and we too are
dot recommending any change.

We have also considered another suggestion* that a defence
witness should be allowed to be contradicted by his statement
to the police. With respect, we do not think it would be desir-
able to allow a witness to be contradicted by a record prepared
by the opposite party, The Commission took the same view in
the earlier Report’.

14.15. In the light of the above discussion, we propose that
section 161(3) and the main paragraph of section 1 e2(1) be
amended as follows :—

“161. (3) The police-officer may reduce into writing
any statement made to him in the course of an examination
under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate
and true record of the statement of each such person whose
statement he records, and where the person can read the states
ment so recorded, obtain his signature thereon after he has
read it.

1Cf. 37th Report, discussion as to section 162.

2Two of us Shri R. L. Narasimham and Shri S. Balakrishnan, do
not agree with this view. Their suggestions for amending Chapter XIV
of the Code are set cut in a Note appended to this Report.

3 See observations in Laxman १. Kelu A.J.R. 1968 S.C. 1390.

* 14th Report, Vol 2, page’ 753, pera. 45.

3 37th Report, paras, 450 sh 451 and Appeedix 12.


95

162. (1) No statement made by any person to a police-
officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, ...
no record thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, and
no part of such statement or record, shall be used for any
purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inguiry or trial in
Tespect of any offence under investigation at the time when
such statement was made.”

14.16. Section 163(1) contains a direction to police officers
and other persons in authority not to offer any such inducement,
threat or promise as is mentioned in section 24 of the Evidence
Act. Sub-section (2) then says that such persons in authority
need not by any caution or otherwise prevent any voluntary state-
ment being made by any person. implying that a caution is not
necessary to a person making a confession. Then comes section
164 which mentions the elaborate precautions that should be
taken by a magistrate before recording a confession and that
includes a caution and a warning. It has been judicially observed
that the provisions in section 163(2) and section 164(3) are not
in harmony. In the earlier Report. the Commission had conse-
quently recommended that it should be made clear that section
164 over-rides this implication of section 163(2}. We aeree
and propose that the following proviso should be added to section
163(2) :--

“Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 164.”

14.17. Under section 164(1) at. present, any Presidency
Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class and any Magistrate of
the second class empowered by the State Government is comne-
tent to record confessions and statements during investigation. We
agree with the recommendation in the earlier Report? that only
judicial magistrates should have these powers. We think, how-
ever, that after seoaration of the judiciary all second class magis-
trates could be trusted to exercise their powers and no special
empowerment by the State Government or by the High Court would
be necessary.

The eatlier Revort® considered the auestion whether state-
ments recorded under section 164 should be on oath or not and
recommended that thev should be. The actual practice. we
understand, varies; but it would certainly be prover if such state-
ments were alwavs made on oath and this should be expressly
provided in the section itself.

By way of drafting improvement. we propose a re-arraneement
of the provisions put together in: sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 164. The sectio nmay be revised to read as follows :—-

“164. (1) Any Metrovolitan Maeistrate or Judicial Magis-
trate mav. whether or not he has jurisdiction in the case, record
any confession or statement made to him in the course of an

137th Report. para. 460.

237th Report, paras. 461 to 464.

837th Report, para. 466, See also 28th Report on the Oaths Act,
pares 29, 30.

Section 163.

Section 164,

Recording of
confessions and
Statements,


Sections 165 aad
166,

Section 167.

78

investigation under this Chapter or under any other law for the
time being in force, or at any time afterwards before the com-
mencement of the inquiry or trial.

(2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confes-
sion, explain to the person making it that he is not bound to
make a confession and that, if he does so. it may be used as
evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall not record any
such confession unless. upon questioning the person making it. he
has reason to believe that it is being made voluntarily.

(3) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner
provided in section 364 for recording the examination of an
accused person and shall be signed by the person making the
confession; and the Magistrate shall make a memorandum at the
foot of such record to the following effect :—

‘ET have explained to (name) that he is not bound to
make a confession and that, if he does so. any confession he
may make may be used as evidence against him and I believe
that this confession was voluntarily made. Yt was taken in
my presence and hearing, and was read over to the person
making it and admitted by him to be correct, and it contains
a full and trie account of the statement made by him.

(Signed) A.B.
Magistrate.”

(4) The Magistrate recordine a confession or statement
under this section shall forward it to the Magistrate by whom the
case is to be inquired into or tried.

(5) A Magistrate recording a statement under this section
shall do so in such of the manners hereinafter prescribed for
recording evidence as is, in his opinion, best fitted for the circwms-
tances of the case, and shall have Dower to administer oath to the
witness whose statement is recorded.”

14.18. When a police officer decides to search a place during
investigation, he has to record his reasons: and if any articles are
seized, he must prepare a list. Copies of the records thus pre-
pared have to be sent to a magistrate at once. and sub-section (5)
of section 165 further provides that the “owner or occupier of
the olace searched shall on anplication he fnrnished with a copy”
of the same bv the magistrate. The cost of the copies is to be
ordinarily naid by the owner or the accunier. We aeree with
the recommendation in the earlier Report! that such conies should
be furnished free of cost and propose that in section 165(5) and
in section 1665). after the woro “furnished”. the words “free of
cost” be inserted

14.19. Section 167 provides for remands. ‘The total period
for which an arrested person may be remanded to custody—pntice
or judicial—is 15 days. The assumption is that the investigation
must be completed within 15 days. and the final report under
section 173 sent to court bv then. In actual practice, however,
this has frequently been found unworkable. Quite often. a
complicated investisation cannot be completed within 15 davs.
and if the offence is serious, the police naturallv insist that the
accused be kept in custody. A practice of doubtful legal validity

137th Report. paras, 473 and 476,

¥

vy



77

has therefore grown up. The police file before a magistrate 2
preliminary or “incomplete” report, and the magistrate, purport-
ing to act under section 344, adjourns the proceedings and remands
the accused to custody. In the Fourteenth Report, the Law
Commission doubted if such an order could be made under section
344, as that section is intended to operate only after a magistrate
has taken cognizance of an offence, which can be properly done
only after a final report under section 173 has been received, and
not while the investigation is still proceedine. We are of the same
view, and to us also it appears proper that the Taw should be
clarified in this respect. The use of section 344 for a remand
beyond the statutory period fixed under section 167 can lead to
serious abuse. as an arrested person can in this manner be kept
in custody indefinitely while the investigation can go on in a
leisurely manner. It is, therefore, desirable, as was observed
in the Fourteenth Report, that some time limit should be placed
on the power of the police to obtain a remand, while the investiga-
tion is still going on: and if the present time limit of 15 days is
too short, it would be better to fix a longer period rather than
countenance a practice which violates the spirit of the legal safe-
guard. Like the earlier Law Commission, we feel that 15 days
is pethaps too short, and we propose therefore to follow the recom-
mendation in the Fourteenth Report that the maximum period
under section 167 should be fixed at 60 days. We are aware of
the dancer that such an extension may result in the maximum
periad becoming the rule in every case as a matter of routine?: but
we trust that proper supervision by the superior courts will prevent
that. We propose accordingly to revise sub-sections (2) and (4)
of section 167 as follows :—

“(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is for-
warded under this section may, whether he has or has not
jurisdiction to try the case, from time to time authorise the
detention of the accused in such custody as such Magistrate
thinks fit. for a term not exceeding fifteen davs at a time and
sixty days in the whole. If he has no jurisdiction to try the
case or commit it for trial, and considers further detention
unnecessary. he may order the accused to be forwarded to 8
Magistrate having such jurisdiction :

Provided that—

(a) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody
under this section unless the accused is produced before him;
(b) no Magistrate of the second class not specially
emnowered in this behalf by the High Court shall authorise
detention in the custody of the police. a

(4) Anv Magistrate other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate
making such order shall forward a copy of his order, with his
reasons for making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.”

14.20. The Thirty-seventh Report? did not propose any Sections 168 to
material alteration in sections 168 to 172; nor do we. Only one 172,

114th Report. Vol. 2. pages 758-760, paras. 53 to 56.
2Cf. 37th Report. paras. 477, 478.
2 See 37th Report, paras. 485 to 497.


Section 173—sup-
ply of copies of

documents we
accused,

‘Where documents
are voluminous,
inspection should
suffice,
Re-opening
‘investigation.

78

suggestion needs to be noticed. It is that the police diaries which
under section 172 a court can send for and look at should be
open to inspection by an accused person. We are unable to
accept the sugestion, as it would dteer informers conveying infor-
mation to the police and hamper speedy investigation. It is cleat
that under the law, as it is, all relevant statements recorded by the
police are handed over to the accused, and nothing else is
necessary.

14.21. Section 173 requires every investigation to be comple-
ted without delay, and on completion the police officer mast send
to the proper magistrate a report in a form prescribed by the
State Government, mentioning the particulars of the offence and
of the accused and of the witnesses. apart from certain other
matters. Further, the section provides that after sending such a
report and, in any case, before the inquiry or trial starts in court,
the police officer must furnish the accused certain documents,
such as copies of statements of witnesses to be produced at the
trial, copies of documents to be relied upon by the prosecution
and copies of any confession made during investigations. There
bas been a lot of complaint that these copies are not furnished in
time in most cases, causing much avoidable delay. Also, we
were told at nearly every place we visited that these copies pre-
pared by the police are hardly legible, and nearly every time an
adjournment beocmes necessary to neable defence counsel to
obtain legible copies. The copies are hurriedly prepared by hand
in most cases. It is possible that police officers whose statutory
duty it is to prepare and hand over the copies to the accused are
not adequately equipped for the purpose, and the extra work
involved has not Jed to a proportionate increase in the staff. It
would, we think, be much simpler if the statutory duty is shifted
from the police to the magistrate taking cognizance. He would
then be in a better position to ensure that the case in court is not
held up for want of proper copies and also to ensure that legible
copies are furnished.

14.22. It has at times been found that documents relied upon
by the prosecution are too voluminous to be copied out or even
their extracts prepared. This difficulty has been felt particularly
by the Centra! Bureau of Investigation’ while investigating compli-
cated cases of commercial fraud where a large number of account
books have to be produced in evidence. In the earlier Report?
the Commission recommended that in such circumstances, and
subiect to the orders of a competent court, the documents may be
made available for inspection by the accused. We agree that this
should be provided.

14.23. A revort under section 173 is normally the end of the
i Sometimes, however, the police officer after sub-
mitting the report under section 173 comes upon evidence bearing
‘on the guilt or innocence of the accused. We should have thought
that the police officer can collect that evidence and send it to the
magistrate concerned. It appears, however.* that courts have

r Sugaestion considered and not accepted in 37th Report, paras. 492
to 497.

337th Report, para. 506(b).

3 See 37th Report, para. 499 (Reviews case-law).


79

sometimes taken the narrow view that once a final report under
section 173 has been sent, the police cannot touch the case again
and cannot re-open the investigation. This view places a hindrance
in the way of the investigating agency, which can be very unfair
to the prosecution and. for that matter, evea to the accused. It
should be made clear in section 173 that the competent police
Officer can examine such evidence and send a report to the
magistrate. Copies concerning the fresh material must of course
be furnished to the accused.

14.24. We propose that section 173 should be revised as
follows पु 1

“173. (1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall
be completed without unnecessary delay.

(2) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of
the police station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered
to take cognizance of the offence on a police—report a
report, in the form prescribed by the State Government,
stating—

(a) the names of the parties;

(b) the nature of the informatioa;

(८) the names of the persons who appear to be acquain-

ted with the circumstances of the case;

(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed,

and if so, by whom:

(e) whether the accused has been arrested:

(0) whether he has been released on his bond under section
169, and, if so, whether with or without sureties;
whether he has been forwarded in custody under
section 170.

The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as
may be prescribed by the State Government, the action
taken by him to the person, if any, bv whom the information
relating to the commission of the offence was first given,

(3) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed
under section 158, the revort shall, in any cases in which the
State Government bv general or special order so directs, be
submitted throuch that officer, and he may. nendine the
orders of hte Magistrate, direct that officer in charge of the
police-station to make further investigation.

(4) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under
this section that the accused has been released on his bond,
the Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge of
such bond or otherwise as he thinks fit.

(5) When such report is in respect of a case to which
section 170 applies. the police-officer shall forward to the
Magistrate along with the report——

(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which
the prosecution proposes to rely other than those
already sent to the Magistrate during investigation;

(g

Section 173 re-
vised,

Report of Police
officer on comple-
tion of investiga
tion.


Section 174 to
176.

80

(b) the statements recorded under...section 161 of all
persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine
as its witnesses.

(6) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of
any such Statement is not relevant to the subject-matter of
the proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not
essential in the interests of justice and is inexpedient in the
public interest, he shall indicate that part of the statement and
append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude that part
from the copies to be granted to the accused and stating his
reasons for making such request.

(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude
further investigation in respect of an offence after a report
under sub-section (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate.
Where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the
police station obtains further evidence. oral or documentary
he shall forward to the Magistrate a further report or reports
regarding such evidence in the form prescribed; and the
provisions of sub-sections (2) to (5) shall, as far as may be,
apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in
relation to a report under sub-section (2).”

14.25. Section 174 provides for an inquest by the police in
certain circumstances, and section 175 empowers a police-officer
holding an inquest to summon two or more persons for the purpose.
Every person questioned at the inquest is bound to answer truly
the questions put to him. In the earlier Report! the Commission
has suggested the deletion of the word “truly”, as it does not occur
in section 161. Since we are now proposing to insert? that word
in section 161, it need not be taken out of section 176. In certain
circumstances the inquest must be held by a magistrate and these
are mentioned in section 176, We agree with the recommendation
in the earlier Report® that before holding the inquest the magistrate
must inform the near relatives of the deceased so that they may, if
sufficiently interested, attend the hearing. The following sub-
section may be added to section 176 :—

“(3) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section,
the Magistrate shall, wherever practicable, inform such of
the near relatives of the deceased whose names and addresses
are known, and shall allow them to remain present at the
inquiry.

Explanation—In this sub-section, the expression ‘near
relatives’ means parents, children, brothers, sisters and
spouse.”

137th Report, para. 519.
2 See para. 14.10 above.
437th Report, pare. 522,

e


CHAPTER XV

JURISDICTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES
AND TRIALS

A.—Place of inquiry er Trial.

15.1. Sections 177 to 189 lay down general principles for deter~
mining which shal! be the proper Court to inquire into or try an
offence, Fo)lowing the old rule of Eaglish common law pertaining
to the “venue” of a trial section 177, provides that every offence
shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a court witbin the
local limits of whose jurisdiction the offence was committed, In
England this territorial principle of criminal law was closely con-
nected with the institution of the grand jury who, as neighbours,
gave their testimony conceming crimes committed in the locality.
“Venue”, as a term of law, originally meant the place where the
jury was summoned to come for the trial of a case; and the jurors
had to be from the same parish or neighbourhood where the crime
had tken place. Apart from the fact that material witnesses might
be expected to be available in that locality and consequently it
would be convenient both to the prosecution and to the defence
if the trial took piace there, the sense of social security was better
maintained by requiring the dispensation of criminal justice to be
done in the vicinity of the crime.

15.2. Recent legislation, like the Indictments Act of 1915,
the Criminal Justice Act of 1925, and the Magistrates’ Courts Act
of 1952, has, however, largely modified the common law rule in
England. It is 00 Jonger necessary that the venue should be in the
county or place where the indictable offence has been committed.
Since the passing of the Criminal Justice Act, 1925, a person
charged with an indictable offence may be proceeded against in
any county or place in which he has been apprehended, or is in
custody on a charge of the offence, or has appeared in answer to
summons lawfully issued charging the offence, as if the offence
had been committed in that county or place. For all purposes
incidental to, or consequential on, the prosecution, trial or punish-
ment of the offence, it is deemed to have been committed in that
county or place.

15.3. We do not think, however, that the mules relating to the
proper place of inquiry and trial contained in this chapter should
be dispensed with. Considering the size of the country, the distance
of courts from the place of crime and difficulties of transport in the
interior, it is, in our view, desirable that the inquiry and trial
should ordinarily take place in the vicinity of the crime and some
venue rules must be provided in the Code.

15.4. As the word “ordinarily” used in section 177 of _ the
Code indicates, the general rule laid down ir this section is neither
exclusive nor peremptory. In the subsequent sections alternative
venues for inquiry aad trial are provided for in regard to certain
types of offences. Barring section 178 which empowers the State

Introductory —
“Venue” in
English common
Jaw.

Recent legislation
in England as to
venue.

Venue rules de-
sirable in Indian
conditions.

General rule in
section 177 not
exclusive.


Some offences
triable where
accused is found.

Charges in terri-
torial jurisdic.
tion of courts,

Meaning of
“ordinarily”
explained by
Supreme Court.

82

Government to supersede the normal ‘rule in regard to certain
sessions trials, the other provisions supplement that rule and
cither authorise certain venues different from the place of com-
mission of the offence even where it is known or can be deter-
mined, or authorise different venues where the place of commis-
sion of the offence is prima facie not determinable,

15.5. A few offences of a predatory character like thuggery
and dacoity are made triable by any court within whose local
jurisdiction the offender may be found. The venue for an offence
committed outside India is also naturally any place within India
where the accused may be found according to section 188. Similar
provisions constituting an exception to the general rule are to be
found in some special laws ९.९. section 7 of the Foreign Recruit-
ing Act 1874, section 134(1) of the Railways Act 1890, Section
66 of the Inland Steam-vessels Act, 1917, and section 5 of the
Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948.

15.6, The rule laid down in section 177 has come up for
consideration by the courts in connection with charges in the terri-
torial jurisdiction of a court taking place after it has taken
cognizance of an offence. Where such a charge was due to the
transfer of territory from a British Indian Province to an Indian
State, or from one district in a Province to another district,2 or
from one State in the Union of India to another State*, the Courts
have held that it does not affect the jurisdiction of the court to
continue to deal with the offence of which it has taken cognizance.
In the case of transfer of territory from one State to another which
could only be effected by an Act of Parliament, express provision
is usually to be found in the Act itself in regard to the pending
cases affected by the transfer. We do not consider that any general
provision is necessary in the Code for this purpose.

15.7. The rule is one of general application and governs all
trials held under the provisions of the Code, including trials of
offences punishable under local or special laws. It has been held
by the Supreme Court‘ that, although the section uses the word
“ordinarily”, it means the same as except where otherwise pro-
vided in the Code itself or other law. The Court observed :—

“There is 20 doubt that the State Legislature is compe-
tent to provide for the trial of offences created by its statutes
otherwise than is prescribed by section 177 of the Code; but
it must appear from the relevant provision of the special
statute that a departure from the general principle prescribed
by section 177 is intended.”

In view of this ruling, it does not seem necessary to alter the
wording of the section with a view to making it more definite and
precise.

1Emp, v. Saheb Din (1911) 12 Cr. LJ. 470;

Emp. v. Ram Naresh, (1911) LL.R. 34 All. 188;

Emp. v. Ganga, (1912) LL.R. 34 All. 45.
2 Emp. v. Saveruddin, LL.R. (1938) 2 Cat. 357.
a +. TL.R. (1952) Puni. 186.
tate of Bombay, ALR (1960) S.C. 1329 at 9. 1332.

aN

>a


83

15.8. Section 178 empowers the State Government to direct
that any cases or class ot cases committed for trial in any district
may be tried in any sessions division. Now the combined effect of
sections 177 and 206 is that a magistrate inquiring into an
offence committed in his district bas to commit the otfender for
tial to the Court of Session within whose jurisdiction that offence
was committed, that is to say, the Court tor the sessions division
which comprised his district. But if there is a direction of the
State Government under section 178 applicable to a particular
case, it becomes triable in such other sessions division ag is speci-
fied in the direction.

15.9. Although this provision concerning an extraordinary
power on the Siate Government has been 19 the Code since the
beginning, it appears that occasion for its use bas been rare. One
instance,‘ apparently the latest, which came to our aotice was a
direction issued in 1951 by the Government of Uttar Pradesh to
the eifect “that all Special Police Establishment cases committed
to the Court of Session in any district in Uttar Pradesh shali be
tried in the Lucknow Sessions Division”. At the same ume the
State Government found it necessary to give a supplementary
direction under? sub-section (2) of section 193 (sic) of the Code
that the Sessions Judge of Lucknow was to be an Additioval
Sessions Judge for ati other sessions divisions in the State. This
was apparently because while the first direction enabied the cases
to be tied in the Lucknow sessions division, as provided for in
section 178, it was not sufficient to confer jurisdiction on the
sessions court of that division to try the cases. Strictly interpreted
section 178 would not be sufficient authority for a magistrate to
commit a case of the specified class for triai to the Court of
Session for the specitied sessions division.*

15.10. The power conferred by section 178 is an extraordi-
ary power intended to be used only when some consideration of
Public interest (¢.g., maintenance of public order during the trial
of a sensational case) justifies the holding of a sessions trial in a
different sessions division. We have, after due consideration,
come to the conclusion that, despite its infrequent use and seem-
ingly arbitrary character, the provision should remain in the Code.
Aithough the section is expressed to override only section 177, it
is obviously intended to override also the other venue provisions
and should be placed later after section 184,

15.11. In the proviso, the references to sevtion 15 of the
Indian High Courts Act, 1861, section 107 of the Government of
India Act, 1915, and section 224 of the Government of India
Act, 1935, are obsolete and should be omitted. The references to
article 227 of the Constitution and section 526 of the Code do not
exhaust the legal provisions under which the High Court could
issue directions of the same nature, It is also necessary to cover

1 Harides Mundhra y. The State of UP. ALR. 1959, All, 82.

2This citation. taken from the judgment appears to be erroncous.
Sub-section (4) of section 9 is the relevant provision.

3 Queen Empress v. Nga Tha Moung, (1884) LL.R. 10 Calcutta, 643.

Section 178.

Extraordinary
Power sell
used.

Retention recom

mended,

Amendment
proviso.

of


Sections 179, 180
and 182—formal
amendments pro-
Posed.

section 181(1).

the possibility of previous directions issued by the Supreme Court.
We recommend that the proviso may read :—

हे “Provided that such direction is not repugnant to any
direction previously issued by the High Court or the Supreme
Court under the Constitution, this Code or any other law.”

15.12. Sections 179, 180 and 182 (somewhat illogically
separated by section 181 dealing with particular offences) enume-
rate a few general principles for determining the venue for inquiry
or trial in the case of certain kinds of offences with reference to
their nature and characteristics. The first two sections adopt differ-
ent wording to express the same idea for which there does not
appear to be any need or justification. Thus in section 179 there is
no need to refer to any person who is accused of the commission

- of an offence when the intention is to desctibe the kind of offence,

as is done in section 180, Then, while section 179 simply says
“such offence may be inquired into or tried”, section 180 refers
to “a charge of the first mentioned offence”. We recommend that
these verbal discrepancies should be removed and the wording of
the two sections assimilated as follows —

“179, When an act is an offence by reason of a thing
which has been done and of a consequence which has ensued,
the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within
whose local jurisdiction such thing has been done or such
consequence has ensued.

180. When an act is an offence by reason of its relation
to another act which is also an offence or which would be
an offence if the doer were capable of committing an offence
x x x the first mentioned offence may be inquired into or
tried by a Court within whose locai jurisdiction either act was

ne.”

15.13. Section 181 consists of four sub-sections, cack dealing
with a group of offences under the Indian Penal Code and pres-
cribing the venue for the inquiry and trial. Sub-section (1) covers
the offences of being a thug, being a thug and committing murder
or rather murder committed by a thug, dacoity, dacoity with
murder, belonging to a gang of dacoits and escaping from custody,
and lays down that any of these offeaces may be inquired into or
tried by a court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the
person charged is. It is noticeable that, differing from the other
three sub-sections, sub-section (1) does not expressly mention the
place of commission of the offence as an alternative venue, but
ovbiously the intention is not to exclude that venue. In fact, the
rales laid down in sections 177 to 184 are not mutually exclusive
but cumulative in effect and intended to facilitate the prosecution
of offenders by providing a wider choice of courts for initiating the
inquicy or trial. Though no practical difficulty has arisen in the
application of sub-section (1) of section 181 by the absence of
a reference to the place of commission of the offence, it is desir-
able for the sake of consistency to introduce it in this sub-section
also. The sub-section may be revised to read :—

“(1) Any offence of being cing & thug, of murder committed
by a thug, of ३०००७, of ity with murder of belonging


85

to a gang of dacoits, or of escaping from custody may be
inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdic-
tion the offence was committed or the accused person is
found.”

15.14. Sub-setion (2) of section 181 indicates the possible
venues for the offences of criminal misappropriation of property
and criminal breach of trust. Besides the local area where the
offence was committed the venue may be laid io any area within
which the property which was the subject of the offence was either
Teceived or retained by the accused person,

45.15. As defined ia section 405 of the Indian Penal Code,
the offence of criminal breach of trust may be one of two types.
The first occurs when the trusted person dishonestly misappro-
priates or converts to his own use the Property in question; and
the second, when he dishonestly uses or disposes of that property
in violation of :—

(a) any direction of law Prescribing the mode of discharge
of the trust, or

(0) any legal contract, express or implied, which be has
made touching the discharge of the trust.

The place of commission of the offence in the first type is the
place where the accused dishonestly misappropriate the property
or converted it to his use, and in the second type, it is the place
where he dishonestly used or disposed of the Property in violation
of law or contract.

15.16. Doubt exists in many cases as to the exact manner,
Point of time and place where the dishonest misappropriation,
Conversion, use or disposal was effected. Since these Matters are
within the special knowledge of the accused, the complainant is
unable to adopt the jurisdiction with which the offence has been
committed. Though no such doubts ordinarily arise in regard to
the place or places where the Property in question was received
or retained by the accused, these places are not always suitable
for launching the prosecution.

15.17. The question has accordingly arisen in a number of
feported cases whether these offences can be inquired into or
tried by a court within whose jurisdiction the accused was bound,
by law or contract, to render accounts or to return the entrusted
property but failed to discharge that obligation. The decisions of

igh Courts on this poiat are conflicting.

15.18. In an early Calcutta case,! Mukerji J. of the Calcutta
High Court took the view :--

“Sf there is a contract that the accused is to render
accounts at a particular place and fails to do so as a
result of his criminal act in respect of the money, he
can, without unduly straining the language of the
section, be said to dishonestly use the money at that
place as well in violation of the express contract and

1Gunananda Dhone २, Sunti Prakash Nandy, ALR. 1925 Cal. 615.

Section 181(2).

Breach of trust—~
two types.

Place where
offence is com-
mitted often
doubtful.

Place of account.
ing as venue.

Calcutta view,


Bombay view.

Allahabad view.

86

so commits the offence of criminal breach of trust at
that place also.”

lo pater case!, Rankin C.J. of the same High Court dissented
from this view in the following terms :-—

“I am bound to say that, while ] must appreciate the great
convenience that will arise if this view is accepted, 1
doubt extremely whether the learmed Judge is right
in saying that this does not unduly strain the language
of section 405, 1.P.C.******The fact that a mao fails
to account in Calcutta does not seem to me to be the
same thing as that be honestly uses the money in
Calcutta or that he dishonestly disposes of the money
in Calcutta.”

At about the same time two other Judges of the Calcutta High
Coust, relying more on the English common law rule relating to
the venue for cases of embezzlement than on the Code, held? :—
“Jf there is evidence apart from the fact of non-accounting

to show where the misappropriation was committed,

the venue must be laid either in that place or in the

piace where the properly was received or retained. If

there is no evidence to show where the misappropria-

tion was committed other than the fact of non-

accounting, then the venue may be laid in the place

where the accused failed to account, because that is

where the offence was committed within the meaning

of section 181(2).”

15.19, In re Jivandas Savchand,? a full Bench of the Bombay
High Court came to the conclusion that section 179 of the Code
has no application at all to cases ‘of criminal breach of trust and
also completely dissented from the views taken by the Calcutta
High Court in Gunanda Dhone’s case. Beaumont C.J. stated :—

“With very great respect to the learned Judges who
decided that case, I am quite unable to follow the
line of reasoning. It seems to me to involve a con-
fusion between the place where the offence was
committed and the place where the complainant first
acquired evidence that the offence had been com-
mitted. { can see nothing in section 405 of the Indian
Penal Code to justify the contention that when a man
in Rangoon delivers false accounts in Bombay, he is
thereby making a dishonest use in Bombay of money
or property which has never left Rangoon.”

45.20. In a somewhat later case,* Sulaiman C.J. and Bennet

J. of the Allahabad High Court came to the following con-
clusion :-—

“where there is a violation of 4 direction of law or a legal

contract, the proof of that violation may be by nega-

tive evidence that the direction of law or the contract

1 Pascal v. Raj Kishore Mathur, ALR. 1951 Cal. 521.
2Paut De Flonder v. Emp. ALR. 1931 Cal. 523.
FA.LR. 1930 Bom. 490.

< Mohru Lal y. Emp. A.LR. 1936 All. 193.

v

me ae


1 ENE eee ५

87

bas not been fulfilled. We are of opinion that
where the direction of law or the contract required
that the accused should dispose of the property at a
particular place, then the court having jurisdiction at
that place will have jurisdiction to try the offence of
the second part of section 405 of the Indian Penal
Code where there is a charge that the accused has
failed to comply with the direction of law or the legal
contract and has failed to carry out his duty at that
place. Where it is alleged that the accused has failed
tg account for the property, then the second part of
section 405 will apply and jurisdiction exists at the
place where the property should have been delivered
by the accused.”

15.21. In some early decisions the Courts considered the rule
in section 179 applicable and held that the place where the
complainant suffered 1055 “in consequence of” the accused person’s
act could be the venue for his trial on a charge of criminal breach
of trust. The following extract from a judgment of the Allahabad
High Court? typifies this line of reasoning :—

“The consequence which ensued here is that money was
taken out of the pocket of a British India subject.
That man suffered in Allahabad from the consequence
of the applicant’s supposed guilt.Section 181(2) of
the Code does not in any way modify the provision
of section 179,”

Most High Courts, however, have taken the viéw that loss
to any person caused by the misappropriation is not an ingredient
of the offence, that the offence is complete as soon as there is
appropriation, conversion or use with a dishonest intention and
that section 179 has no application whatever in regard to this
offence.

15,22. Where it is doubtful whether the Inisappropriation Applicability
took place at A or at B, the first clause of section 182 (“when section 182,

it is uncertain in which of several local areas an offence was
committed”) is applicable and it has been held 4 the Supreme
Court? that the offence may be tried at either place. The pro-
visions of section 182 are supplemental to those contained in
the last five words of section 181(2) (“or the offence was
committed”) and the latter does not exclude the former,

Applicability by
section 179,

of

15.23. The law’ in England is stated in the following English taw.

terms :—

“The embezzlement is committed in the place where the
accused person has refused to account, or, if there is no
evidence of fradulent embezzlement except of non-account-
ing in the place where he ought to have accounted and
failed to do so, or has accounted falsely, or in the place
where he received and misappropriated the property in
question.”

1 Mohammed Rashid ४, Emp., A.1.R. 1926 All. 466.
2 State of Madhya Pradesh v. K. P. Ghiara, A.¥.R. 1957 S.C. 196.

*Halsbury’s Laws of England (3rd Edn.) Vol. 10, para. 1523 at
page 788.


Amendment of
sub-section (2)
recommended,

Section 181(3).

Amendment of
1923,

Further amend-
ments recom-
mended.

11.24. In view of the conflicting decisions noted above, we
recommend that sub-section (2) of section 181 should be
amended to read :—

“(2) Any offence of criminal misappropriation or of
criminal breach of trust may be inquired into or tried bya
Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was com-
mitted ot any part of the property which is the subject of
the offeace was received or retained, or was required to be
returned or accounted for, by the accused person.”

We do not think it necessary to limit the additional alternative
venue, namely, the local area where the property was required
(by law or contract) to be returned or accounted for by the
accused person, to cases where there is no evidence of the
offence other than the failure to retum or account for the pro-
perty.

15.25. Sub-section (3) of section 181 provides alternative
venues for two categories of offences, namely, (i) theft and any
offence which includes theft and (ii) any offence which includes
the possession of stolen property. The first category includes
the aggravated forms of theft like theft in a building theft by a
servant, etc., and also robbery and the aggravated forms of
robbery involving theft, but not extortion and its aggravated
forms. The second category, however, comprises all offences
which include the possession of stolen property. As defined in
section 410 of the Penal Code, stolen property includes not
only property the possession of which has been transferred by
thelt ‘or robbery, but also property the possession of which has
been transferred by extortion and property which has been
criminally misappropriated or in respect of which criminal
breach of trust has been committed.

15.26. The sub-section was given its present form by the
Amendment Act of 1923. Originally, it only referred to “the
offence of stealing or any offence which includes stealing”. The
Lowndes Committee which examined the Amendment Bill
accepted the proposal to replace “stealing”, by the technical
term “theft” and, furthermore, enlarged the enumeration of
offences to include the possession of stolen property. Their
Report added somewhat cryptically :—

“This will cover the case of extortion; see the definition
in section 410 1. P. C.”

15.27. It is clear, however, that the revised sub-section does
not cover the offence of extortion or any offence which includes
extortion. We see mo reason why it should not. It would
jndeed be convenient in many cases of extortion if the alterna-
tive venues provided in sub-section (3) for theft and robbery
were available. We recommend that the sub-section should be
split into two sub-sections: one dealing with the offences of
theft, extortion and robbery, including their aggravated forms,
and the other dealing with offences which include the possession
of stolen property. These sub-sections may be as follows :—

“(3a) Any offence which includes theft, extortion or
robbery may be inquired into or tried by a Court within


89

whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the
stolen property which is the subject of the offence was
possessed by any person committing it or by person who
received or retained such property knowing or having reason
to believe it to be stolen property.

(3b) Any offence which includes the possession of stolen
Property may be inquired into or tried by a Court within
whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the
stolen property was possessed by any person who received
or retained it knowing or having reason to believe it to be
stolen property.”

15.28. It will be noticed that. under the second sub-section,
the venue for an offence punishable under section 411, 412,
413 or 414 1. P. C. does not include the jurisdiction within which
the stolen property was possessed by the person committing the
original offence. ‘Since, however, under section 180—vide illus-
tration (b)—the venue could be laid in the jurisdiction within
which the original offence was committed, the position for all
Practical purposes would remain the same,

15.29. In regard to the offences of kidnapping or abducting
2 person, sub-section (4) of section 181 provides that the venue
may be laid either in the jurisdiction where the offence was
committed or where the kidnapped or abducted person was con-
veyed or concealed or detained. While the provision is adequate
and does not require any change of substance, we recommend 2
slight change of wording to improve its form.

15.30. Controversial questions have frequently arisen in
tegard to the venue for the offence of cheating where the frau-
dulent or dishonest misrepresentation is made by post, telegram
Or jong distance telephone and where the property of which
the person deceived is cheated is delivered to a common carrier
or other agent at one place and received by the cheat at another
place. In the absence of special provisions similar to these
contained in section 181, such questions have necessarily to be
decided with reference to the general principles laid down in
sections 177, 179 and 182. Different views have been exp ressed
hy the High Courts in applying these principles to the facts of
the particular cases before them.

15.31. In an early Bombay case,* both sections 179 and 182
were held to be applicable. The High Court observed that the
act of deceiving and the act of inducing delivery of the property,
were composite acts which began, in the particular case, with
the delivery of the parcels to the post office at Panvel. This was
an essential part of the offence and, although the consequent
delivery of the property took place at Poona, section 179 of the
Code applied to the case. Alternatively, the High Court held,
the offence was committed partly in Panvel by the posting of the
parcels and partly ia Poona where the money was paid by the

\See para 15.38 below.

* Gafur Karimbax v, Emp., A.1.R. 1930 Bom. 358, See also Yusuf
Ali ¥. Wahajuddin, ATR. 1914 Al. 373; Gindher Daz ४. King Emp.
ATR. 1924. All. 77.

Section 181(4)

Venue for cheat-
ing im certain
types of cases,

Both section 179
and. 182 held
applicable.


90

addressees to the post office. Either the second clause or the
fourth clause of section 182 was applicable and the case could
be tried by the Panvel court.

Posting held one 15.32. In another Bombay case,!, where the accused had

of series of acts. cont from Nandurbar letters by post to various merchants in
Bombay ordering goods and promising to pay on receipt of the
goods, but absconded after obtaining delivery, the High Court
held that the posting of the orders by the accused at Nandurbar
was one of the series of acts which went to make up the offence
of cheating, and the Magistrate at Nandurbar had jurisdiction
under section 182 to try the offeace.

Offence commit- 15.33. But in a Madras case,? where the accused at Manga-
complainant's lore sent by value-payable post parcel bogus lottery tickets to the
end, complainant living in Trichur (Cochin State) and the latter paid

a certain sum on delivery of the parcel, the Madras High Court
held that the deception was practised at Trichur, the delivery
of property also took place there, aad consequently, the offence
was committed in Trichur, and not in Mangalore. The post
office was held to be the agent of the accused both for delivering
the packet to the complainant and for receiving the money from
nm.

Patna and Lahore 15.34. In a Patna case* the view was taken that the offence
: of cheating could be tried at the place from which the accused
made the false representation by sending a cheque which was
dishonoured, but in a Lahore case,* where the accused in district
B sent a letter to his creditor in district G and falsely insured
it for a certain sum with the intention of relying on the postal
receipt of the letter as proof of discharge of his debt, it was
held that the court in district G had jurisdiction under section
179 of the Code to try offence of cheating.

Supreme Court's 15.35. The Supreme Court, however, in the case of Mobarik

analysis. Ali Ahmed v. State of Bombay, has decided the question entire-
ly under section 177 of the Code and analysed the position as
follows :—

“The offence of cheating under section 420 of the Penal
Code as defined in section 415 of the Code has two essential
ingredients, viz., (1) deceit 7.6., dishonest or fraudulent mis-
reptesentation to a person, and (2) the inducing of that
person thereby to deliver pro) perry. Jn the present case, the
volume of evidence set out above and the facts found to be
true show that the appellant, though at Karachi, was making
representation to the complainant through letters, telegrams
and telephone talks, sometimes directly to the complainant
and sometimes through Jasawalla, that he had ready stock
of rice, that he bad reserved shipping space and that on
receipt of money he would be in a position to ship the rice
forthwith.

In re Hormasji, ALR, 1943 Bom, 183.

24n re Antony D. Silva, ALR. 1949 Mad. 3.

3 Matcalfe v. Watson, AX.R. 1924 Pat, 708.

4 Narain Das ४. Prem Chand, AIR 1931 Notes 25 (Labore).
SAJBR. 1957 S.C. 857. 867-868. 23.


91

“These representations were made to the complainant at
Bombay, notwithstanding that the appellant was making the
representations from Karachi. The position is quite clear
where the representations were made through the trunk
phone. The statement of the appellant at the Karachi-end
of the telephone becomes a representation to the complainant
only when it reaches cognition of the complainant at the
Bombay-end. This indeed has not been disputed.

“Jt makes no difference ia principle if the representations
have in some stages been conveyed by telegrams or by letters
to the complainant directly or to some one of the appellant's
agents including Jasawalla in that category. There is also
HO question that it is as a result of these representations
that the complainant parted with his money to the tune of
about Rs. 54 lakhs on three different dates.

“On these facts it is clear that all the ingredients neces-
sary for finding the offence of cheating under section 420
read with section 415 have occurred at Bombay. In that
sense the entire offence was committed at Bombay, and not
merely the consequence, viz., delivery of money, which was
one of the ingredients of the offence.”

15.36. On the strength of this analysis, it might be argued
in comparable cases that no part of the offence of cheating and
dishonestly inducing delivery of property takes place at the
accused person’s end and the entire offence is committed at the
deceived person's end. The application of either section 179
or section 182 might be regarded as of doubtful validity. There
should, however, be no objection in principle to the person
accused of cheating from a distance being triable for the offence,
not only at the place where his victim was deceived and/or
made to part with property, but also at the place from where
the accused has been carrying on his dishonest practices and
reaping the benefit. We therefore recommend that a special
provision should be made in section 181 on the following
ines. :--

“Any offence which includes cheating may, if the
deception is practised by means of letters or telecommunica-
tion messages, be inquited into or tried by any Court within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction such letters or messages
were sent or were received; and any offence of cheating
and dishonestly inducing delivery of property may be inquir-
ed into or tried by any Court within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction the property was delivered by the person
deceived or was received by the accused person.”

15.37. In the absence of a special provision, the offence of
bigamy can be inquired into or tried only at the place where the
offence is committed. This fact, coupled with the statutory res-
triction’ that a complaint by the aggrieved wife or husband is
necessary for initiating proceedings against the tigamist, places
undue obstacles in the way of prosecuting the latter. It makes
it easy for that person to go to a distant place, perhaps in another

See section 198 of the Code.

Special provision
recommended,

special provision
as to venue for


State, get the second marriage performed, return with impuaity
to bis or her usual place of Tesidence and live with his or ber
second spouse in the same neighbourhood as the first. In other
countries where the law of monogamy js traditional and is enforc-
cd with greater rigour, such conduct would not be _ possible.

Since bigamy is conceived as an offence against the institution
of marriage in which society is concerned, we consider that practi-
cal opportunity to bring ‘offenders before the courts should not
be denied by restricting the venue to the local areas where the
bigamous marriage was actually performed. it should, in our
opinion, be extended to the local area where the offender fast
resided with his or her fawfully married spouse. We recommend
that a new sub-section should be included in section 181 on the

following lines :—

“Any offence punishable under section 494 or section
495 of the Indian Penal Code may be inquired into or
tried by any Court within the focal limits of whose juris-
diction’ the offence was committed or the offender last
resided’ with his or her spouse by the first marriage.”

Section 181 as 15.38. In the light of the above recommendations, section

revised. 181 may be amplified and revised to read as follows :—
Place of trie! “181. (1) Any offence of being a thug, of murder
in case of oer- committed by a thug, of dacoity, of dacoity with murder,

of belonging to a gang of decoits, or of escaping from
custody may be inquired into or tried by a Court within
whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the
accused person is found.

(2) Any offence of kidnapping or abducting a per-
son may be inquired into or tried by a Court within
whose local jurisdiction that person was kidnapped oF
abducted or was conveyed or concealed or detained.

(3) Any offence of theft, extortion or robbery may
be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen pro-
erty which is the subject of the offence was possessed

/ any person ९०] iting it or by any person who fre-
ceived or retained such property knowing or having
reason to believe it to be stolen property.

(4) Any offence of criminal misappropriation or of
criminal breach of trust may be inquited into or tried
by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence
was committed or any part of the property which is the
subject of the offence was received or retained, or was
required to be returned or accounted for, by the accused
person.

(5) Any offence which includes the possession of
stolen property may be inquired into or tried by a Court
within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committ-
ed or the stolen property was possessed by any person

2 Compare section 488(8), Cr. P.C.


93

who received or retained it knowing or having reason to
believe it to be stolen property.

(6) Any offence which includes cheating may, if the
deception is practised by means of letters or telecommu-
nication messages, be inquired into or tried by any Court
within whose local jurisdiction such letters or messages
were sent or were received; and any offence of cheating
and dishonestly inducing delivery of property may be
inquired into or tried by any it within whose local
jurisdiction the property was delivered by the person
deceived or was received by the accused person.

(7) Any offence punishable under section 494 or
section 495 of the Indian Penal Code may be inquired
into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction
the offence was committed or the offender last resided
with his or her spouse by the first marriage.”

15.39. Section 182 does not require any modification, but
as it lists in general terms four types of cases where different
alternative venues are permissible it would be more appropriate
to place the section immediately after 177 as section 178 and
put the existing 178 after section 183.

15.40. Proceeding to section 183, we notice an inconsistency
between the wording of the opening part and that of the con-
cluding part which appears to have escaped judicial attention
or comment. The section deals with “an offence committed
whilst the offender is in the course of performing a journey or
voyage”, but prescribes that the venue may be laid in any local
areas through or into which either “the offender or the person
against whom, or the thing in respect of which, the offence was
committed, passed in the course of that journey or voyage’.
The last four words could only mean the journey or voyage
which the offender was in the course of performing when he
committed the offence. If strictly interpreted in this manner,
the section would seem to be of little or no practical application
to the common type of cases which it is obviously intended to
cover,

15.41. X is travelling by train from Bombay to Calcutta and
at some place not definitely known is killed and robbed. The
offender is traced but it cannot be said that he was performing
any journey when he committed the offence. He might have
got into the train at one station, committed the offences and
got out of the train at the same or the next station. While the
apparent intention of section 183 is to enable the inquiry or trial
in such a case being held in any local area between Bombay and
Calcutta, the wording will stand in the way as it cannot be
shown that the accused was performing any journey. We re-
ommend that the section should be redrafted on the following
HES >—

“When an offence is committed whilst the person by
or against whom, or the thing in respect of which, the
offence is committed is in the course of performing a
journcy or voyage, the offence may be inquired into or

Section 182.

Section 183 in-
correct wording.

commended,


Scope of section
183 not widened
by s, 180.

Corresponding
provision in Eag-
land,

Section 184 un-j

necessary.

Venue in case of
joinder of charges
and joint trials.

94

tried by a court through or into whose local jurisdiction
that person or thing passed in the course of that journey
or voyage.”

15.42. In a recent reported case,! some articles were stolen
from a passenger travelling by train from one place to another
in Rajasthan. Subsequently these articles were recovered from
differem. persons at different places outside that State. When
these persons were prosecuted for the offence of receiving stolen
property in a Rajasthan court, the Rajasthan High Court decid-
ed that section 183 had no application, since the offence was
certainly not conumitted during the train journey of the complain-
ant and that if section 180—vide illustration (b)—was relied
on, the offender could be tried only by a court within whose
jurisdiction the theft was actually committed. This appears to
us to be correct position and does not require any change.

15.43. Incidentally, we notice that the corresponding provi-
sion in England is to the effect? that “where an offence has been
committed on any person, or on or in respect of any property, in
or on 3 vehicle or vessel engaged on any journey or voyage
through two or more local jurisdictions, the offence may be
treated, for the purposes of the preceding provisions of this Act,
as having been committed in any of those jurisdictions”. This
is somewhat narrower in scope and effect than the provision in
section 183 of the Code or the formally revised provision sug-
gested above.

15.44. Section 184 provides that “all offences against the
provisions of any law for the time being in force relating to rail-
ways, telegraphs, the post office or arms and ammunition may
be inquired into or tried in a presidency-town whether the offence
is stated to have been committed within such town or not, pro-
vided the offender and alf the witnesses necessary for the pro-
secution are to be found within such town.” The section was
taken from section 238 and 239 of the Presidency Magistrates’
Courts Act, 1877. Even if it served some useful purpose in
those days it does not appear to have been resorted to or
found useful in any appreciable number of cases in recent times.
The proviso seems to look only to the convenience of prosccu-
tion in requiring the presence in the presidency-towns of all the
witnesses for the prosecution. There appears to be no good
reason for this special provision applying only to the three presi-
dency-towns and in respect of only four Central Acts. The
section should be omitted.

15.45. It will be convenient at this stage to consider the
problem of venue in relation to joinder of charges and joint
trials for which provision is made in sections 234, 235, 236 and
239 of the Code. Except as provided in these sections there has
to be a separate charge for every distinct offence of which any
person is accused and every such charge has to be tried
separately under section 233. When under section 234, 235
or 236 an accused person may be charged with and tried at one
trial for all or more offences, it is but reasonable to assume

Munna Lal ५, State, ALR. 1964 Raj. 118.
2 Section 3(3) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act, 1952.


95

that the venue for the trial can be laid in any local jurisdiction
within which any of those offences may be inquired into or
tried under the provisions of Chapter XV of the Code. Sinailar-
ly when under section 239 two or more persons may be charged
with and tried together for different offences, the prosecution
has a similar choice of venue for the trial.

45.46. This question has, however, been frequently raised in
the courts in regard to a criminal conspiracy. It has now been
held by the Supreme Court? that the court having jurisdiction to
try the offence of criminal conspiracy, even if those offences were
committed outside the jurisdiction of the court, as the provisions
of section 239 are not controlled by section 177. It was observed
in that decision, that “there is no reason why the provisions of
sections 233 to 239 may not also provide exceptions to section 177,
if they do permit the trial of a particular offence along with others
in one court.” In another decision,? the Supreme Court has also
held that a court having jurisdiction to try the offences committed
in pursuance of the conspitacy can try the main offence of cons-
piracy, even if it was committed outside the jurisdiction of the
court.

15.47. However, since there appears to be a lacuna in the
venue provisions and this has led to controversies in the court
proceedings, we recommend that an express provision should be
made on the following lines :—

“184. Place of trial for offences triable together.-—-Where—

(3) the offences committed by any person are such that
he may be charged with and tried at one trial for,
each such offence by virtue of the provisions of sec-
tion 234, 235 or 236 or

(b) the offence or offeaces committed by several persons
are such that they may be charged and tried together
by virtue of the provisions of section 239,

the offences may be inquired into or tried by any court
competent to inquire into or try any of the offences.”

This provision would only be giving effect to a view accepted
by the Supreme Court as right and proper and would not, in our
opinion, be prejudicial to the accused in any way.

15.48. Provision is made in section 185 for deciding any
question arising as to the court which “ought to inquire into or
try an offence”. This formula was adopted in sub-section (1) of
the section when it was revised by the Amendment act of 1923 to
make it clear that, in deciding the question, the High Court could
take into account, not only the convenience of the prosecution
or the defence, but also the competence of the forum. The High
एुण्णां,.........०* however, cannot decide a question under this

1Purushottam Das Dalmia v. Siate of West Bengal, (1962) 2 SCR.
106: ALR. 1961 S.C. 1589.
one” N. Mukherjea v. Siate, (1962) 2 S.CR. 116; ATR. 1961 S.C.
1601.

3See also R. K, Dalmia v. Delhi Administration, (1963) 1 S.C.R.
253; ALR. 1961 S.C. 1821.

Express provision
recommended,

Section 185.


Power should be
with High Court.

Modifieation of
of sub-seetion (1)
suggested,

Criticism of sub-
section (2).

Revision of sec-
tion 185—reeom-
mended.

96

section unless the matter is brought to its notice with the proper
records. As was suggested by the Calcutta High Court in State
v. Sadananda Darji, it would be convenient if the High Court
made rules laying down the procedure to be followed by subordi-
nate courts in making a reference under this section.

15.49. With reference to sub-section (1) we considered a
suggestion that it should be amended so as to provide that the
court which first took cognizance should try the offence, thereby
saving the time of the High Court. Reference was made to the
analogous provision in section 10 of the Civil Procedure Code,
but different considerations must apply to criminal proceedings
where the question of proper forum could be of importance, both
to the prosecution and the defence. Where, for instance, pro-
ceedings for the same offence against different persons are institat-
ed in different courts, one on complaint and the other on police
report, the court which first took cognizance may not be the pro-
per forum, and the power to decide the question should be with
the High Court.

15.50. It will be noticed that the wording of sub-section (1)
is wide cnough to permit a reference being made by a subordinate
court which has first taken cognizance of an offence even where
no other court subordinate to the same High Court has taken
cognizance of that offence. For a reference under sub-section (2),
however, the requisite condition is that two or more courts not
subordinate (0 the same High Court should have taken cognizance
of the same offence. While this difference in approach appears
to have been deliberate and for fairly obvious reasons, we feel
that no harm would be done by bringing sub-section (1) into lime
with sub-section (2) in this respect. Even where the question of
forum concerns only one High Court it need be referred to it for
decision only when two or more subordinate courts have taken
cognizance of the offence.

15.51. Sub-section (2) of section 185 is curiously ambivalent
in its approach. The first High Court may only decide that the
trial may proceed in the court subordinate to it. It cannot decide
that the trial should not proceed in that court but in the court
subordinate to another High Court. When one High Court decides
that the trial should proceed within its appellate jurisdiction,
the other proceedings have to be discontinued. The rationale of
this cumbrous and dilatory provision in regard to a matter of
urgent importance to the accused person is difficult to understand.
We recommend that it should be made as clear-cut and simple as
the provision in sub-section (1).

15.52. The section should be consolidated and revised on the
following lines :—

“185. Where two or more courts have taken cognizance
of the same offence and the question atises as to which of them
Ought to inquire into or try that offence, the question shall be
decided,—

(a) if the courts are subordinate to the same High Court,
then by that High Court and

TALR. 1952 Cal, 563.


‘97

(७) if the courts are mot subordinate to the same High
Court, then by the High Court within the local lionts
of whose Appellate criminal jurisdiction the proceed-
ings were first commenced; and thereupon ali other
proceedings in respect of that offence shall be dis-
continued”.

15.53. In this connection we considered whether it would be
desirable to vest in the Supreme Court the power now vesting ia
the High Courts under sub-section (2), in view of the fact that
more than one High Court is concerned and the power to transfer
cases from a court subordinate to one High Court to a court sub-
ordinate to another High Court is vested in the Supreme Court
under section 527 of the Code. We however, came to the con-
clusion that the question of proper forum is not of such difficulty
or importance as to merit a direct reference to the Supreme Court
under the law. it can be adequately dealt with by the High Court
within whose appellate jurisdiction the proceedings in respect of
the offence were first commenced. Even in the extremely unlikely
case of three courts in three different States taking cognizance of
the same offence at about the same time, there is no reason why
the first High Court should not be empowered by law to decide
which of them should continue with the proceedings.

15.54, Section 186 confers on certain magistrates a power to
initiate action against any person within their jurisdiction who is
reasonably suspected to have committed an offence triable by a
court outside that jurisdiction. Though the magistrate does not
take cognizance of the offence in the technical sense, he is em-
powered by the section to inquire into it as if it had been com-
mitted within his jurisdiction, compel the person to appear before
him and bind him to appear before a magistrate who will have
jurisdiction to inquire into the offence. The power is available
whether the offence is cognizable or non-cognizable.

. 15.55. Since the proceedings under this section arc of 2
judicial character, it is not necessary that District Magistrate and
Sub-divisional Magistrates should have the power to take action.
00 the other hand, all Judicial Magistrates of the first class may
be authorised to take action without being specially empowered
by the State Government to do so. We recommend that the open-
ing words of sub-section (1) may be revised to read, “When a
gistrate of the first class sees reason to believe” etc.

15.56. Section 187 prescribes the procedure to be followed
after a person has been arrested on a warrant issued by a Sub-
divisional Magistate or Magistrate of the first class. The Magis-
trate is required to send the person to the District Magistrate or
the Sub-divisional Magistrate to whom he is subordinate unless
there is already a warrant for that person's arrest issued by the
Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the offence. It is then pro-
vided in sub-section (2) that this procedure will not be necessary
if the arrested person is to be sent under section 186 to the court
of a competent Magistrate in the same district. We consider that
1 these controls and dilatory procedure are unnecessary and the
provisions of section 186 (amended as proposed above) can be

Not necessary to
bring in the Sup-
reme Court,

Section 186.

Amendment of
sub-tection (1)
st 5

Section 187—-
omission recom:
mended.


safely left to their operation. We recommend that section 187
should be omitted.

Section 288-— 15.57. The main provision in section 188 is that “when an

counterpart _ of offence is committed by—

section 4, LP.C. (a) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond
india; or

(b) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India
wherever it may be,

he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been
committed at any place within India at which he may be found.”
This furnishes the necessary procedural counter-part to those sub-
stantive penal laws which have extra-territorial application. Thus,
under section 4 of the Indian Penal Code, the provisions of that
code apply also to any offence committed by—
(1) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond
India; or
(2) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India
wherever it may be.

It is explained in the section itself that the word “offence” includes
every act committed outside India which, if committed in India,
would be punishable under the Penal Code. To make the position
clearer still, section 3 provides that any person liable by any
Indian Jaw to be tried for an offence committed beyond India shall
be dealt with according to the provisions of this Code for any act
committed beyond Ini ia in the same manner as if such act had
been done within India.

Extea-tesritorial 15.58. The word “offence” is also defined? in the Criminal
offence, Procedure Code to mean any act or omission made punishable by
any law for the time being in force. Though the words “in India”
are not in the definition at the end, there can hardly be any doubt
that they have to be understood; and when section 188 refers to
the commission of an offence without and beyond India, the act
done or omitted to be done in foreign territory or on the high seas
constituting the offence has to be punishable as such by an Indian
Jaw. In other words, in order to attract this procedural provision
the relative penal law must also have express _extra-territorial
application on lines similar to section 4 of the Indian Penal Code.

Anomalous posi- 15.59. We have already noticed in Chapter I that by virtue of
10 of Jammu the definition of “India” in section 4(1)(j) of the Criminal Pro-
"cedure Code, any place in the State of Jammu and Kashmir is

a “place without and beyond India”. The result is that if a citizen

of India, whether he is a resident of that State or of some other

State in India, commits an offence in Jammu, he may be dealt

with at any place in any other State of India where he may be

found, but before the charge is inquired into at the latter place,

the sanction of the State Government will be required {there beisg

no Political Agent for the State of Jammu and Kashmir).? This

is indeed an anomalous and unsatisfactory situation. Parliament’s

1 See section 4(1)(0).
® State v. Om Parkash, 1966 Cr. LJ. 366.


99

power to legislate for the State does not at present extend to
items 1 and 2 of the Concurrent List, relating, respectively, to cri-
minal law and criminal procedure. We have recommended above!
that the anomaly should be removed by first suitably amending
the Constitution (Application to Jammu & Kashmir) Order, 1950,
under article 370 and then extending the two Codes to the State.

15.60. The use of the word “place” in clause (3) of section
188 may give rise to a doubt whether the section applies where
a citizen of India commits an offence on the high seas, or while On
board a foreign vessel, or in air space over foreign territory or the
high seas while on board a foreign aircraft. The wording of the
first proviso to the section also does not help resolve this doubt.
It was decided in a Bombay case? that the proviso does not apply
to an offence committed on a ship on the high seas since there is
no “territory”, and no Political Agent for the “territory”, in which
the offence is committed. It is desirable to amend clause (a) as
well as the first proviso so as to make it clear that the section
applies when an offence is committed outside India by any citizen
of India, whether on the high seas or elsewhere.*

15.61. An offence falling within clause (b) of section 188 is
extra-territorial only when the Indian ship or aircraft is outside
India including its territorial waters. To this extent, the expression
“wherever it may be” is not precise. Clause {b) need not also
refer to all persons on an Indian ship or aircraft since citizens of
India are already covered by clause (a). The main paragraph
of the section may be revised to read :---

“When an offence is committed outside India—

(a) by a citizen of India, whether on the high seas or
elsewhere; or

(b) by a person, not being such citizen, on any ship or
aircraft registered in India;

he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had
been committed at any place within India at which he may
be found.”

15.62. The first proviso to section 188 requires to be simplifi-
ed and recast in view of the political chan; that have taken
place in the last 20 years. It was origin: ally framed with the
object of controlling the prosecution and trial in British India of
persons accused of committing offences in the former Indian
States. There were a number of Political Agents of the Govern-
ment of India appointed regionally for groups of these States to
100: after the political relationship between the rulers and the
paramount power. When a British Indian subject was alleged
to have committed an offence in an Indian State, the charge as to
such offence could not be inquired into in a British Indian pro-
vince unless the Political Agent for that State certified that it ought
to be inquired into there. Where the offence was committed

) See para 1.9 above.
* Manuel Philip ५. Emp., ALR. 1917 Bom. 280.
See also Po Thaung v. Emp., (1918) 12 Cr. LJ. 198.
S Article 1 of the Convention on_ the Seas, 1958, defines the
term “high seas” to mean all parts of the sea that are not included in
the territorial sea or in the inland waters of a State.

Amendment of
clause (a) to re-
move doubt.

Amendment of
main paragraph
recommended,

First Proviso.


Noa obetamte
clause.

Sanction should
be of Central
Government.

Meaning रण
“charge as 10"
offence.

Amendment o
Proviso recom-
mended.

Second proviso.

100

outside India altogether, the previous sanction of the Provincial
Government was required under the proviso.

15.63. The non obstante clause which was inserted in the pro-
viso by the Amendment Act of 1923 could also be traced to the
same political considerations. The Select Committee, while re-
porting on this particular amendment, said :—

“Certain decisions of the Madras High Court scem to
make it doubtful whether section 188 is subject to the provi-
sions of sections 179 to 184 and we think it is desirable to
clear this up. We are not satisficd that this was the intention
of section 188, and in our opinion it is safer, when a man मै
tried in British India in respect of an offence committed in a
Native State, to require the Political Agent’s certificate in every
case. The amendment which we propose will make this
clear,”

15.64. Since the section now applies mainly to offences com-
mitted by Indian citizens in foreign countrics or by foreigners on
Indian ships or aircraft, jt would be appropriate to provide for
the previous sanction of the Central Government, rather than that
of the State Government. From the practical point of view the
existing provision requiring a certificate from the Indian envoy in
the foreign country appears to be unnecessary. It is also likely
to lead to undue delay in initiating proceedings. It could be left
to the Central Government to consult its envoy in the foreign
country to such extent as it deems fit and proper.

15.65. The proviso refers to a “charge as to” the cxtra-
territorial offence being inquired into in India, This has 1०0 to
a needless controversy as to the stage when the Political Agent’s
certificate or the State Government’s sanction has to be obtained
and produced before the court. While one view is that it is
sufficient to do so some time before the charge is framed against
the accused, some courts have held that it is a condition precedent
to the inquiry by the court into the offence. This controversy
will be avoided by providing “that, notwithstanding anything in
any of the preceding sections of this Chapter, no such offence
shall be inquired into or tried in India except with the previous
sanction of the Central Government.”

15.66. The second proviso is obscurely worded. The inten-
tion is apparently to import the principle laid down in section 403
of the Code and make it applicable in relation to further proceed-
ings under the Extradition Act in a foreign country for the same
offence. If the proceedings taken against a person under section
188 for an extra-territorial offence have resulted in a trial of that
person by a court of competent jurisdiction in India and upon
such trial the person is convicted or acquitted or discharged of
the offence, section 403 will be directly applicable and will debar
his trial in India once again for the same extra-territorial offence.
This being so, it is difficult to give meaning to the periphrasis “bar
to subsequent proceedings against such person for the same
offence if it had been committed in India”. Section 403 applies
equally to an offence committed in India and to an offence com-
mitted outside India,


101

15.67. We think that in so far as any such provision is Te-
quired in the statute book, it should find a place in the Extradi-
tion Act, 1962, rather than in the Code. What is required in
that Act is a provision to the effect that—

(a) while proceedings under section 188 of the Code are
pending against any person in respect of any offence,
no proceedings for extraditing him from India shall
be taken in respect of the same offence either in
India or outside India; and

(b) if in such proceedings, the person is convicted, ac-
quitted or discharged of the offence by a competent
court, no extradition proceedings shall be taken
against him in respect of the same offence either in
India or outside India.

We recommend that the second proviso to section 188 should
be omitted.

15.68. We considered a suggestion that section 188 should
be made applicable to Indian companies and corporations in the
same way as it applies to Indian citizens. This would, in our
opinion, be a case of putting the cart before the horse. It is only
when a substantive penal law applies also to Indian companies
in respect of offending acts committed by them outside India that
8 corresponding provision on the lines of section 188 will be re-
quired. The Indian Penal Code, for instance, does not envisage
the commission of offences by Indian companies outside India.
If in the case of some special law e.g., the Foreign Exchange
(Regulation) Act, 1947, it is felt that Indian companies contra-
vening its provisions outside India should be liable to be tried in
India, it would be as easy, as it would be appropriate, to make a
special provision in that law itself. As a general provision, sec-
tion. 188 does not, in our opinion, require extension to corporate

ies,

15.69. The question may arise whether an Indian citizen who
has been tried by a court of competent jurisdiction in a foreign
country for an offence can be proceeded against for the same
offence when he is found in India, assuming of course that the
act committed by him is an offence punishable under an Indian
law having extra-territorial application. Section 403 of the Code
will not in terms apply to such a case and it isa moot point
whether article 20(2) of the Constitution (which lays down that
“fo person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence
more than once”) will of itself operate as a bar to the proceed-
ings under section 188. Since, however, the Government before
siving its sanction is bound to take into account this fact and ail
the circumstances of the trial in the foreign court, we do not
consider it necessary to suggest any change in the section from
this point of view.

15.70. In the light of the above discussion section 188 may
be revised to read :—
“188, When an offence is committed outside India—

(a) by a citizen of India, whether on the high seas or
elsewhere; or

Provision should
be 50866 in the
Extradition Act
1962.

Suggestion to ex-
tend section 188
to corporations.

Is previous trial
in foreign coun-
try bar to pro-
ceedings under
section 188.2

Section 188 as
revised,

Offence | commit.
ted outside India,


Section 189.

Power to direct
copies of deposi-
tions and exhibits
to be received i
evidence,

Section 190.

102

(b) by a person, Bot being such citizen, on any ship or
aircraft registered in India;

he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had
been committed at any piace within India at which he may
be found :

Provided that, notwithstanding anything in any of the pre-
ceding sections of this Chapter, no such offence shall be in-
quired into or tried in India except with the previous sanc-
tion of the Central Government.”

15.71. Section 189 needs one or two consequential and minor
changes. Although the opening, words “whenever any such
Offence as is referred to in section 188 is being inquired into or
tried” are comprchensive, the section applics only where an
extra-territorial offence is alleged to have been committed in a
foreiga country. In order to toake this clear it would be desir-
able to amend the opening words. Since the sanctioning autho-
rity under the first proviso to section 188 is to be the Central
Government, the reference to the state Government in section 189
should be replaced by the Central Government. And since the
expression “Political Agent” as defined in the General Clauses
Act, 1897, means the principal officer representing India in the
forcign country, we recommend that it should be replaced by “a
diplomatic or consular representative”. Section 189 may accord-
ingly be revised to read :—

“189. When any offence alleged 10 have been committed
in 6 territory outside India is being inquired into or tried
under the provisions of section 188, the Central Government
may, if it thinks fit, direct that copies of depositions made or
exhibits produced before a judicial officer in or for that terri-
torry or before a diplomatic or consular representative of India
in or for that territory shall be received as evidence by the
Court holding such inquiry or trial in any case in which such
Court might issue a commission for taking evidence as to the
matters to which such depositions or exhibits relate.”

B : Corkditions requisite for Initiation of Proceedings.

15.72. The group of sections, from section 190 to section
1998, describes the methods by which, and the limitations sub-
ject to which, various Criminal Courts are entitled to take cop-
nizance of offences.

Section 190 first mentions the classes of Magistrates entitled
to take cognizance, and then says that cognizance may be taken —

“(a) upon receiving a complaint of acts which constitute
such offence;

(0) upon a report in writing of such facts made by any
police officer;
(०) upon information received from any person other

| a police officer or upon his own knowledge or
suspicion that such offence has been committed.”


one

i ——

103

15.73, Clause (०) is of limited practical importance as resort
to it is not had in many cases. Leaving that alone, and speak-
ing broadly, the cases fall into two categories :—

™ (1) those started on complaiat; asd
(2) those started on a police-report.

A “complaint” is defined in section 4(1) (8) as not including the
“report of a police officer”. It seems to us, however, that there
is no practical advantage in distinguishing a case started on a
complaint {rom a case started on “the report of a police officer
which is not given under section 173. In Chapter XXI of the
Code, where two different procedures are laid down for the trial
of two different kinds of cases, the point of distinction is whether
the case was instituted on a “police report” or not, and the ex-
pression “the report of a police officer” is not used, The same
is the case in Chapter XVII.

15.74, At first sight, of course, the difference in_ meaning
between a “police report” and the “report of a police officer” may
seem slight, but authoritative decisions show that the expression
“police report”, which was in fact the expression used in clause
(0) of section 190(1) before 1923, has a technical connotation,
limited to a report made by an investigating officer under section
173 of the Code. Such an investigation can only be of a cogniz-
able offence, or if made into a non-cognizable offence, it must be
with the permission of a Magistrate required by section 155. We,
therefore, consider it important that Magistrates should be readily
able to distinguish a case instituted on a “police report” from
any other kind of case; and to facilitate this, we propose, that
the expression “police report” should be clearly defined in the
Code itself, and the definition should follow the judicial decisions,
limiting it to a report made under section 173, For the same
Teasons, we propose that clause (b) of section 190, sub-section
(1) should mention only a “police report”, leaving other kinds
of reports by a police officer to be treated as complaints. We
have already proposed the necessary verbal alteration in the defi-
nition of “complaint” now contained ia section 4.

15.75. These proposals, we hope, will do away with the con-
troversy whether the present wording of section 190(1) (9) does
or does not include a report made regarding a non-cognizable
offence investigated by a police officer without the orders of a
Magistrate, which on occasions has arisen. At the same time,
there will be a clear-cut division between cases properly investi-
gated by the police and others, and the distinction between cases
instituted on a police report and other cases will be easy to
make.

15.76, Section 190 authorises only a Presidency Magistrate,
a District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional Magistrate to take cogni-
zance of offences, and leaves any other Magistrate to be specially
empowered in that behalf, so that a first class Magistrate cannot,
without such special power, take cognizance. We find no great
advantage in this scheme, as most of the cases have to be handled
by first class Magistrates and, in practice, we gather, all first class
Magistrates have to be so empowered. We feel that all first class

Two main cate
gories of cases.

“Police _ report”?
to be defined and
used in clause (0).

Object of pro-
posals.

First class magis-
trates need not be
specially
empowered,


Amendment

opening words.

Amendment

clause (०).

of

of

Meaning of ‘'may
take cognizance.”

section
revised.

190

as

104

magistrates can be safely entrusted with this power, and the for-
mal step of specially empowering them can be done away with.
We therefore propose to mention ali first class Magistrates in the
section itself, leaving magistrates of the second class to be spe-
cially empowered. We assume, of course, that first class powers
are conferred on magistrates only when they are experienced
enough to exercise them.

15.77. There remain two small matters about this section. It
opens with the words “Except as hereinafter provided”, while in
fact the provisions that follow ate not in a strict sense “excep-
tions”, but only additional requirements for initiating proceed-
ings. It would in our view, be more appropriate to use the
words “subject to the provisions of this Chapter”.

15.78. Clause (c) of sub-section (1) authorises a magistrate
to take cognizance of an offence not only on his own knowledge,
but also on suspicion that an offence has been committed. We
recognize that 2 police officer can, in certain circumstances, act
01 suspicion—(reasonable of course)—that an offence has been
committed;! but we do not think it wise to place such a responsi-
bility on a judicial officer, and we therefore propose to delete that
provision from the clause.

15.79. Before concluding we would like to mention one as-
pect of section 190 which has been discussed in the courts but
which does not scem to require any change in its wording. It
will be noticed that section 190 provides that certain magis-
trates “may” take cognizance of offences if certain conditions are
satisfied. It has at times been argued in court and the argu-
ment accepted, that, despite the use of the word “may” a magis-
trate is bound to take cognizance of an offence if there is before
him a proper complaint, or a proper police report. At other
times, as in a recent case in the Supreme Court, it has been ob-
served that a Magistrate has ample discretion in this respect and
if on looking at a police report he finds that there has not been a
thorough investigation he can, without taking cognizance, order
further investigation. We take it, therefore, that a magistrate has
certain discretion in this connection but as this discretion is judi-
cial in nature, it is limited in its scope, and that is how it should

We, therefore, do not propose to disturb the language of
the section.

15.80, We would accordingly revise the section to read as
follows :—

“190, Cognizance of offences by Magistrate—(1) Subject
to the provisions of this Chapter, any Presidency Magistrate
or Judicial Magistrate of the first class and any Magistrate of
the second class specially empowered in this behalf under sub-
section (2), may take cognizance of any offence—

(8) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute
such offence;

(0०) upon a police report of such facts;

Cf. Section 54.


1985

(०) upon information received from any person other
than a police-officer, or upon his own knowledge, . .
न्न्न्न्ल्न that such offence has been committed.

(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any
Magistrate of the second class to take cognizance under sub-
section (1) of such offences as are within his competence to
inquire into or try.

15.81, Since clause (०) of section 190(1) contemplates the
possibility that cognizance of an offence may have been taken by
a Magistrate because of his own knowledge or bis own informa-
tion, a safeguard bas been provided in section 191 that in such a
situation the accused must be told, “before any evidence is taken,”
that he is entitled to have the case tried by another court and if
he so chooses, “the case shall be committed to the Court of Ses-
sion or transferred to another magistrate”. This rests on the view
that administration of justice should always appear to be un-
biased. As the provision now stands, however, it is possible that
4 magistrate may, in spite of the accused’s previous abject, go
on with the inquiry in order to commit him to the Court ot
Session. The proper and dignified course for a magistrate would,
in our opinion, be to make over the case to another magistrate
88 soon as an objection is raised. This procedure would be fairer
to the magistrate as well as the accused. If cognizance is taken
by a magistrate under clause (०) and the accused objects to the
magistrate hearing the case, the case must at once be made over
to another magistrate competent to inquire into or try it. No
mention of the Court of Session would then be necessary in the
section. We recommend that it should be modified as follows :—

“191, When a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence
under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 190, the
accused shall, before any evidence is taken, be informed that
is entitled to have the case inquired into or tried by another
Magistrate, and if the accused, or any of the accused if there
be more than one, objects to further proceedings before the
Magistrate taking cognizance, the case shall be transferred
to such other Magistrate as may be specified by the Chief Judi-
cial Magistrate in this behalf.”

15.82, Section 192 has two sub-sections. The first em-
powers a Chief Presidency Magistrate, a District Magistrate or a
Sub-divisional Magistrate to transfer a case after taking cognizance
of it, to another magistrate subordinate to him. This is a neces-
sary power for the proper arrangement of criminal work and the
object is that senior magistrates may find it convenient to look
at most of the cases in the first instance but after taking cogni-
zance send them for disposal to their subordinates. The second
sub-section enables a District Magistrate to clothe a first class
Magistrate with powers like his own under sub-section (1). This
again is useful in order to relieve the District Magistrate of un-
necessary burden.

15.83. Section 192 is placed with other sections which deal
with cognizance of offences by criminal courts and, as far as the
express provisions of the Code are concerned, they speak of cog-
nizance only of offences. Section 192(1), however, speaks of

Section 191.

Section 192.

Te cover cases
concerning
offences only.


Revision recom-
mended,

Section 193.

106

“any case of which he (i.e. the Magistrate) has taken cogni-
vance”. The Courts have therefore been persuaded to hold that
the power of transfer mentioned in section 192(1) includes the
power to transfer ail kinds of cases under the Code, and not only
cases concerned with offences. In concrete terms, the decisions
hold that not only an ordinary case under the indian Penal Code
can be thus transferred but also proceedings under section 107
or 133 or 145 of the Criminal Procedure Code. We take Bo €x-
ception to this interpretation. We feel, however, that it is a bit
inconguous that this kind of power of transferring proceedings
under section 107, Cr. P.C. should be included in a provision
which in its proper context should deal only with “offences” and
their cognizance. The power ‘of transferring other proceedings
necessary as it may be—should be mentioned in a more suitable
context. The language of section 192 should be changed to make
it clear that it has nothing to do with transfer of a case other than
a case involving an offence. The provision for transferring other
Kinds of cases will be placed in the Code elsewhere.

15.84, We recommend that section 192 should be revised as
follows :-—

“192. Making over of cases to Magistrate—(1) Any Chief
Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of an
offence, make over the case for inquiry or trial to any compe-
tent Magistrate subdrdinate to him.

(2) Any Magistrate of the first class empowered in this
behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cog-
nizance of an Offence, make over! the case for inquiry or trial
to such other competent Magistrate as the Chief Judicial
Magistrate may, by general or special order, specify.”

15.85. Sub-section (2) of section 193 provides that Addi-
tional Sessions Judges and Assistant Sessions Judges shall try
such cases only as the State Goveroment may direct them to try
or as the Sessions Judge of the division may make over to them
for trial. It appears unnecessary to bring the State Government
into what is, mainly, a matter of distribution of work among the
courts in district, a matter of day to day control of the work of
the courts which, as pointed out by the Supreme Court,” must
rest with the High Court. In Bombay, the power of the State
Government to issue directions under this provision is exercisable
only in consultation with the High Court. Even this restricted
power need not be retained with the State Government. As it is,
the distribution of cases is mainly attended to by the Sessions
Judges and they should continue to do so under the overall con-
trol of the High Court. We recommend that the sub-section may
be amended to read-—

“(2) An Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions
Judge shall try such cases only as the Sessions Judge of the
division, by general or special order, may make over to him
for trial or as the High Court, by special order may direct him
to try.”

3 (1, section 528, (2) and (4).
State of Assam v. Ranga Muhammed, ALR. 1967 S.C. 903.

005 “कि


107

15.86. Section 194 deals with the cognizance of offences by
the High Court. We have discussed above in Chapter Hi the
question whether the ordinary original criminal jurisdiction of the
Calcutta High Court requires to be retained, and recommended
that it should be abolished and that the City Sessions Court in
Calcutta should have the same complete jurisdiction with regard
to criminal cases as in Bombay and Madras. Since the other
High Courts do not exercise ordinary original jurisdiction there
is no need for sub-section (1) of section 194,

15.87. Sub-section (2) of section 194 deals with a special
procedure known as “information by the Advocate General”. It
provides that the Advocate General may exhibit information
azainst persons to the Hich Court for all purposes for which Her
Majesty’s Attorney General may exhibit information on behalf
of the crown in the High Court of Justice in England. This
special procedure has been considered in England as too dilatory
and too inconvenient to afford any satisfactory remedy? and
seems to have been used but rarely. The last such case? to be
filed in England was in 1910 in respect of 9 libel on the king.
The procedure has since been abolished altogether?

15.88. In India also the procedure has seldom been used.
The last case under this provision seems to be one filed in the
Patna High Court in 1930. In that case,f where information
was exhibited against certain person for fabricating and giving
false evidence on a capital charge, it was observed by the Privy
Council that the procedure adopted “of an ex-officio information
was unfortunate and undoubtedly prejudicial to the accused”,
and further that the case “did not differ from other cases of
perjury and conspiracy which have been tried by the ordinary
procedure and its result, it is to be hoped, will be to discourage
the recourse to unusual procedure in similar cases in future”. In
two other cases,5 both involving contempt of court, references
were made to section 194(2) as contentions were raised in both
cases that the proper procedure to be adopted for initiating con-
temnt of court proceedines was the one prescribed in section
194 (2), In both cases the Courts held that the procedure under
section 194(2) is not to be preferred. This procedure which is
fot necessary and has so little to commend it need not be retain-
ed, especially as the corresponding provision in English law on
which it was modelled has been abolished.

15.89. We would therefore recommend that section 194 be
repealed.

15.90. Section 195 deals with prosecution for three different
groups of offences. viz. contempt of lawful authority of public
servants, certain offences against public justice and certain
offences relating to documents given in evidence. The second
and third groups are connected in that both of them affect the

TR. v. Davies (1996) TKB page 41.

2R. ४. Mylius (1910).

8 The Criminal Law Act 1967 (058) Section 666).

3 Dwarkanath vs. Emp. 31.8. 1933 PC, 124.

"In re an Advocate of Allahabad, AIR. 1935 All. 1;
In re Tushakand Ghosh, ALR. 1935 Cal. 419,

Section 194 orixi.
nal jurisdiction of
High Courts.

Section 19402).

Special procedure
found unsuitable
in India,

Repeal of section
494,


Revised section
relating to public
servants,

Section —195(1)
clauses (b) and (०).

Clause (c) should
apply to witnesses
also.

108

administration of justice. Clause (a) of sub-section (1) and

ion (5) concern public servants, clause (0) and (८) of
ction (1), sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) concern
the Courts, and sub-section (4) relates to both. It would, in
our opinion, be conducive to clarity if the two subjects are
dealt with in separate sections. We recommend that section
195 may be split up on the lines indicated above.

15.91. The first section may be as follows :—~

“194. Prosecution for contempts of lawful authority of
public servants—(2) No Coust shall take cognizance---

(a) of any offence punishable under sections 172 to 188
of the Indian Penal Code, or

(9) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit such
offence, or
(०) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,
except on the complaint in writing of the public servant con-
cerned or of some other public servant to whom he is sub-
ordinate.

(2) Where a complaint bas been made by 8 public ser-
vant under sub-section (1), any authority to which he is
subordinate may order the withdrawal of the complaint and
send a copy of such order to the Court; and upon its receipt
by the court no further proceedings shall be taken on the
complaint.”

15.92. Under clauses (b) and (c) of section 195(1), the
complaint of the civil, revenue or criminal court concerned is
necessary for apy criminal court to take cognizance of certain
offences against public justice or certain offences relating to
documents given in evide lence. As observed in a Madras case,
“this salutary rule of law is founded on common sense. The
dignity and prestige of Courts of law must be upheld by their
presiding officers, and it would never do to leave it to parties
aggrieved to achieve in one prosecution gratification of personal
revenge and vindication of a Court’s honour and prestige. To
allow this would be to sacrifice deliberately the dispassionate
and impartial calm of tribunals and to allow a Court’s prestige
to be the sport of personal passions”.

15.93. Jt will be noticed that while clause (b) applies when
any of the specified offences is committed in, or in relation to,
any proceeding in any Court, clause (c) applies only when the
offence of forgery etc. is “alleged to have been committed by a
party to any proceeding in court in respect of a document pro-
duced or given in evidence in such proceeding”. An iroportant
point that has to be considered here is whether the restriction
of the application of the section to a party to the proceeding
should be retained. The purpose of the section is to bar private
prosecutions where the course of justice is sought to be pervert-
ed, leaving it to the Court itself to uphold its dignity and pres-
tige. On principle, there is no reason why the safeguard in
clause (c) should not apply to offences committed by witnesses?

1 Ramaswamy v. P. Mudaliar AUR. 1938 Mad. 173. 174.
3 An illustration of forgery by @ witness is furinshed by the facts |
Dr. S. Dutt v. State of UP, ALR, 1966 S.C. $23.


109

also. Witnesses need as much protection against vexatious pro-
secutions as parties and the Court should have as much control
over the acts of witnesses that enter as a component of a judicial
proceeding, as over the acts of parties. If, therefore, the provi-
sions of clause (०) are extended to witnesses, the extension
would be in conformity with the broad principle which forms the
basis of section 195.

15.94. Another question which arises in this connection is
whether persons who abetted the offence but are not parties to
the proceeding come within the purview of clause (c). It would
seem that their case is covered by sub-section (4) by which the
provisions of sub-section (1) are made applicable to abetment.

In an old case,’ the Bombay High Court took the view that
if a criminal court were to try the abettors it would in fact be
taking cognizance of the principal offence committed by the
party without a complaint from the court which is specifically
forbidden by section 195(1)(c). They also observed that sub-
section (4) of section 195 “appeared to lend countenance” to
this view.

Many High Courts, however, have taken the contrary view
that in the case of persons who are not parties to the proceed-
ing and are alleged to have abetted the commission of forgery
by a party, a complaint by the court is not necessary for prose-
cuting them. This leads to the somewhat incongruous situation
that while the main offender could not be prosecuted without
sanction, any minor aiders, or abettors or accessories of his
could be so prosecuted.

15.95. Another controversial point is, where an offence
specified in clause (c) is alleged to bave been committed by
several persons of whom only one is a party to the court pro-
ceeding, can the others be prosecuted without a complaint from
the court, and also, can the court make a complaint against
those persons who are not parties? Different views have been
expressed by the High Courts on both these questions.

15.96. Taking an over-all view of the matter and keeping
in mind the object of the section, we consider that the scope of
clause (c) should not be restricted to offences committed by
parties to the court proceeding. The clause should apply when
any of the specified offence is alleged to have been committed by
anv person in respect of a document produced or given in
evidence in any proceeding. It should also apply, as provided
in sub-section (4), to criminal conspiracies, abetments and
attempts to commit any such offence in respect of any such
document.

15.97. Though the question has occasionally arisen whether
and when a particular impugned document was actually “produc-
ed or given in evidence in such proceeding”, the expression is
clear enough and we do not consider it necessary to alter it.

15.98. Sub-section (2) of section 195 defines the term
“court” where it occurs in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section

1In re Narayan Dkonddev Risbud, (4910) 12 Bom. LR. 383,

Applicability to
abetments.

When offence is
committed — by
several persons.

Scope of clause
(c) to be enlarged.

“Produced or
given in evie
dence”.

Distinction bet-
ween courts and
quasi-Judicial
tribunals,


Recommendation
Tey 8. tribu-
nas.

Exclusion of re-
and sub-
registrars. 1

(1) as including 2 civil, revenue or criminal court but not in-
cluding a registrar or sub-registrar under the Indian Registra-
tion Act, 1877. (This reference is now to be read as a reference
to the Indian Registration Act, 1908). In the Code as enacted
in 1898, the definition used the word “means” instead of “in-
cludes”. The latter word was substituted by the Amending Act
of 1923. This naturally raises the question what else, besides
civil, revenue and criminal courts, is covered by the generic term
“court”. As observed by the Supreme Court in Virinder Kumar
Satyawadi v. The State of Punjabi—

“It is familiar feature of modern legislation to set up
bodies and tribunals and to entrust to them work of a judi-
cial character but they are not courts in the accepted sense
of that term. * * * * It may be stated broadly that what
distinguishes a Court from a quasi-judicial tribunal is that it
is charged with a duty to decide disputes in a judicial manner
and declare the rights of parties in a definitive judgment.
To decide in a judicial manner involves that the parties are
entitled as a matter of right to be heard in support of their
claim and to adduce evidence in proof of it. And it also
imports an obligation on the part of the authority to decide
the matter on a consideration of the evidence adduced and
in accordance with law. When a question therefore arises
as to whether an authority created by an Act is a Court as
distinguished from a quasi-judicial tribunal, what has to be
decided is whether having regard to the provisions of the
Act it possesses all the attributes of a Court.”

15.99. In any concrete case this question is bound to raise
difficult and complex issues. Consequently we have a long series
of cases over the years deciding what tribunals and officers acting
ina judicial capacity should be regarded as courts and what
should not be so regarded. The substitution of “includes” for
“means” in the definition has, if anything, added to the diff-
culties of the problem. We consider that for the purpose of
clauses (8) and (c), “court” should mean a civil court or a
Tevemue court or a criminal court properly so called, but where a
tribunal created by an Act has all or practically all the attributes of
a court, it might be regarded as a court only if it is declared by
that Act to be a court for the purposes of this section. This would
make the position clear to all. concerned, and particularly to
criminal courts when required to take cognizance of offences fall-
ing within the scope of clause(c). They would then be left with the
comparatively easy question whether the judicial body or autho-
tity before which the document was produced or given in evi-
dence was a civil court or a revenue court or a criminal court.

15.100. The present definition of “court” s cifically ex-
cludes registrars and sub-registrars functioning under the Indian
Registration Act. This appears to have been done in 1898 in
order to settle controversy as to whether these officers when
acting in a quasi-judicial manner in connection with the registra-
tion of documents should be regarded as courts for the purposes.
of section 195(1) of the Code. The view of the Bombay High
Court? was that they were not courts since section 84 of the

1(1955) 2 S.C.R. 1013, 1018.
20. EB. vy. Tulja, LL.R. 12 Bom. 36,

~-


Hii

Indian Registration Act did not mention section 195 of the Code
while declaring for what purposes they should be deemed to be
public servants and the proceedings before them should be deem-
ed to be judicial proceedings. A full bench of the Madras High
Court! held the contrary that the registrar who has the power
under section 75 of the Act to summon and enforce the atten-
dance of witnesses and to compel them to give evidence “as if
he were a civil court” is in all essentials a court. The Allahabad
High Court dissented from this view and observed? :—

“The word “court” must be taken in its ordinary sense,
and the word would not in ordinary language be one used of
the Registrar. Throughout the Indian Registration Act, the
Registrar is described as an officer and his place of business
as an office. When it is necessary to invest him with the
powers of a court the language used is language which clearly
implies that he is not a court. Section 75 of Act III of 1877
makes use of the expression ‘as if he were a civil court’. In
section 483 of the Code of Criminal Procedure he is to be
deemed a civil court for special purposes.”

We consider that the specific exclusion of registrars and sub-
registrars is unnecessary, as they cannot be regarded as civil
courts for the purposes of section 195.

“In clauses (a) and (8) of sub-section (1), the term
‘court’ means a civil, revenue or criminal court, and includes
a tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or
State Act if declared by that Act to be a court for the pur-
poses of this section.”

15.101. Section 195 in so far as it applies to prosecution for
certain offences against public justice may accordingly be revised
as follows :—

“195. (1) No Court shall take cognizance—

(a) of any offence punishable under any of the fotlow-
ing sections of the Indian Penal Code, namely, sec-
tions 193 to 196, 199, 200, 205 to 211 and 228

when such offence is alleged to have been commit-
ted in. or in relation to, a proceeding in any Court, or

(b) of any offence described in section 463, or punish-
able under section 471, section 475 or section 476,
of the same Code, when such offence is alleged to
have been committed in respect of a document pro-
duced or given in evidence in a proceeding in any

‘ourt,

except on the complaint in writing of that Court, or of some other
Court to which that Court is subordinate.

(2) In clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1), the term
“Court” means a civil, revenue or criminal court and includes a
tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act
if declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of this
Section,

3 Atchayya v. Cangayya, LL.R. 15 Mad. 138.
20. E. ५. Ram Lal, LLR. 15 AH. 141, 143,

Section 195 as
revised.

Prosecution 7
offences against
Public justice and
offence relating to
documents given
in evidence.


112

(3) For the purposes of this section, a court shall be deemed
to be subordinate to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie
from the appealable decrees or sentences of such former Court,
or in case of civil court from whose decrees no appeal ordi-
narily lies, to the principal court having ordinary original civil
jurisdiction withio the local limits of whose jurisdiction such civil
court is situate :

Provided that—

(8) where appeals lie to more than one court, the appel-
late court of inferior jurisdiction shall be the court
to whick such court shall be deemed to be subor-
dinate; and

(9) where appeals lie to 3 civil and also to a revenue
court, such court shall be deemed to be subordinate
to the civil or revenue court according to the nature
of the case or proceeding in connection with which
the offence is alleged to have been committed.

(4) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply also to
any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or the
abetment of, any offence specified therein as they apply to such
offence.

Sectlon 196¢—Pro- 15.102. Under section 196 a complaint made by order of,

So agast the OF under authority from, the State Government or some officer

State, empowered by the State Government is necessary to initiate pro-
ceedings for a varicty of non-cognizable offences punishable under
different sections of the Indian Penal Code. First come all the
offences against the State punishable under sections 121 to 130,
except section 127 which relates to receiving property taken by
war or depredation against any power in alliance or at peace with
the Government of India. Though all these offences (except
two) are triable only by a Court of Session and the minimum
punishment is imprisonment for seven years or more, the offences
are non-cognizable under the Second Schedule to the Criminal
Procedure Code and, at the same time, private complaints are
shut out by section 196 of that Code. The object of this sec-
tion which provides an exception to the general rule that a cri-
minal prosecution can be initiated at the instance of any person
is to prevent unauthorised persons from intruding in matters of
State by instituting prosecutions and to secure that such prosecu-
tions shall only be instituted under the authority of Government.t
We do not find any good reason for excluding only section 127 of
the Penal Code from the purview of this section. Further, it
seems to us that, in addition to the State Government, the Central
Government also should have the authority to imitiate prosecu-
tions by ordering a complaint. It is conceivable that in some
circumstances the Central Government might be more concerned
with prosecuting the offender than a State Government. We note
that untit 1937 this authority was vested in the Governor-General
in Council, the Local Government or some officer empowered by
the Governor-General in Council.

1566 Bal Gangadhar Tilak, YL.R. 22 80७. 112(125).

ct


113

15.103. The second group of offences covered by section 196
are the offender, punishable under Chapter EXA of the Indian
Penal Code except section 171F so far as it relates to persona-
tion. This Chapter was inserted in the Indian Penal Code by
the Indian Election’s Offences and Inquiries Act, 1920, and for
the first time made various corrupt and illegal acts committed dur-
ing elections, likely bribery, undue influence, making fzlse state-
ments, personation etc., punishable offences. A wide definition of
election as denoting an election for the purpose of selecting mem-
bers of any legislature, municipality or other public authority of
whatever character was inserted by the same Act in section 21! of
the Penal Code. It was felt that the purity of afl elections should be
maintained by penalising various corrupt and illegal practices
but at the same time in order to allay the apprehensions of several
local governments that the new penal provisions were likely to
be abused, specially in rural areas, for putting one’s personal
enemies into trouble by foisting false cases on them after an clec-
tion, reference to this Chapter of the Penal Code was included
in section 196 of the Criminal Procedure Code. It was thought
that this would give some discretion to the Government to deter-
mine whether criminal proceedings were warranted in the circum-
stances of each case so that vexatious proceedings instituted
solely on the basis of political animosity by private individuals
could be avoided. This secondary object was certainly achieved
but it is doubtful whether the penal provisions ostentatiously put
in the Penal Code, but effectively blunted by section 196 of the
Procedure Code, helped to maintain the purity of elections to any
appreciable extent.

15.104, This difficulty was realised in some provinces in
regard to the offence of personation punishable under section
1717 of the Penal Code. Even a person blatantly committing
this offence at the polling booth could not be arrested or other-
wise proceeded against on the spot since the offence was non-
cognizable and the complaint of an empowered officer was requir-
ed for prosecuting the offender in court. The Criminal Proce-
dure Code was locally amended by four provinces excluding this
offence from the scope of section 196 and making it cognizable.
This lead was followed up in the Representation of the People
Act, 1951, and the amendment became applicable throughout
India.

15.105. The experience of the last 20 years in the field of
countrywide democratic elections shows that unless these impe-
diments to prosecution are removed, the mere fact that bribery,
undue influence, character assassination etc., are punishable on
conviction by a criminal court, makes little difference and these
corrupt practices are indulged in with impunity. The number of
comp Taints lodged by the Government or empowered officers in
regard to election offences (apart from personation) is naturally
very small. Under the party system of government prevalent
throughout the country it will, no doubt, be embarrassing for the
State Government to decide in the first instance whether a com-

aint ought to be lodged in a particular case. Whichever way
it decides this question it is most likely that political motives and
prejudices will be attributed to it. It is possible that if the bar

2 See Explanation 3. Section 6 wakes the definition applicable to
Chapter IXA of the Code also.

Prosecution of
election offences—
history.

Personation ex-
cluded from sec-
tion 196 in 1951.

Exclusion of all
election offences
recommended,


Abetment of ex-

tra-territorial
offences.

Sections _ 153A,
295A and 505,
LPC.

Keeping lottery
office.

Latter part of sec-

tion 196 to
simplified.

be

14

contained in section 196 of the Code is removed there will be 2
spate of private complaints, including quite a few vexatious ones
for the sake of harassment, but we fecl that this possibility must
be faced in the interest of free and fair elections. We recom-
mend that aif election offences should be excluded from the
purview of section 196. We would also recommend that neither
illegal payments in connection with an election nor failure to keep
election accounts need be offences punishable under the Penal
Code and accordingly sections 171 H and 171 I of that Code
be repealed.

15.106. The third item in section 196 is any offence punish-
able under section 108A of the Indian Penal Code. This section
does not exactly create au offence but only explains that a person
abets an offence who, in India, abets the commission of an act
outside India which, if committed in India, will constitute an
offence. It is a form of abetment which along with other forms
is punishable under different sections of the indian Penal Code.
An abetment of the nature described in section 108A is congniz~
able or non-cognizable according as the offence abetted is cogniz-
able or non-cognizable. The object of a provision in section
196 that a court shall take congnizance of such abetment only
on complaint made by order of the State Government appears to
be to keep under control prosecutions which might impinge on
foreign relations in general, and relations with the former Indian
States in particular. (Incidentally, it should be noticed that when
a person in Punjab abets the commission of an offence in Kashmir,
the abetment falls under section 108A of the Penal Code and
consequently attracts section 196 of the Criminal Procedure
Code. In view of the external affairs aspect of the matter, pro-
ceedings for abetment of extra-territorial offences should, in our
opinion, require a complaint made by order of the Central Gov-
ernment or of the State Government.

15.107. The offences under section 153A, section 295A and
section 505 of the Penal Code continue to be non-cognizable,
though by an amendment of that Code in 1961 the maximum
punishment has been increased to three years. We recommend
that, in regard to these offences also, proceedings should require
a complaint made by order either of the Central Government or
of the State Government.

15.108. Section 294A of the Indian Penal Code makes it an
offence to keep an office for, or to publicise, any unauthorised
lottery and the offence is non-cognizable. We see no reason why
private complaints in respect of this offence should be shut out
and recommend that the section should be eft out of section 196.

15.109. The latter part of section 196 is unnecessarily com-
plicated. The complaint necessary for initiating proceedings may
be made “by order of, or under authority from, the State Gov-
ernment or some officer empowered by the State Government in
this behalf.” We recommend that this should be simplified to
complaint made by order of the Central Government or of the
State Government. A simple provision of this type would avoid
the time-consuming controversies that are frequently raised in
the courts as to whether the officer has been duly empowered by
the State Government, whether the authority to lodge the parti-


115

cular complaint has duly emanated from that officer or from the
Government and so on.

15.410, Finally, we propose that any criminal conspiracy to
commit any of the offences covered by section 196 should also
be covered by that section, instead of by clause (1) of section
196A as at present.

15.111. Section 196 may accordingly be revised to read :--
“196. No courr shail take cognizance of—

(a) any offence punishable under Chapter VI, section
153A, section 295A or section 505 of the Indian
Penal Code, or

(b) any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, or

(c) any such abetment as is described in section 108A
oj the Indian Penal Code,

except upon complaint made by order of the Central Government
or of the State Government.”

15.112. Section 196A was inserted in the Criminal Proce-
dure Code by tse Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1913, which
made criminal conspiracy as such an offence by inserting sections
120A and 1208 (Chapter V-A) in the Indian Penal Code. it
was apparently felt that, in the case of petty conspiracies made
punishable for the first time by sub-section (2) of section 1208,
private complaints should not be freely allowed and prosecutions
should be instituted only when necessary in the public interest.
The section classifies such criminal conspiracies in two groups
and makes a fine distinction as to the manner of initiating pro-
ceedings. There scems to be no point in this refinement.

It has been authoritatively held by the Supreme Court! that
when the object of the conspiracy is to commit a cognizable off-
ence, such as cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of pro-
perty, and other non-cognizable offences such as forgery were
also committed as steps for effecting this object, the consent of
the State Government or District Magistrate is not required under
clause (2) of section 196A. In view of this decision, we do not
consider that any clarification is necessary in the section.

15.113. Section 196A may accordingly be simplified and re-
vised as follows :--

“196A. No Court shall take cognizence of any criminal
conspiracy punishable under section 120B of the Indian Penal
Code, other that a criminal conspiracy to commit a cogniz-
able offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards,
unless the State Government or the District Magistrate has
consented in writing to the initiation of the proccedings :

Provided that where the criminal conspiracy is one to
which the provisions of section 194, section 195 or

3 Bhanwar Singh v. State of Rajasthan, ALR. 1968 S.C. 709.

Criminal conspi-
racies also to be
covered,

Section 196 as
revised,
Prosecution for
the offences
against the State.

Section 196A,

Prosecution for
certain classes of
criminal conspi-
racy.


Section 196B.

Preliminary in-
vestigation in
certain cases.

Section 197-—its
object.

History of the
section.

ie

section 196 apply, no such consent shall be
necessary.”

_ 15.414. Section 196B provides that in the case of any offence
in respect of which the provision of section 196 or section 196A
apply, a District Magistrate or Chief Presidency Magistrate may,
“Notwithstanding anything contained in those sections or in any
other part of this Code” order a preliminary investigation by a
police ollicer not being below the rank of faspector. The object
Of suck an investigation can only be to enable the competent
authority to decide whether it should order a complaint under
section 196 or give consent to the initiation of proceedings under
section 196A. We, therefore, recommend that the section should
be amended vesting the power to order investigation in that au-
thority and making it clear that such investigation will take place
before the complaint is ordered or the consent is given, The
words “notwithstanding anything contained in those sections or
in any other part of this Code” are clearly unnecessary and
should be omitted. ‘he section may be revised to read :—~

“196B. The Central Government or the State Govern-
ment beiore ordering complaint to be made under section
196, and the State Government or the District Magistrate
before giving consent under section 196A, may order a pre-
liminary investigation by a police officer not below the rank
of Inspector, in which Case such police officer shall have the
powers referred to in sub-section (3) of section 155.”

15.115. Under section 197 the previous sanction of the ap-
propriate Government is necessary when a judge or a Magistrate
or a public servant, not removable from his office save by or
with the sanction of Government, is to be prosecuted for an
offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty. Substan-
tially similar provisions have found a place in the Code since
1801, the object being to enable the more important categories
of public servants periorming onerous and respcnsible functions
to act fearlessly by protecting them from false, vexatious or mala
fide prosecutions.

15.116. As originally enacted, section 197(1) read :-—

“When any Judge, or any public servant not removable
from his office without the sanction of the Government of
India or ihe Local Government is accused as such Judge or
public servant of any offence, no court shall take cognizance
Of such offcace except with the previous sanction of the Gov-
ernment having power to order his removal, of some officer
empowered in this behalf by such Government or of some
Court or other authority to which such Judge or public ser-
vant is subordinate, and whose_power to give such sanction
has not been limited by such Government.”

It was subsequently noticed that the section did not give protec-
tion to officers not removable from their office except by or with
the sanction of the Secretary of State, nor to Magistrates as such
while acting in their non-judicial capacities. It was also felt that
the phrase “accused as such Judge or public servant of any off-

47


117

ence” was not sulticieatly precise. Accordingly, the section was
amended by the Amending Act of 1923 to read :—

“When any person who is a Judge within the meaning of
section i9 of the Indian Penal Code, or when any Magistrate,
or whea any public servant who is not removabic from his
othice save by or with the sanction of a Locai Government
or some higher authority, is accused of any offence alleged
to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to
act in the discharge of his official duty, no Court shali take
cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction
of the Local Government.”

15.117. The protection against Prosecution thus given to cer-
tain public sezvants was Placed on a constitutional footing by
section 271 of the Government of Ladia Act, 1935. Sub-seciion
(1) of this section provided that “no Bill or amendment to
abolish or restrict the protection afforded to certain servants of
the Crown in India by section 197 of the Indian Code of Criminal

the Federai Legislature without the previous sanction of the Gov-
ermor General in his discretion.” Sub-section (2) of the same
section further provided that “the powers conferred upon a Local
Government by the said section 197 with Tespect to the sanction-

which, the person by whom and the manner in which, a public
servant is to be tried, shall be exercisable only-—

(a) im the case of a person employed in connection with
the affairs of the Federation, by the Governor-Gene-
tal exercising his individual j oder and

(b) in the case of a person employed in connection with
the affairs of a Province, by the Governor of that
Province exercising his individual judgement.”

Following this latter Provision, the words “except with the pre-

vious sanction of the al Government in section 197(1) of the
‘ode were replaced by the Adaptation of Indian Laws order of

1937 with the words “except with the previous sanction-—

{a) in the case of a person employed in conuection with
the affairs of the Federation of the Governor-General
exercising his individual judgment; and

(0) in the case of a person employed in connection with
the affairs of a Province, of the Governor of that
Province exercising his individual judginent.”

Subsequent Adaptation Orders made necessary formal changes
in the section without altering its substance.

15.118. The section now applies to three classes of public
servants, namely :-—

{i) any person who is a Judge within the meaning of
section 19 of the Indian Penal Code;?

Would be defmitive or who is one of a body of persons, which bes of
Person is empowered by law to give such 8 fudgment”, y

Protection rein-
forced by Govern-
ment of 1949
Act, 1935,

Analysis of the
section,


Does section
offend article 14
of the Constitu-
tion?

118

(४) any Magistrate; and

(iii) any public servant who is not removable from his
office save by or with the sanction of a State Gov-
ernment or of the Central Government.

Such a public servant is protected against a prosecution only if
the offence is alleged to have been committed by him while acting
or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty. The
protection consists im the prosecution having to obtain the previ-
ous sanction of the Central Government if the person is employed
in connection with the affairs of the Union, and of the State Gov-
gament if he is employed in connection with the affairs of a
tate.

15.119. The Supreme Court has held? that “Article 14 (of
the Constitution) does not render section 197, Criminal Proce-
dure Code, ultra vires as the discrimination is based upon a
rational classification. Public servants have to be protected from
harassment in the discharge of official duties while ordinary citi-
zens not so engaged do not require this safeguard”. Ia this case,
however, the Supreme Court did not consider whether any ua-
constitutional discrimination was involved in the section extend-
ing its protection to a few categories of public servanis and not
to every public servant as defined in section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code. The judgement states, “if the Government gives
sanction against one public servant but declines to do so against
another, then the Government servant against whom sanction is
given may possibly complain of discrimination. But the peti-
tioners who are complainants cannot be heard to say so, for
there is no discrimination against any complainant. The dis-
crimination will be patent in a case where a senior officer remov-
able from bis office only by the State Government and a subor-
dinate ofticer removable from his office by a lesser authority are
sought to be prosecuted in connection with their official duty,
and the State Government considers it proper to refuse sanc-
tion in respect of the senior officer but has no voice as to the
prosecution of the subordinate. It will be a nice point of law
to determine whether the classification adopted in section 197 of
public servants removable from office only by or with the sanc-
tion of the Government and other public servants is “rational”
having regard to the objective of the safeguard. It has, however,
been laid down by the Supreme Court’, wi file explaining the scope
of article 14, that “the Legislature is free to recognise degrees
of harm and may confine its restrictions to those cases where the
need is deemed to be the clearest.” It can, thercfore, be argued
that Parliament considers that the need of superior Government
servants to protection under this section is the clearest and does
not consider it necessary to extend the protection to lower groups
of Government servants and that in this view, the section does
not offend article 14.

1 Mata Jog Dubey v, H. C. Bhari (1955) 2 S.C.R. 925, 931.

2 Ibid. ०. 932.
8 Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justice Tandolkar, ALR. (1958) S.C. 538,



119

45.120. It has been suggested by a State Government that
this discrimination, whether unconstitutional or not, should be
removed by making section 197 applicable to all public servants
irrespective of the authority competent to remove them from
their office. Activities of the Government have greatly increased
and a public servant at the lowest rung of the ladder is also called
upon to perform duties likely to prejudice the interest of certain
individuals though the same may be in the larger interest of the
society. It is not always possible for the superior oificer to per-
form the duties himself and on a number of occasions he has
to get things done by his subordinates. It is said that this situa-
tion has 100 to an increased number of fictitious and frivolous
proceedings against public servants who are not protected by
section 197 of the Code, bur we have 90 definite information in
support of this statement.

15.121. However that may be, we do nox think it would be
proper or prudent to widen the scope of the section so as to
cover all public servants irrespective of their grade or rank which
goes, Pari passu, with the importance of the duties they have to
perform. [he definition of “public servant” given in section
21 of the ladian Penal Code, particularly clause twelfth, is very
comprehensive. It includes, besides government servants proper,
“every person in the service or pay of a local authority or of a
corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State
Act or of a Government company as defined in section 617 of
the Companies Act, 1956”. The public servants now protected
by section 197 are, broadly speaking, those government servants
in the higher grade with more responsible and onerous duties to
perform and hence requiring to be protected from vexatious pro-
secutions which would be highly detrimental to the administrative
work of Government. There is, in our opinion, no need to ex-
tend this protection to other categories of government servants.

15,122. The meaning of the word “acting or purporting to
act” in section 197 has been well settled by a string of decisions*
of the Federal Court, the Privy Council and the Supreme Court.
Any difficulty that may be felt lies in the actual application of
the principles laid down in these decisions to the facts and cir-
cumstances of particular cases. The scction docs not prescribe
any particular form of sanction, but Courts usually insist on
being satisfied that the sanctioning authority has applied its
mind to the facts of the case before granting sanction, and that
the sanction is not arbitrary?. The sanction need not specify the
Offences as precisely as a charge®, and omission to mention a parti-
cular section of the law also does not seem to preclude the pro-
er

1 Hari Ram ALR, 1939 F.C. 43, 46;

HH. 8. Gill, ALR. 1948 ९.८. 128;

T, A. Menon, ALR. 1950 PC. 19;

Mathum. ALR. 1954 S.C. 455;

Bishwabhusan v. The State, ALR. 1954 S.C. 359;
Satwant Singh v. The State of Punjab (1960)

2 SCR. 89; ALR. 1960 S.C. 266,

Indu Bhusan ४. The State, ALR, 1958 S.C. 148;

Baijnath y. The State, AX.R. 1966 S.C. 220; (1966) 1 S.C.R. 210.

2Gokal Chand Dwarka Das, (1948) 75 Indtan Appeals 30. 37;

1948 P.C. 82;
Jawant Singh v. The State of fund, 1958) S.C.R. 762, 765.

३ Emperor १. Jehangir Cama, ALR. 1927 Bom. 501, 503.
15घ84/69

Suggestion to re-
move discrimina-
tion.

Widening scope of
section to cover
all public servants
not recommended,

Procedural — do~
tails under the
section.


120

secution from. proving the relevant facts’. Though prosecutions
sometimes {ail becatise of defects in the sanction, it does not
appear to be necessary to imsert any provision in the Code as
to what the sanction should contain.

Section to apply 15.123 Section 197, as it now stands, applies to a public
{9 public servant servant of the specified category only when he is holding office
after’ tenrement 35 guch public servant. It does not apply to him after he has
retired, resigned or otherwise left the service’. As interpreted
by the Supereme Court, the section requires that the person charg-
ed must be a public servant not only at the time when the offence
was alleged to have been committed but also when he “is accused”
of the offence’. it appears to us that protection under the sec-
tion is needed as much after retirement of the public
servant as before retirement. The protection afforded by
the section would be rendered illusory if it were open to a
private person harbouring a grievance to wait until the public
servant ceased to hold his official position, and then to lodge
a complaint’. ‘fhe ultimate justification for the protection con-
ferred by section 197 is the public interest in seeing that Official
acts do not lead to needless or vexatious prosecutions. It should
be left to the Government to determine from that point of view
the question of the expediency of prosecuting any public servant.

Reference to sec 15.124, Sub-section (1) refers to “a Judge within the
tion 39. PC. meaning of section 19 of the Indian Penal Code”. Even with-
. out these words, the position will be the same in view Of section
4, sub-section (2), of the Code of Criminal Procedure. In fact,
section 556 of this Code, while referring to the Judge, does not
refer to section 19 of the Indian Penal Code. As regards Magis-
trates, however, the definition in section 19 of the fadian Penal
Code’ may not cover Magistrates while exercising non-judicial
functions or even when holding certain inquiries. It is neces-
sary to refer to Judges and Magistrates explicitly since not all
of them fall under the category of public servants not removable
from their office save by or with the sanction of the Govern-
ment.

Sub-section (2) of 15.125. Sub-section (2) empowers a Government not only
fection, 19 MAY to determine the person by whom the manner in which, and the
ret हे offence or offences for which, the prosecution of the public ser-
vant is to be conducted, but also to specify the Court before
which the trial of the public servant is to be held. It is presum~-
ably to ensure that the dignity of high-placed government servant
is Maintained and that he is not compelled to undergo the em-
barassment of a trial by junior and inexperienced magistrates.
There appears to be no harm in retaining the sub-section without

any modification.

व Maj. J. Phillips v. The State, ALR. 1957, Cal. 12, 25.

2 Keshavial v, The State, ALR. 1961 S.C. 1395; (1962) 1 SCR.
451 (Section 197):

In re S. A. Venkataraman, (1958) S.C.R. 1037 (section 6, Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1947).

3 Emperor v. P. A. Joshi, AIR. 1948 Bom. 248 (Reviews cases).

4C}. the observations in In re S. Y. Patil AIR. 1937 Nag. 293
(now overruled by Keshavial’s case, supra}.


123

15.126. In the light of the above discussion, sub-section (1)
of section 197 may be revised as follows :

“(i) When any person who is or was a Judge x x x or
Magistrate or a public servant not removable from his office
save by or with the sanction of the Central Government or
of a State Government is accused of any offence alleged to
have been committed by him while acting or purporting
to act in the discharge of his official duty, n0 Court shall
take cognizance of such offence except with the previous
sanction—

(a) in the case of a person who is employed, or as the
case may be was at the time of commission of the
alleged offence employed, iu connection with the affairs
of the Union, of the Central Government;

(0) in the case of a person who is employed, or as the
case may be was at the time of commission of the
alleged Offence employed, in connection with the affairs
of a State, of the State Government.”

15.127, Section 197A was inserted by the Amendment Act
of 1951 which extended the Code to all Part B States. It con-
fers on the Rulers of the Former Indian States a protection
sunilar to, but wider than, that conferred on public servants by
section 197, Sub-section (2) of section 197A debars criminal
courts from taking cognizance of any offence alleged to have
been commitied by any such Ruler except with the pnevious
sanction of the Central Government. Under clause (a) of sub-
section (1), the Central Government has notified 284 former
Indian States; and every person who is for the time being recog-
nived by the President as the Ruler of any of these States is en-
titled to protection under the section.

15.128. During the British regime, the Rulers of Indian States
in political alliance with the paramount power were treated as
sovereign within their respective territories and, consequently,
they enjoyed the absolute privileges enjoyed by independent
sovereigns and their ambassadors in the courts in England in
accordance with the principles of international law. In British
India also, so far as the criminal courts were concerned, they
were not amenable to their jurisdiction at all on the principle
which is stated in a classic judgement! on the subject as follows :—

“The principle to be deduced from all these cases is
that, as 8 consequence of the absolute independence of
every sovereign authority, and of the international comity
which induces every sovereign State to respect the indepen-
dence and dignity of every other sovereign State, each and
every one declines to exercise by means of its courts any of
its territorial jurisdiction over the person of any sovereign
ot ambassador of any other State, or over the public pro-
perty of any State which is destined to public use, or over
the property of any ambassador, though such sovereign,
ambassador, or property be within its territory, and, there-
fore, but for the common agreement, subject to its jurisdic-
tion.”

The Parlement Belge, (1880) 5 P.D., 197, 214, 215.

Sub-section (1)
revised.

Section 197A,

Absolute हि: ९
ge enjoy

the rulers during
British regime.


Continuance of
privilege under
the Constitution.

Limited — protec-
tion under $6९-
tion 197A.

Section 198—dele-
tion_of reference
to Chapter XIX
of LPC, reco-
mmneded.

Offences against
marriage —_con-
solidation of pro-
visions in sections
198, 199 199A
aad 1998.

122

15.129. When alter Independence, the process of integrat-
ing the former indian States with the rest of the country began,
guarantees were “given t0 the Rulers under the various Agree-
ments and Covenants for the continuance of their rights, dig-
nities and privileges. The rights enjoyed by the Rulers vary
from State to State and are exercisable both within and without
the States. They cover a variety of matters ranging from the
use of red plates On cars to immunity from civil and criminal
jurisdiction and exemption from customs duties. Even in the
past it was neither considered desirable nor practicable to draw
up an exhaustive list of all these rights. x हू X Obviously, it would
have been a source of perpetual regret if all these matters had
been treated as justiciable. Article 363 has, therefore been em-
bodied in the Constitution which excludes specifically the Agree-
ments of Merger and the Covenants from the jurisdiction of
Courts except in cases which may be referred to the Supreme
Court by the President. At the same time, the Government of
india considered it necessary ‘that conStitutional recognition
should be given to the guarantees and assurances which the Gov-
ernment of India have given in respect of the rights and privi-
leges of Rulers. This is contained in Article 362, which pro-
vides that in the exercise of their legislative and executive Organs
of the Union and States will have due regard to the guarantees
given to the Rulers with respect to their personal rights, privi-
leges and dignities.”*

15.130. ‘The enactment of section 197A in the Code of
Criminal Procedure was intended to give effect to this directive
in so far as criminal prosecutions ‘of ex-rulers were concemed.
Having regard, however, to the changed circumstances, the sec-
tion did not confer on them an absolute immunity from prose-
cution for any offence, but only a limited protection in the sbape
of a previous sanction by the Central Government to the prose-
cution, No amendment is required in this section.

15.131. Section 198 deals with the cognizance of offences
falling under section 491, sections 493 of 496 and sections 500
to 502 of the Indian Penal Code. These three groups of offences
have nothing in common, but under section 198, proceedings
can be jnitiated only on complaint made by some person aggriev-
ed by the offence. The first offence mentioned in the section,
namely, breach of contract to attend On or to supply demands
to helpless persons, hardly ever comes before the courts, It
seems to us to be wholly unnecessary to hedge it in with the
procedural restriction that only some person aggrieved by the
Offence can lodge a complaint against an offender. We recom-
mend the deletion of the reference to Chapter XIX of the
Indian Penal Code in section 198.

45.132. The second group of offences covered by
the section are the first four offences in Chapter XX
of the Indian Penal Code. The other two offences in the same
Chapter, namely, adultery and enticing or taking away a married
woman with criminal intent, are dealt with mainly in section
199, Certain procedural aspects which are common to sestions

LWhite paper on Indian States (Revised Edition). 1950, pp 125126,
paragraph 240.

+


123

198 and 199 are dealt with in sections 199A and 1998. 1६
would be conducive to clarity and ease of reference if the cogni-
zanoe of all offences relating to marriage (sections 493 to 498 of
the Indian Penal Code) and matters connected therewith are dealt
with in a singic section. A draft is proposed below.

15.133. fn this draft section, we have made two minor modi-
fications of substance. There is at present a conflict of decisions
as to whether sections 198 and 199 apply to attempts and abet-
ments of the offences. One view is that any abétment or
attempt to commit the offence, say of bigamy, could be regarded
as an offence “falling under” section 494 of the Penal Code.
The proposed draft makes this clear.

15.134. Clause (b) of the second proviso to section 198
and the second proviso to section 199 which are in identical
terms, relate to offences under sections 494, 497 and 498 of the
Penal Code. Jn the circumstances envisaged in the proviso, it
hardly scems necessary that the person duly authorised by the
husband serving in the Armed Forces should be required to
obtain leave of the Court to make the complaint on his behalf.
There is also no reason why the proviso should not apply to
the other offencés relating to marriage in the same Chapter.

15.135. The revised section 198 dealing with prosecutions
for offences against marriage may be as follows : —

“198. (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence
punishable under Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code
except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved
by the offence :

Provided that—

(a) Where such person is under the age of eighteen years,
or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or in-
firmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who
according to the local customs and manners, ought not
to be compelled to appear in public, some other
person may with the leave of the Court, make a com-
plaint on his or her behalf;

(9) where such person is the husband and he is serving in
any of the armed forces of the Union under conditions
which are certified by his commanding Officer as
precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to en-
able him to make a complaint in person, some other
person authorised by the husband in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section (4) may.... make a
complaint on his behalf;

(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable
under section 494 of the Indian Penal Code is the wife,
complaint may be made on her behalf by her father.
mother, brother. sister, son or daughter or by her
father’s or mother’s brother or sister.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), no_ person
other than the husband of the woman shall be deemed to

New section to
apply to attempts
and abetments.

Modifications _
relating to serving

soldiers.

Revised section
198.

Prosecution for

offences
marriage.

against


New section re-
garding prosecu:
tion for defama
tion.

Prosecution for
defamation.

124

be aggrieved by any offence punishable under section 497
or section 498 of the said code:

Provided that, in the absence of the husband, some
person who had care of the woman on his behalf at the
time when such offence was committed may, with the leave
of the Court, make a complaint on his behalf.

(3) When in any case falling under clause (व) of the
Provisq to subesection (1)..... the complaint is sought
to be made on Sehalf of a person under the age of eighteen
years or of a lunatic by @ person who bas not been ap-
pointed or declared by a competent authority to be the
guardian of the person of the minor or lunatic, and the
Court is satisfied that there is a guardian so appointed or
declared, the Court shall, before granting the application for
leave, cause notice to be given to such guardian and give
him a reasonable opportunity of being heard,

(4) The authorisation referred to in clause (b) of the
Proviso to sub-section (1) shall be in writing, shall be
signed or otherwise attested by the husband, shall contain
2 statement to the effect that he has been informed of the
allegations upon which the complaint is to be founded, shall
be countersigned by his Commanding Officer, and shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by that officer to the
effect that leave of absence for the purpose of making a
complaint in person cannot for the time being be granted to
the husband.

(5) Any document purporting to be such an authorisa-
tion and complying with the provisions of sub-section (4).
and any document purporting to be a certificate required
by that sub-section shall, unless the contrary is proved, be
presumed to be genuine and shall be received in evidence.

(6) The provisions of this section apply to the abetment
of or attempt to commit, an offence as they apply to the
offence.”

15.136. So far as offences falling under Chapter XXI of the
Indian Penal Code, fe. defamation, are concerned, the provision
m section 198 may be put in a new section 198AA consisting
only of the main clause and the first proviso. The provision
contained in section 199A is hardly necessary in defamation
cases, and can safely be dispensed with. The section will read
as follows :—

“198AA. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence
punishable under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code
except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved
by the offence :

Provided that where such person ig under the age of
eighteen years, or is an idiot or Junatic, or is from sickness
or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who,
according to the local customs and manners, ought not to
be compelled to appear in public. some other person may,
pith ihe deave of the Court, make « complaint on hie or


128

15.137. Section 198A lays down a tule of limitation in
regard to the offence of rape where it consists of sexual inter-
course by a man with his own wife, the wife being under fifteen
years of age. Clause (ii) of the section is obviously spent and
may be omitted. The revised section will read :—

“498A. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence
under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, where such
offence consists of sexual intercourse by a man with his
own wife, the wife being under fifteen years of age, if more
than one year has elapsed from the date of the commission
of the offence.”

15.138. Section 198B, which was introduced by the
Amendment Act of 1955, deals with prosecution for the offence
of defamation where such offence is committed against certain
high dignitaries and public servants in respect of their conduct
in the discharge of public functions. The section lays down a
special procedure for such cases. The Court of Session is em-
powered to take cognizance of such offence, without the ac-
cused being committed to it for trial, upon a complaint in
writing made by the Public Prosecutor. It is not necessary? for
the aggrieved person to siga the complaint under this section,
but the complaint has to be made with the previous sanction of
a specified authority. There are also distinctive features which
will be discussed below.

15.139. The legislative history of the section is interesting,
and instructive. In the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amend-
ment) Bill of 1954 as introduced in Parliament, it was proposed
that the offence of defamation of public servants should be made
cognizable on the ground that? “often grossly improper, unfound-
ed and defamatory allegations and charges are made against
public servants in regard to their actions in the discharge of
their official duties. It is desirable, in the public interest, that
inquiries should be made into such charges. Therefore, such
cases are being made cognizable, so that they may be brought
before a court by the police after proper investigation. Such
cases are being made triable exclusively by a Court of Session.”

15.140. There was strong opposition to this proposal, parti-
cularly from the Indian Federation of Working Journalists. The
Press Commission® which reported on 12th July, 1954, made the
following points against the Bill :—

“We think that it would not be altogether safe to make
such offences cognizable with all the consequences flowing
from such a provision. It would enable the police to arrest
the alleged offender without_a warrant. to take preventive
action contemplated under Chapter XIII of the Criminal
Procedure Code and to conduct searches under sections 165
and 166 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The defamatory

2P. C, Joshi, ALR. 1961 SC. 387: (1961) 2 SCR. 63. See also
suib-Sec. (14) inserted by Act 40 of 1964.

IStatement of Obiects and Reasons attached to the Bill: note on
clause 25.
t went of the Press Commission (12 Suly. 1954) paragraph 172
10 175.

Section 1984--
omission of
spent clause.

Prosecution for
offence of martial
misbehaviour.

Section 198B~
Introguction.

Legislative his-
tory.

Views of the Press
Commission.


Recommendation
of the Press Com-
mission,

Pinal views of
the Joint Com-
mittee.

126

allegation may be so vague that it would be impossible to
secure a conviction. These allegations may vary in gravity;
some may be serious while others may be so inconsequen-
tial that no one would take sérious notice of them. Yet
to invest police officers with power to take action in all
these cases might weli constitute an instrument of oppres-
sion. xX xX xX xX it would depend upon the subjective appre-
ciation by the police officer as to what constitutes defama-
tion. x x x Even if ultimately no case is sent up by the
police, the ignominy involved in an artest is not wiped out.

On the other hand, we realise that there would be some
cases where serious allegations are made which would re-
quire police investigation. There may also be public ser-
vants, perhaps with guilty conscience who would not be
willing to bring cases into courts and to clear themselves
of the defamatory allegations. The police cannot take any
action because the offence is a non-cognizable one, and
under section 198 of the Criminal Procedure Code, no court
can take cognizance of the offence of defamation {an
offence falling under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal
Code) except upon a complaint made by a some person
aggrieved by such offence. A procedure has therefore, to
be devised which will strike a balance between those two
considerations, viz., (1) frivolous action by the police and
the consequent harassment of the alleged offender, and (2)
the desirability of police investigation or magisterial inquiry
in some cases where it is necessary that the public servant
should clear himself of the defamatory allegations.”

15.141. The Press Commission recommended an addition
to section 198 as follows :—

“Provided further that where the person aggrieved
under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code is a public
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code, by reason of allegations made in respect of his con-
duct in the discharge of his public duties, the magistrate
with jurisdiction may take cognizance of the offences
upon a complaint made in writing by some other public
servant to whom he is subordinate.”

It also recommended an addition to section 202 to the effect
that “where the complaint is in respect of defamation of a pub-
lic servant in the discharge of his duties the Magistrate shall
make the inquiry himeslf or direct an inquiry or investigation
into the complaint as aforesaid.”

15.142, The Joint Committee which considered the Bill of
1954 agreed! that “the offence of defamation against the Presi-
dent. Governor or Rajpramukh of a State, Minister, or other
public servant should not be made cognizable.” They omitted
the clause by which section 198 was amended and recommended
as follows :—

“Instead, the Committee have inserted a new section
198B in the Criminal Procedure Code. In drafting this sec-

1 Joint Committee's Report, para 18 on clause 25.

>>


127

tion, the Committee have taken into consideration the recom-
mendations of the majority of the members of the Press Com-
mission and the evidence tendered by, the representatives of
Jndian Federation of Working Journalists. _ While the Com-
mittee consider that dafamation of a public servant should
not be made a cognizable offence, they are of the opinion that
there should be an independent authority apart from the
person aggrieved to set the law into motion. The Committec
are of the view that the procedure laid down in sub-section
(2) of section 194 is cumbersome, and might prove expen-
sive. The Committee consider that the Public Prosecutor
should have the right to launch a prosecution in all such
cases by a written complaint which should be filed before the
Court of Session. The Court of Session may take cognizance
of the offence upon such complaint without the accused being
committed to it for trial, and it shall try the case following
the procedure prescribed for warrant cases. The Public
Prosecutor, however, shall have no right to make a complaint
except with the previous sanction of the person specified in
sub-section (3) or section 198B. Such a complaint should
set forth such particulars as may be reasonably sufficient to
give notice to the accused of the offence alleged to have been
committed by him, and should be filed within six months
from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been

committed.”
वि पति Section designed
15.143, Section 1988 thus emerged in its present form after Teaver 09

much deliberation and discussion. It was substantially different rament’s reputa-
from the original clause in the Bill, and also from the provision tion.
suggested by the Press Commission. It brings in the Public Prose-
cutor, who is expected to make the complaint made with the Gov-
eroment’s approval and to conduct the trial before the Court of
Session. It puts the whole weight of the Government against

the accused, in what would otherwise have been a private litiga-

tion between the accused and the public servant. This interven-

tion of the State can be justified only on the ground that the Gov-
ernment has an interest in protecting its reputation when it is
likely to be tarnished if an attack on its officers goes unchallenged,

or in other words, the defamation, besides causing harm to the
individual, has caused appreciable injury to the State.

15.144. The primary object behind section 1988 is to pro- Sub-section (1)—
vide a machinery enabling Government to step in to maintain yonteessiry, fo
confidence in the purity of administration when high dignitaries री PY
and other public servants are wrongly defamed. We think that ह
to achieve this object, it is unnecessary to cover all Government
servants irrespective of their position. Government servants in
general, can seek permission of the Government and approach
the Courts for vindicating their official conduct.1_ The special
provision is needed only for the high dignitaries who really consti-
tute the Government itself. We think that it should be confined
to the President and the Vice-President of India, the Governors
of States, Administrators of Union Territories and Ministers,
whether of the Union or of a State.

Details as to the number and nature of the prosecutions
taunched under section 1988 since 1955 which were furnished to

3 (7 Rule 19, Central Civil Services’ Conduct Rules.



Defamation of
ex-ministers.

Sub-section (1)
revised.

128

us by the Courts of Session show that a comparatively large
pumber of cases were on behalf of the subordinate ranks of Gov-

ernment servants. For example, during the period 1955 to 1967, ,

only twenty-five cases were instituted under this section in Punjab,
out of which 2 related to Class I officers, 8 related to class If
officers and 15 related to other Government servants such as
sub-Inspectors of Police, Registration Clerk, Accountants, Peons
etc. The Total number of prosecutions in any year was very
small.

We are of the view that the provisions of the section, excep-
tional as they are, should be confined to the high dignitaries of
the State mentioned above. In the case of defamation of other
public servants, the ordinary provisions of section 198 should be
enough, so far as the Code is concerned.

15.145. In a case! decided by the Allahabad High Court, the
question arose whether section 198B applied when the person de-
famed was a Minister of the State Government but bad ceased
to hold that office at the time when he was defamed. The High
Court held in the affirmative stating that publication of the defa-
matory atticle, apart from being defamatory of the ex-minister in
his personal capacity, “was also a defamation of a Minister of the
U.P. State. It was, therefore, the State which suffered the injury
along with the individual and the responsibility for initiating pro-
secution for defamation, therefore, lay with the State of U.P.
irrespective of the fact whether the particular Minister remained
in the State as such at the time the article was published or when
sanction to prosecute the accused was obtained or not.”

We are somewhat doubtful whether, strictly as a matter of
interpretation, this view of sub-section (1) is correct. Looking
to the main object of the section, however, we consider that the
section should apply only when the person defamed holds, at the
time of the defamation, an office mentioned in that sub-section.
In the case of a Minister, for instance, the defamation must be of
a person who, on the date of the defamation, is actually a Minis-
ter. In our opinion, it is not necessary that the State should have
the power to initiate prosecutions under this section for alleged
defamation of ex-ministers.

15.146. Sub-section (1) of section 1988 may accordingly be
revised as follows :—

“(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code,
when any offence falling under Chapter XXI of the Indian
Penal Code is alleged to have been committed against a person
who, at the time of such commission, is the President of India,
the Vice President of India, the Governor of a State,
the Administrator of a Union Territory, or a Minister of
the Union or of a State or of a Union Territory, x x x in
respect of his conduct in the discharge of his public func-
tions, a Court of Session may take cognizance of such offence,
without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint ia
writing made by the Public Prosecutor.” .

1 Ramesh Sinha v.iPublic Prosecutor, A.J.R. 1960 All, 763, 768.



129

15.147. Sub-section (3) which requires the Public Prosecutor
to obtain the previous sanction of the Government concerne
in the case of public servants and of some particular secretary to
the Government in the case of the President, Vice-President,
Governor or Minister, appeats to be unnecessarily complicated.
Yn the case of the Governor of a State, for instance, a Secretary
to the Government authorised by the Governor in this behalf has
to apply his (the Secretary’s) mind to the facts of the case and
give his previous sanction to the Public Prosecutor lodging the
complaint. This may place him in an awkward and embarras-
sing position if the Governor himself has suggested taking action
under the section. It would be simpler and more straight ‘orward
to provide for the previous sanction of the Government concern-
ed in all cases. The sub-section may be revised as follows :—

“(3) No complaint under sub-section (1) shall be made
by the Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction—

(a) of the State Government, in the case of the Gover-
nor of a State or of a Minister of the State Govern-
ment; and

{b) of the Central Government in any other case.”

15.148. Sub-section (5) lays down that the Court of Session
taking cognizance of an offence under sub-section (1) shall try
the case without a jury and follow the same procedure as a
Magistrate is required to follow in trying a warrant case insti-
tated on complaint. Since Jury trials are to be abolished and the
procedure for sessions trial in general is to be simplified, it wilt
be sufficient to provide that the Court of Session may try a case
under this section as if it had been committed to it by the Magis-
fate 9 on a complaint. The sub-section may be revised as
follows :—

“(5) A Court of Session taking cognizance of an offence
under sub-section (1) shall try the case as if it had been com-
mitted to it by a Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence
upon a complaint :

Provided that the person against whom the offence is
alleged to have been committed shall, unless the Court of
Session, for reasons to be recorded, otherwise directs, be
examined as a witness for the prosecution.”

The latter half of the sub-section which has been put in the form
of a proviso in the above redraft is intended to avoid abuse of
the procedure or any suspicion of it. Ordinarily, there could not
be a fair trial in a case of defamation without the person who
claims to have been defamed entering the witness box and stand-
ing cross-examination. In order to maintain public confidence,
the sub-section rightly provides that, even where the aggrieved
person is a high dignitary, he must give evidence in person.

15.149. Sub-sections (6) to (11) provides for the pa pment
of compensation in any case where the court acquits or disc!
the accused and is of the opinion that the accusation against him
was false and either frivolous or vexatious. Cases where the

Sub-section (3)
Tevised.

Sub-section ($)
revised.

Compensation
under sub-section
(8) to (11).


Sub-sections (6)
and (7) amended.

Sub-sections (8)
to (11).

Sub-section (12)
omitted.

130

aggrieved person is the President or the Vice-President of India
or the Governor of a State are, however, taken out of the pur-
view of these sub-sections. This leaves the cases where the
person against whom the offence of defamation is alleged to have
been committed is a Minister or other public servant. Though
that person may not have expressly given his consent to the com-
plaint lodged by the Public Prosecutor, the Court is required to
call upon that person (and not the Public Prosecutor) to show
cause why he should not pay compensation to the accused? In
practice, however, the complaint would not have been sanctioned
by the Government in the case of defamation of a Minister un-
fess the Minister himself had initiated the prosecution or, at any
rate, given his personal consent to it. We have recommended
above that the scope of this section need not extend to cases of
defamation of ordinary public servants. Where defamation of a
Minister is alleged and not proved and the complaint is found to
have been filed without reasonable cause, it is but proper that, as
provided in sub-section (6), the Court should ask the Minister
to show cause why he should not pay compensation to the
accused.

15.150, Sub-sections (6) and (7) may be amended to read
as follows :— पु
“(6) If, in any case instituted under this section, the Court
of Session x x x discharges or acquits all or any of the accused
and is of opinion that there was no reasonable cause for mak-
ing the acquisition against them or any of them, it may, by
its order of discharge or acquittal, direct the person against
whom the offence was alleged to have been committed, where
such person was at the time of such commission a Minister,
to show cause why he should not pay compensation to such
accused or to each or any of such accused, where there are
more than one.

(7) The Court of Session shall record and consider any
cause which may be shown by the person so directed, and if it
is satisfied that there was no reasonable cause for making the
accusation, it may, for reasons to be recorded, direct that
compensation to such amount not exceeding one thousand
rupees, as it may determine, be paid by such person to the
accused or to each or any of them.”

15.151, Sub-sections (8) to (11) do not require any change
of substance.

15.152. Sub-section (12) makes the section applicable to
the High Courts at Calcutta and Madras in the exercise of their
original criminal jurisdiction. But so far as Madras is concerned,
Madras Act 34 of 1955 has omitted sub-section (12), and it is
only the City Sessions Court which has jurisdiction under the
section in the Presidency-town. In view of our proposal to abolish
the ordinary original jurisdiction of the High Court at Calcutta,
the sub-section may be omitted.

110 may be noted that the provision regarding compensation was not
recommended by the Joint Committee which considered the Amendment
Bill in 1954 though it was suggested by one of its members in a dis-
senting note. It came in. fater by means of an amendment moved in
हिल Lok Sabha while considering the Bill as revised by the Joint Com-

(९९.


131

15.153. Sub-section (13) states that “the provisions of
section 198B shall be in addition to, and not in derrogation of,
those of section 198”. The precise meaning and effect of this
sub-section was a matter of controversy until it was ९६ settled by the
Supreme Court.! The sub-section is “enacted with a view to
state ex abundanti cautela that the right of a party aggrieved by
publication of a defamatory statement to proceed under section
198 is not derrogated by the enactment of section 1988. The
expression ‘in addition to’ and ‘not in derrogation of mean the
same thing, that section 198B is an additional provision and not
intended to take away the right of a person aggrieved, even if
he belongs to the specified classes and the offence is in respect of
bis conduct in the discharge of his public functions, to file a com-
plaint in the manner provided by section 198”. The Supreme
Court thus negatived the contention that, in every case falling
under section 198B, besides the complaint filed by the Public
Prosecutor, there must also be a complaint by the aggrieved
person.

15.154. Presumably with a view to making this position clear,
sub-section (14) was added to section 1988 by the Anti-Cor-
cuption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964. This sub-section states
that “where a case is instituted under this section forthe trial of
any offence, nothing in sub-section (13) shall be construed as
requiring a complaint to be made also by the person aggrieved
by the said offence”. ‘The correct position appears to be that the
remedies available to the aggrieved person under the two sections
are not mutually exclusive but are parallel to, and independent
of, each other. Where the aggrieved person and the Government
concemed have decided to proceed under section 198B, it is
clear that the complaint need not comply with the condition laid
down in section 198. This idea could be readily brought out by
inserting the usual saving provision in section 198, e.g., the words
“save as otherwise provided in section 198B”. If this was done,
the only point to make clear in section 198B would be that the
tight of the aggrieved person to bring forward a complaint on
his own in the Court of a Magistrate in accordance with section
198 was not in any way affected.

15.155. We accordingly propose that in place of the existing
sub-sections (13) and 14), the following sub-section may be
put in section 1988 :—

“(13) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the
Person against whom the offence referred to in sub-section
(1) is alleged to have been committed, to make a complaint in
respect of that offence before a Magistrate having jurisdic-
tion or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance of
the offence upon such complaint.”

15.156. Sub-sections (1), 2). (3), (4), (13) and (14) of this
section are properly within the scope of this Chapter since they
deal with the conditions required for initiation of proceedings in
a certain category of cases. The other sub-sections, however, are
special pevsons governing the trial of these cases by the Court
of Session, and, as such, it will be more appropriate ६

in Chapter XXIII below. पु PPrOP' © Pat them

1P. 6. Joshi y. State of U.P, AER. 1961 S.C. 387, 390.

Effect of Sub-
section (13).

Sub-section (14)
added in 1964,

Revised sub-sec-
tion in place of
Sub-sections (13)
and (14).

Yoclusion of part
of section — in
Chapter XXUE
recommended,


General scheme
of chapter.

Provisions sound,

‘Section 200-omis-
sion of “at once’’.

CHAPTER XVI
COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES

16.1. Chapter XVI of the Code deals with complaints to
Magistrates and contains. only four sections. _One of these, sec~
tion 201, merely provides that if a complaint is made to 8 Magis-
trate who is not competent to deal with it, he must, if it is in writ-
ing, return it with an endorsement that it should be presented to
the proper court, and if it is an oral complaint, direct the com-
plainant to the proper court. The other three sections describe
bow a competent Magistrate should deal with complaints. The
scheme is simple enough. The Magistrate must fitst examine the
complainant and, if there ate any witnesses present, they too
must be examined and a record of such examination made. If
the Magistrate finds that there is substance in the complaint and
he ought to proceed further, he can, of course, summon the
accused. The formal power in that respect is contained in section
204. In case, however, he is not satisfied after hearing the
complainant and the few witmesses, the Magistrate can postpone
the issue of process against the accused, and for satisfying him-
self, either—

(a) inquire into the case himself, or

(b) send it for inquiry to a subordinate Magistrate, or
(९) send it for investigation to a police officer, or
(9) send it for investigation to some other person.

This inquiry or investigation is, according to section 202, for

the purpose of “ascertaining the, truth or falsehood of the com-
plain’ The section further requires the Magistrate to record
jis reasons for ordering such an inquiry or investigation. The
next section provides that if after such investigation or inquiry
the Magistrate finds that there is no justification for proceeding
further and summoning the accused, he may dismiss the com-
plaint after recording his reasons,

16, 2. We are satisfied that the general policy underlying
these provisions is sound. Every-day experience of the courts
shows that many complaints are ill-founded, and it is necessary
therefore that they should at the very start be carefully considered
and those which are not on their face convincing, should be sub-
jected to further scrutiny so that only in substantial cases should
the court summon the accused person, We are not therefore pro-
posing any change of substance.

16.3. There are, however, some details which admit of im-
Provement. Section 200 requires that the magistrate must
examine the complainant “at once” in order to emphasise that
such examination is, in every case, the first step to be taken. It
ean, however, lead to a futile controversy about the effect of
some time interval between the receiving of a complaint and the
complainant’s examination, which we would like to avoid. We
have therefore deleted the expression “at once”, as we bave no
doubt that the mandate of the law is otherwise sufficiently clear,

a

>


133

16.4. The proviso to section 200 says, among पड other things,
that a presidency magisttate may er may not ninister oath to
the complainant, and further, in the case of a written complaint
he need not make such a full record of the examination as other
magistrates are required to do. - We find no proper justification,
these days, to make a distinction between a presidency magis-
trate and other competent magistrate, and havo removed the dis-
tinction.

16.5. One question for our consideration was whether a com-
plainant must always appear in court to support his complaint,
unless the complainant be a court of a public servant already
excepted by section 200, or whether he can be permitted to be
examined on commission and perhaps, send his written complaint
to the court through post. We are clear that the making of a
complaint is a formal act with legal consequences and it must be
done formally in person or through properly appointed counsel
and the complainant must be ready to support it with his sworn
statement in court. The provision for a commission is contained
in section 503 of the Code and it contemplates only the witnesses’
examination on commission. Although therefore some courts
have at times allowed a commission to be issued for the exami-
nation of a complainant, we are not in favour of encouraging such
a practice.

16. 6. In the light of the above discussion, section 200 may
be revised to read as follows :—

“200. A Magistrate takimg cognizance of an offence on
complaint shalt examine upon oath the complainant and the
witnesses present, if any, and the substance of such examina-
tion shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the
complainant and the witnesses, and also by the Magistrate :

Provided that, when the complaint is made in writing, the
Magistrate need not examine the complainant and the wit-
ness¢s—

(a) if a public servant acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duties or a Court has made the com-
Plaint; or

(b) if the Magistrate makes over the case for inquiry
or trial to another Magistrate under section 192;

Provided further that if the Magistrate makes over the
case to another Magistrate under section 192 after examining
the complainant and the witnesses, the latter Magistrate need
not re-examine them.”

16.7. We recommend a formal redraft of section 201, with-
out making any change of substance, as follows :--

“201. If the complaint is made to a Magistrate who is
not competent to take cognizance of the offence, he shall—
(a) if the complaint is in writing, return it for presenta-

tion 10 the proper court with an endorsement to that effect,
ai

Proviso-ciause
(0) omitted.

Examination of

der section 200.

Revision of soo
tion 200.

Examination of
the complainant.

Redraft of sec-
tion 201.
Procedure = by
Magistrate not
competent to
take

of the case.


134

(७) if the complaint js not in writing, direct the com-

plainast to the proper Court.”
record his

Section 202 (1)- 16.8. Section 202(1) requires a Magistrate to
recording of rea. seasons in case he postpones the summoning of the accused and
sons not _neces- o¢ders an inquiry or investigation into the complaint. It has been
ry forcefully represented to us by the Chief Justice of a High Court
that Magistrates find it difficult at that stage to record their
reasons. We are inclived to agree. ‘One reason why a Magistrate
may be reluctant to issue process against the accused can be that
he feels doubtful about the value of the complainant's statement,
and the few witnesses if any, produced by bim. kt would be
clearly embarrassing for bim to say 50 in writing at that stage.
Nor do we see any real purpose that can be served by any expres-
sion of judicial opinion at that stage. We therefore propose

to do away with the requirement.

Object of inquiry 16.9, Section 202 says in terms that the further inquiry
or investigation. gr investigation is intended for the purpose of “ascertaining
the truth or falschood of the complaint’. We consider this
inappropriate, as the truth or falsehood of the complaint cannot
be determined at that stage, nor is it possible for a magistrate
to say that the complaint before him is true wheo he decides
to summon the accused. The real purpose is to ascertain whether
grounds exist for “proceeding further”, which expression is in
fact used in section 203. We think therefore that the langu-
age of section 202 should correspond to the language of sec
tion 203, and we have accordingly made suitable verbal altera-

tions.

Inquiry by subor- 16.10. When a magistrate decides to postpone the issue
dinate magistrate of process under section 202, he can make an inquiry 10010 the
not desirable. — Case himself or have an inquity made by a subordinate magis-
the case has to be decided by bim-

trate. Finally, however,

self. A inquiry is a proceeding in court involving the hearing
of evidence, and if that evidence is to be finally weighed by @
particular magistrate, it is, we think, proper that it should be
heard by the same magistrate. The delegation of a part of
the task—possibly a tedious part—to another judicial _func-
tionary can well lead to avoidable delay. Nor 1s the division
of responsibility, implied in the present scheme, wholly desir-
able. We arc, therefore, suggesting the deletion of this power
from the provision.

Complaints of 16.11. We are recommending in a_ subsequent chapter
offences rm {riable the abolition of commitment inquiries. This necessitates certain
exclusively by the ainendments in the procedure to be followed in an inquiry into
complaints where the offence complained of is one tiable ¢x-
clusively by, the Court of Session. We recommend that the
Magistrate who takes cognizance of such offence on complaint
must himself make an inuiry into the complaint, and cali upon
the complainant to produce all his witnesses and examine them
on oath, Further, in such cases the Magistrate should not direct
an investigation by a police officer or other person. For this
purpose, we propose two. amendments of section 202 in the form
of another provisa to sub-section (1) and a proviso to sub-sec-

tion (2).

Chapter 18.

AL


135

16.12. The section may be amended to read as follows :

“202. (1) Any Magistrate, on reccipt of a complaint of
an offence of which he is authorised to take cognizance or
which has been made over to him under section 192, may,
if he thinks fit, postpone the issue of process against the
accused, and either inquire into the case himself or direct an
investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other
person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether
or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding :

Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be
made—

(a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence
complained of is triable exclusively by the Court of Session;
or

(b) where the complaint has not been made by a court,
unless the complainant and the witaesses present (if any)
have been examined on oath under section 200.

(2) In any inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate
may, if he thinks fit, take evidence of witaesses on oath :

Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the
offence complained of is triable exclusively by the Court of
Session, he shail call upon the complainant to produce all bis
witnesses and examine them on oath,

(3) If an investigation under sub-section (1) is made by
8 person not being a police officer, be shall have for that in-
vestigation all the powers conferred by this Code on an officer
in charge of a police station except the power to arrest with-
out warrant.”

16.13. Section 203 provides that if the Magistrate dealing
with a complaint finds no sullicient cause for proceeding with the
case even alter considering the evidence of the complainant and
his witnesses and the result of the inquiry or investigation made
under section 202, he “may” dismiss the complaint. It is diff-
cult to imagine what other course is possible in such circumstances,
and the direction of law for the dismissal of such a complaint
might as well be plainer. We propose, therefore, to put in “shall”
in place of “may”. Reasons have, of course, to be recorded

for the dismissal of the complaint, as the order is subject to
scrutiny by the District Magistrate and the Sessions Juuge, and

is revisable by the High Court. These ate necessary safeguards
against the arbitrary dismissal of a complaint.

16.14, Further, in law, a second complaint after the dismissal
of a similar complaint is competent, Quite obviously, however,
if a Magistrate has dismissed a complaint alter careful considcra-
tion of the material before him, he is unlikely to fied “sufficient
cause for proceeding” with it on the second occasion; and even
if the magistrate who deals with the second complaint is diffe-
rent, the likelihood of his proceeding with it is not increased. Only
in exceptional circumstances will a second complaint be proceed-
33४69

Posiponement of
issue of process.

Section — 203—
“May dismiss the
complaint”,

Fresh complaint
after dismissal
of previous com.
plaint admissible
099 in exccp.
tional = circum
stances,


Legislation _ not
recommended,

Revised section
203.

Dismissal of com-
plaint,

136

ed with. The law is in accordance with these exceptions. In @
recent decision’, the Supreme Court has held :—

“An order of dismissal under section 203, Criminal Pro-
cedure Cade is no bar to the entertainment of a second com-
plaint on the same facts, but it will be entertained only in
exceptional circumstances like when the previous order was
passed on an incomplete record or on a misunderstanding of
the nature of the complaint or it was manifestly absurd, un-
just or foolish, or where new facts which could not with
reasonable diligence have been brought on the record in the
previous proceeding, have been adduced.”

16.15. It was suggested to us that the enumeration of the
special circumstances by the Supzeme Court should be accepted
as exhaustive and the law should provide that, barring those cir-
cumstances, no second complaint on the same facts would be
competent. We are not convinced that the circumstances men-
tioned by the Supreme Court exhaust the category of special cir-
cumstances in which a court would, and in our opinion, should,
entertain a new complaint, but leaving that alone, it is clear that
the enumeration is largely in abstract terms, which can be of
little assistance in practice. In the very case before the Supreme
Court}, although the facts were not disputed, there arose in the
Supreme Court itself, a sharp difference of opinion regarding the
existence of special circumstances. Two Judges held that in the
circumstances of the case the entertainment of the complaint was
an abuse of the process of the court and could not be permitted;
while one Judge found that the second complaint was a step ia
the furtherance of justice. It seems to us, therefore, that legisla-
tion in this respect is not called for, there being no doubt about
the law itself.

16.16. Section 203 speaks of the Magistrate dealing with the
case as “the Magistrate before whom a complaint is made or to
whom it has been transferred”. This we consider uonecessarily
lengthy and indirect, as the context leaves no doubt that the
power of dismissal is given to the very same magistrate who has
dealt with it, under section 200 and 202. We propose that section
203 may be revised as follows :—

“203. If, after considering the statements on oath (if any)
of the complainant and of the witnesses and the result of the
inquiry or investigation (if any) under section 202, the
Magistrate is of the opinion that there is no sufficient ground
for proceeding, he shall dismiss the complaint. In every such
case he shal? briefly record his reasons for so doing.”

1 Pramatha Nath Talukdar and another v. 341०1 Ranjan Sarkar, (1962)
Suppl. 2 S.C.R. 297; ALR, 1962 S.C. 876.



CHAPTER XVil

COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE
MAGISTRATES

17.1. This Chapter consists of two sections, one dealing with
the issue of process, and the other with the power to dispense
with the personal attendance of the accused at the commence-
ment of proceedings before the Magistrate.

17.2. Section 204(1) refers to the Second Schedule and to
the division made in the fourth column of that Schedule between
cases where a summons is to issue in the first instance and cases
where a warrant is to issue, While in the former case the Magis-
trate has to issue a summons (unless he proposes to issue a
warrant under section 90), in the jatter case, “he may issue a
warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons for causing the accused
to be brought or to appear” before the Magistraie,

17.3. An analysis of the fourth column of the Second Sche-
dule shows that a summons is to issue in the first instance for
every summons case with the exception of the following thurieea
offences under the Indian Penal Code, namely :—~

(i) Offence under section 153, 357, 374, 417, 434, 448,
482, 508 or 509, punishable with one year’s impri-
sonment,

(ii) offence under section 138 or 2258, punishable with
6 months’ imprisonment,

(iii) offence under section 292, punishable with 3 months’
imprisonment, and

(iv) offence under section 510, punishable with imprison-
ment for out more than 24 hours.

_ On the other hand, a warrant is to issue in the first instance
in every warrant case except in regard to offences under the
following sections of the Indian Penal Code :—

(1) section 326 (imprisonment for life),

(1) section 376 (10 years’ imprisonment),

(iii) section 325 (7 years’ imprisonment),

{iv) section 335 (4 years’ imprisonment),

(५) sections 161, 162, 164, 165, 167, 324, 344, 347,
aa, 484, 485 and 487 (3 years’ imprisonment),
an

(vi) section 169, 177, 189, 217, 223, 225A, 229, 270,
295, 338, 342, 345, 346 and 355 (2 years’ impri-
sonment).

These few exceptions do not appear to be based on any
logical principle or practical consideration. The law may well
be simplified by omutting the fourth column from the Second

Scheme of Chap-
ter.

Section 204 (1)—
issue of summons
or warrant,

Omission of 4th
column in 2nd
Schedule recom-
mended.


Simplification of
sub-section (1).

Section 205.

Plea“of guilty in
absentia in petty
cases,

Special procedure
recommended.

13

Schedule and by relating sub-section (1) of section 204 about
issue of process to summons cases and warrant cases.

17.4. A suggestion bas been received that if the case is one
relating to an ollence punishable with imprisonment ot jess than
three years, a summons should issue in the first instance. There
are not many offence under the Indian Penal Code which are
punishable with imprisonment which may extend 10 two years,
and even in these cases, the Magistrate nas luli discretion under
section 204 to issue a summons in the first instance. This pro-
vision is sufficient for all practical purposes, and we recommend
that sub-section (i) of section 204 be simplified as tollows :—

“(1). ॥ in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cogni-
zance ot an offence there is suilicient ground for proceed-
ing, and the case appears to be a summons-case,
shail issue his summoas for the attendance of the accus~
ed. Jf the case appears to be a warrant-case, he may
issue a warrant, or ॥ he thinks fit, a summons, for caus-
ing the accused to be brought or to appear at a certain
time before such Magistrate or (if he has not jurisdic-
tion himself) some other Magistrate having jurisdiction.”

17.5. Section 205 empowers a Magistrate to dispense with
the personal attendance of the accused whenever he issues a
summons for the appearance of the accused. It may be noticed
that the power is not confined to summons-cases, but extends
also to warrant-cases where the Magistrate issues a summons in
the first instance. The Courts have taken the view that the
power 10 dispense with the personal attendance of the accused
under this section is limited to the first issue of process and
that it cannot be exercised at any later stage. If the Magistrate
finds it necessary at a later stage to dispense with the personal
attendance of the accused, he will have to act under and in
accordance with the provisions of section S40A. The two
complementary provisions appear to be adequate and do not
require any change.

17.6. The Law Commission in its Fourteenth Report re-
commended! that a provision similar to that contained in section
130 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, enabling the accused to
plead guilty without appearing in Court and to remit the pre-
determined fine should be made applicable to the trial of petty
offences, particularly those under special and local laws. It
pointed out that “there are a large number of petty offences
mostly of a technical kind, in which the imposition of a fine
as penalty would meet the ends of justice. In those cases, where
there is every likelihood of the accused pleading guilty, the need
for the examination by the courts of a large number of witnesses;
often public servants, may be avoided if the above procedure is
employed”.

17.7. We consider that this procedure could be adopted with
advantage in regard to any offence punishable only with fine not
exceeding one thousand rupees. The prosecution may indicate
in the police report or complaint whether the case is regarded

2 14th Rep. Vol, 2, page 786, para. 24,


139

as a fit one for applying this procedure : and if the Magistrate
taking cognizance of the offence agrees he may indicate in the
summons that if the accused desires to plead guilty to the charge
without appearing in Court, he may transmit his plea and the
stipulated fine. either by post or by messenger. It should, how-
ever, be provided in the law that the amount of fine that might
be specified in the summons should not exceed one-hundred
Tupees. The new provision should not apply to any offence
under any special or local Jaw which, like the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1939, contains a provision for convicting the accused in
his absence on a plea of guilty and sentencing him to pay a fine.

17.8. We accordinely recommend adding in Chapter XVII
of the Code a new section as follows :—

“205A. (1) If, in the opinion of a Magistrate tak-
ing cognizance of a petty offence, the case mav be sum-
~marily disposed of under section 241A. the Magistrate
may issue summons to the accused requiring him either
to appear in person or hv pleader before the Magistrate
on a specified date. or if he desires to plead guilty to
the charse without appcaring before the Magistrate to
transmit before the specified date, by post or by messen-
ger, to the Magistrate, the said plea in writing and the
amount of fine specified in the summons which shall not
exceed one-hundred rupees.

(2) For the purposes of this section, ‘petty offence’
means any offence punishable only with fine not exceed-
ing one thousand rupees, but does not include any offence
SO punishable under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, or
under any other law which provides for convicting the
accused person in his absence on a plea of guilty.”

Tn Chapter XX, -which deals with the trial of summons cases
by Magistrates, another new section should be inserted as
follows :—- :

“241A. (1) Where a summons has been issued under
section 205A and the accused desires to plead guilty to
the charee without apnearine before the Macistrate. he
shall transmit to the Macistrate by post or by messenger,
a letter containing his plea and also the amount of fine
specified in the summons.

(2) The Magistrate may thereupon convict the accus-
ed in his absence on his plea of guilty and sentence him
to pay the fine specified in the summons, and the amount
fansmitted by the accused shall be adjusted towards
that fine.”

17.9. While considering section 173, we have recommended!
that the duty cast on the police by sub-section (4) of supplying
to the accused copies of statements and documents mentioned
therein should be transferred to the Magistrate taking cognizance.
Apart from changes consequential on this altered arrangement,
the only change of substance which is Proposed is that where a

1 See paragraph 13 above,

New _ sections
205A and 241A.

Special summons
in_case of petty
offence,

Conviction — in

ed on plea of
guilty.

Supply. of copy
of pol report
and other docu-
ments to the

acct W Sec
tion 2058,


Supply of copy
of police report
and other docu-
ments to the
accused,

Supply of copies
of statements etc,
in complaint case
triable by Court
of Session,

Supply of copies
of statements and
documents to the
accused in com-
plaint case triable
by Court of
Session.

140

document is voluminous, the Magistrate mey allow the accused
or his pleader to inspect it instead of causing 5 copy to be fur-
nished. The new section providing for the sopply of copies and
for the matters connected therewith may be as follows :—

“205B. In any case where the proceeding has been
jnstituted on a police report. the Magistrate shall with-
out delay furnish to the accused free of cost a copy of
each of the following :—

(i) the police report;

Gi) the first information report recorded under sec-
tion 154;

(iii) the statements recorded under sub-section (3)
of section 161 of all nersons whom the pro-
secution proposes fo examine as its witnesses.
exclnding therefrom anv part in regard to
which a request for such exchision has - been
made by the police officer under sub-section
(4) of section 173;

{iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded
under section 164; and

(v) anv other document or relevant extract thereof
forwarded to the Magistrate with the police
report under rub-section (4) of section 173:

Provided that the Magistrate mav. after perusing any
such part of a statement as is referred to in item (iif)
ahave and considering the reasons given by the police
officer for the request. direct that a copy of that part
of the statement or of such portion thereof as the Macis-
trate thinks proper, shall be furnished to the accused:

Provided further that if the Maclstrate is satisfied
that any document referred to in item {v) above is
voluminous. he shall. instead of furnishine the accused
with a copy thereof. direct that he will only be allowed
to insnect it either personally or through pleader in
Court.”

17.10. Where the Magistrate issues process under section 204
on complaint and the offence is triable exclusively by the Court
of Session. the Macistrate should grant to the accused covies of
the statements of all persons examined by the Magistrate, and
other material on which the prosecution relies in order that the
accused may get adequate information about the charge against
him and vrenare for his defence. This is all the more necessary
since commitment proceedings are to be abolished. The new
section may be as follows :—

“205C. Where in a case instituted on a complaint it
annears to the Magistrate issuing process under section
204 that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court
of Session. the Magistrate shall without delay furnish
to the accused, free of cost, a copy of each of
following :—

qi) कक कु ४ हर है; 25% तय under section | or
ion persons examined the
Magistrate;


141

(ii) the confessions and statements, if any, record-
ed under section 164; and

(iii) any documents produced before the Magistrate
on which the prosecution proposes to rely :

Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any
such document is voluminous, he shall, instead of furnish-
ing the accused with a copy thereof, driect that he will
only be allowed to inspect it either personally or through
pleader in Court.”

17.11. Where the case (whether instituted on a police report
or on complaint) relates to an offence triable by the Court of
Session, the Magistrate has to send up the case to the Court
of Session. Since an inquiry by the Magistrate is not contem-
plated in the scheme which we propose in regard to such offenc-
es, the provision in this respect can take a simple form and can
be placed ia this Chapter as forming part of the commencement
of proceedings before magistrates. It will be convenient to refer
to this process as “commitment of the case to the Court of
Session”, although the procedure is radically different from the
commitment procecdings at present provided in Chapter 18. The
new section may be as follows :—

“205D. When in a case instituted on a police report
or on a complaint, the accused appears or is brought
before the Magistrate and it appears to the Magistrate
shat he case is triable exclusively by the Court of Session,

e shall—

(a) commit the case to the Court of Session;

{b) if the accused is in custody, forward him to that
Court, and, if he is not in custody, take bail
from him for appearance before that Court;

(०) send to that Court the record of the case and
the documents and articles, if any, which are
to be produced in evidence; and

(d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment
of the case to the Court of Session.”

Commitment of
case to Court
of Session—new
section 205D.

Commitment of
case to court
of Session when
offence is triable
exclusively, by it,


Nature of com-

mittal

proceed-

ings ०७७॥ 1955.

Main object not
attained in prac-
ee.

Proposal in 1954
to abolish com-
mittal proceed

ings in
cases not

police
acce-

CHAPTER XVIII

INQUIRY INTO CASES TRIABLE BY THE COURT OF SES-
SION OR HIGH COURT

18.1. Chapter 18 prescribes the procedure for the prelimi-
nary inquiry before a Magistrate where the case is triable
exclusively by a Court of Session or a High Court or, in the
opinion of the Magistrate, ought to be tried by such Court.
Committal proceedings, as these inguiries are commonly calied,
have been a distinct feature of the Code from the beginning.
Ordinarily, a Court of Session or High Court may take cogni-
zance of an offence and try the case only on the basis of a com-
mittal made to it by a Magistrate under the provisions of this
Chapter. Until 1955, the procedure for the committal inquiry
was the same, whether the proceedings had been instituted oc-
fore the Magistrate on a police report or on a complaint or ip
any other manner. He was required to take all the evidence—
oral and documentary—that may be produced in support of the
prosecution, or on behalf of the accused, or that may be called
for by the Magistrate himself, examine the accused and satisfy
himself that there was sufficient ground for committing the
accused to the Court of Session. If he was so satisfied, he
framed a charge or charges against the accused, bound over the
witnesses. committed the accused and sent up the case to the
Court of Session. If he was not so Satisfied, he discharged the
accused.

18.2. The main object of the committal proceedings was to
ensure that innocent persons alleged to have committed grave
offences were not harassed by being made to face a sessions
trial straichtaway and that only those persons against whom 8
Prima facie case was made out before a Magistrate underwent
that ordeal. But. to quote from the Statement of Objects and
Reasons appended to the Amendment Bill of 1954,—

“Experience, however, has shown that Macistrates
commonly commit practically all the persons brought
be‘ore them bv the police. The proportion of persons
discharged at this stage does not exceed 2% or there-
abouts. These commitment proceedings, however, are
made extremely lengthy, involve many adjournments and
cause not only the prosecution. but the accused as well,
trouble and heavy expense. Even after the commit-
ment. the sessions trial may not commence for some
months. The result is that persons guilty (sic) of
extremely grave offences have to remain in suspense for
more than a year or so.”

18.3. Tt was accordingly proposed in that Bill that, in all
cases instituted on a police report, committal proceedings <hould
be abolished and the accused should be put un bv the Mavictrare
directly before the Court of Session for undergoing trial. These
proceedings were, however, retained for cases initiated by


143

private complaints on the ground that “the safeguards to the
accused which become available in cognizable cases through
notice investigation are non-existent.” This proposal did not
find favour with Parliament which eventually adopted a via
media in the shape of a slightly abbreviated form of committal
proceedings in police report cases. The procedure was set outina
comnrehensive new section 207A consisting of sixteen sub-
sections. and the old sections 208 to 220 in the Chapter were
made applicable to cases instituted otherwise than on a police
report. It should be bore in mind that such cases are very few
indeed as compared to the cases instituted on a police report.

18.4. The main differences between the two procedures may
be briefly noted. In a police case. the accused has to be furnish-
ed with a copy of the police report. of the statements of prose-
cution witnesses as tecarded by the police and of all documents
on which the prosecution relies. The Magistrate is reauired to
satisfy himself that this has heen done at the commencement of
the committal proceedine® (This innovation introduced in 1955
applies equally to warrant cases tried by Magistrates). In a
complaint case, this is of course not possible and hence not
required, .

In a police case, the Magistrate is required “to take the
evidence of such persons, if any, as may be produced by the
prosecution as witnesses to the actual commission of the offence
allesed”. While he has a discretion to take the evidence of
ather prosecution witnesses if he considers it necessary in the
interests of justice. he is not expected to take the evidence of
anv defence witness. Ina complaint case, on the other hand. the
Mavistrate has to take “all such evidence as mav be produced
in support of the prosecution or on behalf of the accused”.

In a police case. the Magistrate proceeds to frame a charge
against the accused if. on the basis of the statements of wit-
nesses recorded bv the police under section 161(3) and those
recorded hv himsclf, he “is of opinion that the accused should
be committed for trial”. In a complaint case. the Macistrate
frames a charre when he “is satisfied that there are sufficient
erounds for committine the accused for trial”. This difference
in wording suegests a higher standard for the prosecution
evidence in complaint cases.

The difference is somewhat more noticeable in reeard to
the circumstances in which the Magistrate is expected to
discharse the accused. In a police case, he mav do so जाए “if
he is of opinion that (the) evidence and documents (before
him) disclose no erounds for committing the accused person
for trial”. Tn a complaint case. he may do so “if he finds that
there are not sufficient erounds for committing the accused
person for trial”.

These differences, however, are not very material. nor of
any great conseauence since. as mentioned above. the number
af ceccinne cases instituted otherwise than on a police renort is
verv small We mav accordingly concentrate attention on
section 207A under which most committal inquiries are sow
conducted by Magistrates.

Present position
main differences
between — proce-
dure in _ police
cases and com-
Plaint cases.


Controversy over
procedure

High Courts, Bar
Associations and
State — Govern-
ments consulted.

144

18.5. The purpose of providing a shorter procedure in police
cases was, of course, to speed up the committal proceedings and
to avoid, as far as possible, a duplication of the taking of
evidence, first, by the committing Magistrate and then, by the
Court of Session. Ever since its introduction, the new procedure
has been a subject-matter of controversy. Even in 1958, the
Law Commission noted in the earlier Report that “the views
expressed x x x before us were sharply divided on this ques-
tion. One view supported the abolition of the committal stage
altogether so that the Sessions Court may be seized straightaway
of th police report cases. On the other hand, a large section
धर emphatically supported a reversion to the old full
committal procedure, There was little support for the continua-
tion of the present shortened committal procedure.”! While
takinz the view that the abolition of committal proceedings
altogether will not be justified. the Commission at that time
felt “that it would not be right to reach definite conclusions on
this question in view of the fact that the amended committal
procedure has been in operation only for a little over two years.
Greater experience of its working has to be gained before a
decision is reached to make radical chances in legislation so
recently enacted.”2 For the time being. the Commission only
recommend:d two amendments in section 207A,? one in sub-
section (4) so that all witnesses to the commission of the crime
and all other important witnesses should be examined in the
committal proceedings, and the other in sub-section (6) chane-
ing “disclose no grounds” to “there are not sufficient grounds”.

18.6. When the revision of the Code was taken up in 1960
and suggestions were received from the public, they were found
to be of the same conflicting nature as before in regard to the
utility of committal proceedings. In view of the importance of
the subject, the Commission decided to ascertain in greater
detail the views of those who were competent to speak on it,
and addressed a letter* to the High Courts, the leading Bar
Associations and the State Governments soliciting their views
specially on the following questions ;

(1) Are commitment proceedings under section 207A
of the Code an improvement over the pre-1955
position from the point of view of securing a
speedy and fair trial for the accused?

(2) If not, should the pre-1955 position be restored in
respect of commitment proceedings by repealing sec-
tion 207A and making suitable modifications in. the
other sections ?

(3) Do commitment proceedings serve any useful pur-
Pose at all and would it be better to dispense with
such proceedings?

(4) Will an authority similar to the Director of Public
Prosecutions in England be useful and effective in

114th Report, Vol. पर, 9. 793, para. 10.
2 Ibid, 9. 797. pera, 18.

3 Ibid, 9. 797, pare. 19.

4 Letter dated 23rd August, 1968.


145

Indian conditions, perticulrsly in regard to the

prosecution of sessions cases?

One or more Members of the Commission also held discus-
sions on these points at various places with Judges, members of
the Bar Associations and others.’ As was only to be expected,
the views expressed in the replies to the Commission’s letter and
at the personal discussions revealed a sharp difference of opinion.

18.7. Before considering the arguments for and against the
abolition of committal proceedings, it will be useful to refer to
the evolution of the English procedure for the trial of felonies
or indictable offences. As stated by Holdsworth?,—

“Early law did not contemplate any preliminary
enquiry into the guilt or innocence of an accused person.
Criminals were presented for trial either by the jury of
presentment, or in consequence of the finding of the
coroner’s inquest. If they were taken in the act. they
were generally executed out of hand. x x x In fact, in
the seventeenth century, the examination conducted by
the magistrates was of an inquisitorial nature. The pri-
soner was closely examined. The witnesses for the
prosecution were not examined in his presence. Their
evidence was only for the information of the court. Even
as late as 1823 it was stated to the grand jury that. when
a magistrate was conducting this preliminary examina-
tion, he was acting inquisitorially and not judicially; that
such proceedings might and ought to be conducted in
secret: and that information so ascertained might be
communicated to the prosecutor but not to the party
accused. In 1836, the Prisoners’ Counsel Act allowed
accused persons to inspect all depositions taken against
them. In 1848. it was enacted that the witnesses for the
prosecution should be examined in the presence of the
accused. ‘The accused person was allowed to make any
statement he pleased or to call any witnesses he pleased;
but he was not to be obliged to do either: and the Magis-
trate must inform him about this. The preliminary ex-
amination before the Magistrates was thus made an
entirely judicial proceeding.”

The pattern thus set in Eneland for the trial of serious
offences—a preliminary judicial inquiry before magistrates follow-
ed by a full-fledged fury trial before the court of assize or quarter
sessions—was copied while codifying the law of criminal pro-
cedure in British India.

18.8. Recently. however. an important chanee has been
made in England by the Criminal Justice Act. 1967 in respect
of proceedines before examining justices. It has introduced a
new tvpe of “committal for trial without consideration of the
evidence”. Under the ordinary procedure, examining justices are
obliged to consider the evidence, which must be adduced orally

1 See Introduction to this Report.
3 Holdsworth. History of Engii&k Law (1922). Vol. 1. np. 205 to 297.

English —_ proce.
dure for trial of
felonies.

Change made by
the Criminal Jus-
tice Act of 1967.


146

before them, and any statement of the accused. They cannot
accept written statements as evidence and must satisfy themselves
that there is sufficient evidence to place the accused upon his
trial. The Act of 1967 cnables them to admit as evidence, sub-
ject to certain safeguards, written statements of witnesses to the
same extent as oral evidence to the like effect. A learned writer
in a Law Review comments on the new procedure as follows! :---

“Committal proceedings have long been recognised as
time-consuming and potentially productive of a sense of
unfairness and of risk of prejudice for the defence when
reported in the press. Witnesses did not come up to proof
and thus counsel’s opening speech was sometimes unwittingly
inaccurate, evidence was admitted at committal proceedings
but rejected as inadmissible at the trial: only the prosecution
case was given at committal and the press renort was neces~
sarily one-sided. and often haphazard and fortuitous; at the
trial the Judge always had to warn the jury to put out of their
minds anything they had read about the case. Accordingly
a new simplified committal procedure and restrictions on
reporting, while retaining the essential principle that the
accused is entitled to know in advance the case he has to meet
at the trial, and to have press publicity if he wishes, are
very welcome. Where the accused is legally represented,
committal may now take place formally by consent on the
basis of written statements, served on the defence before the
hearine. which will not even be read out aloud in court nor
even read by the magistrates, if the defence does not wish the
Prosecution witnesses to be called.”

No committal 18.9. Tn Scotland there are no committal nroceedings at all.

Proceedin,
Scotland, a

in The Lord Advocate and the Crown Office staff in Edinburch are
responsible for deciding whether the evidence justifies prosecution,
the offence to he charged and the Court in which the prosecution
is to be hroucht. The procurator-fiscal in a county (correspond-
ine to onr Public Prosecutor in a district) has a wide discretion as
to the rroscention of lesser offences and receives euidance from
the Crown Office regarding more serious crimes. He sends to the
Crown Office “nre-conitions” (i.e., the statements of witnesses
recorded hefore trial) and revorts of crime received from the police
and from private individuals. Each prosecution witness is pre-
cognised privately, the accused being neither present nor represen-
ted by counsel. The function of the procurator-fiscal corresnonds
more to the investigating judee in continental procedure than to
magictrates conducting a preliminary inquiry in Eneland. It is
his duty to ensure that pre-cognitions are as full as possible and
faithfully represent the evidence of witnesses.

Main features of 18.10. Tt is a rule of Scottish procedure? “that every indict-
Scottish proce. ment must have anpended to it a list of all productions which are

dure,

to be used as evidence by the Crown at the trial and of all Crown
witnesses with their addresses. The indictment is served upon
the accnsed not less than six clear days before the first dict. that is.
the sitting of the Court at which the accused is called on to plead
‘euiltv’ or ‘not guilty’. Tf the accused does not nlead guilty, the
trial takes place at the second diet. which must be not less than
2A. Samuels in the Modern Law Review (196%) at 0. 17.
LOR” 0. Normand, “The Public Proscoutor in Scotland’, (1938) 54
OR, 9. 353.

A

2


421

nine clear days after the first diet. There is therefore a minimum
of fifteen clear days between the date when the accused person
first receives the list of the witnesses and of the productions which
may be used against him and the date of trial. In practice the
time is usuaily Considerably longer.” The defence is also obliged
10 provide a tist of its witnesses to the prosecutor who may pre-
cognise them. The pre-cognitions, however, are merely aids to
the examination oi the witnesses in Court, They are not disclosed
to the Judge or jury.

18.11. Another country which does not have committal pro- Procedure in
ccedings for the trial of grave offences is Israel. Under a recent Israel.
199, it has dispensed with such proceedings. The jaw provides
that the accused person may at any reasonable time inspect a copy
Of the investiga‘ion material in the possession of the prosecutor
and that the prosecution may not produce any evidence in court
or call any witness unless the accused has been given a reasonable
opportunity to inspect and copy the evidence or statement of the
witness during the investigation. The procedure is thus similar
to that obtaining in india for the trial of warrant cases before
Magistrates under section 251A of the Code.

18.12, Some of the Australian Provinces which have been Procedure in
following the traditional English system of a prelim.naty inquiry aa Australian
by a Magistrate followed by a jury trial before a Judge in ihe case 71083.
of all serious offences have been feeling the delay, expense and
inconvenience involved in the committal proceedings. They
have recently 0९९७ amending their laws so that such proceedings*
are shortened, particularly where the accused has pleaded guilty.

As in England, siatutory declarations are made admissible in lieu
of Oral evidence in these procecdings.

18.13. We have mentioned these few foreign instances only Committal pro-
to show that committal proceedings are by no means an essential ceedings not
Part of a fair trial which a person accused of a grave crime has a sseential fora
right to expect. They are more in the nature of a convenience हे
from the point of view of the prosecution as well as of the defence,
especially in places where trial by jury is prescribed by law. A
jury trial has necessarily to be concentrated into as short a period
as possible and carricd on without a break. Committal proceed-
ings help in presenting the evidence of the prosecution and the
defence in an organised manner before the jury, besides, of course,
affording a protection to the individual against having to face a
jury trial when the evidence to support the charge against him is
insufficient. With the abolition of jury trials, these advantages
have lost much of their importance,

18.14. It should also be noticed that the Indian Legislature Committal pro-
has occasionally provided for the direct trial of the accused person ceedings dispens-
by the Sessions Court without any committal proceedings before a ¢d with by lawin
Magistrate. Section 1988 of the Code, for example, dispenses "1 “*S¢s-
with such proceedings when the prosecution is for defaming the
President or Vice-President of India, the Governor of a State, a
Minister of the Union or of a State, or other public servant
employed by Government. Under the Prevention of Corruption
Act, Sessions Judges, appointed as Special Judges, take direct
cognizance of certain serious offences involving bribery and
corruption and try them mote or Ises according to warrant-case


148

procedure. Special courts and tribonals have also been estab-

lished from time to time tor the trial of persons charged with

Brave offences without the cuse being committed to them aiter a
Magister.al inquiry. In all these cases, the avowed object of the

special provision or /aw is to avoid the delay inherent in committal
proceedings and expedite the trial of the Offence, At the same

lime, it canpot be contended that the law has in any way failed to Y
secure the esseniicis 0: a .air ual for the accused,

38.15. The main object of Chapter 18 of the Code in inter-
posing a judicial inquiry by a Magistrate as a preliminary to every
Sessions trial is to secure that a prema facie case is made out against
the accused person 10 the satisiaction of the Magistrate, and that,
where the Magistrate is not satisfied that there are sufficient grounds
for committing the accused tor trial, the latter is discharged and
saved the trouble and expemse involved in facing the Sessions
Court. This would seem to be the only rea} justification for a
procedure which involves the taking of the same prosecution
evidence twice over, puts the State as well as the accused to
additional expense and troubie and holds up the trial for a consi- F
derable period. Examination of the witnesses before the effective 4
Court is posiponcd by wecks, sometimes months, because of this
procedure. it would be well to remember in this connection
Katyana’s injunction to the Hindu kings of old :--

na kdla-haranam karyam
rajnd@ sakshi-prabhashne

mahdan dosho bhavet kalat
dharma-vyavriti-lakshanah,

{No delay should be permitted by the king in gettin,
witnesses to depose; for lapse of time leads to great evil
marked by their deviating from the lawful course.] हे
No effective 18.16. Even under the 101 committal proceedings in vogue >
screening of before the amendment of 1955, it was noticed that the screening
flimsy cases. of flimsy cases, which these proceedings were designed to effect,
was in fact not achicved. Subsequent to the amendment, the
number of cases in which the committing Magistrates found it
possible to discharge the accused because the evidence and docu-
ments produced by the prosecution “disclosed no grounds for
committing the accused person for trial” was not unnaturally even
smaller than before. The amendment might have reduced to a
certain extent the time taken in the committal proceedings, since
the prosecution witnesses actually put forward and examined by
the Magistrate were fewer, but this gain in time was offset in quite
a few States, particularly in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, by the time
taken after commitment for the case to be brought up before the है.
Court of Session for trial. The Commission was informed that
this interval, which ought not to be more than three or four weeks,
was in many cases about a year in Uttar Pradesh and in Bibar
according to recent statistics. There is also no doubt that in
almost all States the time spent in committal proceedings themselves
continues to be considerable in spite of the amendment of 1955.

Many of the arguments Rut forward in support of retaining
committal proceedings are on che assumption that they


149

effectively help in the screening of flimsy cases. For instance,
when it is urged that evidence before committing magistrate often
establishes that ikere is a0 prima jacie case against the accused
or some of the accused and they are saved the trouble and expense
of a sessions trial, or that the committal slage Operates as a
check against innocent persons being brought beiore the Court of
Session on the oasis 01 uelecdve pounce iavestigation, or that com-
mittal proceedings save the tume 01 Sessions Judges and  copeestee
in ther Courts, the argument conveniently tutas a blind eye to
the tact that the number ol cases resulting in discharge of any of
the accused persons by the Magistrate is very small indeed. ‘The
advantage on this score is consequently aeghigible as compared to
the magisterial time and public money wasted in the great majority
of committal proceedings,

48.17. Another line of argument for retaining committal pro-
ceedings is that the accuscd must have a fuli and clear picture of
the case against him before be is brought up before the Sessions
Court and tor this purpose it is essential that a Mag.strate should
record the statements on oath of all the prosecution wimesses, Or,
at any ratc, of the “witnesses to the actual commission of the
offence alleged”. While one may readdy agree that these deposi-
tions taken in his presence give the accused a better idea of the
case against him than copies of their statements-recorded by the
police under section 161(3) and of the other documents relied 0०8
by the prosecution, we do not think that they are essenual for a
fair trial of the accused. In order to prepare his defence, he has
certainly a right to know the nature of the evidence which the
prosecution has obtained against him, but this, in our opinion, is
made available to him under section 173(4). It bas to be
remembered that what finally matters is the evidence before the
Sessions Judge at the trial and not the statements recorded by the
Magistrate or by the police in the first instance, and the longer
the time taken in bringing the witnesses before the trial court, the
better are the chances of their deviating from the truth.

18.18. We may quote here a Sessions Judge who writes from
personal experience as follows :—

“Another fact which I have noticed is that the commit-
ment proceedings are unduly delayed and there are instances
where the accused have been committed to the Court of
Session after more than two years of the date of offence.
Even in serious offences like murder, the commitment pro-
ceedings take quite a long time. This has a number of evils
in its train. The main evil is that there is a lot of gap
between the examination of the witnesses in the Court of
Session and before the Magistrate, and again in the Court of
Session and the date of occurrence, and the witnesses who
are by a large number illiterate make discrepant statements
op sOme matters and this furnishes an opportunity to the
defence to confront the witness with his previous statement
made in the committing court or before the police. Further
if there is a delay in the trial of the case the witnesses aro
likely to be won over. In some cases I have found that due

2 9bri Rajoadra Nath Aggerwal, District & Sessions Judge, Simla.

Committal pro-
ceedings not
essential for giv-
ing accused clear
picture of the
case.

Sessions Judge's
evidence.


Abolition of com-

ings recommend.

Independent
authority to con-
rol public prose-

Defects of the sys-
tem pointed out

i860

to delay important witnesses disappear, and there is delay |
in the disposal of the trial. 1 have also found that whea
there is a delay in the trial of the case, important witnesses
such as doctor, investigating officer, are transierred and some-
umes it becomes difficult to procure their presence and this
delays the finishing of the trial.”

Similar views have been expressed by a number of other Sessions
Judges with varying emphasis on the different points brought out
in the above report.

18.19, After a careful consideration we are of the unanimous
opinion that committal proceedings are largely a waste of time and
etfort and do not contribute appreciably to the efficiency of the
trial before the Court of Session. While they are obviously time-
consuming, they do mot serve any essential purpose. There can
be no doubt or dispute as to the desirability of every trial, and
more particularly of the trial for a grave offence, beginning as
soon as practicable after the completion of investigation, Com-
maittal proceedings which only serve to delay this step, do not
advance the cause of justice. The primary object of protecting
the innocent accused trom the ordeal of a sessions trial has not
been achieved in practice; and the other main object of apprising
the accused in sutficient detail of the case he has to meet at the
trial could be achieved by other methods without going through a
very partial and ineffective trial rehearsal before a Magistrate. We
recommend that committal proceedings should be abolished.

18.20. We have mentioned above’ that one of the connected
questions on which informed opinion was sought by us was
whether an authority similar to the Director of Public Prosecu-
tions in England would be useful and effective in Indian condi-
tions, particularly in regard to the prosecution of sessions cases.
The opinions received by us were generally in favour of such an
authority provided its independent character could be safeguarded
and it was given an effective voice in advising whether the evidence
collected by the investigating agencies was suflicient to put up
the case before the Court of Session. Such an authority would
doubtless be specially valuable after the abolition of committal
proceedings,

18.21. We have now in every district an officer appointed by
the State Government who is designated the Public Prosecutor and
who, with the assistance of one or more additional Public Prose-
cutors, conducts all prosecutions on behalf of the Government in
the Court of Session. These senior Public Prosecutors are under
the general control of the District Magistrate. Prosecution in the
magisterial courts is, generally speaking, in the hands of either
the police officers or of persons recruited from the bar and styled
Police Prosecutors or Assistant Public Prosecutors all of whom
work under the directions of the Police Department.

18.22. in an earlier Report?, the Law Commission analysed
the defects of the existing system in the following passage :

“We have pointed out earlier that, in most of the States,

the prosecutors in the Magisterial courts are either police

3 See para. 18.6 above.
214th Report, Vol. II, pp. 769-770.

yr

se


353

officers, who may or may not be legally qualified, or members
of the Bar, but they all function as a part of the Police Depart-
ment. However experienced the specially appointed police
officers might be, want of legal knowledge or legal qualifica-
tions must affect adversely prosecutions conducted by them.
On account of a lack of adequate knowledge of law, and parti-
cularly of case law and the law of evidence, such prosecuting
officers are not capable of presenting their cases with ability
and cffectiveness. As compared with counsel appearing for
the accused, who are ail legally qualified and trained, their
performance is bound to be inadequate. The burden of pro-
ving a case is upon the prosecution, and the prosecution
ought to be represented by advocates, as able if not abler than
the lawyers for the accused. In any case, there can be little dis-
pute about the general principle, now largely accepted, that
the prosecutors ought to be legally qualified persons and
should be recruited from the Bar.

It must not also be forgotten that a police officer is generally
one-sided in his approach. It is no reflection upon him to say so.
The Police Department is charged with the duty of the mainten-
ance of Jaw and order and the responsibility for the prevention
and detection of offences. It is naturally anxious to secure con-
victions. Not infrequently, relevant witnesses are kept back by
the prosecution. Intimidation of defence witnesses is also not
unusual. These are the results of an excess of zeal by the police
officers and a want of a realization of their true function. But if
the purity of judicial administration is to be maintained, such con-
duct must be sternly checked. We have also been told of police
officers of the lower grade in charge of the prosecutions delibera-
tely weakening their cases out of corrupt motives. It is obvious
that by the very fact of their being members of the police force
and the nature of the duties they have to discharge in bringing
8 case to court it is not possible for them to exhibit that degree
of detachment which is necessary in a Prosecutor.

The Public Prosecutor is almost wholly occupicd with the
conduct of prosecutions in the Sessions Court and in appearing
for the State in criminal appeals or revisions and like matters.
Apart from such advisory functions as he may discharge when
tequested to do so by the District Magistrate or the District
Superintendent of Police, he has no control over the cases before
they come to the court. Even 19 the exercise of the power to
withdraw from a prosecution, he is controlled to a large extent
by the District Magistrate or the District Superintendent of Police.
On account of the practice that has prevailed for a long time, the
Public Prosecutor has come to occupy a subordinate position.
Even when he is aware of the defects in the prosecution evidence,
he is not in a position to influence the future course of the prose-
cution. He is rarely consulted at the crucial stages of investigation
and has no opportunity of guiding the investigating agency 19 the
matter of gathering relevant evidence.

A large number of complaints never come to court for the
reason that the police after investigation report them to be not
worth proceeding upon grounds of insufficient evidence or legal
difficulties. It is true that in such cases, the complainant can
himself directly file a complaint. The propriety of dropping the


Recommendation
to make prose-
cuting agency in-
dependent of
police  depart-
ment.

Director of pub-
Tic prosecution
for each district
recommended.

Public prose-

cutor to be of

higher status with
wider range 0!
functions.

Responsibility of
publ ic prosecutor
in police report
sessions cases.

152

prosecution in such cases is a matter that is at present examined
only by the departmental officials. The Public Prosecutor is ua-
able to interfere in any of these matters, being regarded more Or
less as a subordinate official under the control of the District
Magistrate and the District Superintendent of Police.”

18.23. The Law Commission then suggested? “that the pro-
secuting agency should be scparated from and made independent
of its administrative counter-part, that is the Police Department,
and that it should not only be responsible for the conduct of the
prosecution in the court but it should also have the liberty of
scrutinising the evidence particularly in serious and important
cases before the case is actually filed in court. Such a measure
would ensure that the evidence in support of a case is carefully
examined by a properly qualified authority before a case is imsti-
tuted so as to justify the expenditure of public time and money on
it. It would also ensure that the investigation is conducted on
proper lines, that all the evidence needed for the establishment
of the guilt of the accused has been obtained. The actual conduct
of the prosecution by such an independent agency will result in a
fairer and more impartial approach by the prosecutor to the case.”

18.24. As a first step towards improvement, the Law Commis-
sion proposed? that in every district a separate prosecution depart-
ment should be constituted and placed in charge of an official who
may be called a “Director of Public Prosecutions”, and indicated*
in some detail what his principal functions should be.

18.25. It is to be regretted that this recommendation has not
been given any serious consideration by the State Governments

¢ and that there has been little improvement in the calibre of the

Prosecuting a gencies in India and, consequently, in the level of
efficiency in the conduct of prosecutions in the more important
cases, whether before the Sessions Court or the Courts of Magis-
trates. We would therefore repeat the recommendation. Should
the reluctance of the State Governments to move in this direction
be to the creation of a new office with a high sounding designation,
we would suggest that the objective could be achieved by giving
the Public Prosecutor of the district a greater authority, a higher
status and a wider range of functions than he has at present, and
approximating to those envisaged for the Director of Public Pro-
secutions by the Law Commission in the earlier Report. These
changes, substantial as they would be, would not require any
radical amendment of the Code and could be effected by adminis-
trative action of the State Government.

18.26. With the abolition of committal proceedings, it will be
the responsibility of the Public Prosecutor to scrutinise the police
report (or “charge-sheet” as it is commonly called) before it is
submitted to the Magistrate and to see that a case which, accord-
ing to the police is exclusively triable by a Court of Session, is
really so and that there is sufficient evidence to support it. This
is said to be the practice even now, at Jeast in important sessions
cases, and there should accordingly be no difficulty in enforcing

114th Report, Vol. Ii, p. 770, para 14.
214th Report, Vol. Hf, p. 770, para, 15.
8 Ibid, 9. 771.


153

it in ail sessions cases. At this stage, the Public Prosecutor should
have the authority to send the case back for further investigation
and to modify the proposed charge whenever he finds it necessary
to do so.

18.27. Though committal proceedings as such are to be abo-
lished, we propose that the existing system under which Magis-
trates alone are competent to take cognizance of offences should
be continued even in regard to cases triable exclusively by the
Court of Session. Later in this Report,! we are recommending
a considerable reduction in the number of offences under the
Indian Penal Code which should be within the exclusive jurisdic-
tion of the Sessions Court: but the cases partaining to such offences
need not be instituted directly in that Court. Whether on a police
Teport or otherwise, such cases will, as at present, be instituted
in the Court of a competent Magistrate.

18.28. We have recommended in an carlier Chapter that
the duty now cast on the police by section 173(4) to furnish
copies of the police report statements of witnesses, and relevant
documents to the accused should be shifted to the Magistrate
taking cognizance of the offence? When a sessions case is insti-
tuted before a Magistrate on a police report, he will first sec to it
that all these copies are furnished to the accused in good time
and will also decide that, prima facie, the case is triable exclu-
sively by the Court of Session.

18.29. As regards the small number of sessions cases that
may be instituted on complaint, it would obviously be convenicnt
if they were also brought before a Magistrate in the first instance;
but we do not consider it necessary to retain the elaborate provi-
sions contained in sections 208 to 220 which lay down the proce-
dure for committing such cases to the Court of Session. The
object of this procedure is to get all prosecution witnesses examin.
ed by the Magistrate in she presence of the accused in order that
the accused may have a full idea of the case which is brought
against him. We propose® that in such cases it will be sufficient
if the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence on complaint
holds an inquiry under section 202 and examines the complainant
and all his ‘witnesses on oath, but not in the presence of the
accused. Tf on the basis of such swor statements he finds that
there is “sufficient ground for proceeding” he should issue process
to the accused as provided in section 204, He should then erant
to the accused copies of the statements of all persons examined
by the Magistrate and other material on which the prosecution
relies in order that the accused mav get adequate information
about the charge against him and prepare for his defence.‘

The combined effect of these two provisions will be to nince
॥ person accused of a grave offence by a private complainant in
a somewhat better position than one charged with similar
offence on the basis of a police investigation. In the former case,
a preliminary inquiry by a Magistrate into the truth of the com-
plaint is made mandatory and takes the place of an investigg

See para, 47.10 below.
2 See para. 14.21 above.
2 See naras 16.11 and 16.12 ahove.
4 See para 17.10 above.

Sessions cases to
continue to be
instituted in Ma
gistrates’ Courts.

Magistrate’s
function in potloe
Feport cases.

Procedure in coms
plaint cases.


Procedure

154

by the police. The accused gets copies of the statements of all
prosecution witnesses recorded by the Magistrate in the former
case and the statements recorded by the police under section
161(3) in the latter case. With these safeguards which appear ६०
us to be sufficient, we consider that committal proceedings could
be dispensed with for complaint cases also.

for 18.30, Although there will be no committal proceedings as

the sessions trial. such, in the sense of a judicial inquiry with the accused present,

Omission
Chapter

18
commended,

the Magistrate will, under the proposed scheme, be “committing
the case to the Court of Session” whenever it appears that it is
triable exclusively by that Court. The steps to be taken by him
have been indicated? at the end of the last Chapter. The procedure
for the sessions trial will broadly be the same as for the trial of
a warrant case instituted on a police report. The statutory pro-
visions in this respect are set out in a subsequent Chapter;? but
we may mention here the main features of the trial before the
Court of Session. The first hearing will be devoted to a state-
ment of the case by the Public Prosecutor, consideration of the
statements of witnesses and other documents on which he pro-
poses to reply, framing of the charge against the accused, record-
ing of his plea and other necessary preliminaries. An adjournment
will be necessary at this stage in order to secure the attendance
of all the prosecution witnesses and also to give the defence time
to prepare for their examination in the light of the opening day's
proceedings. The second stage will be the recording of the prose-
cution evidence which could, and should, go on de die in diem,
followed by the examination of the accused. Another short ad-
journment will be necessary at this stage for the defence evidence
and conclusion of the trial,

The proposed scheme for the sessions trial does involve two
adjournments for 10 or 15 days each which are probably not re-
quired—in theory, at any rate—under the existing procedure. In
practice, however, many sessions trials even now are not conclud-
ed at one continuous sitting and adjournments are found to be
necessary for one reason or another. The inability of the prose-
cution to produce all its witnesses on the a) ppointed days is said
to be the main cause. Such delays can only be avoided if all con-
cerned in the trial are imbued with a feeling of urgency and a
desire for its speedy conclusion.

of 18.31. The whole of Chapter 18 of the Code may accordingly
fe be omitted.

2 See para. 17.11 above.
2 See para. 23.2 below.


CHAPTER XIX
THE CHARGE

19.1. Section 221 jays down the main requirement for the
framing of a charge as regards the offence with which the accused
is charged.

Sub-section (6) provides that in the presidency-towns the
charge shall be written ig English and elsewhere it shall be
written either in English or in the language of the Court. We see
no justification at the present day to have a separate rule for
presidency-towns and recommend that there also the charge should
be written either in English or in the language of the Court. A
suggestion has been received that the charge should be written in
the language of the accused when it is not the language of the
Court. The Code expressly provides? that in trials of warrant cases
by magistrates as well as in sessions trials, the charge should be
read and explained to the accused. These provisions are adequate
to secure a fair notice to the accused and there is 0 need to add
a reference to the language of the accused in sub-section (6).

19.2. Section 222(1) prescribes the important general rule
that full particulars as to the time and place of the offence and as
to the person against whom or the thing in respect of which the
offence was committed should be given in the charge. Sub-section
(2) of the section provides a limited relaxation of the rule in a
case of criminal breach of trust or of dishonest misappropriation.
Tn these two cases it is sufficient to specify the gross sum embez-
zled or misappropriated and the dates between which the offence
was committed. subject to the limitation that the interval bet-
ween the first and the last of such dates shall not exceed one
year. The charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of
one offence within the meaning of section 234.

19.3. The combined effect of sections 222(2) and 234(1) is
that a person accused of breach of trust may be charged with and
tried at one trial for three such offences committed within the
space of 12 months, and in regard to each such offence the relaxa-
tion as to stating particulars of time, place and amount may be
availed of. But when the embezzlement has been going on for a
long time, say three years, it is not permissible to rely on section
222(2) for grouping together each year’s embezzlement as one
offence and then rely on section 234(1) for trying the three
charges at one trial. It is suggested that multiplicity of criminal
proceedings is not avoided in such a case because both the sections
have the same period limit of one year. By way of remedy the
suggestion is made that the period mentioned in section 234(1)
should be increased to two years and also that the number of
charges that can be tried jointly may be increased from three to
five or even six. We are unable to agree with either suggestion. We
do not think it is desirable to permit generally the joinder of more

1 Sections 251A(4). 255(1) and 271.

Section 221.

Language of
charge.

Section 222.

Effect of sectlons
222(2) and 234(1).


Sections 223 to
230.

Section 231—revi-
sion recommend-

Section 232 omit-
ted and provi-
sions included in
section 535,

156

than three offences of the same kind at one trial or to increase the
period-limit to two years. Apart from embezzlement cases it
would not be to the advantage of the prosecution or of the defence
to deal with numerous different transactions spread over a long
period at one tial. Even in embezzlement cases the limit of one
year, set in both the sections, is not unreasonable and there is no
g0od justification for increasing it.

19.4. Sections 223, 224 and 225 do not call for any com-
ments. In section 226 the special provision for the High Courts
35 not necessary and the words “or in the case of a High Court,
the Clerk of the State” may be omitted. Similarly, since trial by
jury 5 proposed to be abolished, in section 227(1)) the latter part
Cor in the case of trials by jury before the Court of Session or the
High Court, betore the verdict of the jury is returned”) may be
omitted. Sections 228, 229 and 230 also 00 not call for “anv
comments.

19.5. Under section 231, whenever a charge is altered or
added to by the Court after the commencement of the trial, the
Prosecutor and the accused “shall be allowed” to recall or re-
summon and examine, with reference to such alteration or addi-
tion, any witness already examined. Where an application is made
for re-summoning of such witnesses, the court is bound to grant it,
and cannot refuse it on the ground that the accused cannot be
prejudiced? or even on the ground that the alteration is of such a
nature that it cannot affect the evidence. Now, it may happen that
the application for recalling and re-summoning the witness is
made only for the purpose of vexation or delay or defeating the
ends of justice. In such cases, the court should have a power to
refuse the application. If the evidence of a witness is of a purely
formal character and the other party merely desires to prolong the
procecdings by taking advantage of the right given by the section,
there is no reason why it should be mandatory for the court to re-
summon the witness. We, accordingly, recommend that section
231 be revised as follows :-~

“231. Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the Court
after the commencement of the trial, the prosecutor and the
accused shail on application be allowed—

(a) to recall or re-summon, and examine with reference
to such alteration or addition, any witness who may
have been examined, unless the court, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, considers that such applica-
tion is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or
for defeating the ends of justice;*

(0) to call any further witness whom the Court may think
to be material.”

39.6, Section 232 deals with the cffect of a material error in,
or absence of, a charge which has misled the accused in his
defence. It provides that in such a ९४६० the court of appeal, revi-
sion or confirmation shall direct a new trial upon a charge framed

1 Ramalinga v. Emp. AIR. 1929 Mad, 200, 201;
Negendra Nath vy, Emp., ALR. 1932 Cal. 486, 487.

2 CF. Sections 251A(9) and 257(1).


157

in such manner as it thinks fit, or, if it is of opinion that on the
facts proved in the case no valid charge could be preferred against
the accused, it shall quash the conviction. This is hardly the pro-
per place for sucha provision. While the power of the superior
courts to order retrial is referred to in subsequent sections like
376(b), 423(1) and 439(1), the effect of omission to frame a
charge or an error in a charge is again provided for in sections
535 and 537(b). We consider that section 232 should be omitted
and its provisions suitably modified and combined with the pro-
visions in sections 535 and 537(b)!.

19.7. The first requirement of a fair trial in criminal cases is
3 precise statement of the accusation. This requirement the Code
seeks to secure. first by laying down in sections 221 to 224 what
a charge should contain; next, by laying down in section 233 that
for every distinct offence there shouid be a separate charge; and
lastly, by Jaying down in the same section that (exceptin certain
specified cases) each charge should be tried separately, so that
what is sought to be achieved by the first two rules is not nullified
by a joinder of numerous and unconnected charges.

These exceptions are based on some rational principle or other,
In section 234, which permits a joint trial for offences of _ the
same kind not exceeding three in number and committed within
a period of twelve months, the principle is the avoidance of a
multiplicity of proceedings. In section 235(1), the principle is
the relation between offences forming part of the same transac-
tion, separate trials whereof will naturally result in an incomplete
comprehension of the totality of the crime even where they do not
lead to conflicting judgments. The principle behind section 235(2)
and section 235(3) is that if a criminal act has several as) pects.
all of them should be adjudged together. Sections 236 and 237
(which should be read together) provide for the not unusual type
of case in which while broad facts concerning an offence are, or
can be, established by the evidence, not all the incidents and
circumstances are known. In such cases it is permissible to charge
the accused with having committed all or any of different but
connected offences, and also to convict him of an offence with
which he has not been expressly charged but might have been
charged. Lastly, section 239 permits a joint trial of several persons
in specified cases because of some basic connection between the
various offences committed by them.

19.8. The meaning of the expression “distinct offence” in
section 233 has been fully explained by the Supreme Court in a
recent decision.2 No changes are necessary in this section.

19.9. We considered the question whether there is any need
to increase the period of twelve months mentioned in section
234(1) or the number of offences which are triable at one trial.
We are of the view that either increase would embarrass the
accused and hinder a smooth and fair trial.

1 See pata. 45.9 below.
2 Banwari Lal v. The Union of India, (1963) Suppi. 2 S.C.R. 338;
ALR. 1963 ५.८. 1620.

Joinder of chare
ges—general
scheme.

Section 233 “‘dis-
tinct offence’.

Section 234.


Section 235—Join-
der of charges of
misappropriation
and falsification
of accounts.

New sub-section
recommended.

158

The principle laid down in section 234(2) as to when offences
may be regarded as being “of the same kind” is, in our opinion,
sound. The exception made by the proviso in regard to simple
theft punishable under section 379 of the Penal Code and theft
in a dwelling house etc., punishable under section 380 is also
sound and the proviso does not require any addition, ¢.g., theft
after preparation for violence (section 382) or robbery involving
theft (section 392).

19.10. The application of section 235, particularly in relation
to conspiracies, has been dealt with in a aumber of decisions! of
the Supreme Court, and the scope of the section in this respect
is now well settled. There is some controversy,? as to whether
the joinder of three charges of criminal breach of trust or mis-
appropriation with three charges of falsification of accounts con-
nected with those offences is permissible, even when all the off-
ences have been committed within the space of twelve months.
A charge specifying the gross sum, framed with reference to
section 222(2), is no doubt a charge of one offence within the
meaning of section 234, but this legal fiction contained in section
222(2) is only for the purposes of section 234.3 While the falsifi-
cation of accounts connected with a single act of misappropriation
can be said to form the same transaction and consequently a joint
trial of the two offences is permissible under section 235(1), it is
not permissible to try together even two offences of misappropria-
tion and two connected falsifications of accounts, much less a series
of misappropriations charged as one offence under section 222(2)
and all the connected falsifications of accounts.

This position creates practical difficulties. Criminal breach of
trust (or misappropriation) is often accompanied by  falsifica-
tion of accounts (or analogous offences) committed either to
facilitate the breach of trust or to conceal its commission. The
exclusion of such connected offences of falsification of accounts
from the fiction created by section 222(2) deprives this section
of its usefulness in many cases. While misappropriation on
several occasions within a ycar accompanied by falsification of
several items in the account books may be fairly described as
parts of the same transaction, the several acts of falsifying the
accounts cannot be clubbed together in one charge.

19.11. After considering various alternatives we — recom-
mend the insertion of a new sub-section in section 235 as
follows :—

“(1) When a person charged with one or more offences
of criminal breach of trust or dishonest misappro-
priation of property as provided in sub-section (2)
of section 222 or in sub-section (1) of section 234,
is accused of committing, for the purpose of _facili-
tating or concealing the commission of that offence

2 Purshottam Das Dalmia v. The State, (1962) 2 $.C.R. १01:
की, K. Dalmia vy. Dethi Administration, (1963) 1 S.C.R. 253, 273;
State of Andhra Pradesh v. Ganeshwar Rao. (1964) 3 S.C.R. 297.

2See case-law discussed in Sriram v. The State, AIR. 1956 All. 466.

8 D. K. Chandra y. The State. ALR. 1952, Bom., 177;

Krishna Murthy v, Abdul Subhen, ALR. 1962 Mys. 128.



159

or those offences, one or more offences of falsifica-
tion of accounts, he may be charged with, and tried
at one trial for, every such offence.”

19.12. Section 236 cannot be said to be very clearly or
expressively worded. The two illustrations that are appended to
it would seem to be essential for a proper understanding of what
the section means and what types of cases are intended to be
covered by it. In fact, the second illustration is hardly covered
by the words of the section inasmuch as when a person makes
on oath two contradictory statements, and the prosecution can-
not prove which of them is false, he does not commit several
offences but only one. The illustration is, for practical purposes,
a distinct rule cnabting the Court to frame a charge of inten-
tionally giving false evidence without specifying which one of
two or more particular statements the accused either knew or
believed to be false, or did not belicve to be true. This is referred
to in the illustration as charging in the alternative.

19.13. The section refers to a “series of acts being of such
a nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts
which can be proved will constitute.” In a Calcutta case,! the
judge observed—

“The confusion which has arisen about the interpreta-
tion of section 236 is due to the way in which it
is worded. What is really meant seems to be ‘if a
single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it
is doubtful which of several offences has been
committed if the facts as alleged by the prosecu-
tion are established, the accused may be charged
with the commission of all or any of such offences.
The facts which can be proved are only ascertained
after the completion of the trial and therefore the
charge cannot be made to depend on them; more-
over in the terms of the section, the doubt raust
arise from the nature of the act or series of acts, and
the doubt would arise because of the inferences which
might be drawn from those acts.”

This view does not appear to be correct. It was dissented
from by the Bombay High Court in a case? where the prosecu-
tion was in doubt as to tl a age of a girl who was alleged to have
been kidnapped or abducted. The Court observed—

“The condition on which the section comes into opera-
tion must be complied with, and there must be a
single act or series of acts of a certain nature, and
the nature must raise a doubt about which of
several offences the facts which can be proved, will
constitute. But we think that doubt may include a
doubt as to what exact facts within the ambit of
the series of acts postulated can be proved. At the
time the charge is framed, the prosecution can

VIstahar Khandkar ४. Emp., 1.L.R. 62 Cal. 956; AIR. 1936 Cal. 796.
2 Emp. v. Kasinath, AYR. 1942 Bom. 71 (F.B.

Section 236-~un-
clear wording.

Judicial interpre~
tations of the sec-
tion.


Section 237.

160

never know exactly what facts they will succeed in
establishing. The most promising witness may break
down in cross-examination: and in our view the
prosecution are entitled to say: ‘If we prove certain
of our alleged facts, then such and such an offence
will be committed; but if we prove other of such
facts, then it will be another offence’. and to charge
the offences in the alternative. That is the exact
case here, the prosecution being in doubt whether
they could prove that the girl was under sixteen.
We think illustration (a} to section 236 shows that
the Calcutta view of the section is too narrow.”

This is accepted as the correct interpretation of the section.
To put it in an amplified form, if the offending act or scrics of
acts alleged in the case is of such a nature that it may, depend-
ing on the facts that can be proved, at the trial, constitute one,
Or more than one, of several offences and doubt exists as to the
particular offence or offences with which the accused should be
charged, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, all
or any of such offences, or he may be charged with having
committed in the alternative one or the other of such offences.

19.14. The interpretation of section 237 also was a matter
of some difficulty in the past. In a case? which went up to. the
Privy Council, several accused were charged under section 302,
Indian Penat Code, but as regards some of them, the evidence
did not sufficiently or definitely prove that they were present at
and had taken part in the murder. ft was, however, found that
they had wrapped up the corpse, placed it on a horse, and gone
away with it. These accused were convicted under scction 201,
Indian Penal Code, though not charged thereunder and their
convictions were upheld by the Lahore High Court. Dismissing
the appeal, the privy Council, after referring to sections 236 and
237 of the Criminal Procedure Code, said—

“The illustration (to section 237) makes the meaning of
these words quite plain. A man may be convicted
of an offence, although there has been no charge in
respect of it, if the evidence, is such as to establish
a charge that micht have been made. That is what
happened here. The three men who were sentenced
to rigorous imprisonment, were convicted of
making away with the evidence of the crime by
assisting in taking away the body. They were not
charged with that formally, but they were tried on
evidence which brings the case under section 237.”

Yn a later judgment of the Privy Council? it was emphasised
that the wide power to convict the accused df a crime not
charged is subject to two conditions, viz., (1) that the crime of
which the accused was found guilty was established by the
evidence and (b) that having regard to the information avail-
able to the prosecuting authorities. it was doubtful which of ene
or more offences would be established by the evidence. These

1 Begu v. King Emp., ALR. 1925 P.C. 131.
2 Thakur Shah. ALR. 1943 P.C. 192.


162

judgments of the Privy Council have been referred to with
approval by the Supreme Court more than once. Since the jaw
appears to be well settled, we consider it best to leave the :vord-
ing of the sections and the illustrations as they are.

19.15. Section 238(2A) provides that when a person is
charged with an offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to
commit that offence although such attempt is not separately
charged. It is clear that the section does not cover abetment of
an offence, and Courts have held! that conviction for abetment
would not be permissible where the accused was only charred
with the substantive offence. In one case?, however, a conviction
for abetment of rape was upheld, though the offence charged
was one of rape, and the abetment was treated as a ‘minor’
offence under section 238(2). We do not think this was a
correct view to take of the section.

The case of abetment stands on a footing different from that
of attempt. Abctment is not an incomplete form of the offence,
Aor connected with it in the same way as an attempt. The ingre-
dients that have to be proved for the abetment of an offence are
quite different from those required to establish the substantive
offence.* There are authorities to the effect that if the facts of
the case are such that the principle of sections 236 and 237 is
applicable and if no prejudice has been caused to the accused in
his defence, a conviction for abetment is permissible even though
only the substantive offence was charged.t We do not consider
it necessary or proper to widen the scope of section 238 by equat-
ing abetment with a minor offence of the same species.

19.16. While section 238(3) saves the provisions of section
198 and section 199, it is incomplete in that it docs not refer to
the other analogous sections which also require a complaint or
sanction for taking cognizance of particular offences, For
example, section 195, 196 and 196A 8150 require the complaint
of a particular person or authority for the offences dealt with
therein; and sections 197 and 197A require the previous sanction
of the Government for prosecution in respect of certain offences,
It appears to be desirable to make it clear, in section 238. that a
conviction for a minor offence is not authorised where the re-
quirements imposed by the law for the initiation of procecdings
in respect of the minor offence have not been complied with. This
clarification will incidentally help to codify the proposition that
“section 238 must yield to section 195.”5 Thus, where the com-
plaint is of an offence under section 211, Indian Penal Code,
there cannot be a conviction under section 182 on the ground
“that the latter is a minor offence. The Supreme Court® has

2 Padmanaba y. Emp., (1910) LL.R. 33 Mad. 264: Emp. v. Ragya,
A.LR. 1924 Bom, 432; Hulas Chandra vy, Emp., ALR. 1927 Cal. 63, 64:

Hirasa v. Emp.. ALR. 1947 Pat. 350, 351: Chote v. Emp. ADR. 1948
All. £68, 170; Narvir Chand v. The State, AAR. 1952 M.B. 17, 20.

2 Samuel John v. Emp., ALR. (935 All. 935, 937.

3 Narvirchand v. The State, AL.R. 1952 M.B. 17. 20.

4 Hirasa ४. Emp.. ALR. 1947 Pat. 350, 351, 352, 353 (reviews case
taw): Debi Prasad v. Emp., AJR. 1932 Cal. 455.

5 Kantir Missir v. Emp. S.1.R. 1930 Pat. 98. 102.

4 Basir-ul-Haq v. State of West Beneal, (1953) S.C.R. 836; A.LR.
1953 S.C, 293, 396.

Section 238(2A)
and abetment.

Section
incomplete.

238(3)


Section 238 (3)
{revised.

Section 239.

Section 240.

162

also observed that the provisions of section 195 cannot be evad-
ed by the device of charging a person with an offence to which
it does not apply, and then convicting him of an offence to
which it does, upon the ground that such latter offence is a
“minor offence”.

This aspect of the matter may be illustrated by the facts in an
Allahabad case,’ wherein a sentence under section 173, Indian
Penal Code, was set aside by the High Court. The Magistrate’s
explanation, that he took cognizance under section 2258, Indian.
Penal Code, and convicted the accused under section 173 by
virtue of section 238, Code of Criminal Procedure, was not.
accepted, as there was no complaint of a public servant as re-
quired by section 195.

49.17. We, therefore, recommend that, for sub-section (3)
of section 238, the following sub-section may be substituted :—

“(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to autho-
rise a conviction of any minor offence where the condition re-
quisite for the initiation of proceedings in respect of that
minor offence have not been satisfied.”

19.18. Section 239 which lays down when persons may be
charged and tried jointly has been elucidated in a recent decision?
of the Supreme Court. The various clauses of the section need
not be treated as mutually exclusive, and it is permissible to
combine the provisions of two or more clauses. The joint trial
of several persons partly by applying one clause and partly by
applying another clause is authorised.

A small grammatical amendment 18 required in clause (b)
which should read—

“(b) persons accused of an offence and persons accused:
of abetment of, or x x x attempt to commit, such
offence.”

It has been held by the Privy Council® that the offence of
conspiracy and any offence committed in pursuance of the cons-
piracy are to be regarded as forming part of the same transac-
tion for purposes of section 235 and persons accused of such
offences can, thus, be tried under clause (9) of section 239.

We note that Beaumont C.J. has, in a Bombay case,‘ criticis-
ed the language of clause (f). The interpretation of the words
“possession of which has been transferred by one offence” is,
however. now well settled, and we do not consider it necessary
to alter the wording.

19.19. No change is needed in section 240.

व Narain Singh v. Emp., ALR. 1925 All. 129 (Neave J.).

2 State of Andhra Pradesh v. Ganeshwar Rao, (1964) 3 S.C.R. 297;
ALR. 1963 S.C. 1850.

8Babulal v. Emp. 65 Indian Appeals 138: ALR. 1938 P.C. 130.
133.
4 Emp. v. Lakho Amra, AIR. 1932 Bom. 201.


163

19.20. We considered the question whether a provision
should be inserted after section 240 to empower the Court to
order separate trial where a trial had begun on a joinder of vari-
ous charges. The power is exercised even now although without
an express provision. We do not think it is necessary to insert
such a provision.

19.21. It was suggested during our discussion that if the
accused made a request in writing for the trial of certain charges
together, then the joinder of those charges should be allowed
even if the joinder is not otherwise permissible under the provi-
sions of sections 233 to 239. We do not think that, in Pfactice,
there will be many accused persons making such a request,
While theoretically there might be no objection to the suggested
provision, it would not have much practical utility.

Power 10. order
separate trial,

Joinder of charges
with consent of
accused — Provi-
sion fot recom
men


Section 241—In-
troductory.

Section 241A
(New).

Sections 242 and
243,

CHAPTER XX
TRIAL OF SUMMONS CASES BY MAGISTRATES

20.1. Summons cases are tried with much less formality tham
warrant cases, and the manner of their trial is less elaborate.
There need, for instance, be no formal charge, and at present
even a formal plea by the accused is not necessary. As soon as
the accused appears, “the particulars of the offence of which he is
accused” are stated to him, and he is asked “if he has any cause
to show why he should not be convicted”. If he admits that he
has committed the offence and shows “no sufficient cause why he
should not be convicted”, he can be convicted at once. In case
the Magistrate docs not on such admission convict him or if the
accused “does not make such an admission”, the Magistrate
proceeds to bear the complainant, take “such evidence as may
be produced” to support the prosecution, and then to hear the
accused and take such evidence as he produces in defence. The
proceedings are then virtually over, unless of course the Magis-
trate himself thinks it necessary to call some more evidence; and
all that remains to be done by the Magistrate is to consider the
evidence and either acquit or convict and sentence the accused.
Even the method of preparing the record is less formal. The
whole of the evidence is not required to be taken down; a memo~
randum of the substance of the evidence is enough (section
355). The scheme is simple, and the intention clearly is that
these not very serious but numerous cases should be decided
quickly. We agrec that this is how it should be. All the esscn-
tials of a fair triat are present here, and the nature of these cases
is such that a more elaborate method would only add to the ex-
pense and perhaps harassment of the partics without substantial-
lv aiding the cause of justice. Without departing from the subs-
tance of the existing provisions, therefore, we have considered
if some changes of detail would improve the working of the
existing scheme.

20. 2. We have provided! in Chapter XVII that in the case
of certain petty offences, an accused who is willing to plead guilty
need not be compelled to appear in Court, either in person or
through pleader. Our object is to avoid unnecessary trouble
to offenders who have committed petty offences and are willing
to pay the penalty. To provide for the procedure in such cases,
a new? section 241A has also been proposed to be included in
this Chapter.

20.3. We recognise that a formal charge is not necessary in
summons-cases, and it is sufficient to state the particulars of the
offence. Section 242 then says that the accused should be ask-
ed “if he has any cause to show why he should not be convicted”.
This tends to be a little ambiguous. The intention, we take it,
is to provide an opportunity to the accused to plead guilty or

1Section 205A (proposed). .
2566 para 17.8 above.


165

not guilty. The language of sections 242 and 243, however, is
likely to create the impression that an admission of guilt alone
may not be sufficient ground for a conviction. We think it would
be better if a straight-forward provision is made for the accused
to piead guilty or not at that stage, as everybody understands these
<i> what is meant by “pleading guilty” or “not guilty”, and the
Code itself uses this expression on other occasions. If the accus-
ed pleads guilty, he can be convicted at once; but if he does not,
the case has to be decided on the evidence. On this view,
section 242 and 243 may be amended to read as follows :—

When the accused appears or is brought before
the Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of which he is
accused shall be stated to him, and he shall be asked whether
he pleads guilty or has any defence to make, but it shall not
be necessary to frame a formal charge.

243. If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall
record the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by

the accused,.. and may in his discretion convict him
thereon.”

20.4. While doing this, we hope to set at rest a controversy
that seems to have arisen at times about the meaning of section
242 when considered along with section 205. It will be noticed
that section 205 enables a Magistrate issuing a summons for an
accused to dispense with his personal attendance and to permit
him to appear by his pleader. This power is likely to be used
mostly in summons cases. Yet, in such cases, the proceedings
have to start with the questioning of the accused about the
accusation against him, so that if that questioning has to be per-
sonal, the power mentioned in section 205 cannot be usefully
exercised. One view, therefore, has been that in cases where
the personal attendance of the accused is dispensed with, his
pleader can, in his stead, plead to the “charge” or make an
answer to the statement of allegations. The other view is, that
such an admission of guilt is a serious matter, and if made negli-
geatly by a pleader, it can burden the accused with severe
Penalty, so that the accused alone can make such an admission
and the questioning of the accused must be intended to be per-
sonal. There is Uttle doubt that nowadays in the Criminal
Courts a pleader is in every case a Practising lawyer. We do not
think a member of the legal profession is likely to act without
clear instructions in such a matter; and we therefore see no great
danger in cntrusting this task to the accused’s pleader. We pro-
pose therefore that where the personal attendance of the accused

has been dispensed with, his pleader may answer the charge
against him.

20.5. The wording of sub-section (1) of section 244 15
unnecessarily verbose. All the situations mentioned there in
detail are covered by the opening words, the only two Possibi-
lties being when the Magistrate convicts On a plea of guilty, and
when the Magistrate does net do so and tl

x हु nd the case proceeds to
evidence. The proviso to the sub-section is 8150 unnecessary.
The sub-section may be revised to read as follows :—

Substance “of
accusation tobe
stated.

Conviction of
plea of guilty.

Procedure under
section 242 when
attendance - of
accused has been
dispensed with.

Section 244,

“(1) If the Magistrate does not convict the accused Procedure whes.

under section 243. . . the Magistrate shail proceed to

not convicted,


‘Section 245.

Section 246,

166

hear the prosecution and take all such evidence as may be
produced in support of the prosecution, and also to hear the
accused and take all such evidence as he produces in his
defence.”

In sub-section (2) also, the word “prosecution” may be
substituted for the word “complainant” in order to cover police-
cases besides complaint cases.

20.6. A controversy has arisen whether the examination of
the accused person himself is compulsory under section 342 in a
summons-case. That section occurs in the Chapter on “Gene-
ral Provisions as to Inquiries and Trials”, and it provides that
the Court shall question the accused “generally on the case after
the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before
he is called on for his defence”. Some High Courts are of the
opinion that this provision applies to the trial of summons cases,
as it occurs in the Chapter meant for all inquiries and trials,
while some High Courts think that it is inapplicable to summons
cases, as the accused is never, in such cases, called on for his
defence. We fcel that the examination of an accused would be
useful in all cases, and we intend making a suitable clarification*
in section 342.

In regard to section 245, however, the question would be
whether this examination maust be of the accused in person or
whether his pleader can be examined if the accused’s attendance
has been dispensed with. Considering the general nature of
summons cases, we think no hatm would occur if the pleader is
examined instead of compelling the accused’s attendance, unless
of course the court considers it necessary to do so. In other
words, we prefer to leave this matter largely to the discretion of
the Magistrate and merely enable him to examine the
pleader if he thinks that sufficient or to compel the attendance of
the accused and examine him in appropriate cases. As we intend
to provide for this in section 342, we propose to omit the words
“and (if he thinks fit) examining the accused” from section
245(1). No other amendment is required in this section.

20.7. In Chapter XIX of the Code concerning the charge,
there is a provision that a person charged with one offence may
be (if there is evidence, of course) convicted of another offence
for which he might have been charged according to the provi-
sions of that Chapter? As there may be no charge framed in a
summons case, a somewhat similar provision has been made in
section 246 which says that a Magistrate may convict the accused
“of any offence triable under this Chapter which from the
facts admitted or proved he appears to have committed what-
ever may be the nature of the complaint or summons”. The
language used here is very wide, but we have no doubt that it is
not the intention that a person accused of a particular offence
triable under this Chapter, that is as a summons case, can
convicted of a totally different and unconnected offence about
which he may never have been questioned and against which he

1 See para. 24.50 below.
2Section 237.

jms ee


167

may never have defended himself. We, therefore, propose that a
qualifying clause “if the Magistrate is satisfied that the accused
would not be prejudiced thereby” should be added to section 246.

20.8. Section 247 seemingly requires the presence of the
complainant in a complaict case at every heamng; and prior to
the amendment of the Code in 1955, the rule was that if the
camplainant absented himself, the accused must be acquitted
unless the Magistrate thought it proper to adjourn the hearing.
it was cvidently felt that this rule was too harsh, and a proviso
was added in 1955 saying that “where the Magistrate is of opinion
that the personal attendance of the complainant is not necessary”
he may dispense with such attendance. The rigour of the original
rule has thus gone, and the whole thing is left to the discretion of
the Court which, we assume, is being properly exercised. It has
been suggested thet if the complainant is a public servant or the
complainant is properly represented by a pleader, the case should
not be dismissed because of his absence. We have, however, no
reason to think that in such situations the Court will not be
persuaded to dispense with the presence of the complainant, so
that the provision of law as it stands and as it is intended to be
worked is in our view adequate.

The only change which we suggest in the section is to extend
the scope of the proviso so as to empower the Magistrate to
proceed with the case where the complainant is represented by his
pleader or by the officer conducting the prosecution.

A question has ariscn whether the complainant's death ends
the proceedings in a summons case; and we find that different
views have been expressed on this question. As a matter of
policy, we think the answer should depend on the nature of the
case and the stage of the proceedings at which death occurs. It
is impracticable to detail the various situations that may arise and
the considerations that may have to be weighed. We think, in
the circumstances, that the decision should be left to the judicial
discretion of the court, and the legal provision need only be that
death and absence stand on the same footing. We trust this will
in practice work satisfcatorily.

In the fight of the above discussion, section 247 may be
amended so as to read as follows :—

“247, (1) If the summons has been issued on com-
plaint, and upon the day appointed for the appearance of the
accused, or any day subsequent thereto to which the hearing
may be adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the
Magistrate shall, notwithstanding anything hercinbefore
contained, acquit the accused, unless for some reason he
thinks it proper to adjourn the hearing of the case to some
other day :

Provided that where the complainant is represented by a
pleader or by the officer conducting the prosecution or where
the Magistrate is of the opinion that the personal attendance
of the complainant is not necessary the Magistrate may dis-
pense with his attendance and proceed with the case.

Section 247.

Non-aj
or death of cone
plainant.


168

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as
may be, apply also to cases where the non-appearance of the
complainant is due to his death.”

‘Section 248. 20.9. Section 248 enables the complainant to withdraw the
complaint with the Court's permission, and the accused is then
acquitted. It has been doubled if the complaint can be withdrawn
regarding some of the accused if there be more than one, and one जा
High Court has held that the whole case against all the accused
stands withdrawn if it is withdrawn regarding some of them, We
think that this power, like that of compounding an offence, should
be exercisable concerning each accused separately when there are
more than one accused. We propose that section 248 may be
amended to read :

Withdrawal of “248. If a complainant, at any time before a final order
complaint. is passed in any case under this Chapter, satisfies the Magis-
trate that there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to
withdraw his complaint against the accused, or if there be
more than one accused against all or any of them, the Mags-
trate may permit him to withdraw the same, and sball there-
upon acquit the accused against whom the complaint is so a
withdrawn.”

Section 249. 20.10. No change of substance is necessary in section 249.
The reference to the District Magistrate may be replaced by “Chief
Judicial Magistrate”, and for the words “any other Magistrate”,
the words “a Magistrate of the second class” may be substituted.

Section 250. 20.11. Section 250 of the Code is designed for payment of
compensation to those accused against whom frivolous or vexati-
ous complaints are brought in Court, Apart from providing that
compensation upto one- of the fine which the Magistrate can
impose can be awarded to the accused, it lays down the lure
governing such proceedings. Notice to the comp! poo is
necessary, and of course he bas to be heard in reply, and against ‘N
the fina! order, an appeal lies. The procedure is, we think, satis-
factory. We are not, however, satisfied with the scope of the
power given to the Court, At present, the Court must be
satisfied that the accusation “was false” and either
frivolous or vexatious. We should have thought that
a false accusation would be necessarily vexatious; but that view
has not found favour with the Courts, and we understand that io
very few cases, Magistrates resort to section 250 on the view that
its requirements are rarely satisfied. To discourage frivolous
complaints, it would, we feel, be proper to widen the scope of
this provision. It is obvious that a complainant who brings 2
false complaint knowing it to be false needs to be punished.
Knowledge on the complainant's paft is, however, a subjective,
matter, and in any case bard to prove. We propose to put in its .
place on objective test, namely, the total absence of any reason-
able ground for the accusation. In most cases, we think this
would be the same as actual knowledge of the falsity of the
accusation. We therefore propose, that in any case where the
Magistrate acquits or discharge the aceused and is further of
opinion that there was no reasonable ground for making the
accusation against them or any of them, he may award compen-
sation to the accused. The only other change we suggest is that


169

the limit of non-appealable orders under this provision when
made by a first class Magistrate should be raised from Rs. 50 to
Rs. 100. No change in the procedure is required.

The following amendments may be made in the section :--

(1) in sub-section (1), for the words “that the accusa-
tion against them or any of them was false and either frivo-
1005 or vexatious”, the words “that there was 00 reasonable
ground for making the accusation against them or any of
them”, shall be substituted;

(2) in sub-section (2), for the words “that the accusa-
tion was false and either frivolous or vexatious”, the words
“that there was no reasonable ground for making the accu-
sation” shall be substituted; and

(3) in sub-section (3) for the words “fifty rupees” the
words “one hundred rupees” shail be substituted.


Section 251.

Sub-section (1) to
be omitted in view
of new section
2058,

Section 251A (2).

CHAPTER XXI
TRIAL OF WARRANT CASES BY MAGISTRATES

21.1. After the amendments made in 1955, this Chapter
practically falls into two parts. The first consisting only of
section 251A lays down the procedure for the trial of warrant
cases instituted on a police report, and the second consisting of
the other sections in the Chapter, namely, sections 252 to 259,
lays down the procedure in other cases. This division has result-
ed in the repetition of some of the provisions but as the two parts.
are thereby made clear and self-contained, the scheme does not
require to be changed.

21.2. Section 251A deals with the procedure to be adopted
in warrant cases instituted on a police report. Under sub-section
(1), the first thing that has to be done by the Magistrate is to
satisfy himself that the documents referred to in section 173 have
been furnished to the accused, and if not, the Magistrate has to
cause them to be so furnished. We have recommended above
that the duty cast on the police by sub-section (4) of section 173
should be transferred to the Magistrate taking cognizance and
suggested the necessary provision? to be included in Chapter
XXII. In view of this provision, sub-section (1) of section
251A may be revised as follows :

“(1) When, in any case instituted upon a police report,
the accused appears, or is brought, before a Magistrate at
the commencement of the trial, the Magistrate shal} satisfy
himself that the provisions of section 205B have been com-
plied with.”

21.3. Section 251A(2) provides that, if upon consideration
of the documents received under section 173 and making such
examination, if any, of the accused as the Magistrate thinks
necessary and after giving the parties an opportunity of being
heard, the Magistrate considers the charge to be groundless, he
shall discharge the accused. The reference to section 173 may
be replaced by a reference to the new section 2058.

One of the suggestions? received by us is that consideration
of the documents alone cannot enable the court to form a definite
opinion as to whether a prima facie case exists, and that the pro-
cedure laid down in sections 252 et seq should be adopted for
Cases instituted upon police report as well, subject to a modifica-
tion that, after the framing of charge, there should be no further
right of cross-examination and the accused should be called upon
to enter upon his defence straightway. One advantage of the
proposed procedure, it is stated, would be that if the statements
of the prosecution witnesses disclosed that no offence was com-
mitted, the court should discharge the accused at an early stage.

3 See paragraph 17.9 above.
2 ‘The suggestion has been made by the Deputy 1.G.P., Delhi F. 3(2)/
55-L. C. Part वी, S. No. 34(d) and F. 3(2}/55-LC. Part I. S. No. 83.


i71

We are unable to accept this suggestion as it strikes at the very
basis of the distinction between cases instituted upon police
report and other cases. It is no doubt possible that in a few
cases the recording of prosecution evidence at the outset before
framing charge may prove to be useful. We do not, however,
consider it desirable to make any such radical change as suggested.

Sub-section (2) does not require the Magistrate to record his
reasons for discharging the accused. As he has to reach that
conclusion after a proper consideration of the documents and
hearing both sides and his order of discharge is subject to revision,
it is obviously necessary that he should record his reasons in the
order. The words “and record his reasons for doing so” may be
added at the end of the sub-section.1

21.4. No changes are needed in sub-sections (3) and (4) of
section 251A.

21.5. With reference to sub-section (5), the question whether
im a warrant case the pleader of the accused can be allowed to
plead to the charge has been considered by the courts.? The
view generally taken is that if the accused is present, his plea must
be recorded, even though his pleader is present, but if the attea-
dance of the accused has been dispensed with, the pleader can be
allowed to plead to the charge. We do nor think that any specific
amendment is necessary on the point.

21.6. Sub-section (6) provides that if the accused refuses to
plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried, the date for the
examination of witnesses shall be fixed. It does not, however,
cover the case where the accused pleads guilty, but the plea is not
accepted by the court under sub-section (5). The wording of
section 244(1) (as amended in 1923) leaves no such lacuna in
Tegard to summons-cases. 1६ would be useful to adopt a similar
wording in section 251A(6).

While sub-section (7) requires the Magistrate to take all such
evidence as may be “produced” in support of the prosecution,
there is no express provision in sub-section (6) or elsewhere for
the issue of process to compel the attendance of prosecution wit-
nesses. There has been some controversy in the past as to
whether process can be asked for. Most High Courts? have
taken the view that it can, but the lacuna has been judicially
noticed.* Yt may be noted that the corresponding provision for
the trial of complaint-cases—section 252(2)—is more specific on
this point. In Uttar Pradesh the following words have been
added at the end of sub-section (6) by a local amendment’ :—

“and shall summon the witnesses, documents or things
specified in any application made on behalf of the prosecu-
tion before the said date for summoning the same, unless for

1 See para. 21.13 below.

® Dorabshah, व... 50 Bom. 250; Champa, ALR. 1950 Cal. 161;
Kanchanbai, AAR. 1959 Madhya Pradesh 150.

8 Public Prosecutor, ALR. 1965 Andhra Pradesh 162: Paban, ALR.
1965 Cal. 387: Phulloo ALR. 1966 All. 18.

4 State v. Shib Charan, A.1.R. 1962 Orissa 157, 159 (para. 9).

SUP. Act 31 of 1962.

Section 251A(3)
and (4). Ny

Section 251A(5).

Section 251A(6),


Section 2S1A(7).

Section 251A(8).

Section 251A(9)

172

reasons to be recorded, he deems it unnecessary to summon
all or any of them.”

We accordingly recommend that sub-section (6) be amended
to read—

“(6) If the Magistrate does not convict the accused
under sub-section (5), be shall fix a date for the examination
of witnesses; and the Magistrate may, on the application of
the prosecution, issue @ summons to any of its witnesses
directing him to attend or to produce any document or other
thing.

21.7. It has been mentioned to us that the proviso to sub-
section (7) which permits the cross-examination of any witness
to be deferred until any other witness or witnesses has been
examined is sometimes resorted to without sufficient justification
and leads to delay, expense and inconvenience to witnesses. There
is at present no such provision in regard to sessions trials. While
the underlying principle is sound, such deferments of the cross-
examination of witnesses are not intended to be a routine matter.
We, however, do not think it desirable to omit this part of the
proviso as suggested to us.

The proviso also enables the Magistrate to recall any witness
for further cross-examination. It has becn suggested that the
proviso should further provide for the summoning of a new
witness whose name is revealed during the examination of othér
witnesses. Even apart from section 540, there is nothing to
debar the production of such a witness by the prosecution so long
as the prosecution cvidence is not closed. No amendment is
required on this point.

21.8. Sub-section (8) allows the accused to put in any
written statement he wants. The practical necessity for
provision has been questioned but it seems to us that it does no
harm and might be of some use to an accused person who (or
whose pleader) feels that his examination under section 342 has
not given him a full opportunity to explain all aspects of the case.
The sub-section does not require to be curtailed.

21.9. Sub-section (9) requires the Magistrate to summon at
the instance of the accused, a witness “for examination or cross.
examination”, but under the proviso, the attendance of a witness
is not compellable where the accused has had an opportunity of
cross-examining that witness. This is, however, subject to
counter-exception expressed by the words “unless the Magistrate
is satisfied that it is necessary for the purposes of justice”. The
Magistrate’s action is, thus, hedged in by a number of seemingly
contradictory provisions. Further, the word “or” in the main
paragraph seems to allow the summoning of a new witness only
for cross-examination, which may not be desirable and is perhaps
not the intention of the sub-section. No change is, however,
suggested on this point, since the sub-section vests full discretion

‘This provision ig being made for Sessions trials also. See para 23.2,
revised section 276(2) below.


173

in the Magistrate and indicates that he should be guided by “the
ends of justice”.

In the proviso to sub-section (9), the words “after the charge
is framed” are unnecessary, because under the preceding sub-
sections of the section, no examination of a prosecution witness
takes place before the charge. The reference should teally be to
the stage before the accused enters on his defence. The words
in question should be replaced by the words “before entering on
his defence”.

21.10. Sub-section (11) provides that where in any case in
which a charge has been framed, the Magistrate finds the accused
not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal, A State Govern-
ment has stated that the abseace of witnesses on the date fixed
for hearing sometimes leads to acquittal and a subsequent prose-
cution is barred under section 403. It is suggested that an
acquittal by reason of the absence of prosecution witnesses should
be no bar to the subsequent prosecution and that this difficulty
can be overcome by the insertion of a provision similar to section
249.

The question whether the accused is to be acquitted if there
are no prosecution witnesses was considered by us in detail. In
this connection the question whether the court is bound to
summon prosecution witnesses under section 540 when the p rose
cution does not produce the witnesses, was also discussed. In
an Orissa case,! it was stated that the case of the absence of
prosecution witnesses is not provided for in the Code, and an
order of acquittal was set aside in that case as an acquittal must
be based on “evidence”. Of course, once the prosecution has
summoned the witnesses through Court, the Court must enforce
their attendance? But the question is, can the court acquit the
accused metely on the ground of want of diligence on the part of
the prosecution ?

In a Madras case,? it was stated that once the Court has
already framed a charge in a warrant case, “an important duty is
laid on it to see that all the powers available to the Court for the
examination of witnesses are exercised for a just decision of the
case irrespective of the laches of the complainant. Such powers
include the powers under section 540, Criminal Procedure Code
to summon witnesses on the motion of the Court”.

In an Andhra Pradesh case,‘ the prosecution witnesses were
not present, and the summonses also were not returned, on the
date of hearing. The Assistant Sub-Inspector undertook the
responsibility of producing the witnesses at the next hearing, None
of the witnesses were however present at the next hearing, and
consequently the accused were acquitted. Even so, the High
Court set aside the acquittal.

1 Shibcharan, A.LR. 1962 Orissa 157 (R. K. Das J.).
2 State of Mysore v. Narasimha, ALR. 1965 Mys. 167 (D.B.).
_3P. P, ४. M, Sambangi, ALR. 1965 Mad, 31, 35, para. 4 (Rama-
krishnan 3.).
<P. P. v. Pachtyappa, ALR. 1965 AP. 162 (Mohammed Mirza J.)

Section 25107).


Section 251A(12)
and (13).

Section 252.

Section 253.

174

We have recommended above an amendment of sub-section
(6) expressly enabling the prosecution to apply for, and the
Magistrate to issue, summonses to secure the attendance of
witnesses. We think the position will be clearer when _ this
amendment is made. In any event, the insertion of a provision
like section 249 in this Chapter relating to the trial of warrant
cases will mean keeping the accused in suspense for no fault of
his and for an indefinite period simply because the prosecution is
unable to produce its witnesses before the Court. This is not a
situation which can be recommended.

21.11, No changes are needed in sub-sections (12) and
(43).

21.12. In section 252(1) we propose to substitute for the
words “complainant {if any)”, the word “prosecution”, and to
omit the proviso which will be rendered unnecessary by this
amendment.

Section 252(2) appears to throw on the Magistrate the res-
ponsibility of ascertaining the names of any persons likely to be
acquainted with the case and to summon such of them as he con~
siders necessary. This would appear to be both unnecessary and
undesirable when the case has been instituted on complaint
whether by a private individual or by a public servant. In those
cases the complainant would have already furnished a list of pro-
secution witnesses under section 204(1A). Even in the rare
cases where cognizance was taken under section 190(1)({c) there
would be somebody prosecuting the case who should be in a posi-
tion to give a list of witnesses. Sub-section (2) in its present
form does not appear to be necessary, and in its place we may
have a sub-section as follows :

“(2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the pro-
secution, issue a summons to any of its witnesses directing him
to attend or to produce any document or other thing.”

This will bring section 252(2) into line with section 251A(6) as
proposed to be amended.*

21.13. We propose to make two amendments in section
253(1). In view of the comprehensive provision in section 342
relating to examination of the accused the words “and making
such examination (if any) of the accused as the Magistrate thinks
Mecessary” are practically superfluous and may be omitted. When
the Magistrate finds that no prima facie case has been made out
against the accused there will hardly be anything to examine him
about! Secondly, it is desirable to make it clear in sub-section
(1), as already done in sub-section (2), that the Magistrate should
record his reasons for discharging the accused. An order of dis-
charge under either sub-section is a judicial order and subject
to revision.?

Sub-section (1) may be revised as follows :—

“(1) If, upon taking all the evidence referred to in section
252. . . . the Magistrate Considers, for reason to be

2 See vara. 21.6 above.
ah Narayan ४. P. Chettareddi, AUR. 1961 0.9. 117, 119 (Reviews
cases).


175

recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out
which, if unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the
Magistrate shall discharge him.”

24.14. In section 254, also the reference to examination of
the accused is unnecessary and may be omitted. The opening
words of the section may be amended to read “If when such evi-

dence has been taken or at any previous stage of the case, etc.”

21.15. Im section 255(1), the words “whether he is guilty”,
may be replaced by the words “whether he pleads guilty” as being
more appropriate.

The question whether, in section 255(2), after the words
“record the plea”, the words “as far as possible in his own words”
should be added as in section 243 was considered by us. As
section 243 relates to summons cases where there is no charge,
the direction to record the admission of the accused as far as
possible in his own words has a meaning and a purpose. The
situation under section 255 is different. The plea is with reference
to a detailed charge which has to be formulated precisely and
must give full particulars of the offence. It is unnecessary to
provide in this context that the plea must be recorded in the
accused person’s own words.

21.15a. Section 255A, which is analogous to section 310
applying to sessions trials, was inserted by the Amending Act of
1923. The Lowndes Committee! which examined the Amend-
ment Bill of 1914 recommended it for these reasons :

“We think that this addition is necessary after section 255
to provide for a case where previous conviction is also char; ged.
Definite provision is made for this in the case of trials before
a Court of Session (see section 310), but it does not seem
to have been provided for by the Code in the case of @
Magistrate’s trial.”

The Select Committee which examined this clause observed
as follows? :

“Tt was suggested to us that the new section 255A is un-
necessary, on the ground that though a procedure for the
proof of previous convictions is necessary in a Sessions Court
to prevent the Jury or the Assessors from being prejudiced by
anything that they may hear as to the accused’s previous
record, yet in warrant cases the same considerations do not
apply. On the whole, however, we think the new section may
serve a useful purpose, and we have retained it.”

Although 10 a Patna case,> it was observed by a Judge that
“no advantage is to be gained by this procedure”, we do not re-
commend the omission of this section. Postponement of the in-
quiry into the charge of previous conviction does not cause any
jnconvenience to the Magistrate or delay in the proceedings.
Occasionally even the trained mind of a Magistrate may be
affected by the knowledge that the accused has been previously

2 Report of the Lowndes Committee Appendix B, under clause 56A.
2 Report of the Select Committee, (1922), under clause 68.
3 Ishwar Singh v. Shama Dusadh, AJR. 1937 Pat. 131.

Section 254,

Section 255.

Section 255A,


Section 256.

Section 257.

Section 258,
Section 259.

176

convicted? If this charge also is put to the accused from the
beginning, he may get the feeling that the Magistrate is perhaps
prejudiced by the knowledge of that previous conviction which it
is better to avoid.

21.16. As proposed above in regard to section 251A(6), a
formal amendment is required in the opening words of section
25611). For the words “If the accused refuses to plead, or does
not plead, or claims to be tried”, the words “If the accused is not
convicted under sub-section(2) of section 255” may be substi-
tuted. No other amendment is required in section 256.

21.17. Under section 257(2) the Magistrate may, before
summoning any witness at the instance of the accused, require a
deposit to be made of the reasonable expenses of such witness,
A suggestion has been made that this sub-section should be
deleted. While in the majority of the cases, the Magistrate may
not think it necessary to exercise the power under this sub-section,
it does not appear to be necessary or desirable to take away the
power. Usually, the Government bears the expenses of defence
witnesses, but not in all cases*. The matter is dealt with by
tules.®

There seems to be some controversy as to the course to be
adopted by the Magistrate when some prosecution witnesses are
absent and cannot, therefore, be cross-examined after charge, One
view is, that the accused should be acquitted and that the evidence
Previously given by those prosecution witnesses should be “ex-
punged®. Another view is that the court should re-summon the
witnesses under section 257.7 The correct position seems to be
that if the parties concerned have taken the necessary steps in
accordance with law for summoning of the witnesses, or if the
accused wishes to exercise his right of further cross-examination
in accordance with law, the court must enforce the attendance of
such witnesess, and cannot acquit the accused merely on the
ground of the complaint’s or witnesses’ absence. The rulings ap-
parently to the contrary are distinguishable on facts.9-?°

21.19. Section 258 needs no change.

21.20, A suggestion® has been made that the cases in which
the Magistrate may discharge the accused because of the com-
plainant’s absence should not be limited to non-cognizable offen-
ces and compoundable offences. This question was also consi-

1Cf. Beaumont C. J. in Emp. v. Ahmad Ebrahim, AJR. 193$
Bom. 39.

2 See para. 21.6 above.

39560 Saved Habib v. Emp., ALR. 1929 Lah. 23, 24 (Shadi Lal 0.).).

4Ganpat Ra. v. The Crown, ALR. 1923 Lah. 420 (Moti Sagar J.);
Abdul Rehman. ALR. 1952 Ajmer 45.

556९ Jit Singh v. The Stare, AGR. 1963 Punj. 143.

® Sadek Mohd. Ahmed Hassan v. Jyotish Chander, AJL.R. 1948 Cal.
88 (Roxburgh and Chunder J¥.).

1 Rampal v. Mangala, AJR. 1952 Rai. 601.

8 Repin v. Pahan, A.¥.R. 1951 Cal. 418.

% Emp. v. Nazir, ALR. 1930 All. 795, 796, (Boys 3.)

136 Gobinda v. Rahi Prasad, A.LR. 1953 Ori 152.

17 छ, 3(2)/55-L.C. Part वा, S. No. 52, pages 269-270 of the Corres-
pondence (Suggestion of the Chief Presidency Magistrate, Madras).

+


177

dered in the past. The Lowndes Committee! had suggested
deletion of the words “and the offence may be lawfully compound-
ed” as suggested by the Bengal Government. The Committee’s rea-
soning was, that no useful result would follow from attempting
(in ordinary cases) to force the complainant to go on against his
will. But the Select Committee? which considered the Amendment
Bill of 1922 thought that this would be going too far and that it
would be “sufficient to extend the application of the section to
cases of non-cognizable offences.” The words “or is not a cogni-
zable offence” were accordingly added in the section.

As to the principle underlying the section it was observed in a
Rangoon case* :—

“The principle underlying the provisions dealing with the
trial of non-compoundable or cognizable warrant cases is that,
whether instituted on complaint or otherwise, the final respon-
sibility for the conduct of such cases rests with the State and
that where there is reasonable ground for believing that such
an Offence has been committed, once the machinery of the law
has been set in motion, the right of arresting its progress rests
with the State alone.”

Agreeing with this view, we do not recommend any widening
of the scope of section 259.

The question whether the requirement of compoundability and
the requirement of non-cognizability are alternative or cumulative
has been discussed in one case. The language of the section is
clear on this point, and we do not, therefore, consider any such
amendment necessary as was hinted at in that case.

It has been suggested 5-० that a proviso should be added in sec-
tion 259 to the effect that the Magistrate shall not discharge
the accused if the complainant is a public servant acting Or pur=
porting to act in the discharge of his official duty. We do not
think aay such provision is necessary. Discharge of the accused
under this section is a matter within the discretion of the court,
and the fact that the complaint was made by the complainant in
the discharge of his offcial duty will necessarily be taken into
account by the court before passing an order under this section’.

2 Report of the Lowndes Committee. Appendix 8, clause 59.

2 Report of the Select Committee, (1922) under clause 71

3 Maung Thin, LR. 5 Rang. 136; ALR. 1927 Rang, 174, 175
(Doyle J.)

4 Shankar Das v. Mahu Ram, ALR. 1963 H. P. 32, 33, para 4.

5B. 3(2)/55-LC. Part I, S. No. 61.

8 See also F. 3(2)/55-L.C. Part Hi, 5. No. 34(०) and 34, (Sugges-
tion of a District Magistrate, endorsed by the Administration of the
Union Territory).

7See also discussion relating to section 247.


General,

Section 260—Clas-
ses of Magistrates
who may try sum-
marily,

CHAPTER XXIi
SUMMARY TRIALS

22.1. From the point of view of procedure, a summary
trial is an abridged form of the regular trial and is resorted to
in order to save time in trying petty cases. Short-cuts in pro-
cedure in criminal cases are not without risks; but in view of the
safeguards provided as to the type of judicial officers who may
exercise this power, the nature of the offences that may be so
tried and the punishment that may be inflicted in such trials,
summary jurisdiction is justifiable.

22.2. Under section 260(1), the Magistrates who can try
a case summarily are (a) the District Magistrate, (b) any first
class Magistrate specially empowered by the State Government,
and (c) any Bench of Magistrates invested with the powers of a
first class Magistrate and specially empowered by the State
Government.

Tn view of the proposed separation and change in nomen-
clature, the reference to “District Magistrate” should be changed
to read “Chief Judicial Magistrate”. However, we do not consi-
der it necessary to include the Chief Judicial Magistrate as, in
practice, he would hardly have the time or occasion to try cases
summarily.

At present, Presidency Magistrates are not mentioned in sec-
tion 260, because under section 362(4) Presidency Magistrates
are not required to record the evidence or to frame a charge in
a case in which an appeal does not lie. We Propose to remove
this special provision and to equate the procedure to be adopted
by Presidency Magistrates in such cases with that laid down for
summary trials. This not only avoids repetition, but also indi-
cates clearly the record to be kept in the case. Hence we are
adding Presidency Magistrates in section 260(1). (Compare
the amendment made by Bombay Act 54 of 1959 on this point
in section 260 and in section 362).

As regards first class Magistrates, the power to try cases
summarily should be conferred, not by the State Government,
but by the High Court which is in overall control and is in a
better position to know their capabilities. As regards Benches
of Magistrates also, the conferment of powers under this section
should be by the High Court and not by the State Government.

Thus the three classes of magistrates who may try cases sum-
tmarily will be—
(a) any Presidency Magistrate,

(5) any Judicial Magistrate of the first class specially em-
powered in this behalf by the High Court, and

(०) any Bench of Magistrates invested with the powers of
a. Judicial Magistrate of the first class and specially
empowered in this behalf by the High Court.


179

Suggestions have been reccived that such powers should be
given only to senior Judicial Officers. While it should be de-
sirable that only experienced Magistrates with, say, 5 years’ ex-
perience as a first class Magistrate should be given these powers,
a statutory provision of a rigid character is not necessary. In
fact, we find that powers under this section arc even now con-
ferred only upon experienced Magistrates.

22.3. Section 260(1) gives in clauses (a) to (m) a list of
the offences that may be tried summarily.

Clause (a) provides that all offences punishable with im-
prisonment upto six months may be tried summarily. This coin-
cided with the d2finition of summons cases in the Code before
the amendment of 1955. We are of the view that since the
definition of “summons cases” has been now changed to cover
offences punishable with imprisonment upto one year, the scope
of offences triable summarily should also be correspondingly
widened by substituting “one year” for “six months” in this
clause,

Consequentially clauses (b) and (c) should 5९ omitted, since
the offences punishable under sections 264, 265, 266 and 323
of the Penal Code are punishable with imprisonment that may
extend to one year only. it has been suggested that the offences
under section 324 may be added in clause (c), and that, in
clause (m), offences under the Prevention of Gambling Act,
Opium Act, Excise Act and Dangerous Drugs Act may be added.
The offence under section 324 (voluntarily causing hurt by
dangerous weapons) is much more serious than that under
section 323; it is cognizable, not bailable and punishable with
imprisonment that may extend to three years and with fine. As
regards offences under the Opium Act, a general provision
covering all such offences would not be desirable. The sugges-
tion has not, therefore, been accepted.

A suggestion has been made to effect the following changes
in section 260(1) :

(i) in clauses (d), (e), (f) and (g), the limit laid down
for the value of the property should be _ increased
from Rs. 200 to Rs. 1000; and

(it} offences under sections 406, 417, 419 and 420 in-
volving property not exceeding Rs. 1000 in value
should be included in the section.

So far as the increase in the value of the property is con-
cerned, we note that the value mentioned before the Amendment
of 1955 was Rs. 50 and it was increased to Rs, 200 in 1955.
As not much time has elapsed since the increase, we are not
inclined to recommend a further increase.

As regards offences under section 406 (criminal breach of
trust), 419 (cheating by personnation) and 420 (cheating and
dishonestly inducing delivery of property), these offences often
involve complicated questions of facts and law, and it appears
to us that an extension of the procedure for summary trials to
such offences is not without risk. The offence under section:

Section 260-0ffen«
ces that may be
tried summarily,


Section}261,

180

417 (cheating) will be covered by the proposed extension of
section 260(1)(a} to offences punishable with imprisonment upto
one year. We do not, therefore, recommend any amendment in
this respect.

In clause (i), the reference to house-trespass under section
448 should be omitted since the offence is punishable with
imprisonment up to one year only. The reference to section 457
should also be omitted since this is a grave offence punishable
with five years’ imprisonment and when connected with theft
with 14 years’ imprisonment.

Clause (m) is not accurately worded. Section 20 of the
Cattle Trespass Act, 1871, does not create an offence, by itself.
It is by virtue of the definition in section 4(1) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure that any act in respect of which a com-
Plaint may be made under section 20 is included in the defini-
tion of “offence”. The clause should be amended to read—

“(m) any offence constituted by an act in respect of
which a complaint may be made under section 20 of the
Cattle Trespass Act, 1871.”

22.4. Under section 261, the State Government can confer
on any Bench of Magistrates invested with the powers of a
Magistrate of the second or third class the powers to try sum-
marily the specified offences. As in the case of the Benches
Mentioned in the previous section, we consider that the confer-
ment of powers under this section also should be by the High
Court, and not by the State Government.

In an earlier Report', the Law Commission observed that in
States where there are Magistrates of the second class, summary
jurisdiction should be given to such Magistrates sitting singly.
In our view, however, it would not be proper to give the power
in question to individual Magistrates of the second class, having
regard to the need for experi 1८०७९ and maturity for a proper
exercise of summary jurisdiction.

As for the offences which the Bench of Magistrates may try
summarily, one of the sections of the Indian Penal Code men-
tioned is section 352 (assault or use of criminal force otherwise
than on grave and sudden provocation), but the offence under
section 358 (assault or use of criminal force on grave and sudden
provocation) is not mentioned. The former is punishable with
imprisonment upto 3 months, or fine upto Rs, 500 or both,
while the latter is punishable with simple imprisonment upto one
month or fine upto Rs. 200 or both. It has been suggested that
the offence under section 358, Indian Penal Code should be in-
cluded in section 261(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Having regard to the fact that the latter offence is in all respects
a less serious one than the former, we would accept the sugges-
tion.

1 14th Report, Vol. 2, page 731, paragraph 47, and page 732, items 10.


183

22.5. Section 262(1) provides that in summary trials the Section

shali be folowed in warrant cases, except as mentioned in
sections 263, 264 and 265. In an earlier Report? the Law Com-
mission recommended that this distinction between summons-
cases and warrant-cases shouid be abolished in summary trials.
Since the Code defines the offences triable summarily and con-
templates the appointment of specially empowered Magistrates
for trying such cases, it was recommended that a uniform pro-
cedure should be followed in all such cases. it was pointed out,
that in the majority of the offences so triable, the punishment
was imprisonment for 6 months or less (which would be sum-
mons-cases under section 4(1)(w) as it stood before 1955),
and that the maximum sentence that could be passed was limited
to three months even when the specified offences were warrant
cases. For these reasons, the Law Commission recommended
that summons-case procedure should be followed in all cases, as
no particular advantage would be gained by following the more
complicated warrant-case procedure if the case was to be tried
summarily. We entirely agree with this recommendation.

22.6. Section 262(2) provides that no sentence of imprisos- pete

ment for a term exceeding three months shall be passed on con-
viction in a summary trial. We recommend that this limit of
three months be increased to six months. It is true that the
object of the restriction in section 262(2) is to restrict the pass-
ing of sentence of considerable length in a summary trial, but an
increase upto six months should not, in our view, be objection-
able since every sentence of imprisonment is appealable. Section
414 of the Code, as originally enacted, barred an appeal in a
case tried summarily in which a sentence of imprisonment not
exceeding 3 months or a sentence of fine not exceeding Rs. 200
was passed. That part of section 414 which related to impri-
sonment was omitted in 1923, and therefore every sentence of
imprisonment or fine of over Rs. 200 is now appealablie.

The record in a summary trial is no doubt less elaborate than
that in a regular trial; but our recommendation that the substance
of the evidence be recorded in all cases other than those where
the accused pleads guilty will facilitate an effective scrutiny by
a higher Court into the correctness of the Magistrate’s order.
In view of the fact that the scope of section 260(1)(a) is pro-
posed to be widened so as to cover offences punishable with im-
Pprisonment है to One year, an increase in the maximum imprison-
ment which the court can award would also prove to be of practi-
cal use in some cases.

22.7. Accordingly, section 262 may be amended so as to read
as follows :—

“262. (1) 10 trials under this Chapter, the procedure
prescribed for summons cases shall be followed......
except as hereinafter mentioned.

134th Report, Vol, 2, pages 730-732, paragraph 45.

2626)
procedure prescribed for summons cases shali be followed in Semmens ट्रक ।
summons cases and the procedure prescribed for warrant cases summary triats.

Amendment

section

262

of
Te


Section 263 and
264.

182

(2) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding six
months shall be passed in the case of any conviction
under this Chapter.”

22.8. Sections 263 and 264 deal with the procedure to be
followed in non-appealable and appealable cases respectively.
‘the main difference between the two is that, while in the former
no evidence necd be recorded, in the latter case the Magistrate
has to record the substance of the evidence. The defect of this.
scheme is that procedure is made to depend on the result. [a
other words, if the need to record evidence is dependent on
appealability, and appealability in turn depends 00 the sentence
awarded, then the Magistrate has to decide on the guilt of the
accused and sentence that should be awarded even before he
has heard the evidence. This artificiality has led to some con-
flict! in the interpretation of the words “in which appeal lies”
appearing in section 264.

Another shortcoming of this scheme is that the right of re-
vision against a conviction and the right of an appeal against
acquittal are rendered virtually ineffective in so far as the higher
court cannot conduct a meaningful enquiry into the correctness.
of the trial court’s order for want of a proper record of the case.
This reason had prompted the Law Commission to recommend
in an earlicr Report? that the substance of the evidence should
form part of the record of the case in appealable and non-
appealable cases alike. We are also of the same view.

This change should not make any practical difference in the
speedy disposal of summary cases as our investigation Teveals
that, even as it is, the Magistrates, due to the difficulty and
undesirability of making up their minds on the ultimate result
of the case even before they have heard the evidence, do take
notes of the evidence during the examination of the witnesses to
be later incorporated in the records, should an appealable con-
viction follow. It was also revealed that in a large number of
summary trials the accused pleads guilty and the need to record
evidence docs not arise. We, therefore, recommend that the
procedure to be followed in all summary trials should be the
same irrespective of the result of the trial.

Section 263 expressly provides that no formal charge need
be framed in a case where no al lics. Since we recommend
that summons-case procedur:, in which there is no formal
charge, be adopted in all summary trials, the words “or frame
a formal charge” in this section can be deleted.

Accordingly scctions 263 and 264 may be combined and
recast to read as follows :
“263. In every case tried summarily, the Magistrate

or Bench of Magistrates.... shall enter, in such form as
the State Government may direct, the following particulars
namely :—

(a) the serial number of the case;

2 See discussion of case-law in Antonio Vincente v. The State, AIR.

1968 Goa 81.
244th Report, Vol. 2. page 827, para. 8.


ame, 9

183

(0) the date of the commission of the offense;

(०) the date of the report of complaint;

(9) the name of the complainant (if any);

(e) the name, parentage and residence of the accused;

(1) the offence complained of and the offence (if any)

proved, and in cases coming under clause (5), (c),

(4) or (९) of sub-section (1) of section 260, the

> value of the property in respect of which the offence
has been commited;

(g) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);
(bh) the finding. ..;

(i) the sentence or other final order; and

(j) the date on which the proceedings terminated;

and when the accused does not plead guilty, the Magistraie
or Bench shali also record the substance of the evidence and
@ judgment containing a brief statement of the reasons for
the finding.”

22.9, Sub-section (1) of section 265 deals with the langu-
age of the record and judgment. The meation therein of the
mother-tongue of the presiding officer may be omitted as un-
fecessary at the present day. It also appears unnecessary to
tequire the presiding officer himself to write up the record. In
practice, the factual particulars of the case are recorded by the
Clerk of the Court. The sub-section may accordingly be re-
vised to read :

“(1) Every such record and judgment shall be written
either in English or in the language of the Court.”

22.10. Sub-section (2) of section 265 enables the State
Government to authorise any Bench of Magistrates to employ
an official to prepare the record or judgment or both and take
the signature thereon of each member of the Bench taking part
in the proceedings. The official is to be “appointed in this
behalf by the Court to which such Bench is immediately subordi-
nate” i.e., the Chief Judicial Magistrate of the district. As this
is a petty administrative matter, the authorisation also could, it
is suggested, be left in his hands. The sub-section may be re-
vised to read :

“(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may authorise any
Bench of Magistrates empowered to try offences summarily
to prepare the aforesaid record or judgment or both by
means of an officer appointed in this behalg by the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, and the record or judgment so pre-
pared shall be signed by cach member of the Bench taking
Part in the proceedings.”

No modifications are required in sub-sections (3) and (4).

Section 265 (1)-
Language of te-
cord and judge
ment.

Section 263 (2),
8) and (4) Special
provisions for
Benches.


CHAPTER XXIIi

TRIALS BEFORE HIGH COURTS AND COURTS OF
SESSION

Chapter to be 23.1. In this Chapter, which is the longest in the Code con-

shortened

after sisting of 70 sections, the procedure for trials before High Courts

omitting referen- and Courts of Session is laid down in detail. A large portion of

ces to High Court
and jury trials.

the Chapter is devoted to various details connected with trial by
jury, like preparing and maintaining lists of jurors, issuing sum-
monses to them, choosing of jury etc, The Law Commission
has, ia a previous Report,? recommended that the jury system
should be abolished. Even now it is followed by Courts of
Session in very few places. We propose that all references to
jury trials should be removed from the Code. Secondly, we
have, in an earlier Chapter,? recommended that the Calcutta High
Court, which at present is the only High Court exercising ordi-
nary original criminal jurisdiction in a very small category of
cases, should cease to exercise that jurisdiction, In view of these
two proposals this Chapter will be very much shortened and will
lay down the procedure for trials by Courts of Session only,
without the help of jurors or assessors.

Provisions = re~ 23.2. The abolition of commitment proceedings has been
vised. recommended in ap earlicr Chapter.2 Formally, however, cases,
whether instituted on a police report or on a complaint, wilt
ordinarily! be committed to the Court of Session for trial by a
Magistrate who will have gone through certain preliminaries, We
have already indicated in that Chapter in broad outline the
procedure that will have to be followed by Courts of Session on
such commitments. The detailed provisions to be inclulded in
this Chapter governing “Trials re Courts of Session” may
be as follows :—
Trial to be con- “270. In every trial before a Court of Session the prose-
fucted by. Public cution shall be conducted by a Public Prosecutor.®
Opening the Case 271. When the accused appears or is brought before the
for prosecution, Court in pursuance of a commitment of the case under section
205D, the prosecutor shall open his case by describing the
charge brought against the accused and stating by what evi-
dence he proposes to prove the guilt of the accused.®
Discharge. 272. If, upon consideration of the record of the case

and the documents submitted therewith, and after hearing
the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this
behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the
accused and record his reasons for doing so.?

114th Report, Vol. 2, page 873.

2 Para, 3.5 above.

Chanter XVII above.

3 Prosecution under 5. 1988 is an exception.

3 Present section 270.

SCH. section 286(1}. For new section 2050, see para 17.11 above.
TCf. sectien 2S51A(2).



185

273. (1) Hf after such consideration and hearing as afore- Framing of char-
said, the Judge is of opinion that there is ground for pre- 5
suming that the accused has committed an offence triable by
the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the
accused.!

(2) The charge shall be read out in Court and explained
to the accused, and he shall be asked whether he pleads
guilty of the offence charged or claims to be tried.?

274. If the accused pleads guilty, the Judge shall record Plea of suily.
the plea and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon.®

275. Ef the accused is not convicted under section 274, Date for, ree
the Judge shall fix a date for the examination of witnesses, “UtOm-evidence.
and may, on the application of the prosecution, issue any
process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the
production of any document or other thing.*

Evidence of the

276. (1) On the date so fixed, the Judge shall proceed prosecution.
to take all such evidence as may be produced in support of
the prosecution.®

(2) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the cross-
examination of any witness to be deferred until any other wi
ness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness
for further cross-examination.*

277. If after taking the evidence for the prosecution, exa- Acquiltal.
mining the accused and hearing the prosecution and the
defence on the point, the Judge considers that there is no
evidence that the accused committed the offence, the Judge
shall record an order of acquittal.?

278. (1) Where the accused is not acquitted under section Entering upon
277, he shall be called upon to enter on his defence and Sn.
adduce any evidence he may have in support thereof.*

(2) If the accused puts in any written statement, the
Judge shail file it with the record.?

(3) If the accused applies for the issue of any process
for compelling the attendance of any witness or the produc-
tion of any document or thing, the Judge shall issue such
process unless he considers, for reasons to be recorded, that
such application should be refused on the ground that it is
made fer the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating
the ends of justice.1°
279. When the examination of the witnesses (if any) for Arguments.

the defence is complete, the prosecutor shall sum up his case
and the accused or his pleader shall be entitled to reply.1?

3 (४ section 251A(3).

2 Cf. section 271(1) and section 251A(4).
3 Cf. section 271(2) and section 2518(5).
4 CH. section 272 and section 251A(6).

5 Cf. section 286(2) and section 251A(7).
8 Cf. proviso ta section 251A(7).

4 (6 section 289. (2) and (3).

8८7. section 289(4) and section 251A(8).
2 Cf. section 251A(8).

30 Cf, section 25tA(9).

वा Cf. section 290 and section 292.


Judgment.

Previous convic-
tion.

Trial of cases ins-
tituted under sec-
tion 1988.

Procedure in
cases instituted
under section
3988.

186

280. (1) Thereafter, the Judge shali give a judgment in
the case.

(2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless
he proceeds in accordance with the provisions ‘of section 562,
hear the accused on the question of sentence and then pass
sentence on him according to law.*

281. In a case where a previous conviction is charged
under the provisions of sub-section (7) of section 221 and
the accused does not admit that he has been previously con-
victed as alleged in the charge, the Judge may, after he has
convicted the said accused under section 274 or section 280
take evidence in respect of the alleged previous conviction,
and shall record a finding thereon.?

23.3. In ovr discussion of section 198B, we have recom-
mended® that apart from five sub-sections which deal with the
conditions requisite for initiating proceedings under that section,
the remaining provisions of the section should be put in this
Chapter as they are special provisions governing the trial of these
cases by Couris of Session. This section will be as follows :——

“282, (1) A Court of Session taking cognizance of an
offence under sub-section (1) of section 198B shall try the
case under this chapter as if it had been committed to it bya
Magistrate taking cognizance 2f the offence upon a com-
plaint :

Provided that the person against whom the offence is al-
leged to have been committed shall, unless the Court, for
reasons to be recorded, otherwise directs, be examined as a
witness for the prosecution.‘

(2) Every trial under this section shall be held in
camera if either party thereto so desires or if the Court so
thinks fit to 006

(3) If, in any such case, the Court discharges or acquits
all or any of the accused and is of opinion that there was
no reasonable cause for making the accusation against them
or any of them, it may, by its order of discharge or acquittal,
direct the person against whom the offence was alleged to
have been committed, where such person was at the time of
such commission a Minister, to show cause why he should
not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any ot
such accused, when there are more than one.

(4) The Court shall record and consider any cause which
may be shown by the person so directed, and if it satisfied
that there was no reasonable cause for making the accusation,
it may, for reasons to be recorded, direct that compensation
to such amount not exceeding one thousand rupees, as it

3 Cf. section 309. The requirement about bearing the accused on the

auestion of sentence before passing sentence has been added as a desirable
srovision.

2 Cf. section 310 and section 251A4(13).
3See para. 15.160 above.

«Cf. section 198B(5).

8 (+ section 198B(SA).

®Cf. section 198B(6). ae



187

may determine, be paid by such person to the accused or to
each or any of them.?

(5) All compensation awarded under sub-section (4) shall
be recovered as if it were a fine.*

“(6) No person who has been directed to pay compen-
sation under sub-section (4) shall, by reason of such order,
be exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of
the complaint made under this section :

Provided that any amount paid to an accused person
under this section shall be taken into account in awarding
compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit
relating to the same matter.*

(7) The person who has been ordered under sub-section (4)
to pay compensation may, in so far as the order relates to the
payment of compensation, appeal from the order to the High
Court.*

(8) When an order for payment of compensation to an
accused person is made in a case which is subject to appeal
under sub-section (7), the compensation shall not be paid
to him before the period allowed for the presentation of the
appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, before the
appeal has been decided.”’*

1 Cf. section 198B(7)
2 Ct. section 198B(8).
S Cf, section 198B(9},
4 Cf. section 198B(10).
SCH. section 198B(11).


Procedure when
accused is a cor-
poration or asso-
ciation,

Penal provisions
applying to com-
panies and asso-
clations.

Service of sum-
mons On corpo-
rations ;

section 69 (3),

CHAPTER XXIV

GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS

24.1, Before considering in detail the various general provi-
sions contained in this Chapter as to inquiries and trials, it is
necessary to deal with a lacuna in the Code as regards the pro-
cedure when “persons” other than individuals are accused of
offences. Section 11 of the Indian Penal Code states that the
word “person” includes any company or association or body of
persons, whether incorporated or not. The definition in section
3(42) of the General Clauses Act, 1897, is almost the same
except that, instead of “persons”, it refers to “individuals”.
While the context of most of the provisions of the Indian
Penal Code referring to a person being punishable for doing or
failing to do a specific thing would normally exclude their appli-
cation to a body of individuals, there is no doubt that a com-
pany or association can be prosecuted for certain offences under
the Indian Penal Code and other laws which are punishable with
fine.

24.2. Certain special lawe specifically provide for the appli-
cation of the penal provisions contained in them to companies
and associations. The standard form which has been adopted
for this purpose in recent legislation’ runs as follows :—

“If the person committing an offence under this Act is 2
company, the company as well as every person in charge of,
and responsible to, the company for the conduct of ‘its busi-
ness at the time of the commission of the offence shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly etc.

Explanation—For the purpose of this section—

(a) ‘company’ means any body corp orate, and includes
a firm or other association of individuals; and

(b) ‘director’ in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.”

24.3. Provision is made in section 69, sub-section (3) as to
how service of a summons is to be effected on an incorporated
company or other body corporate. This may be done either
by serving it personally on the secretary, local manager or other
Principal officer of the corporation or by registered post letter
addressed to the chief officer of the corporation in India. In
the latter case, service is deemed to have been effected when the
letter would arrive in ordinary course of post. The Code is.
however, silent as to how the corporation is to appear in court

117 section 23C of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
section 17 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. 1954, section 88
seats, Trade Marts roeeope son 140 of the Customs Act, 1962, sec-

¢ Gol L a the
Industrial Development Act, 1962, + 4 Seetlon 61 of the Mehareshtra



189

through a representative, how the person who may come forward
as a representative of the corporation is to be recognised as
such by the court, what will happen if after due service no one
appears in court as the authorised representative of the corpora-
tion, etc.

24.4. In the code of 1882, section 69 did not contain a
sub-section (3); this was added for the first time in the Code
of 1898. It was briefly explained in the Statement of Objects
and Reasons that “this amendment provides for service of
summons on a company or other body corporate in such cases
as public nuisance under Chapter X”. The possibility of a
corporation being summoned to answer to a charge of an offence
before a criminal court was apparently not visualised and conse-
quently no other provision was made in the Code for this pur-
pose.

24.5. Jt appears that this lacuna has not given rise to any
serious practical difficulty in the courts. In a Calcutta case,!
however, where a conviction had to be set aside and the case
remanded because the summons was served on one individual
and there was no evidence to show any relationship between
him and the company, these observations were made :--

“The difficulty is caused by the circumstance that while
the Indian Penal Code, as well as the General Clauses Act,
provides that 3 person includes a company and there are
decisions that a company can be prosecuted for an offence
punishable with fine, there is no clear provision in any
law as to the proper representative of the company when a
company has to be prosecuted for an offence under the
Indian Penal Code or an offence under other Acts like the
Bengal Municipal Act.

In view of the terms of section 69(3), Criminal Proce-
dure Code, showing that summons on a company may be
served on the Secretary or the local manager or other
principal officer, it may he held by analogy that the secretary
or the local manager or the principal officer of the company
will represent the company in such a prosecution.

Accordingly. when summons is issued against a company,
some competent representative like the secretary, local
manager or other principal officer must be described both
by name and by designation as representing the company
and there must be scme evidence of his representative
character. Only in such a case the conviction would be
proper”.

24.6. The evolution of the law on the subject in England
shows how certain difficulties were experienced in this Tespect
to start with and how those were gradually surmounted. First
it was felt that a corporation “having no muscles” could not act
except through the individuals who were its servants. In the
last centsrv the courts got over this difficulty. in cases of non-
feasance, by emphasising that an artificial tegal entity is not

1 Commissioner of Seuth Dum Dum Muuniaipality १, Om Khevla, AIR,
1956 Cat. 237, 238. pera 5 S. है. fen 1.3. "yy Om ®

History of section
693).

Lacuna noticed in
& Calcutta case.

Evolation of law
in England


Corporations
punishable
with fine.

only

190

incapable of failing to 3९०६५ and in cases of puisance (€.g.
obstructing the highway), on the principle that even at common
jaw it was a crime of vicarious responsibility. But the major
development in juristic approach to the problem took place in
this century.

Im a judgment relating to civil liability in tort, the House
of Lords, taking a step which extended beyond the boundaries
of vicarious liability, enunciated the doctrine that the active
and directing will of a corporation, which was “an abstraction”,
must be sought in the person of somebody who “for some pur-
poses may be called an agent, but who is really the directing
tind and wiil of the corporation, the very ego and centre of
the corporation.”? This fiction was later extended to criminal Jaw.

tn 1939, it was held* that a corporation could be indict-
ed for a libel. In 1944, it was held’ that a company
alongwith its managing directors and others, could be indicted
for conspiracy, the fraud of the director being imputed to the
company. The action of the director, it was stated, “is the
very action of the company itself’. The objection that a cor-
poration could not commit crimes because it would be ultra
vires for it to authorise the commission of crimes, was also
overruled.®

Because the corporation has no mind and, therefore, no
guilty mind, it was thought that it could not be held lable for
any crime involving intention, knowledge or deceit. This diffi-
cuity was solved, first by holding a corporation liable for crimes
of absolute prohibition, next by holding it liable in cases where
vicarious criminal liability was permissible, and lastly, by im-
puting the state of mind of the directors to the corporation.
Thus, the scope of criminal liability of corporations widened in
course of time. It was held that even a focal authority could
be convicted of a crime? In 1951, the Yorkshire Electricity
Board was fined £ 20,000 for committing breach of a Defence
Regulation by unauthorised building.*

24.7. As it is impossible to imprison a corporation practically
the only punishment which can be imposed on it for committing
an offence is fine. If the penal law under which a corporation
is to be prosecuted does not provide for a sentence of fine, there
will be a difficulty. As aptly put by a learned writer,*—

“Where the only punishment which the court can
impose is death, penal servitude, imprisonment or whipp-
ing, or a punishment which is otherwise inappropriate

4R. v, Birmingham & Gloucester Rly. (1840) 20.8. 47.

2Great North of England Rly. (1846) 9 0.8. 315; 115 ER. 1294.

SLennards’ Carrying Co. Ltd. ५. Asiatic Petroleum Ce. Ltd.. (1915)
AC. 705. 713 (per Lord Haldane).

‘Triplex Satety Glass Co. Lid, v. Lansgage Safety Glass Ltd. (1939)
2 All. 8. R. 613, 620, 621 (C.C.A.).

3R. ४. LCR. Haulage Lid. (1944) KB. 551: (1944) 1 AU. BR. 691,

Harker v. Brittanic Assurance Co. (1928) 1 K.B. 766.

1 Wursel v. Houghton Main Home Deltvery Service, (1937) 1 10.8, 388.

Glanville Williams, Criminal Law (1961). page 364.

© Welsh, “Criminal Liability of Corporations”. (1945) 62 L-Q.R. 363.



191

to a body corporate, such as a declaration that the offend-
er is a rogue and a vagabond, the court will not stultify
itself by embarking on a trial in which, if the verdict of
guilt is returned n0 effective order by way of sentence
can be made”.

In order to get over this difficulty we recommend that a provi-
sion should be made in the Indian Penal Code e.g. as section
62 in Chapter वी relating to punishments, on the following
lines :~—

“In every case in which the offence is only punish-
able with imprisonment or with imprisonment and fine
and the offender is a company or other body corporate
or an association of individuals, it shall be competent
to the Court to sentence such offender to fine only”.

24.8. Since a corporation cannot be physically present in
court, procedural difficulties may arise which in England have
been got over by legislation. Thus at common Jaw, @ corpora-
tion could not be committed for trial; consequently it was pro-
vided by statute that in place of “commitment” there would be
an order empowering the prosecutor to prefer a bill of indict-
ment against the offending corporation. Statute 250 provides
for the appearance in court through an authorised representa-
tive of the corporation to answer to the charge brought against it.

24.9. We have noticed above that in recent legislation some
penal provisions are expressly made applicable to companies
as well as to unincorporated associations of individuals. The
Code, however, contains no provisions at all in regard to such
associations. Even section 69(3) which provides for the ser-
vice of a summons covers only corporate bodies. Societies
registered under the societies Registration Act, 1860, though not
formally incorporated, possess some of the attributes of 2 cor-
poration, and it appears desirable that they should be treated
on a par with corporations in criminal proceedings.

24.10. We accordingly recommend the insertion of a new
section at the beginning of Chapter XXIV of the Code. The
section (which is provisionally numbered 336) may be as
‘ollows :---

“336. (1) In this section, “corporation” means an
incorporated company or other body corporate, and in-
६०6०४ 2 कट registered under the Societies Registration

ct, 4

(2) Where a corporation is the accused person of
one of the accused persons in an inquiry or trial, it may
appoint a representative for the purpose of the inquiry
or trial. Such appointment need not be under the real
of the corporation.

(3) Where a representative of a corporation appears.
any requirement of this Code that anything shall be done
in the presence of the accused or shall be read or stated
or explained to the accused, shall be construed as 8
requirement that that thing shall be done in the presence

Procedure in
English Law.

Registered socie-
ties.

New section 336
recommended,

Procedure when
corporation or a
registered soclety
is an accused.


Section 337-—sub-
section (1) ana-
sysed,

192

of the representative or read or stated or explained to the
Tepresentative, and any requirement that the accused shall
be examined, shall be construed as a requirement that the
Tepresentative shall be examined.

(4) Where a representative of a corporation does not
appear, any such requirement as is referred to in sub-sec-
tion (3) shall not apply.

(5) Where a statement in writing purporting to be sign-
ed by the managing director of the corporation or by any
person (by whatever name called) having, or being one
Of the persons having, the management of the affairs of
the corporation, to the effect that the Person named in
the statement has been appointed as the repre-
sentative of the corporation for the purposes of this sec-
tion, is filed, the Court shall unless the contrary is proved,
presume that such person has been so appointed.

(6) If a question arises as to whether apy person
appearing as the representative of a corporation in an
inguiry or trial before a court is or is not such represen-
tative the question shall be determined by the Court”.

24.11. Section 337 deals with the tender of pardon to an
accomplice. Sub-section (1), which is the main provision and
a lengthy and complicated one, lays down (1) the offences in
Fespect of which pardon can be tendered; (ii) the Courts which
can tender pardon; and (iii) the stage at which pardon can
be tendered.

(i) The offences in Tespect of which the power can be ex-
ercised fall in three groups, namely :-——

(3) any offence triable exclusively by the High Court or
Court of Session;

(b) any offence punishable with imprisonment which
may extend to seven years; and

(c) any of the offences under eight specified sections of
the Indian Penal le.

(ii) The Magistrates who can tender pardon are District
Magistrates, Presidency Magistrates, Sub-Divisional Magistrates
and Magistrates of the first class.

(iii) Pardon can be tendered at any stage of (a) investiga-
tion into the offence; (b) inquiry into ‘the offence; or (c) trial
of the offence.

Under the proviso, however, where the offence is under inquiry
cr trial, no magistrate of the first class other than the District
Magistrate, can exercise the power unless he is the inquiring or
trying Magistrate, and where the offence is under investigation
no such magistrate can Mapa ood this power unless he has juris-
diction in the place where the offence might be inquired into or


193

tried and sanction of the District Magistrate bas been obtained.
In other words, while the power of the Distzict Magistrate is
unlimited as regards the stage, any other first class magistrate
can tender pardon—

(a) during investigation, only if he has territorial jurisdic-
tion in reard to the nce and the sanction of the
District Magistrate has been obtained, and

(b) during inquiry or trial, only if ke is the inquiring or
trying magistrate.

24.12. It may be noted that the section originally enacted Changes in the
in 1898 was different in all these respects. The power was then Section.
vested in the District Magistrates, Presidency Magistrates and
First Class Magistrates inquiring into the offence and any other
magistrate who had obtained the sanction of the District Magis-
trate. As regards the offences, it was confined to those triable
exclusively by the High Court or Court of Session. Lastly, as
regards the stage of tender of pardon, it did not make elaborate
provisions as at present dealing separately with investigation,
inquiry and trial. During the last 70 years, the section has
been made much more elaborate, and as regards offences, its
scope has been enlarged more than once. {n 1923, offences
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 10 years,
an offence punishable under the latter part of section 211, and
the offences under sections 216A, 369, 401, 435 and 4776 of
the Penal Code were added. Then, in 1955 the limit of 10
years’ imprisonment was reduced to 7 years. and the offences
under sections 161, 165 and 165A of the Penal Code were
included. Apparently by oversight, while the reference to section
211 was omitted in 1955 as no longer necessary, reference to
sections 216A, 369, 401, 435 and 477A were kept, though all
these offences are punishable with imprisonment which may ex-
tend to 7 years.

24.13. The question whether an offence under section 409 A decision of the
of the Penal Code, which is punishable with imprisonment for Supreme Court,
life or with imprisonment which may extend to 10 years and is
triable by the Court of Session, a Presidency Magistrate or a
Magistrate of the first class, was an offence in respect of which
pardon could be tendered under section 337 (as it stood before
the amendment of 1955), was raised before the Supreme Court!.

The argument was that, where an offence was not exclusively
triable by the Court of Session, pardon could be granted only if
it was punishable with imprisonment up to 10 years. but not if
a higher punishment like imprisonment for life was provided for
the offence. The Supreme Court repelled this contention, observ-
ing that the very object of section 337 was to allow pardon to
be tendered where a grave offence was alleged to have been
committed by several persons so that with the aid of the evidence
of the approver the offence could be brought home to the rest.
The gravity of the offence was, of course, to be determined with
reference to the sentence awardable for the offence. The State
Counsel’s sugeestion was that section 337 could be reasonably
interpreted to mean that even where the offences are punishable

1 State १. Ganeshwarq Rao, ALR, 1963 $C. 1850,


194

with imprisonment exceedii ng 10 years, pardon could be granted.
The Supreme Court, while ving that this interpretation might
fulfil the object of the section, namely, to embrace within it the
graver offences, stated that it wished to express no opinion on
it. Tt held that. since the alternative punishment for the offence
under section 409 was imprisonment which may extend to 10
years, and since section 337 did not expressly say that the only
punishment should be imprisonment which may extend to 7 years,
the case was covered by section 337.

Amendment to 24.14. There is, thus, an ambiguity in the expression “any
remove ambiguityy offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
seven years”. We recommend that the ambiguity should be
removed by adding the words “or with a more severe sentence”,
so as to include offences for which the maximum term of impri-
sonment prescribed in the Penal Code or other law is more than
7 years (e.g. 10 years or 14 years) or imprisonment for life.
Oren, (ree 24.15, Offences punishable under sections 161, 165 and 165A
cial Judges, of the Penal Code were brought within the scope of section 337
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955,
The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 which provided for 4
the appointment of Special Judges equal in rank to Sessions
Judges, had made these offences and the offence punishable
under sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Prevention of Corrup-
tion Act, 1947, triable exclusively by the Courts of such Special
Judges. When this Act was subsequently amended in 1955 by
the inclusion of offences under sections 162, 163 and 164 of
the Penal Code within this list, there was no corresponding amend-
ment of section 33701) of the Criminal Procedure Code. These
offences are not in any way different from the offences punish-
able under sections 16] and 164 of the Penal Code, particularly
in regatd to the desirability of obtaining the evidence of an
approver. We, therefore, recommend that a uniform principle
may be adopted. and that all offences which are triable exclusively प्‌
by the court of a Special Judge appointed under the Criminal नजर
Law Amendment Act, 1952, may be brought within the scope
of section 337(1) of the Code.

Offences synch 24.16. As indicated above,’ the reference to sections 216A,
should apply. . 369, 411, 435 and 477A of the Indian Penal Code is super-
- fluous, as the offences under these sections are punishable with
imprisonment for seven years. The reference to the High Court
in the opening part of section 337(1) is also unnecessary, in
view of our recommendation for abolition of the ordinary origi-
nal criminal jurisdiction of all High Courts. We recommend
that this section should apply to any offence triable exclusively
by the Court of Session or by the Court of a Special Judge
appointed under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, and
to any offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend a
to seven years or with a more severe sentence.

Offences against 24.17. In a recent case? which came up before the Supreme
custo Cc i i iy ४1
foreign exchange COurt in appeal, a woman who acted as a carrier in a conspiracy
jaws. _ ~
1 See para 24.2 ubove.
2 Laxmipat Choraria v. The State of Maharashtra. ALR. 1968 S.C.
938, 945.



195

to smuggle gold into India had, im her statements made to the
customs officials investigating the case, admitted her role as a
participant in the crime. But, instead of being included in the
array of accused persons and sent up for trial, she was examined
as a witness against her former associates. ‘The question arose
whether she was competent witness. While holding that she was,
the Supreme Court observed—

“it is, however, necessary to say that where section
337 or 338 of the Code applies, it is always proper to
invoke those sections and follow the procedure there laid
down. Where these sections do not apply, there is the
procedure of withdrawal of the case against an accom-
plice. 10 keep the sword hanging over the head of an
accomplice and to examine him as a witness is to en-
courage perjury. Perhaps it will be possible to enlarge
section 337 to take in certain special laws dealing with
customs, foreign exchange etc. where accomplice testi-
mony will always be useful and witnesses will come for-
ward because 07 the conditional pardon offered to them.”

We have given our respectful consideration to this observa-
tion of the Supreme Court but it does aot seem practicable to
select from among the large number of special laws creating
socio-economic offences those which are sufficiently grave to be
brought within the scope of section 337. The result of such
inclusion will be that every case pertaining to such an offence
where tender of pardon is made, will have to be tried by the
Court of Session which may not be feasible.

24.18. The next question to be considered is whether, in
view of separation, the power to tender pardon under this section
should be given to Judicial Magistrates or to Executive Magis-
trates, or to both to be exercisable at different stages. It is
clear that when the stage of inquiry or trial has been reached, the
power should be exclusively with the Judicial Magistrates and
the Executive Magistrates need not come into the picture. We
are of the opinion that the power to grant pardon even at the
stage of investigation should be confined to Judicial Magistrates
as the matter relates primarily to prosecutions in courts. We
Propose that at this stage the power should be with the Chief
Judicial Magistrate of the district. Once the inquiry or trial
has commenced, the Magistrate holding the inquiry or trial would
normally be exercising the power to tender pardon but the Chief
Judicial Magistrate should also have the power. Accordingly,
we propose that the Magistrate competent to tender pardon
under section 337 should be—

(a) a Presidency Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate,
at any stage of the investigation, inquiry or trial,
an

(0०) a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, while inguir-
ing into or trying an offence, at any stage of the
inquiry or trial.

24.19. A few minor changes are necessary in sub-section
(1A). It is desirable to provide for a clear record of not only

Section 337 (1)
and Magistrates
empowered = to.
grant pardon.

Section 337(1A)-


Section 337(2A).

Section 337(3).

Revised section
recommended,

Tender of pardon
to accomplice.

196

the reasons for tendering pardon but also of the fact whether the
tender was accepted or not accepted. Secondly, there is no
justification lor the proviso which requires the accused to pay
for a copy of the record unless the magistrate for special reason
exempts him from payment. The proviso should be omitted.

24.20. Under sub-section (2A) every approver’s case
whether or not it relates to an offence triable by the Court of
Session has to be committed to that Court when the Magistrate,
after recording the evidence of the approver under sub-section
(2) is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing
that the accused is guilty of an offence. Sub-section (2B), how-
ever, lays down a different procedure in cases where the offence
is triable by the Court of Special Judge appointed under the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952. In view of the abolition
of commitment proceedings, we consider that the procedure
should be made uniform and there is no need to require the
Magistrate to scrutinise the evidence of the approver and that
of the other witnesses produced by the prosecution. It is desir-
able that every approver’s case should be committed to the Court
of Session whether or not the case is exclusively triable by that
Court. 7. vena

24.21. Under sub-section (3), an approver, unless he is
already on bail, has to be detained in custody until the
termination of the trial. The trying Magistrate or Sessions
Court has no power to release the approver on bail. Though
this may seem harsh, particularly where the trial is prolonged,
we do not think the provision should be changed. In extra-
ordinary cases of hardship, the approver can approach the
High Court whose powers as to bail are very wide,

It is fairly clear that the words “unless he is on bail” do not
prevent a Court from cancelling the bail previously granted to
an approver and the general provisions as to cancellation or
modification of bail apply to an approver as they apply to the
accused persons under trial.

24,22. We recommend that section 337 may be revised as
follows :--

“337. (1) With a view to obtaining the evidence of
any person supposed to have been directly or indirectly
concerned in or privy to any offence to which this section
applies, the Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Metropolitan
Magistrate at any stage of the investigation or inquiry
into, or the trial of, the offence, and a Magistrate of the
first class inquiring into or trying the offence, at any
stage of the inquiry or trial, may tender a pardon to such
person on condition of his making a full and true dis-
closure of the whole of the circumstances within his know-
ledge relative to the offence and to every other person
concerned, whether as principal or abettor, in the com-
mission thereof.

(2) This section applies to—

(a) any offence triable exclusively by the Court of
Session or by the Court of a Special Judge

+


197

appointed uader the Criminal Law Amendment
Act, 1952; and

(७) any offence punishable with imprisonment which
may extend to seven years Or with a more
severe sentence.

(3) Every Magistrate who tenders a pardon ‘under
sub-section (1) shall record—

(a) his reasons for so doing, and

(b) whether the tender was or was not accepted
by the person to whom it was made;

and shali on application made by the accused, furnish
him with a copy of such record free of cost.

(4) Every person accepting a tender of pardon made
under sub-section (1)—

(a) shall be examined as a witness in the Court of
the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence
and in the subsequent trial, if any;

(b) shall, unless he is already on bail, be detained
in custody until the termination of the trial.

(5) Where a person has accepted a tender of pardon
made under sub-section (1) and has been examined under
sub-section (4), the Magistrate taking cognizance of the
offence shall, without making any further inquiry in the
case, commit it for trial—

(a) where the offence is triable exclusively by the
Court of a Special Judge appointed under the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, to that

yurt,

() in any other case, to the Court of Session.

24.23. Under section 338, the Court of Session may at any
time after commitment of the case, but before passing judg-
ment, cither tender pardon itself, or may “order the committing
Magistrate or the District Magistrate” to tender pardon. Though
this power is rarely resorted to by a Court of Session, it will
be useful to retain the section. But in view of the abolition of
commitment proceedings, the Court of Session need not be
authorised to direct “the committing Magistrate” or any other
Magistrate to tender pardon. The section may be revised to read
as follows :—

“338. At any time after commitment of a case but
before judgment is passed, the Court of Session may,
with the view to obtaining at the trial the evidence of any
person supposed to have been directly or indirectly con-
cerned in or privy to, any such offence, tender a pardon
on the same condifion to such person”.

Section 338,

Power of Court
of Session to ten-
der pardon,


Section 339 and
339A-latroduc-
sory,

Prosecution for
perjury and pub-
lic” prosecutor's
certificate.

When prosecu-
tion for perjury
should be laun-
ched.

198

24.24. Sections 339 aud 339A lay down the pressdure for
prosecuting 2 person who, alter accepting a pardon tendered
under secton 337 or 338, fails to comply with the condition on
which the teader was made. Section 339 as originally enacted
was found to be sketchy and unsatisfactory in many respects and

was, therefore, amended, and amplified by the addition of section |

339A, by the Amending Act of 1923. A certificate by the
Public Prosecutor that the approver has, either by wilfully con-
cealing anything essential or by giving false evidence, broken the
condition of his pardon, is an essential requisite for prosecuting
him for the offence in respect of which the pardon was tendered
or for any other offence of which he appears to have been guilty
in connection with the same matter,

24.25. 1६ is by no means clear whether the offence of giving
false evidence is covered by the underlined words. This offence
which the approver might have committed,’ either during his
examination as a witness by tbe Magistrate or during bis ¢x-
amination by the Sessions Judge, could hardly be said to be an
offence committed “in connection with the same matter” as the
original offence. But in ap Oudh case’, where sanction of the
High Court under sub-section (3) of section 339 was asked for
by the Sessions Judge who had forwarded the papers to the High
Court, it was held that sanction for the prosecution could bs
granted only if a certificate from the Public Prosecutor under

sub-section (1) was produced.

24.26. In a Nagpur case*, the approver accepted the tender
of pardon and was immediately examined as a witness, but
denied that he knew anything about the murder. At a subse-
quent examination he gave an account of the murder which
agreed with the account given by the prosecution, but a few
days later, he again denied all knowledge and swore that his
previous statement was false and given at the instance of the
Police Inspector. After the sessions trial had ended in the
conviction of two persons for murder, the Public Prosecutor gave
his certificate under section 339(1) to enable the op prover to
be tried for the offeace of murder or for any other offence com-
mitted by him in connection with the same matter. When, with-
out prosecuting him for any such offence, the Local Government
applied under section 339(3) for the sanction of the High Court
to prosecute him for perjury, the Court observed :—

“The reasons for which a High Coust should grant or
refuse sanction to the prosecution of a pardoned approver
for perjury seem to be indicated with fair certainty by the
fact of the sanction being necessary in that case only. It
is clearly not necessary that such a 50 a person should be punish-
ed for perjury if he can be ished sufficiently both for
that and the Original crime on a conviction for that original
crime. Sanction therefore ought to be refused unless it
appears that a conviction for the original crime is unlikely
or a prosecution for it undesirable for any other reason,
or that on a conviction for the original crime the sentence
that could be passed would be too light to cover both

3 Emperor v. Ghastiey, ALR. 1929 Oudh 527.
2 Gambhir Bhajua, ALR, 1927 Nagpur, 189, 192,

~


199

offeaces. 82076 sanction can be granted, therefore, it must
be shown that there is no intention of prosecuting the
approver for the original crime, or that he has already been
prosccuted for it and either bas been acquitted or has
received or is likely to receive such a light sentence that
it is not suilicient to cover his further crime of perjury.”

Rejecting the application for sanction as premature, the Court
added that the person’s acquittal for murder would not of itself
be 30% bar io his conviction for perjury. Lf such prosecution
should tail, that failure of itself would be no reason why another
application jor sanction to prosecute the accomplice for perjury
should not be made. The Court also observed that while the
prosecution ior murder would be by the police on the basis
Of a certificate trom the Public Prosecutor, section 339(1) of
the Code did not cancel section 476. It merely imposed an
additional condition essential to the institution of a prosecution
for perjury by an approver and, even when that condition is
satislied, the prosecution could still be initiated only on a com-
plait cy the Sessions Court or the High Court.

24.27. The position is also obscure in one other aspect.
Under the proviso to sub-section (1), the approver is entitled
to plead at such tial that he has complied with the condition
upon which the tender of parden was made to him. The proce~
dure for giving effect to such a plea is indicated in section 339A.
The trial of the approver for the original offence must neces-
sarily be distinct trom his trial for perjury. While the _ first
would without doubt be regarded as a trial “under section 339”,
the sccond might not be so regarded. It is obviously desirable
that doubts on these points should be removed by a proper
rewording of the two sections.

24.28. kt will be readiiy conceded that the offence of
perjury committed by an approver stands on a special footing
and prosecutions for that offence require a certain amount of
screening. it docs mot, however, appear to be necessary that
there should be, first, a certificate of the Public Prosecutor
under section 339(1), secondly, the sanction of the High Court
under section 339(3), and thirdly, a complaint under section
195(1)(b) (after an inquiry, if necessary under section 476)
by the Court before which the offence was committed or by
the High Court. The certificate of a responsible law officer
like the Public Prosecutor who has been in charge of the
original trial and consequently fully acquainted with the facts
and circumstances of the case might even be regarded as
sufficicnt guarantee that the approver is prosecuted for perjury
only is appropriate cases. As indicated in the judgment cited
above, such a prosccution would be launched in the maiority
of cases only when the circumstances do not justify a prosecu-
tion of the approver for the original offence or when that prose-
cution has, for some reason, failed. After careful consideration,
however, we are of the view that it would be sufficient to provide
for a certificate of the Public Prosecutor and sanction of the
High Court under section 339 and that it is not necessary
to complicate and delay the prosecution by insisting upon a
prior inquiry under section 476, followed by 3 complaint under
section 195(1}(b).

Is triat for per-
jury under 3९९०
tion 339?

Applicability of
sections 195 and
476 to offence of
Perjury by appro-
ver.


Section 339(2).

Section 339A.

Revised section
339 recommended.

‘Trial of persons
not complying
with condition
of pardon,

200

24.29. Section 339(2) provides that “the statement” made
by a person who has accepted a tender of pardon may be given
in evidence against him at a trial referred to in section 339(1).
This gives an impression that there is only one such statement
which is generally not the case. Judicial decisions' make it
clear that the statements referred in sub-scction (2) are the
statements made by the approver after he has accepted the
tender of pardon. As pointed out in a Lahore case,* the sub-
section “makes, by necessary implication, a statement of this
nature an exception to the rule of evidence enacted in section 24,
Indian Evidence Act, so far as that section excludes confessions
made as the result of the inducement of pardon”. Such state-
ments could have been recorded by a Magistrate under section
164 during investigation or by the Court during the inquiry or
trial under section 337(2), and notwithstanding that they were
or might have been induced by the tender of pardon, they are
made admissible in evidence under section ;339(2). Despite
the 1005९ wording, this section cannot be held to cover other
statements made by the approver after accepting the tender of
pardon, e.g., statements made to a police officer or to a private
person. Their admissibility in evidence will be decided under
the general provisions of the Evideace Act.

24.30, The provisions contained in section 339A are supple-
mentary to those contained in section 339. In fact, it will be
conducive to clarity and easier understanding if the provisions
are put together in one section. ‘The reference to a High Court
in sub-section (1)(a) and the reference to the jury and to the
Magistrate in sub-section (2) will have to be omitted as being
unnecessary or superfluous.

24.31. The revised section 339, after including the provisions
of section 339A, may be as follows :

“339. (i) Where in regard to a person who has accepted
a tender of pardon made under section 337 or section 338,
the Public Prosecutor certifies that in his opinion such
person has. either by wilfully concealing anythiag essential
or by giving false evidence, not complied with the condition
on which the tender was made, such person may be tried
for the offence in respect of which the pardon was so tender-
ed and any other offence of which he appears to have been
guilty in connection with the same matter, and also for the
offence of giving false evidence :

Provided that such person shall not be tried jointly with any
of the other accused;

Provided further that such person shall not be tried for the
offence of giving false evidence except with the sanction of the
High Court. and nothing contained in section 195 or in section
476 shall apply to that offence.

व Rambharose, ALR. 1944 Nag. 105 (F.B.); Horilal, ALR. 1940 Nag.
218: Miral, ALR 1943 Sind. 166, 169.

३ Ram Nath v. Emperor, 29 Cr. LJ. 413: ALR. 1928 Lah, 320(2), at
page 322.


201

(2) Any statements made by such person after accepting the
tender of pardon and recorded by a Magistrate under section 164
or by a Court under sub-section (3) of section 337 may be given
in evidence against him at such trial.

(3) At such trial the accused shalt be entitled to plead that
he has complied with the condition upon which such tender was
made in which case it shall be for the prosecution to prove that
the condition has not been complied with.

(4) At such trial, the court shalli—

(a) if it is a Court of Session, before the charge is read
out and explained to the accused, and

(0) if it is the Court of a Magistrate, before the evidence
of the witnesses for the prosecution is takcn,

ask the accused whether he pleads that he has complied with the
condition on which the tender of pardon was made.

(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the
plea and proceed with the trial. It shall, before passing judgment
in the case, find whether or not the accused has complied with
the condition of the pardon, and, if it finds that he has so com-
plied, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Code,
pass judgment of acquittal.”

24.32. Section 340 consists of two sub-sections which have Section 340,

no connection with each other. Sub-section (i) deals with
the right of any person accused of an offence or against whom
Proceedings are instituted under the Code to be defended by a
pleader. Sub-section (2) deals with the right of persons against
whom certain proceedings are instituted to offer themselves as
witnesses, which is an entirely different matter. This should be
dealt with in a separate section, 2 convenient place for which
would be after section 342A.

24.33. Sub-section (2) mentions proceedings under section Sub-section

107 but leaves out proceedings under sections 108, 109 and 110
which are in the same category. We are of the view that persons
against whom such proceedings are instituted should also have a
tight to offer themselves as witnesses. In their case, however, it
should be provided that their failure to give evidence should not
be made the subject of any comment or give rise to any adverse
presumption ; vide clause (b) of the proviso to section 342A.

We recommend that sub-section (2) of section 340 be
gmnitted, and a new section 342B added after 342A reading as
follows :—

“342B, Any person against whom proceedings are insti-
tuted in any Criminal Court under Chapter शा, Chapter X,
Chapter XI, Chapter XI or Chapter XXXVI, or under sec-
tion 552, may offer himself as a witness in such Proceedings :

Provided that in proceedings under section 108, section
109 or section 110, the failure of such person to give evidence
shall not be made the subject of any comment by any of the

amended
amplified.

(2.
an


Legal aid to
accused af x=
pense of the State
in certain cases-
present position.

Recognised as a
“human right” by
International
covenant.

Gideon’s Trum-
Pet_case.

202

partics or the court or give rise to any presumption against
him or any other person proceeded against together with him
at the same inquiry.”

24.34. Though section 340 provides that the accused may be
represented by a pleader, it does not give him any right to legal
aid at the expen-e of the State. Assistance of counsel at the ex-
pense of the State is at present provided for by Tules or adminis-
trative orders which vary from State to State. Almost all States
provide for such assistance in capital cases. Ja Maharashtra and
Gujarat it is provided in all Sessions trials; and in Kerala it is
provided also for all trials before District Magistrates.

ft can hardly be disputed that, in a trial for a serious
assistance Of counsel on both sides is essential for 2
mn of the case. Development in the ficld of human
rights has been towards the recognition of the right of the accused
person to assiuned counsel. The recently adopted International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights! provides in Article 14(3)
that “in the defermination of any ९। al charge against him,
every one shail be entitled to the following minimum guarantees
in full equality :-+

offence, ti

(d) x x x x x to be tried in his presence, and to 06-
fend himself in person or through legal assistance of
is own choosing; to bz informed, if he does not have
legal assistance, of this tight; and to have legal assis-
tance assigned to him, in any case where the interests
of justice so require, and without payment by him
in any such case if he does not have sufficient means
to pay for it:”

_ The European Covenant on Human Rights, which has been
in effective operation for some years, contains a similar provision,

24.36. Ina celebrated case? the Supreme Court of the U.S.A.,
after a review of previous decisions, held that the tight of an
accused in a criminal case to have the assistance of counsel for
his defence? includes the right to have a Counsel provided at the
expense of the State if the accused is too poor to engage one at
his expense. The reasons for this decision have been given by
Black J. as follows :—~

“Not only these precedents but also reason and reflection re-
quire us to recognise that in our adversary system of criminal
justice, any person hauled into court. who is too poor to hire a
jawyer, cannot be assured a fair trial unless counsel is provided
for him. This scems to us to be an obvious truth. Governments,
both State and Federal, quite properly spend vast sums of money
to establish machinery to try defendants accused of crime. Law-
yers to prosecute are everywhere deemed essential to protect the
public’s interest in an orderly societv. Similarly, there are few
defendants charged with crime. few indeed, who fail to hire the
est lawyers they can get to prepare and present their defences.

68 Adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in January,

2 Gideon v. Wainwright, (1963) 372 US. 335.
8U. 5. Constitution, Sixth Amendment.


203

‘That government hircs lawyers to prosecute and defendants who
have the money hire lawyers to defend are the strongest indications
of the widespread belief that lawyers in crimiaal courts are neces-
sities, not luxurics. The right of one charged with crime to
counsel may net be deemed fundamental and essential to fair
trials in some countries, but it is in ours. From the very begin-
ning, our State and national constitutions and laws have laid
great emphasis on procedural and substantive safeguards designed
to assure fair trials before impartial tribunals in which every
defendant stand, equal before the law. This noble ideal cannot
be realised if the poor man charged with crime has to face his
accusers without a lawyer to assist him.”

24.37. In India, the importance of this right, ic. a right to
assignment of counsel at Government expense was emphasised in
the Law Commission’s Report on the Reform ef Judicial
‘Administration,’ where a brict review of the schemes in force in
some of the States was made, and it was pointed out that certain
measures of legal aid were capable of beisg implemented forth-
with, without setting up claborate legal aid organisations, by
amending the law or the rules of the high Courts. As regards
criminal caves, three recommendations were made in that Report.*
. Topresentation by a lawyer should be made available at
Government expense to accused persons without means in all
cases tried by a Court of Session. Secondly, representation by @
Jawyer should be made available at Government expense to
applicants without means in proceedings under section 488 cf the
Code. Thirdly, representation by a Jawyer should be mace avail-
able at Government expense to an accused person withcut means
at the time of the final hearing of a jail appeal which has been
admitted.

24.38. The matter has been engaging the attention of the
Government of India for a long tim:, and the need for action in
the matter has been impressed upon State Governments. But,
apparently, financial considerations have come in the way of
setting up legal aid organisations or putting into effect compre-
hensive schemes. It is not necessary for our purpose to go into
the details of the various possible schemes. But we strongly
recommend that the right of the accused to representation at
Government expense should be placed on a statutory footin: in
relation to trials for serious offences, and as a first step in this
direction. we propose that such a tight should be available in all
trials before the Court of Session. The Code should also contain
a provision enabling the State Government to extend this right
by a notification to any class of trials before other courts in the
State.

24.39. The new section may be as follows :—

“340A. (1) Where, in a trial before the Court of
Session, the accused is not represented by a plcader, the
Court shall assign a pleader for his defence at the expense
of the State.

1 Law Commission, 14th Report. Vol. 1. Chapter 27, pages 587 to 500.
214th Report, Vol. 1, page 598, paragraph 17.

Recommendation
in 14th Report.

Our recommenda *
tion.

New section 340A
Proposed.


Section 342 Intro-

ductory.

Stephen's
cism.

1221 /

2०4

(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of
the State Government, make rules providing for—

(a) the mode of selecting pleaders for defence under
sub-section (1),

(6) the facilities to be allowed to such pleaders by the
Courts,

(९०) the fees payable to such pleaders by the Government,
and, generally, for carrying out the purposes of sub-
section (1).

(3) The State Government may by notification in the
Gazette direct that, from such date as may be specified in
the notification the provisions of sub-sections (1) aad (2)
shali apply in relation to any class of trials before other
Courts in the State as they apply in relation to trials before
Courts of Session.”

24.40. Section 342 is one of the most important sections in
the Code. It requires that the Court must, at the close of the
prosecution cvidence, examine the accused “for the purpose of
enabling him to explain any circumstance appearing in the evi-
dence against him.” The section, for a moment, brushes aside
all counsel, all prosecutors, all witnesses, and all third persons.
It seeks to establish a direct dialogue between the Court and the
accused for the purpose of enabling the accused to give his ¢x-
planation. For a while the section was misunderstood and
regarded as authorising an inquisitorial interrogation of the
accused, which is not its object at all. The key to the section
is contained in the first sixteen words of the section. Giving an
opportunity to the accused to explain the circumstances appear-
ing in the evidence is the only object of the examination. He
may, if he chooses, keep his mouth shut or he may give a full
explanation, or, if he is so advised, he may explain only a part
of the case against him.

24.41. Discussing the history and scheme of his section in
his History of the Criminal Law of England.’ Stephen writes :-—

“The words specifying the purpose for which questions
are to be asked were not in the Code of 1872, which autho-
rised the examination of the accused without assigning any
reason for it. Perhaps the expression was introduced in the
Code of 1882 in order to soften what many people consider
a harsh proceeding. For my own part J regret the alteration.
It will cither be inoperative or most embarrassing, and it
looks like an apology for what does not require one. It is,
however, hypocritical, for the Code contains no provision as
to what is to happen if the questioning does not conform to
the directions of the Code. and it specifically enacts that ‘the
court and jury (if any) may draw such inference from’ the
refusal of the accused to answer or from his answers as they
please. Besides, in practice, every question any one could
want to ask might be justified by the terms of the section;
e.g. ‘The witnesses say they saw you at this place. Were

2Vol. 3, 9 335.

> ‘

er


205

you there or not, and, if not, where were you? The words
thus make hardly any difference.”

24.42. At another place in the same treatise,! however, Law in England.
Stephen has expressed bimself in favour of questioning the accus-
ed at the trial. After tracing the history of the law on this point
in England, he writes :

“his state of the law continued till the year 1848, when
by 11 & 12 Vic. ८. 42, the present system was established,
under which the prisoner is asked whether he wishes to say
anything, and is warned that if he chooses to do so what he
says will be taken down and may be given in evidence on
his trial. The result of the whole is that as matters stand
the prisoncr is absolutely protected against all judicial ques-
tioning before or at the trial, and that, on the other hand,
he and his wife are prevented from giving evidence in their
own behalf. He is often permitted, however, to make any
statement he pleases at the very end of the trial, when it is
difficult for any one to test the correctness of what is said.

“This is one of the most of characteristic features of
English criminal procedure, and it presents a marked con~
trast to that which is common to, I believe, all continental
countries. It is, ६ think, highly advantageous to the guilty.
it contributes greatly to the dignity and apparent humanity
of a criminal trial. It effectually avoids the appearance of
harshness, not to say cruelty, which often shocks on English
spectator in a French court of justice, and J think that the
fact that the prisoner cannot be questioned stimulates the
search for independent evidence. The evidence in an English
trial is, I think, usually much fuller and more satisfactory
than the evidence in such French trials as J have been able
to study.

“On the other hand, f am convinced by much experience
that questioning, or the power of giving evidence, is a posi-
tive assistance, and a highly important one, to innocent men,
and [ do not see why in the case of the guilty there need be
any hardship about it. It must be remembered that most
persons accused of crime are poor, stupid and _ helpless.
They are often defended by solicitors who confine their
exertions to getting a copy of the depositions and endorsing it
with the name of some counsel to whom they pay a very
small fee. so that even when prisoners are defended by
counsel, the defence is often extremely imperfect, and consists
rather of what occurs at the moment to the solicitor and
counsel than of what the man himself would sav if he knew
how to say it. When a prisoner is undefended his position
is often pitiable, even if he has a good case. An ignorant
uneducated man has the greatest possible difficulty in cotlec-
ting his ideas, and secing the bearing of facts alleged. He is
utterly unaccustomed to sustained attention or systematic
thought. and it often appears to me as if the procecdings on a
trial. which to an experienced person appear plain and
simple. must pass before the eyes and mind of the prisoner
like a dream which he cannot grasp.”

1Stephen. History of Criminal Law of England. Vol. 1, pp. 441-442.


Is section 342 re-
dundant in view
of section 342 ?

Need for exami-
nation of accused,

Section 342
should be
retained,

Section 342 (1)--
Two kinds of
examination,

206

24.43. It has been suggested that after the enactment of sec-
tion 342A which cnables the accused to enter into the witness
box ii he so chooses and give evidence, section 342 is redundant
and can be safely omitted. A view has also been expressed that
the claborate examination contemplated by this section leads to
needless delay. At least where the accused is represented by
counsei, it shouki be unnecessary to examine the accused, because
his counse} is bound to put forth, whatever explanation there is
to be offered.

As aguinst this it has to be borne in mind that there are
several oflences {such as receipt of stolen property) which are
Of such a nature that the accused has to give his explanation,
because in the absence of a reasonable explanation! the accused
runs the risk of being convicted by the court relying on section
114, ivustration (a) of the Evidence Act, 1872. The provisions
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, and other special
laws which enable the court to hold the accused guilty unless he
can satistactorily account for his possession of property or other
articles may also be referred to in this connection, Section 342
of the Code affords the accused the only opportunity of giving
such an explanation without running the risk of facing Cross-
examination.

24 44. Furthermore, differing from civil cases in this respect,
the purtics in criminal cases are not equally placed. The whole
machinery of the States is against the accused. The accused has
no investigating machinery, no power of search and no power
of questioning, which the prosecution has. If he puts forth a
definite case, he may not in many cases be able to prove it. This
is also the reason why in civil cases preponderance of evidence
is suificient, but in criminal cases a shadow of doubt operates in
favour cf the accused. Even where the State provides counsel
for the accused, experience shows that the Court has to guide
counsel who is usually a junior member of the Bar. In this
state of affairs, examination of the accused under section 342
appears to be essential procecding. The mode of applying the
section would, no doubt. vary with the knowledge intelligence
and experience of the Judge. If in a varticular case the Judge
exceed: — the permissible limit and subjects the accused to an
inquisitorial examination, the superior courts will correct the
error. The words “question him generally” in the section are
clearly intended to prevent unfair interrogation of the accused.

24.45. We have, after considering the various aspects of the
matter as summarised above, come to the conclusion that sec-
tion 342 should not be deleted. In our opinion, the stage has
not yet come for its beine removed from the statute book. With
further increase in literacy and with better facilities for legal aid,
it may be possible to take that step in the future.

24.48. The examination of the accused under section 342 is
of two kinds :—

(8) the power of the court to put a particular question
to him at any stage for the purpose of enabling him

1G, Feller, ASR. 1943 P.C.. 21: Hori Lal, L.L.R., $6 All. 250.


207

to explain any circumstance appearing ia the evi-
dence against him, aad

(8) the duty of the Court to generally examine him
(after the close of the prosecution evidence) for the
above purpose.

‘The object of the examination in each case is the same.
But the first is optional, while the second is mandatory. The
first can be at any stage of the inquiry or triai, while the second
is after the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined,
and “before the accused is called upon to enter upon his
defence”. The first is particular; while the second is general.
These points of diffe d2tween the two would be brought out
more clearly if cach is dealt with in a separate clause, and we
recommend that sub-section (1) may be split up into two
clauses, each clause dealing with 09९ kind of examination.

24.47. There is a conflict of decisions on the question
whether section 342 applics 10 summons cases. Most High Courts
have taken the view! that it does so apply, but a contrary view?
has been taken by some High Courts.

24.48. Where the Court has dispensed with the personal
attendance of the accused, is it necessary that his pleader shouid
be examined under secticn 342, or should such examination be
of the accused himself ? There is also a controversy on this point,
and different views have been expressed both as to what the law
is and as to what it should be. One view is that the accused
himself should be examined in all cases, and even where his
persenal attendance has been dispensed with at other hearings,
the court must require him to be present for examination under
section 342. Another view is that where it is not a serious case
and persona! attendance has been dispensed with, the court may
also dispense with the examination of the accused or of his
pleader. It is against the intendment of section 342 io examine
the pleader instead of the accused and such examination serves
no uscful purpose.

The question came up before the Supreme Court in a cases
decided recently. After noting the sharp conflict of Judicial
oP inion, the Supreme Court referred to the decision of the

‘alcutta High Court in Prova Debi v. Mrs. Fernandes‘ and
said :—

“In that casc a Full Bench of the Calcutta High Court by
a majority decision held that the Magistrate may in his dis-
cretion examine the pleader on behalf of the accused under
section 342. This view is supported by numerous decisions
‘of other High Courts, but from time to time many judges
expressed vigorous dissents and came to the opposite con-
clusion. The two sides of the question are ably Pifscussed in

1 Khacho Mal v. Emp., ALR. 1926 All. 358; Sita Ram ४. Emp., ALR.
1935 All. 217; Ram Dhiraj ४. Staze. ATR. 1956 89. 167; Batkrishna ९.
Emp.. AAR. 1931 Bom. 132; Gulam Rasul, ALR. 1921 Pat. 11.

2 Ponnuswami, A.LR. 1924 Mad. 15, Vidyanand, ALR. 1962 A.P, 394,

3B. B. Das Gupta v. State of West Bengal, (1969) 1 S.C.J. 867. 869.

4AER. 1962 Cal. 203.

Application to
summons Cases.

Examination of
pleader in places
of accused,


Conclusion.

Amendinent
section 3०१
Fecommens. *.

208

the majority and minority jadgments of the Calcutta ease,
After a full examination of all the decided cases on the sub-
ject, we are inclined to agree with the minority opinion.”

A third view is that the pleader should be examined in such
cases, but the Jaw should also provide that the answers given
by the pleader shall not be put in evidence against the
accused in any other inquiry or trial for any other offence which
the answers of the pleader may tend to show that the accused
has committed. It would not, according to this view, be proper
to totally dispense with the examination of both the accused and
his pleader. There should be something on the record to show
the explanation either of the accused or of his pleader.

A suggestion intended to simplify the matter was also consi-
dered by us, namely, in summons cases, no examination of the
accused under section 342 should be necessary, and neither the
accused nor the pleader need be examined; but in all other cases,
the accused person should be examined peisonally. A more limit-
ed form of this suggestion was also considered by us, namely,
that in summons cases in which the personal attendance of the
accused is dispensed with, section 342 should not apply, and
neither the accused nor the pleader necd be examined.

24.49. We have, on a consideration of the various views ex-
pressed in the matter, come to the conclusion that :—

(a) the section does, and should, apply to all inquiries
and trials, including commitment inquiries and trials
of summons cases, and to make this position clear,

the words ‘In every inguity or trial’ should be in-
serted at the beginning of sub-section (1);

(9) in summons cases where the personal attendance of the
accused has been dispensed with, either under section
205 or under section 540A, the court should have a
power to dispense with his examination; and

(c) in other cases, even where his personal attendance
has been dispensed with, the accused should be
examined personally.

of 24.50. We accordingly recommend that section 342(1) be
(I vised as follows :—

“(i) In every inguiry or trial, for the purpose of enabl-
ing the accused personaliy to explain any circumstances
appearing in the evidence against him, the Court—

(७) may,......at any stage without previously warning
the accused, put such questions to him as the Court
considers necessary, and

(b} shall. ..... after the witnesses for the prosecution
have been examined and before he is called on for
his defence, question him generally on the case:

Provided that in a summons-case, where the Court 835
dispensed with the personal attendance of the accused, it may
also dispense with his examination under clause (b).

+4

wr


209

24.51, Section 342(2) is ambivalent in its import. The first Section 342 (2३
part rightly provides that the accused shali not render himself does. ig किए
fiabic to punishment by refusing to answer the questions put by .
the Court or by giving false answers to them, but the section im-
mediately gives the warning io the accused that “the Court and
the jury (if any} may draw such inference from such refusal or
answers as it thinks just.” 1६ has been suggested that in view
of the clear possibility of the Court drawing an adverse inference
from a refusal to answer, the section offends article 20(3) of the
Constitution, in that its indirect effect may be to compel the
accused to be a witness against himself. We note that two
learned authors! have expressed doubts about the constitutional
validity of the provision.

24.52. The matter has not come up before the Supreme View of High
Court, but High Courts have held that the provision does not Courts.
conflict with the Constitution. The reasoning on which one of
the decisions is based? is that the drawing of an adverse inference
is a far ery from being compelled to be a witness. A distinction
is made between “evidence” and “statement” and it is said that
the statement of the accused is not “evidence”. Tt is also stated®
that no oath is administered to the accused and therefore he is
not a “witness”. We are afraid, however, that it is possible to
argue that the permissibility of drawing an adverse inference
would, at least in some cases, amount to an indirect compulsion
of the accused to enter the witness box. Where the prosecution
evidence is strong, this will be particularly so. It cannot be
denied that the accused will be placed in a dilemma: he must
cither answer the questions under section 342 or enter the wit-
ness box under section 342A. The first course compels him to
incriminate himself, because the answers can be used against him.

The second course also compels him to incriminate himself,
because, once he enters the witness box, he is bound to be cross-
examined.

It may be said that the privilege against self-incrimination
operates regardless of the ultimate result, and emphasises that
certain means cannot be adopted even for a righteous end. In a
Calcutta case.4 the Judges observed :—

“If a person accused of an offence refuses to answer a
euestion on the ground that by answering it he will incrimi-
nate himself or to produce a document on the ground that it
wilt incriminate him. he will in a way be admitting his guilt,
and yet, if effect is to be given to article 20(3) of the Consti-
tution, he will, in effect be protected from being compelied to
furnish evidence of his admitted guilt and protected even by
the issue of, if necessary, a writ. This may seem odd. but in

1Seervai. Constitutional Law. (1966), page 442, paragraph 12.43;
Basti Commentary on the Constitution. (1962). Voi. 2. pages 36, 37.
pp Hal ४ The Stare, ATR. 1956 All. 341, 344, paragraph 33
(

3 in re B. N. Ramakrishna, ALR. 1955 Mad. 100, 119. paragraph
60 (Ramaswami J.).

4 Collector of Customs v. Calcutta Motor and Cycle Co., ALR, 1958
Gal. 982, 690, paragraph 19 (8, 8. Chakravarti CJ. and K. C. Das
8915



Amendment
recommended,

Section 342 (3).

210

balancing the advantages of an effective detection of crime,
with information collected from all sources, against the obser-
vance of civilised standards of enquiry and the upholding of
the dignity of man, the framers of our Constitution like those
of the Constitution of America, have given preference to the
latter.”

24.53. We, therefore, recommend that the iatter part of
section 342(2) be omitted. Since section 342(3} provides that
the answers (whether false or true given by the accused may be
taken into consideration in such inquiry or trial, there is no necd
to state in section 342(2) that the court “may draw such infer-
ence from such answers as it thinks just.”

24.54. The latter part of section 342 (3) provides that the
ani given by the accused may be put in evidence for or
against him in an inquiry into, or tial for, any other offence
which such answers may tend to show he has committed. Such
use of the answers for the accused would be governed by the
Evidence Act. Reference may be made to sub-sections (1),
(2). (3) of section 21 and illustrations (c). (d) and (९)
thereto, and also sections 157 and 159, of the Evidence Act.

The answers given by the accused may amount to an
admission cf some other offence or may by themselves constitutes
an offence, e.g. contempt 0 court or defamation. As regards
the latter case. the question may arise whether the answers enjoy
any absolute protection. In a Bombay case! it was held, that
the criminal law of defamation being codified in section 499 of
the Ind onal Code, the case must (if an excempiian is claim-
ed) be broucht within the four corners of one of tic nine excep-
tions given below that scction, The Couri followed a Calcutta
decision. wherein the judgment contaias a comprehensive dis-
cussion of the law of defamation under the Indian Penal Code.
A wider view was taken in one case by the Madras High Court,®
holding that such answers enjoy absolute protection, and that
this rule of the English 189 was not intended to be abrogated by
section 499 of the Indian Penal Code; but this was over-ruled
in a latter case’ The Allahabad High Court’ has taken the
wider view, recognising absolute protection for answers siven by

the accused

These decisions, however, are not based on the effect of sec-
tion 342(3), but on an interpretation of section 499, Indian
Penal Code. Most courts have assumed that the answers gives
by the accused can be used in evidence in a latter prosecution
for defamation filed against the accused, and have proceeded to
deal with the case on the other legal issues. We have consider-
ed the question whether this position requires to be disturbed.

1 Bhai Shanti v. Umrao Amir, UL.R. $0 Bom. 162; ATR. 1926
Bom. 141. 143 (F.B.).

2 Satish Chandra vy. Ram Dayal, LER. 48 Cal. 388; ADR. 1921
Cal. 1: 24 C.W.N. 982 (S.B.)

मल re Venkata Reddy, (1912) LLR. 36 Mad. 216 (F.B.)

4 Tiruvenzade Mudali vy. Tripuransu Udai, (1926) UL.R. 49 Mad.
728, 737: AIR. 1926 Mad. 906 (F.B.).

ड Murli Pathak, 1LR. 50 Ali, 169; AIR. 1927 AU. 707. 708,
(Dalal J.).

wo


21k

It was stated before us, that the accused is in a less favourable
position than a witness to whom section 132, Evidence Act,
gives full protection. Though the accused is not, in law, “com-
pelled” to answer the questions put under section 342 (so that
the analogy ef section 132 may not be strictly appropriate), yet
the accused has to answer the questions in order to save himself
from conviction for the offence for which he is under trial. Such
compulsion as there may be is, in our view, 00 compulsion in
law. Tf the accused, while answering such questions, commits
an offence. such as defamation, contempt of court, or uttering
obscene words, there is no reason why he should not be punish-
able. Anv privilege that the substantive Jaw itself recognises in
such uld, no doubt, be available; but the procedural law
need not. ia our orinion, add its own special cloak of protection
to the accused.

24.55. It would be more appropriate to place sub-section
(4) of section 342 immediately after sub-section (1) instead of
at the end.

24.56. Under section 342A, (which was inserted in 1955),
the accused is now a competent witness for the defence and can
i once in disproof of the charges made against him or
gainst his coeaccused. Are the words? “in disproof of | the
charees” intended merely to prevent the accused from implicat-
ing other co-accused ? Or do they also shut out cross-cxamina-
tion of the, accused as to the main offence ?_ The position in this
respect appears to be somewhat obscure. It is also not clear as
to what is the scone of the cross-examination of the accused
when he offers himself as witness. Can questions regarding his
character or impeaching his credit be put in cross-cxamination ?
Tf such questions are permissible, to what extent can he be ques-
tioned in respect of previous convictions 2? All these matters
mav prove to be controversial, but having regard to the fact that
section 342A has heen recently introduced and apparently has
not created any difficulty so far, we are not recommending any
elaboration of the section.

24.57. No change is needed in section 343.

24.58. Section 344(1A) vrovides for the postponement of
the commencement of an inquiry or trial and for adjournment
during the inquiry or trial. It empowers the court to remand the
acensed, if in custody. for nat more than 15 davs at a time. The
explanation at the end af the section states that if sufficient
evidence has been obtained to raise a suspicion that the accused
mav have committed an offence, and it appears likely that further
evidence may be obtained by a remand, this is a reasonable cause
for a remand. mainly because of the explanation in these terms,
the view has been taken that remands can be given by Magistrates
under section 344 cven at the stage of investieation and even
before a court has taken cognizance of the offcnee on a police
report.

1The wording follows that of section 7, Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1947.

2Cf. s. 1 of the (English) Criminal Evidence Act, 1898.

Section 342 (4).

Section 342 A.

Section 343.


Detention under
section 16761).

Maximum period

shouid be increased,

Remand under 5.
344 (14) only
after taking cog-

nizance

Adjournment

costs.

Amendment of

section
mended.

recom-

212

24.59, In our opinion, this reliance on s. 344 is mot correct,
as the explanation cited above is only an explanation to that sec-
tion and cannot be read into section 167. This lax view ol the
two sections seems to have been taken in order to avoid the prac-
tical difficulty that arises in cases where investigation is prolong-
ed, the accused has been arrested and detained in custody, and
the maximum period of 15 days allowed for such detention under
s. 167(2) is found to be inadequate. The Code, however, makes
a clear distinction between detention in custody before taking coy-
nizance and detention in custody after taking cognizance. The
former is covered by section 167 and_ the latter by s. 344. The
two are, in our opinion, mutually exclusive and ought to be kept
$0.

24.60. There is, however, no doubt that serious offences take
a long time for investigation and the police often find it neces-
sary to place the accused person under arrest even before the
investigation is quite complete. The only way of solving this diffi-
culty appears to be to increase the period of remand mentioned
in section 167(2) to “fifteen days at a time and sixty days in the
whole”. There may be some risk that if this amendment was
made in s. 167(2) remands would be asked for, and granted, as a
matter of routine up to the permissible limit of 60 days. But such
an amendment appears to us to be unavoidable.

24.61. kn order to make it very clear that remands under scc-
tion 344(1A) can only be given after cognizance has been taken
of the offence and nor at the stage of investigation, we recommend
that the opening words of this section should be altered to
read :---

“Tf the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence finds
it necessary or advisable to postpone etc.”

24.62. Under this section the Court has the power to impose
“such terms as it thinks fit” on either party while granting an
adjournment or postponement at its instance. The power to
impose “terms” would, in theory, seem to include a power to
direct the payment of cosis by a party whose conduct has neces-
sitated the adjournment, We find, however, that Courts are rcluc-
tant to award costs against the prosecution, even where the
adjournment is due to serious laches on its part like delay in
producing important witnesses, delay in giving necessary documents
to the defence. etc. While the power to award costs as a part of
the “term” which can be imposed is not denicd, the courts do
not seem to exercise that power with a view to speeding up the
inquiry or trial. We would therefore draw pointed attention of
the Courts to this power by adding another explanation to section
344

24.63. Sub-section (2) _ of section 344 appears to us to be
practically unnecessary. The requirement in sub-sections (1)
and (1A) that reasons shall be recorded should be quite suffi-
cient. There is also considerable verbiage in sub-section (1A)
which could be cut out. We recommend that in place of the
existing sub-sections (18) and (2) and explanation, the follow-
ing sub-section and explanation may be substituted :—

“(2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence,
finds it necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of

oN
a)


213

or, adjourn, any inquiry or trial it may, from time to time, for
reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such
terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable,
and may by a warrant remand the accused if in custody :

Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person
to custody under this section for a term exceeding fifteen days at
a time:

Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, BO
adjournment or postponement shall be granted, without examining
them, except for special reasons to be recorded.

Explanation 1. If sufficient evidence has been obtained to
raise a suspicion that the accused may have committed an offence,
and it appears likely that further evidence may be obtained by a
remand, this is a reasonable cause for a remand.

Explanation 2. The terms on which an adjournment or post-
Ponement may be granted include, in appropriate ९४५०४, the pay-
ment of costs by the prosecution or the accused”.

24.64, Section 345 deals with the compounding of offences.
Sub-section (1) lists 22 Penal Code offences which may be com-
pounded by the specified aggrieved party without the permission
of the court and sub-section (2) lists 32 other Penal Code offences
which also may be compounded but with the permission of the
court.

24.65. It was suggested before us that instead of having two
such long lists, some simple general rule should be evolved to
determine which offences are compoundable, eg. by relating
them to the punishment provided for the offence. The theory that
the offences at present listed as compoundable are those in which
the individual aggrieved person is much more concerned than the
community as a whole was said to be not very convincing. It was
also said that withdrawal of the prosecution” under section 494
was often resorted to for securing the same result after privately
compounding the offence.

24.66. We have, however, come to the conclusion that it is
not feasible to formulate any general rule for determining com-
poundable offences. The broad principle that forms the basis of
the present scheme is that where the offence 15 essentially of a
pfivate nature and relatively not serious, it is compoundable. 1६
is, in our opinion, better to have clear and specific provisions such
as those contained in section 345 than a general rule which is
likely to lead to different interpretations. A rule 10 the effect
that an offence will be compoundabie if the maximum punishment
provided for it is not more than three years’ imprisonment will,
no doubt, be definite but will not, in our opinion, be suitable.

24.67. It was further suggested that, even if the existing
section is maintained, the distinction between offences compound-
able with the permission of the Court and offences without such
permission should be abolished and that the law should be simphi-
fied requiring permission in every case. This suggestion, ho
ever, did not appcal to us. The safeguard of the Court’s permis-
sion is to prevent an abuse of the right to compound and to

Section 345,

General rule for
determining com-
Poundable offences
suggested,

Not feasible,

Coutt’s _permise
sion necessary in
some cases,


Offences under
special laws not
compoundable,

Addition to the
two lists consider-
ed.

Three additions
in sub-section (2)
recommended,

Petty theft should
be compoundable.

2i4d

enable the court to take into account the special circumstances
of the case which may justify composition. It is not in every
case that such a safeguard is required.

24.68. Uader the Second Schedule to the Code all offences
under special laws are at present non-compoundable. It was
suggested that if such an offence is punishable with fine or with
imprisonment not exczeding one year, it should be compound-
able. We think that thi: should be left co the legislature con-
cerned to decide as a matter of policy whether and to what extent
olfences under the spccial laws should be compoundable. It is
not desirable to make any general provision in the Code touching
this point.

24.69. Various suggestions have been reczived by us to add
some more Penal Code offences in sub-section (1) or in sub-
The additions suggested are : being
143), rioting (s, 147),
false claim in a court of justice (s. 9), fraudulently obtaining
decrees (s. 219), drivin? or riding en a public way so rashly or
nevligently as to endanger human fife (5. 279), causing death
by rash of Higent act (5. 304A), causing grievous hurt by
dangerous weapon (s. 326), wrongful confinenicnt for extortion
(5, 347), theft in a building (s, 380), lurkine house-trespass oF
house-breaking by night (5. 456). the same in order to commit
am offence (s. 457) and bicamy with co! ment (s. 495). We
do not consider that any of these oflences sho 10 be compound-
able. Public peace, order and sceurity are_matters in which
society is vitally interested and offences which jeopardize them
ought to be suitably punished by the couris. They should not
be left to be compounded by the person directly aggrieved by
the offence.

24.70. We, however, agree with the suggestion that the
ofence under suction 354, Indian Penal Code, should, with the
permission of the court, be compoundable by the woman on
whom the assault is committed or to whom criminal force is
used. We also recommend that the offences under section 411
(receiving or relaining stolen properly) or under section 414
(assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property)
should be compoundable with the permission of the court, if the
value of the property does not exceed Rs. 250.

24.71. We have received a suggestion that the term relating
to “theft where the value of property stolen does not excced 250
rupees” should 53 omitted from the list in sub-section (2) of
scclion 345. ft is said that, after the offence of theft has been
made compoundable to this limited extent in 1955, habitual
thieves are taking advantage of it and escaping punishment
This is not casy to understand. In such cases, it is very likely
that the prosecution has mentioned in the chargesheet itself the
previous convictions of the accused with a view to asking for
enhanced punishment under section 75 of the Indian Penal Code,
or, if for some reason it has initially failed to do so, it will bring
the fact to the notice of the court when permission to compound
the offence is sought. We do not think any harm is being done
by the amendment of 1955 which has made petty thefts com-
poundable with the permission of the Court.

Ka

a7


215

24.72. We recommend that the offence of unlafwul compul-
sory labour punishable under section 374 of the Indian Penal
Code, should not be compoundable and that this item should be
omitted from the list in section 345(1).

24.73. As it is possible that a Magistrate inquiring into or
trying an oftence may find that some other Magistrate should
deal with the casc; a provision is made in section 346 enabling
the Magistrate ९0. rcport the case to his superior, who can then
deal with it himscif. or transfer it to some other competent Magis-
trate. Want of jurisdiction is aot mentioned in the section as a
reason for presuming that “the case should be heard by another
Magistrate", and -ome doubt has, on occasions, been expressed*
whether “jack of jurisdiction”, is covered by section 346. We
think it is, and we propose io make this clear by a suitable change
in the language.

There mey be cases which a subordinate Magisivate cannot
dispose of. but wi the Chief Judicial Magistrate can, ९.8. a
case relating to an offence punishable with imprisonment for a
term that may extend to 7 years. There is, at present, no provi-
sion empowering ate Magistrate to refer such cases
to the Chief Jud trate before or during trial. Such a
provision “ould obviously be useful from the point of view of
reducing the work of Sessions Courts.

Presidency towas are expressly excluded from the scope of
the section, but we think that it can be usefully extended to me-
wropoliian arcas. Under our proposed scheme, the Chief Metro-

lilan Magistcate will have higher powers of trial and sentenc-
ing than ordinary Metropolitan Magistrates, and there are likely
to be quite a few cases which an ordinary Metropolitan Magis-
trate cannot dispose of, but which should be referred to th:
Chicf Metropolitan Magistrate for disposal instead of being com-
mitted to the City Sessions Court. We would, therefore, extend
the section to metropolitan areas.

Section 346 is a provision for the transfer of proceedings con-
cerned with offences, i.e. inquiry into and trial of offences. We
propose to make it clear that it is so limited, by adding the words
“into an offence” after the word “inquiry”.

Accordingly, section 346 may be revised as follows :—

“346. (1) If, in the course of any inquiry into an off-
ence or a trial before a Magistrate in any district, the evidence
appears to him to warrant a presumption

(a) that he bas no jurisdiction to try the case or com-
mit it for trial, or

«b) that the case is one which should be tried or com-
mitted for trial by some other Magistrate in the dis-
trict, or

(०) that the case should be tried by the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, he shall stay the proceedings and submit

1Stare v. Pokker, ATR. 1959 Ker. 53 (Reviews cases).

Compulsory las
bour not to be
compoundabie.

Section 346.

Procedure io
cases which Ma-
istrate = cannot
ispose of,


Procedure —_in
Cases which
Magistrate can-
not dispose of.

Section 348

Trial of persons
Previously convi+
cted Of offecces
against coinage,
stamp—law ot
property.

Section 349.

216

the case, with a bricf report cxpiaining its nature,
to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to such other
Magistrate having jurisdiction as the Chief Judicial
Magistrate directs.

(2) The Magistrate to whom the case is submitted may,
if so empowered, either try the case himself or refer it to any
Magistrate subordinate to him having jurisdiction to commit
it for trial.”

24.74. Section 347 lays down the procedure when, after com-
miencement of the inquiry or trial before a Magistrate, he finds
that the case ought to be tried by the Court of Session. As alll
Magistratcs will be competent to commit a case to the Court of
Session and the reference to High Courts will have to be deleted,
the section may be formaily revised as follows :—

“347, if, in any inquiry into an offence or a trial before
a Magistrate, it appears to him, at any stage of the proceed-
ings before signing judgment that that case is one which ought
to be tried by the Court of Session, he shall commit it to
that Court under the provisions hereinbefore contained.”

24.75, Section 348 requires a Magistrate to commit to the
Court of Session the case of any accused person liable to enhanc-
ed punishment under section 75 of the Indian Penal Code as a
previous convict. In order to avoid unnecessary commitment to
the Sessions Court, however, two exceptions have been provided
in the section, (1) when a Magistrate having powers under section
30 of the Code is available to try the case, and (ii) when the
Magistrate dealing with the case is of opinion that he will be abie
to inflict suitable punishment in case of conviction. No change
of substance is necessary in this section, but it may be formal Iv
revised as follows :-—~

“348. (1) Where a person, having been convicted of an
offence punishable under Chapter XI or Chapter XVIE of
the Indian Penat Code with imprisonment for a term of three
years or upwards, is again accused of any offence punishable
under either of those Chapters with imprisonment for a term
of three yeats or upwards, and the Magistrate before whom
the case is pending is satisfied that there is ground for pre-
suming that such person has committed the offence, he shall
be sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or commit-
ted to the Court of Session, unless the Magistrate is com-
petent to try the case and is of opinion that he can himself
pass an adequate sentence if the accused is convicted.

(2) When any person is sent for trial to the Chief Judi-
cial Magistrate or committed to the Court of Session under
sub-section (1), any other person accused jointly with him
in the same inquiry or trial shall be similarly sent or com-
mitted, uniess the Magistrate discharges such other person
under section 251A or section 253, as the case may be.”

24.76. Section 349 deals with the transfer of a case pending
before a second or third class Magistrate if he thinks the accused
guilty but meriting punishment which the Magistrate is not com-
petent to impose. The case then goes to his superior who has to

“*€


217

decide it on the merits. This provision is obviously necessary
and useful. We propose to extend it to convictions before first
class Magistrates also, so that fey can report the case to the
Chief Judicial Magistrates. The latter have higher powers of
sentencing, and it would be useful if cases tried by Magistrates
o€ the first class could be sent to them for punishment, where
the circumstances demand the imposition of a sentence higher
than what a first class Magistrate can impose. At present, this
is not possible, both because Magistrates of the first class are not
mentioned in sub-section (1), and because the proviso to sub-
section (2) restricts the sentencing powers of the Magistrate to
whom the case is forwarded. We consider both these restric-
tions to be unnecessary. Sub-section (1) may be revised as
follows :—

“(1) Whenever a Magistrate X X X is of opinion, after
hearing the evidence for the prosecution and the accused, that
the accused is guilty and that he ought to receive a punish-
ment different in kind from, or more severe than, that which
the Magistrate is empowered to inflict, or, being Magistrate
of the second class, is of opinion that the accused ought to
be required to execute a bond under section 106, he may
record the opinion and submit his proceedings and forward
the accused to the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom he is
subordinate.”

Apart from consequential changes in sub-sections (1A) and
(2), the proviso to sub-section (2) may be omitted,

24.77. Section 350 deals with “part-heard cases”, when one
Magistrate who has partly heard the case is succeeded by another
Magistrate, either because the first Magistrate is transferred and
is succeeded by another, or because the case is transferred from
one Magistrate to another Magistrate. The rule mentioned in
section 350 is that second Magistrate need not re-hear the whole
case; he can start from the place the first Magistrate left it, un-
less of course he is of opinion that “further examination of any
of the witnesses whose evidence has already been recorded is
necessary in the interest of justice.” The decision for a re-hear-
ing, thus, rests with the Magistrate, and this arrangement is, we
think satisfactory.

The section is confined to cases in the Magistrate’s Courts,
aod is inapplicable to the Courts of Session. We have consi-
dered the advisability of extending this rule to Sessions cases,
as we understand that sometimes Sessions Judges are transferred,
leaving behind part-heard cases which have to be heard all over
again. It would be an ideal position if such transfers did not
take place, as Sessions cases are to be heard from day-to-day
and decided within a few days. It is obviously desirable that in
serious cases the whole evidence snould be heard the Judge
who finally decides the case. However, having regard to the rea-
lities of the situation, it is necessary to make some provision for
cases where such transfers do take place, because a mandatory
provision for a de novo trial may often cause considerable incon-
venience and _hardshi ig We, therefore, propose to extend the
section to Judges of Sessions Courts by referring to “Judge or
Magistrate” instead of “Magistrate” only.

Section 350(1).


Section 35002).

Section 350A.

Changes in. cons-
titution of Ben-
ches,

Section 351+
limited 10 offen-
ders in courts,

218

24.78. At the other end are “summary trials”, which again
should be decided quickly and no question of a “part-heard
case” should normally arise. Also, the record of evidence in a
summary trial is scanty; and in certain cases may be Virtually
non-existent. In these cases too, the mule in section 350 ought
not to apply.” We propose that section 350(2) should be amea-
ded to read, “Nothing in this section applies to summary trials
to cases in which etc.”

24.79. Scction 350A deals with Benches of Magistrates, and
provides that the judgment of a Bench will not be affected by
any change in the constitution of the Bench, if it is constituted
“in accordance with sections 15 and 16” and the “Magistrates
constituting it have been present on the Bench throughout the
proceedings”.

The language used here tends to obscure the meaning of the
provision*®, and the Courts have at times complained’ of the
obscurity,

The requirement that the “Magistrate’—meaning “all the
Magistrates” constituting the Bench—should have been present
throughout the proceedings, greatly reduccs the usefulness of the
provision. The cases handled by Benches of Magistrates are not
important, and we think it should be quite suflicient if one of
the Magistrates has been present and heard all the proceedings,
so that the other members of the Bench (cven if not present
throughout) can be properly advised by him. We, therefore.
suggest that the scope of section 350A should be widened, and
all decisions by a Bench of Magistrates should be valid so long
as one of the Magistrates deciding the case has heard the whole
evidence,

Section 350A speaks of “order or judgment”. Obviously,
“judgment”, which is the more important of the two, should be
mentioned first.

In the light of the above discussion, section 350A may be
amended to read as follows :—~

“350A. No judgment or order of a Bench of Magistrates
shall be invalid by reason only of a change having occurred
in the constitution of the Bench, in any case in which the
Bench by which such judgment or order is passed is duly
constituted under sections 15 and 16, and at least one of
the Magistrates constituting the Bench by which the judg-
ment or order was delivered has been present on the Bench
throughout the proceedings.”

24.80. It happens sometimes, though not very often, that a
Magistrate hearing a case against certain accused finds from the

1See section 263.

2For a review of case-law, see Surat Municipality v. Nagendra, ALR.
1953 Bom. 29.

3 5८९ Harnarain v. Emp. ALR. 1943 All. 20; Jai Ram v. The State,
ATR. 1953 All. 137; Kali Charan ¥. Emp. AER. 1955 All. 711.

*Cf. Dasrath Rat १. Emp. LLR. 56 All. 599; AER. 1934 All. 144,
146 (Per Sulaiman €.3.).


219

evidence that some person, other than the accused before him,
is also concerned in that very offence or in a connected offence.
It is only proper that the Magistrate should have the power to
call and join him in the proceedings. Section 351 provides for
such a situation, but only if that person happens to be attending
the Court. He can then be detained and proceeded against.
There is no express provision in section 351 for summoniag such
a person if he is not present in Court. Such a provision would
make section 351 faitly comprehensive, and we think it proper
to expressly provide for that situation.

25.81. Section 351 assumes that the Magistrate proceeding
under it has the power of taking cognizance of the new case. It
does not, however, say in what manner cognizance is taken by
the Magistrate. The modes of taking cognizance are mentioned
in section 190, and are, apparently, exhaustive. The question is,
whether against the newly added accused, cognizance will be
supposed to have been iaken on the Magistrate’s own informa-
tion under section 190(1)(c), or only in the manner in which
cognizance was fir-t taken of the offence against the other accus-
ed. In concrete terms, if the original case was instituted on a
police report, ie. under section 190(1)(b), will cognizance
against the new accused be supposed to have been taken in the
same manner, or under scction 190(1)(c)? The question is
important, because the methods of enquiry and trial in the two
cases differ'. About the true position under the existing law,
there has been difference of opiaion, and we think it should be
made clear. It seems to us that the main purpose of this parti-
cular provision is, that the whole case against all known suspects
should be proceeded with expeditiously, and convenience requires
that cognizance against the newly added accused should be taken
in the same manner as against the other accused. We, there-
fore, propose to re-cast section 351 making it comprehensive and
providing that there will be no difference in the mode of taking
cognizance if a new person is added as an accused during the
proceedings, It is, of course, necessary (as is already provided)
that in such a situation the evidence must be re-heard in the
presence of the newly added accused.

24.82. The offence for which the newly added accused can
be tried is not indicated in precise terms in the section. Obvi-
ously, that offence should be connected with the one for which
the original accused is under trial, To bring that out, a small
verbal amendment is recommended.

24.83. Section 351 should, therefore, be amended to read
as follows :—

“351. (1) Where, in the course of an inquiry into or
trial of an offence, it appears from the evidence that any
person not being the accused has committed any offence for
which such person could be tried together with the accused,
the Court may proceed against such person for the offence
which he appears to have committed.

(2) Where such person is attending the Court, although
not under arrest or upon a summons, ke may be detained by

1 See sections 207, 207A, 251 and 251A

How is
cognizance
taken?

Offences to be
indicated,

Amendment of s.
351, recommen-
ded,

Power to ‘oceed
against other per-
sons appearing to
be guilty of
offence.


220

such Court for the purpose of the inquiry inte or trial of the
offence which he appears to have committed.

(3) Where such person is not attending the Court, he
may be arrested or summoned, as the circumstances of the
case may require, for the purpose aforesaid.

(4) Where the Court proceeds against any person under
sub-section (1), then—

{a) the proceedings in respect of such person shall be
commenced afresh, and the witnesses re-heard;

(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), the case may
proceed as if such person had been an accused per-
son when the Court took cognizance of the offence
upon which the inquiry or trial was commenced.

{Section 352. 24.84, Section 352 contains the healthy rule that Criminal
Courts should ordinarily be open to the public, and no change
is to be suggested in that nule.


CHAPTER XXV

MODE OF TAKING AND RECORDING EVIDENCE IN
INQUIRIES AND TRIALS

25.1. Section 353 jays down the general rule that at any
inquiry or trial, all evidence “shall be taken in the presence of
the accused, or, when his personai attendance is dispensed with,
in presence of his pleader”. There is a difference of judicial
opinion as to whether the words “when his personal attendance
is dispensed with” occurring in this section confer by themselves
a power on the Court to dispense with the persona! attendance
of the accused, or whether they merely refer to the two other
provisions of the Code, namely sections 205 and 540A, under
which such attendance can be dispensed with. The Madras,*
Allahabad? and Axsam* High Courts have taken the view that
the section itself empowers the Court to dispense with the atten-
dance of the accused at the evidence stage but the contrary view
has been taken by the Calcutta‘ High Court. In our opinion,
section 353 is not intended to confer an independent power of
dispensing with the personal attendance of the accused and this
should be made clear by adding a reference to sections 205 and
540A after the words “dispensed with”.

We considered a suggestion that in cases where the accused
deliberately obstructs the proceedings or otherwise makes it im-
possible for the Court to take the evidence of witnesses in his
presence, it should be lawful for the trial to proceed in his ab-
sence, or even in the absence of his pleader if he has no pleader
to represent him. Since, however, no such difficulty bas arisen
in practice, so far as we are aware, we do not consider it neces-
sary to provide for such a contingency.

25.2. The object of section 354 is purely to introduce the
next seven sections. It enacts no rule of procedure and is really
superfluous. Furthermore, the reference to a Sessions Judge is,
strictly speaking, not correct; it should be to a Court of Session
so that there is no doubt as to the a licability of the sections
to Additional and Assistant Sessions Tedges, 'e also propose
to place inquiric, and trials by Presidency Magistrates on the
same footing as those by other Magistrates in regard to the re-
cording of evidence. We, therefore, recommend that this section
be omitted.

25.3. Section 355 governs the recording of evidence in three
categories of cases, namely (1) summons cases tried before a
Magistrate other than a Presidency Magistrate; (ii) cases of the
offences mentioned in clauses (b) to (m) of section 260(1)
when tried by a Magistrate of a first or second class but not sum-
marily; and (iii) proceedings under section 514 otherwise than

tin re: Ummal Hasanath, ALR, 1947 Mad. 433, 434.

2 Sultan Sinch v. The State, ALR, 1951 All. 864, 867 (Full Bench):
Aditya Prasad रे. Jogindra Nath, 5.18. 1948. All. 393. 395.

3 Kamal Devi v. Pannalal, A. 1952 Assam 151.

«Kali Das v. The State, A.LR. 1954 Cal. 576.

Section 353.

Section 354—
0153,
recommended,


Language of
evidence and
language of
record,

Section 355 to
359 and 362 not
well drafted,

222

in the case of a trial. The essential feature is that in these cases,
the Magistrate is only required to make a memorandum of the
substance of the evidence of each witness as the examination of
the witness proceeds. Section 358, however, provides that the
Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, take down the evidence of any
witness in a fuller manner as provided for warrant cases.

The mode of recording evidence in ali other trials except
before Presidency Magistrates and in al} inquiries under Chapter
XIE and XVIII is regulated mainly by sections 356 and 359. In

ese cases, evidence has to be recorded in greater fullness, gene-
rally in the form of a narrative and occasionally, when consider-
ed necessary by the presiding Judge or Magistrate, in the form
of questions actually put and answers actually given.

Sectioa 362 applies to trials by Presidency Magistrates. Here
again two mods of recording evidence are prescribed, a distinc-
tion being made between cascs in which an appeal lies and cases
in which there is no appeal. In the former class of cases, evi-
dence is recorded in the same manner as in the trial of warrant-
cases by Magistrates, while in the latter class of cases the Presi-
dency Magistrate necd not record the cvidence at all.

The mannez of recording evidence in cases coming up before
the High Courts (other than Judicial Commissioners’ Courts)
is left to be prescribed by the Courts themselves under section
365.

25.4. The language or languages in which this record of evi-
dence is to be prepared is also regulated by sections 356 and
357, but only in regard to sessions trials, trials of warrant-cases
and committal proceedings. Neither section 355 nor section 362
refers to the language in which the evidence is to be recorded in
summons-cases and by Presidency Magistrates, Presumably,
however, it is to be done in the language of the Court or in
English. Under section 356, the evidence is ordinarily to be
taken down in the language of the Court. When the evidence is
given in some other Janguage, including English, it may, if prac-
ticable, be taken down in that language or, if it is not practicable
to do so, the evidence has presumably to be translated into the
Tangu age of the Court as the examination of the witness proczeds
and such translation is to be recorded. Sub-section (3) of sec-
tion 356 provides that in cases where the presiding Judge or
Magistrate does not take down the evidence with his own hand
or dictate it in open Court, he should make a memorandum of
the substance of what each witness savs and this memorandum
also shall form part of the record. Section 357 contains a curious
provision that the State Government may direct that in any dis-
trict or part of a district, or in any proceedings before any Court
of Session. or before any Magistrate or class of Magistrates. evi-
dence shall be taken down by the Sessions Judee or Magistrate
with his own hand and in his mother-toneue. The same section,
however, goes on to provide that the State Government may
direct the Sessions Judge or the Magistrate to take down tho
evidence in English or in the language of the Court although
such language is not his mother-tongue.

25.5. This broad summary of sections 355 to 359 and 362

shows that they are a confused jumble of provisions, incomplete
in some respects, and not very clearly or systematically arranged.

4


223

The fanguage in which the cvidence is actually given and the
language of the record are occasionally mixed up. For inst-
ance, it is not in all cases correct to say that the Judge or Magis-
trate “takes down” the evidence in bis mother-tongue or in
English or in the language of the Court. When the witness is
giving evidence in an altogether different language, what is taken
down, or caused to be taken down, by the Judge or Magistrate
is a simultancous translation of that evidence in his mother-
tongue or English or the language of the Court, as the case may
be.

25.6. In this connection it will be useful to remember. parti-
cularly in regard to the language of the record, that this Chapter
was cnacted at a time when English was the language in which
the business of practically ai! the criminal courts was conducted
aad all evidence given in the regional language was translated
into, and recorded in English. The dual record of the evidence,
for which provision is made in section 356(3), owed its origin
ty the same circumstance. The Sessions Judge or Magistrate was
often not sufficiently acquainted with the regional language in
which most of the evidence was given, to take it down in that
language. Consequently, the law had to provide for the pre-
paration of a full record of the evidence by a court official, the
Judge or Magistrate only taking notes of the evidence as the exa-
mination of the witness proceeded.

25.7. In view of the greatly changed conditions which now
prevail, we think it desirable to analyse, both the mode of record-
ing evidence and the iuanguage of the record for different classes
of cases and courts and to simplify the provisions contained in
this Chapter.

25.8. Taking section 355 which prescribes what may be cal-
led a brief record of the evidence in three categories of cases, we
have already mentioned the fact that it is silent as to the language
of tne record. This omission should be rectified by stating in
the section itself that the Magistrate shall make a memorandum
of the substance of the evidence in the language of the Court or
in English. This would be in accord with the present practice.

25.9. This section at present covers summons-cases tried
before a Magistrate other than a Presidency Magistrate. Earlier
in this report we have recommended the inclusion of Presidency
Magistrates in section 260(1) in order that they may be able to
try all summons-cases (and also the warrant-cases specified in
that section) in a summary way. In practice, the number of
summons-cases tried by Presidency Magistrates in a regular
manner must be comparatively very small. It could hardly make
any difference if in those few cases they record the evidence
briefly in the same manner as Magistrates elsewhere are required
to do under section 355. The words “other than a Presidency
Magistrate” occurring in sub-section (1) of this section may
accordingly be omitted.

25.10. The second category of cases in which a brief record
is prescribed by this section are warrant-cases relating to the
offences mentioned in clauses (b) to {m) of section 260(1)

Predominant
Position of
Engtish in the
past.

Simplification
desirable.

Section 355—
Language to be
mentioned.

Section to cover
presidency
magistrates,

Section not to
apply to any
warran <ases,


Section to apply
to inquiries
under Chapter
XH.

Revised section
355.

Record in sum-
mons-cases,

inquiries under
Chapter XII and
proceedings un-
der section 514,

Section 358—
ission
recommended,

224

when tried by the Magistrate of 2 first or second class in the
regular. way. Though some of these cases may be trivial, in view
of the possibility of substantial sentences being imposed in such
cases when not tried summarily, we think a full record of the
evidence would be desirable. We. therefore. Tecommend
omission of this part of sub-section (1) of section 355,

25.11. On the other hand, in inquiries under Chapter XH
fe. sections 145. 146 and 147, which are now governed by
section 356, a brief record of the evidence will be quite sufficient
as the object of these Proceedings is not determination of any
right to immoveable property but the prevention of an appre-
herded breach of the peace aod the Proceedings are intended to
be summary in character. The reference to Chapter XII should

accordingly be transposed from section 356(1) 10 section
355(1).

25.12. Including a few drafting changes, the revised section
355 may read as follows :—

“355. (1) In all summons-cases tried before a Magistrate,
ja all inquiries under Chapter XII, and in all pro-
ceedings under section 514 otherwise than in the
course of a trial, the Magistrate shall, as the exami-
nation of each witness proceeds, make a memo-
randum of the substance of his evidence in the
language of the Court or in English :

Provided that if the Magistrate is unable to make such
memorandum himself, he shall, after recording the
reason of his inability, cause such memorandum 10
be made from his dictation in open Court.

(2) Such memorandum shail be signed by the
Magistrate and shall form part of the record.”

25.13. Section 358 which is a sort of proviso to section 355
is hardly necessary. 11 purports to enable the Magistrate to take
down the evidence in a fuller manner than that contemplated in
section 355. This is not necessary since there could be no
technical objection to any Magistrate taking down a memo-
randum of the evidence of each witness instead of trying to abbre-
viate or summarise it. Section 358, could, in our opinion, be
safely omitted.

25.14. The mode of recording evidence in trials of warrant-
cases before Magistrates, inquiries under Chapter XVIII and
sessions trials is prescribed partly in section 356 and partly in
section 359. The language of the record is dealt with partly in
section 356 and partly in section 357. The provisions would be
clearer and easier to follow if they were put in three separate
sections : one dealing with the mode of recording evidence in
warrant-cases and commitment proceedings, another dealing
with the mode of recording evidence iin sessions trials, and the
third dealing with the language of the record in all these cases,


225

25.15. The first two sections may be as follows :—

“356 (1) In all warrant-cases tried before 2 Magistrate
..-+..3! the evidence of each witness shall, as his
exanlination proceeds, be taken down in writing
either by the Magistrate himself or, under his direc~
tion and superintendence by an officer of the Court
appointed by him in this behalf.

(2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken dowa in the
form of 2 narrative; bat the Magistrate may, io his
discretion, take down, or cause to be taken down,
any part of such evidence in the form of question
and answer.

(3) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the
Magistrate and shalt form part of the record.

357. (1) In ail trials before a Court of Session, the
evidence of each witness shall, as his examination
proceeds be taken down in writing either by the
presiding Judge himself or, under bis direction_and
superintendence, by an officer of the Court
appointed by him in this behalf.

Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the
form of question and answer; but the presiding
Judge may, in his discretion, take down, or cause
to be taken down, the whole or any part of such
evidence in the form of a narrative.

(3) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the
presiding Judge and shall form part of the record.”

(2

25.16 °°’ have made two important changes in this revision,
besides «1.. ‘fying the unduly complicated provisions now
contiancst 1 sections 356, 357 and 359. First, we consider that
present time there is no need for the dual record which
is 4 prepared in a few north Indian States under section
356(3). In cases where the evidence is not recorded by the
Magistrate or presiding Judge himself but by an officer of the
Court under his direction and superintendence, the notes? which
he may (or may not) keep for his own use need not necessarily
form part of the record as provided in this section. Neither of
the revised sections 356 and 357 contains a provision similar to
sub-section (3) of the present section 356. It will also be
noticed that details like “from his dictation in open Court” “in
his presence and hearing” and “personal direction” which now
occur in the present sections 356 and 357 have been omitted in
the revised sections as being superfluous.

25.17. The second substantial change we have proposed is
that in sessions trials evidence of each witness should ordinarily
be recorded in the form of question and answer, though the
presiding Judge may, in his discretion, have the whole or any
part of the evidence recorded in the form of a narrative. This is

&

३ 9 section 356(3). mention of Chapter 18 is omitted in view of pro-
posed changes regarding commitment.

_2Such notes were invariably in English while the full record of the
evidence used to be in Urdu.

Revised Sections
356 and 357.

Record in
warrant cases and
inquiries under
Chapter XVII.

Record in trials
before Courts of
Session.


Language of
record of
evidence.

Section 360.

226

reversing the existing position under section 359. It can hardly
be disputed that, in the process of converting a question put by
the advocate, particularly in cross-examization, and the answer
given by the witness, to a sentence purporting to be the witness’s
statement, accuracy is often lost and the record does not always
convey all the implications of the question avd the answer. We
recognise that making a full record of the evidence in the form
of questions and answers almost necessarily involves the
employment of shorthand writers at every sessions trial but con-
sider that this step has to be taken in the interests of justice.
The additional expense which it might seem to involve is, i: our
opinion, worth incurring, since the presiding Judge would be
relieved of the tiresome task of recording the evidence himself
and be able to concentrate attention on what the witness is say-
ing and assess its worth.

25.18. As regards the language of the record we Propose the
following new section :—

“358. In every case where evidence is taken down under
section 356 or 357—

(a) if the witness gives evidence in the Janguage of the
Court, it shail be taken down in: that language;

(b) if he gives evidence in any other language, it may
if practicable be taken down in that language, and
if it is not practicable to do so, a true translation of
the evidence in the language of the Court shall be
prepared as the examination of the witness pro-
ceeds, siened by the Magistrate or presiding Judge,
and shail form part of the record; and

(०) where under clause (b) evidence is taken down in
a language other than the language of the Court, a
truc translation thereof in the language of the
Court shall be prepared as soon as _ practicable
signed by the Magistrate or presiding Judge and
shal form part of the record :

Provided that when under clause (b) evidence is taken
down in English and a translation thereof in the language
of the Court is not required by any of the parties the
Court may dispense with such translation.”

25.19. Section 360 which prescribes the procedure to be
followed after the evidence of each witness has been taken under
section 356 or 357 requires only one or two formal amendments.
Tn sub-section 2, for the words “Sessions Judge”, the words
“presiding Judge” may be substituted. In sub-section (3), it
would be more accurate to refer to the record of the evidence
being in_a language different from that in which it has been
given. The sub-section may be amended to read :

“(3) 1६ the record of the evidence is in a language
different from that in which it has been given and
the witness does not understand that language, the
record shall be interpreted to him in the language
in which it was given, or in a language which he
understands.”

“4

»


227

25.20. Section 361, which deals with the interpretation of
the evidence to the accused or his Pleader needs no change.

25.21. As already mentioned, ihe recording of evidence in
inquities and trials Sefore the Presidency Magistrate will be
governed by the same provisions as those applicable to other
Magistrates. A distinction is now made in section 362 detween
cases ia which an appeal 105 and those in which no appeal lies.
Tf the case falis in the latter category—and the Magistrate has
to make up his mind at the beeinnine of the trial wi
facie is sot appropriato-——the Masistrate need not record any
evidence. If the Magistrate thinks that the czse is such that in
the event of conviction of the accused, ne may have ty pass an
appealable sentence, he has to record the evidence i:
way as 3 Magistrate in a district. We do not think it is desirable
iS m
varrant-case it is not necessary for a Presi«
dency Magistrate to frame a charge : vide section 362(4). There
is hardly any justification for this artificial distinction, We
recommend the omission of the whole of section 362.

25.22. No ch Of substance is roquired in. section 363,
which relates to remarks Tespecting the demeanour of witness;
but the reference to “a Sessions Judve™ may be replaced by the
words “the prs lige” in order that there may be no doubt
as to the applicability of the section to an Additional or
Assistant Sessions Jude.

25.23. Section 364 relates to the mode of recording the
examination of the accused and the language of such cxamina-
tion and of the record, It applies to all Magistrates other than
Presidency Magistrates whose Proceedings in this respect are
regulated by section 362(2A). Since the omission of section
362 is being proposed, sub-section (2A) of that section may be
included in section 364

This section 0055 not apply to the High Courts of States but
applies to the Courts of Judicial Commissioners. Apparently, the
matter is left to be dealt with either by rules made under
section 365 on the footing that “evidence” in a wide sense
includes the examination of the accused, or by the rules of Court
teferred to in article 225 of the Constitution, However that
may be, since original criminal trials before a High Court or a
Judicial Commissioner’s Court are rare, the exclusion of these
Courts from the scope of section 364 is not of any practical
consequence, There is ro need to treat the Courts of Judicial
Commissioners differeatly and they also may be excluded,

In sub-section (2), the requirement that the record shall be
signed only “when the whole is made conformable to what the
accused declares is the truth” is not very appropriate. The pro-
vision in sub-section (1) that he shall be at liberty to explain or
add to his answers is sufficient for Practical purposes.

We propose that the section may be revised as follows :—

“364. (1) Whenever the accused is examined by a

Metropolitan Magistrate, the Magistrate shall make
a memorandum of the substance of the examina-

Section 361.

Section 362.

Section 363.

Section 364,

Record of exami-
nation of accused,


Section 365.

Record in high
court.

228

tion of the accused in the language of the Court or
in English. Such memorandum shali be signed by.
the Magistrate and shall form part of the record.

(2) Whenever the accused is examined by any
Magistrate other than a Metropolitan Magistrate, or
by 8 Court of Session, the whole of such examina-
tion, including every question put to him and every
answer given by him, shall be recorded in full
either by the Magistrate or Judge himself or under
his direction and superiniendence by an officer of
the Court appointed by him in this behalf.

(3) The record shali, if practicable, be in the language
in which the accused is examined or, if that is not
practicable, in the language of the Court.....

(4) The record shall be shown or read to the accused,
or, if he docs not understand the language 19 which
it is written, shall be interpreted to him in a
language which he understands, and he shall be at
liberty to explain or add to his answers.

(5) It shall thereafter be signed by the accused and by
the Magistrate or presiding Judge who shall certify
under his own hand that the examination was taken
in his presence and heating and that the record
contains a full and true account of the statement
made by the accused.

(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to
the examination of an accused person in the course
of व summary trial.”

25.24. Section -365 may be amended so as to confer a rule-
making power on Judicial Commissioners’ Courts besides _ the
High Courts of States aad also to cover expressly examination
of the accused. The section may read as follows :—

“365. Every High Court may, by gencral rule, prescribe
the manner in which the evidence of witnesses and the exami-
nation of the accused shall be taken down in cases coming
before it; and such evidence and examination shall be taken.
down in accordance with such rule.”

7


CHAPTER XXVI

JUDGMENT

26.1.. Section 366(1) deals with the modes of pronouncing Section 366 6)--
a judgment, though the marginal note to the section speaks of Modes of 20
nouncing judge-
it.

“delivering” a judgment. Under section 366(1) a judgment may
be pronounced or its substance explained. Here “pronounced”
evidently means the reading out of the whole judgment. The
Proviso to section 366(1) states that, if the prosecution or the
defence so desire, the whole judgment shall be read out. Further,
under section 367(1), it is permissible to dictate a judgment in
court. Thus, a reading of sections 366 and 367 reveals three
modes of pronouncing a judgment—

(a) delivering a judgment by dictation in open court;

(0) reading out the whole of a judgment already
written; and

(९) explaining the substance of the judgment already
written.

We feel that all the three modes should be brought under
one section, Further, the provisions of section 367(1) regard-
ing the dating and signing of judgments should also be
included in this section.

26.2. Section 367(1) provides that the judgment shali be
dated and signed at the time of pronouncing it. However, it is
quite obvious that unless the judgment is a very short one, this
requirement cannot be satisfied where the judgment is pro-
nounced by dictating in court. ‘Transcribing a dictated judg-
ment will take time. In such cases the judgment can be signed
and dated only when the transcript is ready—which may be some
hours or cven days after the judgment is pronounced. Therefore.
besides re-arranging the matter contained in section 366(1) and
367(1) as we have recommended above, the position regarding
the dating and signing of judgments dictated in court has also to
be stated more clearly.

26.3. We also propose to add a provision to the effect that
when the judgment is pronounced by explaining the substance
of it, the operative part of the judgment should be read out,

26.4. The main paragraph of section 366(1) provides that
the judgment shall be pronounced or its substance explained.
Clause (a) says that this should take place immediately on the
termination of the trial or on a later notified date; and under
clause (6) it should be in the language of the court or in some
language the accused or his pleader understands. Clause (8)
obviously applies to both modes of pronouncing the judgment,
but clause (b) evidently has reference only to explaining the
substance of the judgment, as otherwise it would mean that the
judgment should be written or read out in some language the
accused understands. We think, that the reference to a language

ment,

Dating and sign-
ing of judgment.

Operative
should be
out.

Reference to
language in s,
3661) (०)

unnecessary,

are
read


Reading out
whole judgment
need to be com-
pulsory.

Section 36602).

Section 366 (3)
and 366(4).
Amendment of
Section 366
recommended

236

the accused or bis pleader understands may be safely omitted,
as the court, when “explaining” the substance of the judgment
will ensure that the accused understands what is being
explained.

26.5. The proviso to section 366(1) requires the court to
read out the whole judgment if so requested by cither party. We
think that it would suifice if the judgment cr a copy thercof is
made available for the perusal of cither party. We also propose
to make it clear, that this should be confined to cases where the
judgment is pronounced by explaining its substance. Obviously,
when the whole judgment is read out or dictated, there is 80
point in requiring a copy for perusal.

Section 366(2) provides that the judgment shalt he
meed in the presence of the accused, except in certain
ied 1 where the presence of his pleader is suffi-
7 ent can give rise to difficulties in cases
where there are more accused than one and some of them, out
on bail, fail to appear at the time of judgment. In such cases, the
pronouncement 61 the jud-ment will have to be postponed even
against the accused present in court, till the absconding accused
are apprehended. This, apart from wasting the time of the
court, Will also cause needless harassment to the other accused,

We would, therefore. recommend that a power be given to
the court 19 pronounce judgment in such instances, even if one
or more of the several accused in the case are not present to hear
it, making it clear that the power is to be used only to prevent
undue delay. Truc, even under the present provisions such #
pronouncement will not be an illegality due to the saving provi-
sion in section 366(3); but it would be better to give the court
such power in clear terms than to leave the procedure as 81
irregularity curable under another section. A consequential
amendment? to section 383 will be necessary in order to provide
that in such cases the Magistrate shall issue a warrant for the
arrest of the accused who is absent.

Two other changes also appear necessary in sub-section (2).
It provides that the accused need not be present to hear the
judgment if bis personal attendance during trial had been already
dispensed with and the sentence to be passed is only ove of fine
or if he is acquitted, in both of which cases the presence of the
accused’s pleader js sufficient. We do not think it necessary to
insist on the presence of even the pleader in such cases. Secondly,
the sub-section, as it stands, deals with the cases of the accused
in custody as well as the accused on bail. 1६ would be better, in
the interests of clarity, to provide for these two cases separately.

26.7. No changes are needed in sections 366(3) and 366(4).

26.8. Section 366 may, in the light of the above discussion,
be amended to read as follows :—

Judgment °366.(1) The judgment in every trial in any
Criminal Court of original jurisdiction shall be pronounced

1 See para, 28.5 below.


231

in open court by the presiding officer immediately after the
termination of the trial or at some subsequent time of which
notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders,—

(a) by delivering the whole of the judgment; or
(0) by reading out the whole of the judgment; or

(८) by reading out the operative part of the judgment and
explaining the substance of the judgment.

(2) Where the judgment is delivered under clause (a)
of sub-section (1), the presiding officer shall cause it to be
taken down in short-hand, sign the transcript and every
page thereof as soon as it is made ready, and write on it the
date of the delivery of the judgment in court.

(3) Where the judgment or the operative part thereof
is read out under clause (0) or clause (०) of sub-section
(1), it shall be dated and signed by the presiding officer in
open court, and if it is not written with his own hand, every
page of the judgment shall be signed by him.

(4) Where the judgment is pronounced in the manner
specified in clause (८) of sub-section (1), the whole judg-
ment or acopy thercof shall be immediately made available
for the perusal of the partics or their pleaders free of cost.

(5) Hf the accused is in custody, he shall be brought
up to hear the judgment pronounced.

(6) If the accused is not in custody, he shall be required
by the court to attend to hear the judgment pronounced,
except Where his personat attendance during the trial has
been dispensed with and the sentence is one of fine only or
hic is acquitted. ....... 3

Provided that, where there are more accused than one,
and some of them do not attend the court on the date on
which the judgment is to be pronounced, the presiding
officer may, in order to avoid undue delay in the disposal
of the . pronounce the judgment notwithstanding their
absence.

(7) No judgment delivered by any Criminal Court shall
be deemed te be invalid by reason only of the absence of
any party or his pleader on the day or from the place noti-
fied for the delivery thereof, or of any omission to serve. or
defect in serving. on the partics or their pleaders. or any of
them. the notice of such day and place.

(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit
in any way the extent of the provisions of section 537.”

26.9. We have already considered! that part of section

367(1) which deals with the dating and signing of the judgment.
The remaining part deals with the contents of the judgment. The
same topic is also dealt with in sub-sections (2) and (4). We
recommend that all these provisions be brought together under
ne sub-section. so that one can know at a plance what the

ontents of a judgment should be.

2See para. 26.2 above.

Section 367,


Section 367 and
reasons for sen-
tence in capital
cases,

Pronouncement
of judgment . by
successor.

Section 367(6).

232

No changes are needed in sub-section (3) of section 367.
Sub-scction (5), is relevant only to trials by jury. As this type
of trial is proposed to be abolished, sub-section (5) of section
367 may be omitted.

26.10. A recommendation relevant to section 367 was made
in the Law Commission’s Report! on Capital Punishment, while
considering the question whether a provision requiring the court
to state its reasons for awarding the sentence of death or impri-
sonment for life in a capital case, should be inserted. The
conclusion was thus expressed—

“The replies to question 8 show a considerable body of
opinion which is ia favour of a provision requiring the court
to state its reasons for imposing the punishment either of
death or of imprisonment for life. Further, this would be
a good safeguard to ensure that the lower courts examine
the case as elaborately from the point of view of sentence
as from the point of view of guilt. It would also provide good
material at the time when a recommendation for mercy is
to be made by the court, or a petition for mercy is consi-
dered. Again, it would increase the confidence of the
people, in the courts, by showing that the discretion is
judicially exercised. It would also facilitate the task of the
High Court in appeal or in proceedings for confirmation in
respect of the sentence (where the sentence awarded is that
of death), or in proceedings in revision for enhancement of
the sentence (where the sentence awarded is one of impri-
sonment for life).

Thus, there appears to be sufficient justification for a
provision requiring the court to state its reasons, whenever
it awards either of the two sentences in a capital case. We
recommend the insertion of such a provision in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898.”

We arc also of the same view, and recommend that the section
be amended accordingly. In this connection, it may be noted
that there are certain offences for which the Penal Code prescribes
the punishment as death or in the alternative, life imprisonment
or imprisonment for a term of years. Therefore, the amendment
recommended above should cover these cases also.

26.11. We note that there is no provision in the Code as to
pronouncement of a judgment written by a predecessor. We
considered the question whether any provision on the subject
should be inserted. In our view, it is not proper that in criminal
cases, a judge should pronounce a judgment written by his pre-
decessor. He can, no doubt, make use of the material contained
in the (draft) judgment prepared by his predecessor. But in
that case he is himself responsible for the contents of the jude-
ment.

26.12. Section 367(6) provides that for the purposes of this
section, an order under section 118 or section 123(3) shall be

145th Report (Capital Punishment), paragraph 820-822.


233

deemed to be 2 judgment. Its main object seems to be to ensure
that, in any such order reasons are given separately for the order
as to each person proceeded against. It is, in our view, sufficient
to provide? in section 118 jtself that reasons should be recorded
for an order under that section. No such vision is necessary
for orders under section 123. These orders are passed by
Sessions Judges, who may be expected to give reasons without a
statutory provision.

26.13. Revised on the lines suggested above, section 367
will read as follows :—

“367. (1) Except as otherwise expressly provided by
this Code, every such judgment—

(a) shall be written in the language of the Court of in
English;

(b) shall contain the point or points for determination,
the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision;

(०) shall specify the offence (if any) of which, and the
section of the Indian Penal Code or other law under
which, the accused is convicted and the punishment
to which he is sentenced; and

(d) if it be a judgment of acquittal, shall state ‘the offence
‘of which the accused is acquitted and direct that be
be set at liberty.

(2) When the conviction is uoder the Indian Penal
Code and it is doubtful under which of two sections, or
under which of two parts of the same section, of that Code
the offence falls, the Court shall distinctly express the same,
and pass judgment in the alternative.

(3) When the conviction is for an offence punishable
with death or in the alternative with imprisonment for life
or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgment shall
state the reasons for the sentence awarded.

26.14. No changes are needed in section 368.

26.15. Section 369, as enacted in 1898, provided that “no
Court, other than a High Court, when it has signed its judgment,
shall alter or review the same, except as provided in sections 395
and 484 or to correct a clerical error.” Despite the express
exclusion of the High Courts from the operation of this provision,
they held? that they had no inoplied power to alter or review their
own judgments whether under section 369 or under section 439
or otherwise. It was accordingly proposed in 1921 that the
words “other than a High Court” should be omitted to make it
clear that section 369 conferred no such power on the High
Courts. The Joint Committee which examined the Bill noticed
that one or two other sections in the Code, besides sections 395
and 484, and clause 26 of the Letters Patent of the High Courts,

3 566 pasa. 8.15 above.

2 Queen Empress v. Durga Charan, (1885) LLR. 7 All. 672; Queen
Empress v. 0. P. Fox, (1885) L1.R. 10 Bom. 176 (F.B.}; In the matter
of Gibbons, (1886) LL.B. 14 Cal. 42 (FB.)

Revision of 8०0०
tion 367 tecom-
mended.

and

Langua दि
contents of judg-
ment.

Section 368.

Section 369 appli-
cability to High
Courts.


Amendment
recommended.

High —_ Court's
power of review.

Section 370.

234

empowered the High Courts to revise their judgments. They
accordingly re-drafted the amendment to tead as follows :—

“In section 369 of the said Code, for the words ‘No
Court other than a High Court’, the words ‘Save as other-
wise provided by this Code or by any other law for the time
being in force or, in the case of a High Court established by
Royal Charter, by the Letters Patent of such High Court,
no Court’ shall be substituted; and the words and figures ‘as
provided in sections 395 and 484° shall be omitted.”

Subsequent adaptation in 1950 and formal amendment in 1955
have given the section its present form.

26.16. It is, however, clear that the Letters Patent or other
instrument constituting a High Court are also Jaws for the time
being in force and accordingly the words “or in the case of a
High Court established by the Letters Patent or other instrument
constituting such High Court” are redundant and somewhat
confusing. In fact, the reference to Letters Patent of the older
High Courts is practically obsolete after the insertion of section
411A in the Code. We, therefore, recommend that the words
cited above should be omitted from the section,

26.17. It is to be noted that the judgment referred to in
section 369 iy the judgment of a criminal court in its original
jurisdiction vide section 366(1). The rule in section 369 that
no court shall alter or review ils own judgment except to correct
a clerical error is made applicable by section 424 to the judgment
of any appellate court other than a High Court. The question
whether a High Court has any inherent powcr of reviewing its
judgment in an appeal or revision will be considered later under
section S61A.

26.18. Section 370 relieves a Presidency Magistrate of the
task of writing a detailed judgment setting out the point or points
for determination, the decision thereon, reasons for the decision,
ctc., as provided in section 367 for other Magistrate. He ha:
only to record the essential particulars of the case and the final
order in all cases, and in those cases in which he inflicts imprison-
ment, or fine excecding Rs. 200, or both, a brief statement of the
reasons for the conviction. It will be noticed that under section
411 a sentence of fine not exceeding Rs. 200 is not appealable
and, presumably because of this fact, section 370, clause (i)
does not require a Presidency Magistrate to record the reasons
for the conviction when the fine is within this Jimit. In regard
to sentences of imprisonment, however, the said clause is not
Jogical even where the imprisonment inflicted is not more than
six months and consequently the sentence is not appealable under
section 411, the Presidency Magistrate has to record reasons for
the conviction. Then again, although a judgment of acquittal
is appealable under section 417, the Presidency Magistrate need
not record even a brief statement of the reasons for his decision
which the prosecution might not always find satisfactory. We
consider that it would be more logical and reasonable to provide
in clause (i) of section 370 that, in all cases in which an appeal


235

lies from the final order either under section 411 or under section
417, the Presidency Magistrate should record a brief statement
of the reasons for his decision. This clause should be amended
to read—
“(1) in all cases in which an appeal lies from the final
order either under section 411 or under section 417, a brief
statement of the reasons for the decision.”

26.19. Under sub-section (1) of section 371, a copy of the
judgment has to be given without delay to the accused on his
application. ‘Jhough the section does not say that this should
be a certified copy the Supreme Court has heid! that “whether it
is the accused person who applies for a copy under s. 371, sub-
section (1) and (2) or it is the State which applies for a copy.
the copy supplied by the public officer must be a certified copy.”
In conformity with this interpretation the words “certified copy”
may be substituted for the word ‘copy’.

This sub-section further provides that the copy shall be given
free of cost except in a summons case. Considering that the
main object of the sub-scction is to facilitate the lodging of an
appeal by the accused without avoidable delay, we propose that
the second sentence of sub-section (1) should be amended to
read “such copy shall. in every case where the judgment is appeal-
able by the accused, be given free of cost.”

In cases where the High Court passes or confirms or main-
tains a death sentence, a certified copy of the judgment should,
in our view, be immediately given to the accused whether or not
he applies for it. This would enable him to make immediate
Preparations for an appeal.

Accordingly, sub-section (1) of ४. 371 may be simplified to
read as follows :—

“371. (1) On the application of accused, a certified
copy of the judgment, or when he so desires, a translation
in his own language, if practicable, or in the language of the
Court, shall be given to him without delay. Such copy
shall, in every case where the judgment is appealable by the
accused, be given free of cost:

Provided that where a sentence of death is passed,
confirmed or maintained by the High Court, a certified copy
of the judgment shall be immediately given to the accused
free of cost, whether or not he applies for the same.

Sub-section (2) of s. 371 may be omitted as it relates to
trials by jury and conscquentially the words “or sub-section (2)”
in sub-section (4) may also be omitted. Sub-section (3) does
not require any change.

Since an order under 5. 118 may result in the imprisonment
of the defendant, we think it desirable that the provisions of sub-
section (1) of this section should also apply to any order under

+ State of UP. v. C. Tobit, 1958 S.C.R. 1275, 1280.

Section 371.

Copy of
ment to be
to accused,

judg-
given


236

s. 118. We, thercfore, propose the addition of a new sub-section
(2) in liew of the existing sub-section (2) reading as follows :—
“(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in
relation to an order under section 118 as they apply in
relation to a judgment which is appealable by the accused.”

Seétions 372 and 26.20. No changes are needed in sections 372 aad 373.


CHAPTER XXVHL
SUBMISSION OF SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION

27.3. When the Court of Session passes sentence of death
and the proceedings are submitted to the High Court, section
374 provides that ihe sentence shail not be executed unless it is
coniiimed ty the High Court. 1a an appeal which came before
the Supreme Court, the accused bad been sentenced to death by
the Court of Session but the High Court, holding that section 27
of the Evidence Act was unconstitutional, excluded a statement
admitted under that section and acquitted the accused as the
remaining evidence was got sufficient to establish his guilt.
Against this order of acquittal the State appealed to the Supreme
Court with a certificate under Article 134(1) (९) of the Constitu-
tion granted by the High Court. The Supreme Court decided that
section 27 of the Evidence Act was a valid provision and that, if
the evidence admitted under that section was taken into account,
there was no doubt as to the guilt of the accused. Their Lordships
accordingly sect aside the order passed by the High Court and
restored the order passed by the Court of Session. They
stated? :--

“it may be observed that the sentence of death cannot be
execuicd unless it is confirmed by the High Court. The High
Court has not confirmed the sentence, but in exercise of our
powers under Article 136 of the Constitution, we may pass
the same order of confirmation as the High Court is, by the
Code of Criminal Procedure, competent to pass. We accord-
ingly confirm the sentence of death.”

It is difficult to follow the reference to Article 136; and it is pos-
sible that a reference to Article 142(1) was intended. However
that may be, in view of this decision of the Supreme Court, we do
mot think it is necessary to amend section 374 of the Code for

‘this purpose.
27.2. After passing sentence of death, the Court of Session

is expected to issue a “warrant of commitment under sentence of 3

death” to the Supcrintendent of Jail. While the form of warrant
is set out as form XXXIV in the Fifth Schedule to the Code, it
is not expressly referred to or provided for in section 374 or any-
where else. It is noticed that when the accused is sentenced by
the Court of Session to imprisonment for life, section 383 expressly
provides for the issue of a suitable warrant and the forwar ding of
the accused with the warrant to the jail in which he is to be con-
fined. It is desirable that a similar provision should be made in
section 374 so that there may be specific statutory authority for
holding the accused in prison after the Court of Session has passed
sentence of death and until it is executed in due course. We
recommend that a sub-section should be added as follows :—

“(2) The Court passing the sentence shall commit the
convicted person to jail custody under a warrant.”

4 State of U.P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya. 1961(1} S.C.R. 14, 33.

Section 374 Sup-
reme Court's
power to confirm
in appeal.

Authority to issue
warrant in form


Section 375.

Section 376.
Section 377,

Section 378.

238

27.3. ia view of the abolition of jury trials, sub-section (2).
of section 375 may be formally amended to read :—

“(2) Unless the High Court otherwise, directs, the pre-
sence of the convicted person may be dispensed with when
such inquiry is made or such evidence is taken.”

27.4, No change is needed in section 376.

27.5. Section 377 requires that every confirmation case shall
be heard and decided by a Bench of two or more Judges of the
High Court. The section, however, does not apply to a Judicial
Commissioner's Court which has only one Judge, as in the Union
Territories of Manipur and Tripura. Jt is somewhat anomalous
that a person sentenced to death in either of these Union Terri-
tories does not have the bencfit of two Judges of the Court of
Criminal Appeal reviewing his case as in the rest of India. An
obvious way of removing the anomaly is to extend the jurisdiction
of the Assam High Court to these two Union Territories. How-
ever, since the number of death sentences passed by the two Ses-
sions Judges is very small, the matter is not of much practical
importance. No amendment is proposed in section 377.

27.6. The wording of section 378 is repeated in section 429
which applics when the Judges composing the Court of Appeal
are equally divided in opinion in regard to “the case” heard by
them. The question has frequently arisen under section 429 as
to what exactly is the case that is to be laid before the third Judge,
whether it means the entire case of all the accused and all the
charges in which they were tried, or whether it means the entire
case of a particular accused about whose guilt the Judges are
equally divided in their opinion or whether, even more restrictediy,
it means only the particular point or points of law or of fact on
which there is a difference of opinion. ‘This difficulty does not
appear to have been felt to any noticeable extent with reference
to section 378.

27.7. In any event we do not consider it necessary or desir-
able to amend scction 378 with the object of clarifying the posi-
tion. When for instance five persons are tried together on charges
of a capital offence, two are convicted and sentenced to death
and the others are convicted of lesser offences, the whole proceed-
ings before the Court of Session are submitted to the High Court
for obtaining confirmation of the two death sentences passed in
the casc. If the two Judges hearing the “referred cases” together
with the connected appeals, if any, of the convicted persons, are
agreed that the death sentence of one of them should be confirmed
but divided in opinion as to the other, it is “the case” heard by
the Bench which has to be laid before another Judge together with
the opinion of the two Judges. The matter in regard to which the
third Judec has to deliver a binding and conclusive opinion under
section 378 is not expressly indicated in the section. There can
however be hardly any doubt that it is the matter over which there
is a difference of opinion between the two Judges and that the
third Judge is entitled and bound to consider this matter in all
its aspects and give his opinion so that a conclusive judgment or
order may follow thereon. There is nothing to be gained by
amending or adding to the words used in section 378 which would
only have the effect of fettering the discretion of the third Judge.


239

27.8. In several cases the question has been discussed whether
the third Judge ought to consider himself bound by the vicws
expressed by the two referring Judges on points on which there
was no difference between thom. Under the corresponding pro-
visions in the Letters Patent! of High Courts and in the Code of
Civil Procedure? the view of the majority of all the Judges includ-
ing those who first heard the case prevails in a civil matter. ‘The
position in criminal cases, however, is different from that in civil
cases where clear-cut issucs of fact and law have to be framed and
decided. Ax observed by the Supreme Court? with reference to
section 429, it is for the third Judge to decide on what points, if
any, he will hear arguments and this postulates that he is com-
pletely free to resolve the differences in such manner as he thinks
fit and proper. The position for the purposes of section 378 is
no doubr the same. in our view, no change in the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure is needed on this point, and the matter should be
left to the discretion of the third Judge.

27.9. We may here refer to the amendment of section 378
proposed by the Lowndes Committee in 1917. They stated in
their Report :—

fe think that in confirmation cases, where the Judges
hearing the case are equally divided, it may not always be
sufficient to refer the case to another Judge by whose opinion
it is to be decided. We think that it should be within the power
of the Judges before whom the case was originally heard in
the High Court to insist upon a re-hearing before themselves
and the additional Judge. As in some cases this may not be
feasible. we would aflow the Chief Justice in any such case
to direct a re-hearing before three other Judges.”

That Committee accordingly proposed the addition of the follow.
ing proviso to section 378 :—

“Provided that, if any Judge being a member of such
Bench so require, such case shall be re-heard before them and
another Judge or, if the Chief Justice or the Judicial Commis-
sioner so dircct, before thrce other Judges, and the judgment
or order shail follow the opinion of the majority of the Judges
so te-hearing such case.”

This amendment was not accepted by the Select Commitee
which reported on the Bill in 1922 :—

“The amendment of section 378 has been condemned by
a majority of the Judges who have expressed an opinion on
the Bill. tn view of the fact that the difficulty which the
amendment is intended to meet is probably of rare occurrence
and that the second portion of the proviso will be inapplicable
in the case of Judicial Commissioners’ Courts which do not
at present consist of five Judges, we prefer to leave the law
as it is, and we delete this clause.”

1 See ev, Clause 36, Letters Patent of the Calcutta High Court.

2Section 98.

3 Dharam Singh v. State, (1962) Suppl. 3 S.C.R. 769; Babu v. The
State, AJR. 1965 S.C. 1467, 1470.

* Gazette of India (1922), Part V, pages 263 and 264; Report of the
Select Committee under clauses 99 and 113.

रू



Section 379.

Section 380.

240

27.10. No change is required in section 379.

27.11. Section 380 is ancillary to section 362 which empowers
Courts to release certain convicted first offenders on probation of
good conduct instead of sentencing them to imprisonment. Jo
fact, with the enforcement of the Probation of Offenders Act,
1958, in many States, the utility of section 562 of the Code has
been much reduced. {€ at all it is necessary to retain that section
in the Code, section 380 may appropriately be added to it. We
propose to omit section 380 from this Chapter and consequentially
to alter the heading of the Chapter to “Of the Submission of
Death Sentences for Confirmation.”


CHAPTER NAVI
EXECUTION

28.1. Section 381, as it now stands, is cv ed to cases where
a sentence of death passed by a Court of ion is sent up for
confirmation by the High Court. Whea a sentence of death is
passed by the High Court in appeal or in revision procecdings for
enhancement of sentence, its execution is now left to be governed
by sections 425(2) and 442 and the High Court Rules. As it is
desirable to have a specific provision in regard to this important
matter, we recommend that a new section 381A be inserted after
section 381, as follows :
“381A. When a sentence of death is passed by the High
Court in appeal or in revision, the Court of Session shall, on
receiving the order of the High Court, cause the sentence to

be carricd into effect by issuing a warranl.”

28.2. We propose the insertion of another new section pro-
viding for the postponement of execution of a death sentence in
cases where an appeal against the judgment of a High Court pas-
sing or confirming such sentence can be preferted to the Supreme
Court under the Constitution. Our object ia recommending the
new provision is to ensure that where there is a possibility of
appealing to the Supreme Court, the appeal is not rendered
infructuous by an unfortunately prompt execution of the sentence.

Appeais in capital sentence cases may come up before the
Supreme Court; (i) as of right under sub-clause (a) or (b) of
article 134(1); or (ii) on a certificate of fitness granted by the
High Court under article 132 or 134(1)(c) or (iii) after obtain-
ing special leave from the Supreme Court under article 136 of
the Constitution.

In the first case, since the appeal is as of right, it is clearly
necessary that execution should be postponed until the period of
limitation for preferring the appeal expires. or, if an appeal is filed
within that period, until the appeal is disposed of.

Yn the sccond case, it is only if an application for a certificate
is made to the High Court that there is a reasonable possibility of
appeal. Jf such application is made, execution should be post-
poned until the application is disposed of. If the certificate is
granted, the possibility of appeal becomes almost a certainty, and
the execution should be further postponed till the period of limita-
tion for preferring an appeal expires. Within that period, the
person sentenced should prefer an appeal and obtain a stay from
the Supreme Court.

In the third case, it is sufficient if execution is postponed for
such period as would enable the person sentenced to apply for
special leave to the Supreme Court. Within that period, the
person sentenced can apply for special leave and obtain from the
Supreme Court orders for stay of execution.

Section 381 Death
sentence passed
by High Court
in appeal or revi-
sion.

Execution of
death sentence
passed by High
Court.

Postponement of
execution in case
of appeal to Sup.
reme Court.


New Section
381 B.

Postponement of
execution in case
of appeal to Sup-
reme Court.

Section 382,
Section 383.

Execution of sen-
tence of imprison-
ment.

242

28.3. The new section providing for postponement of execution
pending possibic appeal to the Supreme Court may be as
follows :-—

“381B. (1) Where a person is sentenced to death by the
High Court and an appeal from its judgment lies to the Supreme
Court under sub-clause (a) or (09) of clause (1) of articie 134
of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution
of the sentence to be postponed until the period allowed for
preferring such appeal hs expired, or, if an appeal is preferred
within that period, until such appeal is disposed of.

(2) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed
by the High Court, and the pers: tenced makes an appli-
cation to the High Court for th nt of a certificate under
article 132 or under sub-clause (९) of clause (1) of article 134
of the Constitution, the High Court shall order execution of
the sentence to be postponed until such application is disposed
of by the High Court. or if a certificate is granted on such
application, until the period atlowed for preferring an appeal
to the Supreme Court on such certificate has expired.

£3) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by
the High Court. and the High Court is satisfied that the person
sentenced intends to present a petition to the Supreme Court for
the grant of special leave to appeal under article 136 of the
Constitution, the High Court shalt order the execution of the
sentence to be postponed for such period as it considers suffi-
cient to enable him to present such petition.”

28.4. No change is needed in section 382.

28.5. Under section 383, an accused person sentenced to
imprisonment has to be forwarded with a warrant to “the jail in
which he is or is to be confined”, Section 384, however, refers
to “the jait or other place” indicating the possibility of a con-
victed persons being confined temporarily in a place other than a
jail. Jt is desirable to bring the wording of section 383 into iine
with that of section 384 in this respect.

Secondly. where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment till
the rising of the Court. as is sometimes done, he is simply detained
in custody in the Court premises for the few hours. No warrant
is prepared or sent under section 383, which can be regarded as
a breach of the statutory provision. It is desirable to add a pro-
viso to the section legalising the procedure.

Third!y, ia our discussion’ on section 366, we have suggested
that a suitable provision should be made in section 383 for cases
where a sentence of imprisonment is passed in the absence of the
accused

Accordingly, we recommend that section 383 may be ampli-.
fied and amended as follows :—

“383. (1) Where the accused is sentenced to imprison-
ment for life or imprisonment in cases other than those pro-
vided for by section 381, the Court passing the sentence shall

3 566 para. 26.6 above.


243

forthwith forward a warrant to the jail or other place in which
he is, or is to be, confined, and, unless the aecused is already
confined in such jail or other piace, shall forward him to such
jail or other place, with the warrant :

Provided that where the accused is sentenced to imprison-
ment till the rising of the Court, it shail not be necessary 10
prepare or forward a warrant to a jail, and the accused may
be confined in such place as the court may direct,

(2) Where the accused is not present in Court when he is
sentenced to such imprisonment as is mentioned in sub-section
(1), the Court shall issue a warrant for his arrest for the pur-
pose of forwarding him to the jail or other place in which he
ts to be confined; and in such case, the sentence shall commence
on the date of his arrest.”

28.6. No change is nceded in sections 384 and 385.

28.7. Section 386 lays down the two methods by which the
Court passing a sentence of fine may take action for realising it.
One is to issue a warrant for levying the amount by attachment
and sale of any movable property belonging to the offender, By
virtue of section 4(2) the expression “movable property” has
the meaning assigned to it by section 22 of the Indian Penal Code,
and not the wider meanine given in the General Clauses Act,
1897; only “corporeal property” may be attached and sold for
realising the fine imposed by a criminal court. This would appear
to exclude actionable claims, debts, salary not due etc. from the
court’s process. Where the offender has only a share in movable
Property belonging to a joint family questions have arisen in the
Courts whether the share can be attached and sold, and if so,
whether attachment can be by way of scizure of the property.
We do not, however, consider it necessary to clarify and elabo-
rate this clause. It is primarily intended to furnish the Court
with a rough and ready method of seizing and selling tangible
goods belonging to the offender. especially when the fine to be
tealised is not a large sum, and it can be left at that.

28.8. The second method laid down in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) and sub-section (3) is cumbrous and time consum-
ing. The Collector to whom the warrant is sent has to take steps
like anv other decree-holdcr in a civil court for recovery of the
fine. This appears to be a waste of time. Once payment of an
amount has been judicially ordered, there is no reason why the
amount due to the State shoutd not be recovered like any other
monetary demand of the State. We recommend that a provision
authorising recovery of the fine by the Collector as an arrear of
Jand revenue mav be substituted in place of clause (b).

It appears that there is some uncertainty as to how far pro-
perty exempt from attachment under the Code of Civil Procedure
is exempt when the Collector proceeds under clause (b). In
view of the changed procedure which we propose in place of
clause (9), it is unnecessary to discuss this point elaborately.

28.9. Under the proviso to section 386(1), if the offender
has undergone the whole of the imprisonment in default of Pay-
ment of fine, no court shall issue a warrant for levy of the fine

Section 384 and
385.

Section 386—Levy
of fine by attach~
ment and sale of.
movable Pro-
perty.

Fine to be made
recoverable as.
arrear of Jand
Tevenue.

Section 386 (1),

proviso.


244

unless, for special reasons to be recotded in. writing, it considers
10 necessary to do so. The object of the proviso and the special
reasons that can possibly arise were dealt with at jength in a
Bombay case! in these words :—

“The proviso applies in terms only to the issue of a fresh
warrant and does not require the withdrawal of a warrant
already issued before expiration of the sentence in default of
payment. But I think that in dealing with such existing
warrants the Court should follow the policy which seems to
have inspired the proviso to section 386.

“That policy appears to be that in general an offender
ought not to be required both to pay the fine and to serve the
sentence in default. But the proviso enables a warrant to be
issued for recovery of the fine, even if the whole sentence in
default has been served, if the Court considers that there are
special reasons for issuing the warrant. I apprehend that
the special reasons should be reasons accounting for the fact
that the fine has not been recovered before the sentence in
default has been served, and any reasons which are directed
to that point would be relevant. It may be that the authori-
ties, through no negligence on their part, did not know of the
existence of the property or the accused may have inherited
property after be served his sentence in default; or there may
not have been time to execute the warrant. Matters of that
sort would all be special reasons for issuing a warrant after
the sentence in default had been served; and I think, in the
same way, they are reasons justifying the Court in refusing
to withdraw a warrant already issued.

“In the present case, in my opinion, there are special
reasons, though not quite those which were recorded by the
Judge. 1 think that a special reason for not withdrawing the
warrant is that before the sentence in default had been served
the authorities had taken steps to enforce this warrant by
levying execution upon the immovable property of the appli-
cant, and the delay which has taken place is not, in my
opinion, shown to be due to any default on the part of the
authorities. The learned Judge himself gave as his reasons
for not withdrawing the warrant that the offence was a serious
one and the complainant had been allotted part of the fine.
In my view, reasons of that sort are not relevant because they
do not account for the fine not having been recovered before
the service of the sentence in default.”

Fine should be 28.10. We notice that in the above judgment the fact that
compens ble when the complainant has been allotted part of the fine was not con-
been ordered. sidered a relevant special reason for purposes of the proviso as
it stands. A contumacious offender should not, in our opinion,
be permitted to deprive the aggrieved party of the smali compen-
sation awarded to it by the device of undergoing the sentence of
imprisonment in default of payment of the fine. When an order
under section 545 has been passed for payment of expenses or
compensation out the fine, recovery of the fine should be

5 Digamhar v. Emperor, ALR. 1935 Bom. 160. 163. 162 (Basumont


245

pursued, and in such cases, the fact that the sentence of
imprisonment in default has been fully undergone should not be
a bar to the issue of a warrant for levy of the fine. We Tecom-
mend that the proviso to section 386(1) should make this clear.

28.11, Section 386(2) contemplates the making of rules by
State Governments!. The desirability of framing such rules has
been pointed out in a Bombay case*. Where such rules are not
made and a claim is made by a third party to the property
attached under section 386(1)(a), the question may arise what
procedure should be followed. One view is, that in such a case the
only thing that can be done by the Magistrate is to stay the sale
and refer the claimant to a Civil Court. But according to an-
other view, the procedure given in section 88(6A) ef seq. (which
js analogous to order 21, rule 58, Civil Procedure Code} should
be followed®-'. The rules should provide for the procedure to
be followed when such claims are made.

28.12. Section 286(3) can be shortened in view of the amend-
ment which we propose in section 386(1)(b). The matter con-
tained in the main paragraph requires to be modified; the proviso
may be retained with such verbal changes as are necessary in view
of the changes to be made of the main paragraph.

28.13, Section 386 may accordingly be amended to read as
follows :

“386. (1) Whenever an offender has been sentenced to
pay a fine, the Court passing the sentence may take action
for the recovery of the fine in either or both of the following
ways, that is to say, it may—

(a) issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by attach-

ment and sale of any movable property belonging to
the offender;

(b) issue a warrant to the Collector of the district,
authorising him to realise the amount as arrears of
land revenue from the movable or immovable _pro-
perty, or both, of the defaulter :

Provided that, if the sentence directs that in default of
payment of the fine, the offender shall be imprisoned, and if
such offender has undergone the whole of such imprisonment
in default, no Court shall issue such warrant unless, for spe-
cial reasons to be recorded in writing, it considers it neces-
sary to do so, or unless it has made an order for the payment
of expenses or compensation out of the fine under section 545.

(2) The State Government may make rules regulating the
manner in which wartants under clause (a) of sub-section
(1) are to be executed, and for the summary determination

1A letter inquiring about the present position has been sent to the
si October. 1968. For the old U.P. Rules, see Harimal, AR, 1933

re Pandurang, A.W.R. 1932 Bom. 476, 477.
rasanna v. Emperor, 1.L.R. 55 Mad. 1041; A.LR. 1932 Mad. 538.

agan Lal v. Memunabi, AX.R. 1955 Savrashtra 86, 87, para, 3
vase-law),

Section 386 (2)—~
Rules for settling
claims necessary.

Section 386 (3).

Amendment of
Section 386 re-
commended.
Warrant for leavy
of fine.


Section 387.

Section 387A.

A Bombay pro-
vision.

Section 388
to 395,

Section 396.
Execution of sen-

tence on escaped
convicts.

246

of any claims made by any person other than the offender in
respect of any property attached in execution of such
wartant.

(3) Where the Court issues a warrant to the Collector
under clause (b) of sub-section (13, the Collector shall realise

the amount in accordance with the law relating to re-
covery of arrears of land revenue, as if such warrant were a

certificate issued under such law.

Provided that no such warrant shall be executed by the
arrest or detention in prison of the offender.”

28.14. Under section 387, a warrant issued under section
386(1)(a) (warrant for the attachment and sale of movable
property) can be executed within the local limits of the jurisdic-
tion of the Court issuing it, and, if endorsed by the District Magis-
tate or Chief Presidency Magistrate concerned, also outside such

local limits.

No amendment of substance is required in section 387.

28.15. Section 387A deals with the levy of fine under a war-
rant issued in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. If, as we have
recommended clsewhere in this Report, the Code is extended to
that State, this special provision will not be necessary and the
section may be omitted. In the meantime, until the Code is 50
extended, section 387A will require a slight formal amendment
to bring it into line with the amendments proposed above in clause
(0) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) of section 386. In
section 387A, for the words “by execution according to civil
process against the movable or immovable property, or both, of
the offender” there should be substituted the words “as if it were
an arrear of land revenue.”

28.16. We have considered an additional provision made in
the Code by a Bombay amendment and numbercd section 387AA,
for the recovery by executive Magistrates of fines and penalties
imposed under special laws. The necd for such a provision is
not very clear, and in any event, it docs not appear to have been

felt in any other State.

28,17. Section 388 and 389 need no change. Section 390 to
395 have already been repealed.

28.18. Scction 396 is not well-constructed. It may be re-
drafted as follows :—

*396. (1) When a sentence of death, imprisonment for
life or fine is passed under this Code on an escaped convict,
such sentence shall. subject to the provisions hereinbefore con-
tained, take effect immediately.

(2) When a sentence of imprisonment for a term is par
ed under this Code on an escaped convict,—

(a) if such sentence is severer in kind than the ser
which such convict was undergoing when he es
the new sentence shall take effect immediate


(b)

- (3)

| (a)
t

)

247

if such sentence is not severer in kind than the sen-
tence which such convict was undergoing when he
escaped, the new sentence shall take effect after he
has suffered imprisonment for a further period equal
to that which, at the time of his escape, remained
unexpired of his former sentence.

For the purposes of sub-section (2},—

a sentence of imprisonment with solitary confine-
ment shall be deemed to be scvercr in kind than a
sentence of the same description of imprisonment
without solitary confinement; and

a sentence of rigorous imprisonment shall be deemed
to_be sevezer in kind than a sentence of simple im-
prisonment with or without solitary confinement.”

28.19. No changes are required in sections 397 and 398.

28.20, Section 399 is in force only where the Reformatory
Schools Act, 1897, is not in force. Furthermore, the Children’s
Acts in force in certain States and Union Territories contain pro-
visions which practically supersede those of section 399 of the
Code. This section is thus obsolete and may be omitted,

28.21. No change is needed in section 400,

Section 397 and
398.

Section 399,

Section 400,


Provisions

lary to

tation,

Prerogative

mercy
1819,

ancil-

powers
under the Consti-

in

of

Eng-

CHAPTER XXIX

SUSPENSIONS, REMISSIONS AND COMMUTATION
OF SENTENCES

29.1. The provisions of this Chapter are ancillary to the
powers conferred on the President of India and the Governors
of Staics by article 72 and article 161, respectively, of the Con-
situation. Both these articles first refer to the power to grant
pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment, ard
then, to the power to suspend, remit or commute the sentence,
of any person convicted of any offence. Section 401 contains
detailed provisions in regard to the suspensions and remissions
of sentences, while section 402 deals with the commutation of
sentences. Following article 72(1)(c) of the Constitution,
section 402A makes the powers conferred by sections 401 and
402 on the State Governments in respect of the State field of
offence exercisable also by the Central Government.

29.2. It is noteworthy that these section do not circumscribe
in any way the power of the President and Governors to grant
pardons, repricves and respites, which is analogous to the sove-
reign’s prerogative of mercy in England. This is described as

follows by a writer? on English constitutional law :-~

“The Sovereign, acting in this country by the Home
Secretary, may pardon offences of a public nature which
are prosecuted by the Crown. A pardon may generally
be granted before or after conviction. No pardon may be
pleaded as a bar to impeachment (Act of Settlement,
1700),2 although some scottish lords impeached for the
rebellian of 1715 were pardoned after conviction; nor may
the Crown remit the penalties prescribed by the Habeas
Corpus Act, 1679, for sending a prisoner out of the realm; and
the Crown ‘cannot by a pardon deprive a third party of his
rights.

A pardon is either free or conditional. An example
of the latter is where a death sentence is commuted to
a term of imprisonment for life. The Home Secretary acts
either on a recommendation to mercy by the Judge who
passed the sentence, or on a petition from the criminal or
others on his behalf. In considering whether to advise a
pardon the Home Secretary is responsible to the Sovereign
and not to Parliament. The practice whereby the decision
is made by the Home Secretary and not by the Sovereign
dates from the beginning of Queen Victoria’s teign.

The Crown may also grant a reprieve, which tempo-
rarily suspends the execution of sentence; or (within statu-
tory limits) may remit the whole or part of the penalty.”

TO. Hood Phillips. Constitutional Law (1962), p. 256
2८1. Danby's case (1679) 11 St. Tr. 599
® Thomas v. Sorrell, (1674) Vaughan 330.


249

29.3. In india, as in England, “the effect of a pardon, or
what is sometimes called a ‘free pardon’ is to clear the person
from all infamy and from ali consequences of the offence for
which it is granted and from all statutory or other disqualifica-
tions following zpon conviction. 1६ makes him, as it were, 8
n. But the same effect docs not follow on a mere
n which stands on a different footing altogether. An
order of remission does not wipe out the offence; it also does
not wipe out the ccnviction. AH that it does is to have an effect
‘on the exccution of the sentence. x x x ‘The judicial power and
the executive po over semtences are readily distinguishable’,
observed Justice Sutherland. To render a judgment is 2 judicial
function. To carry the judgment into cffect is an executive
func'ion. To cut short a sentence by an act of clemency is an
exercise of executive power which abridges the enforcement of

the judgment but does not alter it qua judgment’.

29.4. In connection with the grant of “free pardon” to a
convicted persen, we have considered a suggestion of the Minis-
try of Home Affairs that the Government should be required to
consult the appropriate court before granting pardon. In this
suggestion it is stated that where pardon is proposed to be grant-
ed on the ground of miscarriage of justice or discovery of new
evidence, the practice in England is to consult the Judges and
3 reference has heen made to section 19 of the Criminal Appeal
Act. 1907.2. This section, however, does not go to the length
of providing that a reference must be made in every case but
leaves it entircly to the discretion of the Secretary of State. We ate
not aware whether it is invariably the practice in England to
refer the whole case or particular points to the Court of Appeal
before exercising the prerogative of mercy. However that may
be, since the power to grant pardons is derived from the Con-
stitution, it would, in our view, be hardly appropriate to lay
down by statute the procedure for the exercise of the power,
even if it were constitutionally permissible, a matter about which
we have some doubts Nor do we sce any compelling need to
do <o. It will be noticed that, even in regard to suspensions and
remissions of sentences, prior consultation of the court is not
mad: compulsory under section 401(2) of the Code. And it is
verv seldom, if ever, that the Government seeks the opinion of
the orcsiding judee of the court under this section.

‘Sarat Chandra Rabha |. Khacendranath, (1961) 2 S.C.R. 137, 138.

2 This section as recently amended by the Administration of Justice
Act, 1960, reads—

“Nothing in this Act shat affect -he orerogative of mercy. but
. the Secretary of State, on an application made to bim by 8 person con-
victed on indictment of without any such application, may. if be

thinks fit at any time. either——

(a) sefer the whole case to the Court of Criminal Appeal and the
suse should ihen be treated for all purposes as an appect to that
‘ourt by the rerson convicted; or

(b) If he desires the assurance of the Court of Criminal Appeat
en any pomt a ising in the case. refer that point to the Court of
‘criminal Appeat for their opinion thereon, and the Court shall con-
ider the point so referred and furnish the Secretary of State with
their opinton thereon.” ‘

Effect of grantiog
pardon,

Consulting the
Court fore
granting pardon,


Nature of

the

other powers.

Scope of S
401 not to
larged,

Generat
sion as to

jection
be en-

provi-
effect

of remission of
commutation of

sentence
desirable.

not

250

29.5, As mentioned eattier, Articles 72 and 161 of the C
stitution first refer to the power to grant pardons, repricves.
respitcs or remissions of punishments, and पिया, io the power

to send, remit or commute the sentence, cf any person con-
victed of any oifence. “Reprieve” mcans 10 take back or with-
draw a ce for a time, the effect be! imply ta suspend

10 more than a temporary
first step in com-
77 means delaying
yunishnicat, specially in the case death se id
meas much the same as a reprieve. It would seem
i repeieve or respite of puni i is practically indistin-
guishable from suspending the execution ef the sentence award-
2 coure for a temporary pel
the Great Ses
same as a redu
(¢.g., amount of the fir
awarded) without changing
ans the alteration of
d, as ind

the execu.ion of the sentence. It i
postpenement and, in Engla

९ bur latterly
quantum

ed in section 402 of

pressions in Articles

29.6. The use of_these two sets of
[ए to section 295 of

72 and 161 of the Constitution is trac
the Goverrmeet of India Act, 1935.  Sub-section (1) of this
section referred to the power of the Governor-General-in-Council
to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted by a Court, while sub-scction (2) referred to the right
of the Crown to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions
of punishments. “The Constitution has lumped together both
these powers and placed them on the same faoting. The over-
lap that obviously exists does not harm. There is, however,
no need to enlarge the scope of section 401 of the Code so
to cover expressly pardons, reprieves and respites besides sus-
pensinns and remissions.

29.7. The question of inserting in the Cod: 4. provision
on the lines of section 69 of the Criminal Jusiice Act. 1948,
was raised during the discussions before us. This seciion pro-
vides thai “where Hee Majesty pardons any persar who has
been sentenced to death on condition that he serves a term of
imprisonment, that person shall be deemed io have 0०९1 sen-
tence’ by the Court before which he was convicted to imprison-
ment for the said term. Tt was sugzested for example that if a
person 9 s ced to imprisonment for a term by the court
and a part of this sentence was remitted by the State Govern-
ment, or the sentence was commuted to one of fine. the con-
victs.| person should be deemed to have been <2nteaced to the
shorter tori of imprisonment or, as the cass : to fine
he the Court. This could be of practical importance be-

mans: Acts provide for collateral dicqualifications in the
case ef a person convicted for an oTence and sentenced to
imprisons ४ a specified minimum term. We have. how-
ever. come to the conclusion that the gravity of the offence for
which the law provides such disqualification should depend on
the sentence awarded by the Court and not on the view which
the State Government may take while remitting or commuting



251

the sentnce. in any event, this is essentially a question of policy
and if such aa ameadment is considered desirable in the context of
tr speck bay. it may more appropriately be made in

प्रा Was that there should be a pro-
mesty” which would relieve the appropriate
ranent from the neces: of passing separais of
wn atd tele in_every individual case. fn our opinion.
an aiagadment of the Code for this purpose is not necessary.
Once the pol'cy of granting a “genera; amnesty” for certain cate-
gorics of convicted prisoners is decided upon by the Govern-
meat, it is hord}y desirable that the Government should pass a

oneral order a ave it 10 be applied to individual cases by
e@ prison autho

Lies,

9, Sub-cel (4A) ४ serted in section 401 by the
et Act of 1923 “to make it clear that the power to
omit sentences conferred by section 401 can be exercised in
2 case of orders of a penal nature, e.g., under section 565
the Code.”! ft covers also sentences passed by tribunals
ations and ordinances.? Though a literal
ms of sub-sections (1) to (4)
ases mnentoned in sub-section (4A) may not always be
st created any practical difficulty. We do
catory amendment of sub-section (4A) i

Pradesh amendment cf 1948 has added
authority” after the words “criminal court”
order to confer power on the State
ordars passed by quasi-ludicial ar exe-
entivs outhorilies under other la 14 our opinion, however,
ti le is net the to make such 9 provision.
Te ould be more apnropriate to provide for it in the soeci:!
faw Ac ich the other authority can pass orders restraining
tie Mberty ef a person or imposinz a Jiability on him

ion
Goveremont to

29.10. Sub cciion (1) of section 492 enables she wppro-
priate Governm nmute sentences without the consent of
: wral provision has, hawever, to

and S5 of the Indian Penal Code which
contain special provisio in revard to commutation of sentences
of death and of imprisonment for life. The definition of “appro-
” contained in sub-section (3) of section 402
5 that contained in section SSA of
ft wonkd obviously be desizeble 16
an and to state the law in one place. In
e एज definition of “aporopriate Government” in section
4N2(35, the roforonce in the State Government is somewhat
५5 Will Do noticed thar clause (b) of section SSA
Pons te specifies the particular State Gov.

men! of the State within which the offender is sentenced”.

‘Statement of Objects and Reasons, dated 16th February, 1921.
* Report of the Select Committee, dated 26th June, 1922.

Provision for
general ameesty
not necessary.

Section 401 (4A).

Power to com-
mute sentences.


Section” 402, re-
vised: sections
54, 55 and 558 of
TPC. to be omit-
ted,

Power to com-~

mute sentence.

252

29.11. We, therefore, propose that section 54, 55 and 55SA
may be omitted from the Indian Penal Code and their substance

incorporated in section 402 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
This section may be revised as follow:

“402. (1) The appropriate Government may, without

the consent of the person sentenced,—

(a) commute a sentence of death, for any other punish-

ent provided by the Indian Penat Code;

(0) commute a sentence of imprisonment for प्रा... for
imprisonment of either description for a tern. not
exceeding fourteen years or for fine,

(c) commute a sentence of rigorous imprisonment. for
simple imprisonment for any :erm to which that
person might have been sentenced or for fine;

(d) coraniute a sentence of simple imprisonment, for
fine.

(2) In this section and in section 401, the expression
“appropriate Government” means—

(a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against,
or the order referred to in sub-section (4A) of
section 401 is passed under, any law relating to 8
matter to which the executive power of the Uniow
extends, the Central Government; and

(b) in other cases, the Government of the State within
which the offender is sentenced or the said order
is passed.”

29.12. The power to suspend or remit sentences under sec-
tion 401 and the power to commute sentences under section 402
are thus divided between the Central Government and the State
Government on the constitutional lines indicated in Articles 72
and 161. If, for instance, a person is convicted at the same
trial for an offence punishable under the Arms Act or the
Explosives Act and for an offence punishable under the Indian
Penal Code and sentenced to different terms of imprisonment
but running concurrently, both Governments will have to pass
orders before the sentences are effectively suspended, remitted
or commuted. Cases may occur where the State Government’s order
simply mentions the nature of the sentence remitted or com-
muted and is treated as sufficient warrant by the prison autho-
tities though strictly under the law, a corresponding order of the
Central Government is required in regard to the sentence for
the offence falling within the Union List. The legal provisions
are, however, clear on the point and we do not consider that
any clarification is required.

29.13. It has been suggested that there are a few types of
cases in which the Central Government jis vitally concerned
though the offence is against a law relating to a matter to which
the executive power of the State Government extends and as
such the authority to suspend, remit or commute the sentence
is the State Government. Important instances are offenoss
investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment, offences

ड़

he


253

involving misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to,
Central Government property and offences committed by Central
Government servants in the discharge of their officiat duties.
Sf a Siatz Government chooses to take a lax view of these
offences and io exercise its powers of remission and commuta-
tion unduly liberally, it is bound to create difficulties 0: adminis-
tration for the Central Government. We feei it desirable that
in such cases where the Central Govrnment is obviously con-
cerned in the proper enforcement of the penal provisions,
including the execution of sentences awarded by Court, the State
Government should be required to exercise its powers of remis-
sion and commutation only in consultation with the Central
Government.

29.14. We. therefore, propose that a new section 402B may
be added in this Chapter.

“402B. The powers conferred by sections 401 and 402
upon the State Government to remit or commute a sentence
shall, in any case where the sentence is for an offence—

(i) which was investigated by the Delhi Special Police
Establishment constituted under the Dethi Special
Police Establishment Act, 1946, or

(ii) which involved the misappropriation or destruction
of, or damage to, any property belonging to the
Central Government, or

(iii) which was committed by a person in the service of
the Central Government while acting or purporting
to act in the discharge of his official duty,

be exercised by the State Government only in consultation
with the Central Government.”

Central Govern
ment to be con-
sulted in case of
certain sentences,


Section 403 and
article 20,

Section 403 (2),

Section 403 (5).

CHAPTER XXX
PREVIOUS ACQUITTALS OR CONVICTIONS

30.1. The rules of criminal process, known to lawyers as
autrefois acquit and autrefois convict, find their verbal expression
in our Code in section 403 and are considered so important
that a separate Chapter is assigned to them. The principle on
which the rules rest is that “a man may not be put twice in
jeopardy for the same offence”. This principle is recognised in
our Constitution in article 20. The rule does not rest on any
doctrine of estoppel.

Broadly stated the rule is that a person once acquitted or
convicted of an offence may not again be tried lor the same
offence. Article 20 does not in terms maintain 3. previous
aequittal: but section 403 does, and goes on to explain in detail
the full implications of the expression “same oilence’. Seven
illustrations accompany this section explaining in concrete terms
the different situations which the Courts may have to deal with. No
particular difficulty in understanding the meaning of these pro-
visions appears to have been felt and we do not, therefore,
suggest any change in the language. Nor is any change neces-
sary in the general scheme employed in section 403.

30.2. Sub-section (2) of section 403 permits a person
acquitted of any offence to be afterwards tried for any distinct
oifence for which he might have been separately charged at the
former trial under section 235(4). This is as it should 0०.
A suggestion has, however, been made that the second trial
should be beld within some specified period of limitation so that
the accused is not kept under suspense for ever. We do not
think any idea of imitation can be safely introduced into criminal
trials, public interest demands that an offence should be
ordinarily punishable whenever the offender cun be conveniently
tried. We are not, therefcre, accepting the suggestion.

3. Sub-section (5) of section 403 says: “Nothing in this
section shall affect the provisions of section 26 of the General
Claus . 1897", This section provides that when aa act or
omission constitutes an offence under two or more enactments,
then the offender shail be liable to be prosecuted under either
or any of these enactments, but shall not be liable to be punished
iwice for the same offence. {It has been said in certain decided
cases! that since prosecution under “cither enactment” is permit-
ted under this eeneral provision, it follows that the acquittal of a
person under one enactment would not be a bar to his trial
under the second enactment, even when the facts constituting
the offence were the same. We think these observations go too
far, as the intention of section 403 obviously is to prevent the
trial of a person twice on the same facts. However, out of the

2 Rassol, ALR. 1959 Mys, 136; K. B. Prabhu १. Emp. ALR, 1944
Mad. 369; Abdul Ahmad, ALR. 1952 All. 957, 599.


255

cases we have mentioned, two were actually decided oa other
grounds, and do not create any hindrance in the way | of the
View we have expressed. We are 901, therefore, proposing any
change in the luneudge of sub-section (53 which does not inter-
fere with the main principle underlying section 403.

304, The Expianation added to the section says that
dismissal of a compiaint, the stopping of proceedings under
section 249, the discharge of the accuwed or any entry made
upon a charge under section 273 is Act an acquittal within the
meaning of this sectiun”. A suggestion has been made! for
modifying the explanation by excluding an order of discharge
made by a Court after enquiry on the merits. the argument being
that if the whole evidence has been considered and found in-
sufficient to sustain 8 conviction, it is not very diflereat from
an order of acquittal and ought, in law, to rank with it. The
difficulty about this su: eestion, however, is that wh le the line
between a discharge and an acquittal akable, no such
line can be drawn between an order of discharge made “on the
merits” and an order of discharge made otherwise; and should
the consideration of the whole evidence be made the test, then
a controversy will arise in most cases whether the “whole evi-
dence” was or Was not considered. The prevailing practice 1s.
that if an order of discharge has been made aiter fuil and proper
consideration of the evidence, the Courts will not permit a re-
opening of the same matter; ‘land that practice should, in our
opinion, be sufficient to prevent any unnecessary harassment.
We do not, therefore, recommend any change in the Explanation
ns retards discharge of the accused. Since we are proposing*
the omission of section 273, the words “or any entry mads upon
a charge under section 2737 will have to be omitted from the
Explanation

30.5. In a case decided* by the Supreme Court in 1956.
certain observations were made lendiny support to a s tement
of the Privy Council that the maxim rev judicata. pro veritate
accipitus is no iess enplicable to criminal than to civil proceed-
ings. ‘The decision of the case did not depend on 8 rate,
but those observations have been reneated ia a few subsequent
cases.-5 It has therefore been suggested to us " that the Si
Court has perhaps introduced somethine new into ४१ 403,
EPC. which is not justified and that the Code should in terms
forbid the use of the doctrine of res judicata or, as it is some-
times called “issue estonpel”, in criminal ce Alternatively,
it has been suggested that the view expressed j 1 ५
case should be codified and put into section 403.

30.6. We think thar section 403 has nething to do with any
question of estoppel, and it must stand by itscif’ That does not,
however. rule out the possibility of prttt so the Code some

3 5, 3(20/56-L.C. Part गा, $. No. 52 (Suggestion of a High Court)

4See para, 23.1 above.
3 Pritam Sinvh ४. The State AUR. 1956 S.C. 413, 422.

व Manipur Administration v. Bira Singh, ALR. 1965 S.C. 87.

& Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab, ATR. 1965 S.C. 83, 86.
जग ३(2)/55-..0. Pt. वा, 5. No. 33(a) (Suggestion of a High Court

Explanation t0
Section 403.

fssue estoppel in
sriminal cases,

Should issue ८७-
toppel be provided
in the Code?


256

rule of “issue estoppel” if it be otherwise desirable. We feet
however that legislation on such a matter would at present be
unwise. We find from the reported cases that our Supreme Court
and our High Courts have not had proper opportunity yet of
considering ali the implications of the rele, and any hasty legis-
lation may by its rigidity create difficulties. We may, in this
connection, mention what Lord Devlin recently said in the House
of Lords :#

“The truth is that for estoppel on issues to work satis-
factorily the issues need to be formulated with some pre-
cision. in civil suits, this is usually done as a matter of
record : in criminal process, it is not. If issue estoppel
is going to be introduced into the criminal law, the proper
basis for it is a system of special verdicts on separate issues.
But that would be to introduce a profound change into the
working of our law which | am not prepared at present to
countenance,

Then since estoppel is available to both parties in civil
law, there is the question whether it should be made avail-
able to the prosecution in criminal law. No one so far
has advocated that it should. But is it necessary in the
interests of justice to give the defence unreciprocated advan-
tage? The defence rightly enjoys the privilege of not
having to prove anything; it has only to raise a reasonable
doubt. Is it also to have the right to say that a fact which
it has raised a reasonable doubt about is to be treated as
conclusively established in its favour ?”

These considerations have not yet been weighed in our Courts,
and it is we think too early to say what kind of rule would be
useful for our conditions. We cannot therefore at present accept
cither suggestion.

1 Connelly v, Director of Public Presecutiens. (1964) A.C. 1254;
(1964) 2 All ER. 401.



CHAPTER XXXI
APPEALS

31.1. Section 404 lays down the general principle that no
sneal shall lic except as provided for by the Code or any other
; far the time being in force. No change is needed here.

31.2. Section 405 provides that an appeal from an order
rejecting an application under section 89 of the Code shall lie
to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from sentence of the
court passing the order. No change is indicated here also.

31.3. Under section 406, a person who has been ordered
under section 118 to give security for keeping the peace or for
zood behaviour may appeal, if such order is made by a Presidency
Magistrate to the High Court, and if made by any other Magistrate
to the Court of Session. It was suggested that a proviso to this
scetion, omitted by the amendment in 1955, to the effect that in
any district specified by the State Government appeals from the
orders under section 118 made by a Magistrate other than the
District Magistrate or Presidency Magistrate shal} lie to the Dis-
trict Magistrate (and not to the Court of Session) should be re-
enacted “for the effective control of criminal administration”.
The suggestion cannot, however, be accepted. [t is not in con-
formity with the scheme of separation to vest appellate powers in
the District Magistrate. We do not therefore recommend any
change in this section.

31.4. Section 406A provides that “any person aggrieved by
an arder refusing to accept or rejecting a surety under section 122
may appeal against such order,
(a) if made by a Presidency Magistrate, to the High Court;
(b) if made by the District Magistrate, to the Court of
Session; or
(९०) if made by a Magistrate other than the District Magis-
trate, to the District Magistrate.”

Tn clause (a), the formal substitution of “Metropolitan Magis-
trate” for “Presidency Magistrate” will have to be made. While
no change is necessary in clause (b), we think that in clause
(९) also, the appellate authority should be the Court of Session,
and not the District Magistrate. The hearing of the appeal is
a purely judicial function, and after separation this function. ought
to be vested in the Court of Session. We accordingly recommend
that clauses (9) and (०) should be combined (as in section 406)
to read—

“(b) if made by any other Magistrate, to the Court of
Session.”

31.5. Section 407 which was repealed in 1955, provided for
an appeal to the District Magistrate from a conviction by a magis-
trate of the second or third class. Now, under the amended

iThe same recommendation was made by tho Law Commission ia ite
14th Report; see Vol. 2, page 798, pata 2.

Section 404,

Section 405.

Section 406.

Section) 406A,

Section 487 (Re-
peated).


section 409.

Section 409(2),

258

section 408, such 2ppeals lie to the Court of Session. We think
that these appeal: cll be heard by the Chie! Judicial Magis-
ircie of the di: Ws Wold not oaly reiicve the Court of
5 sunount of fess important work but siso help
वा Magistrate in supervising the work of the
junior magistrates.!

Sh.6. provides Uiat un appeai from a sentence
fincludi ४ or order under section 380) passed by an
Assistant es Judec. District Magistrate or any other Magis-
trate, to the Court of Session. The section is subject to

One lays down that where an Assistant Sessions
istrate empowered under section 30 passes a sen-
ment of over 4 years the appeal sirall lie to the

anid the other that where a Mavistrate convicts a
sedition under section 124A o. the Indian Penal Code
shall fic 10 the F

iwo |

ion, all appeals irom sentences pas.ed by Assistant
Sessions Judges, or Section 30 Magistrates, irrespective of the
erity of the sentences. should lic to the Court of Session.
5 70 need for the special provision that where the sentence
imprisonment for more than 4 years, the appeal
Ww Court, The Joad on the Hich Court will be
lightened to a small extent by transterring these appeals to. the
Court of Session. (‘There will be no Macistrates empowered
under section 30 under owe scheme)

The sucond proviso resarding appeal from a conviction by a
Magisizate for sedition may also be omitted. ‘Tria sedition
are rare 2nd the appeals in question would be rarer stil, in any

there is no veod reason why they should not lie to the
Court of Session,

Deals from sentences passed
ited as under the proposed
strict Magistrates will not hold uny trials.
ion 380 should be replaced by a refyrance
Ss 1 1$ NEW proposed to combine section 380 with

should be 0!

ion
Assistant Sessions Judge if it is from a con-
eld by a Magistrate of the second or third class.
i sw of our pronesal that ali such appeals should lie to the
chief Tncicial Magistrate and net the Court of Session, the
reference to the Assistant Sessions Judge should he omitted from
section 49,

Under section 409(2). an Additional Sessions Judge hears
कांप such appeais as the State Government directs or as the
Sessions Iudee makes over to him. Instead of the State Govern-
meat. the Flich Court should be substituted, as control over subor-
dinate courts is vested in the High Courts by the Constitution.

‘A similar recommendation was made by the Law Commission in its
14th Report: see Vol. 2. page 802. para 16.



259

31.8. Section 410 provides that any person convicted by a
Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may appeal to the
High Court.” No changes are necessary here.

31.9. Under section 411, any person convicted by a Presi-
dency Magisirate may appeal to the High Court if the sentence
is one of imprisonment excecding six months or of fine over
Rs, 200/-. This limit of non-appealable sentences has came in
for cousiderable criticism, It appears to equate Presidency Magis-
tr: with Ui High Court for whom also the prescribed limit
is six months and Rs. 200/- under section 413, and to place them
much above the Sessions Judge for whom the limit is fixed at
one month and Rs. 50/-. The historical background of this
anomalous situation as well as other aspects of the question have
been considered by the Commission in an eatlier Report,’ wherein
it was recommended that in this respect a Presidency Magistrate
should be equated with a Sessions Judge and not with a High
Court. We entircly agree with this view, In our opi
limit in both cascs should be imprisonment not exceed
months and/or fine not exceeding Rs. 200/-.

One of the suggestions received by us is to the effect that ap-
peals from Presidency Magistrates should lie to the Chief Presi-
dency Magistrate, while another recommendation is that appeais
from sentences passed by Presidency Magistrates upto a certain
limit of imprisonment and fine should be to the City Sessions
Court. The main idea behind these suggestions is to reduce the
number of criminal appeals to the High Court. We are however
unable to accept either suggestion since it would mean making
a radical change in the character and ‘status of the Presidency
Magistrate’s courts which does not seem desirable.

31.10. Section 4114 deals with appeals from convictions and
acquittals by a High Court in the exercise of its original criminal
jurisdiction. Though it is proposed to abolish the ordinary ori-
ginal criminai jurisdiction of High Courts, this section, if retained,
will continue to apply to trials held by a High Court in the exer-
cise of its extraordinary jurisdiction. Since such trials are
extremely rere, we feel that, in the inferests of finality to the pro-
ceedings, appeals should lie direct to the Supreme Court and
not to another bench of the same High Court, Instead of the
present elaborate rules, we would recommend a simple provision
to the effect that an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from
8 conviction in a trial held by a High Court on fact as well as
law, but there will be no appeal in the event of an acquittal,
Uf the State wishes to appeal from an acquittal by a High Court,

it will have to seek leave to appeal under article 136 of the
Constitution,

31.11. Under section 412. there is no appeal by a person
who is convicted on a plea of guilty by Courts mentioned in the
section, “except as to the extent or legality of the sentence”.
The rationale behind the section is that a person who deliberately
pleads guilty cannot be aggrieved by being convicted. The

1141 Report, Vol, 2, pages 800-801, para 11.

Section 416.

Section 411.

Section 411A.

Section 412,


Section 413.

269

principle is sound. We would go further. in our view, where
a High Court convicts and sentences a person on a plea of
guilty, an appeal should not be allowed, even as regards the

extent or legality of the sentence. {ft can hardly be contemplated
that the judgment of a High Court would suffer from a serious
infirmity in respect of the extent or legality of the sentence. We

recommended an amendment of the section to bar an appeal in
such cases.

31.12. Section 413 provides that there shall be no appeal in
the following cases :—
(5) where the High Court passes a sentence of imprison-
ment not exceeding six months or a fine not excceding
Rs. 206/-;
(ii) where the Court of Session passes a sentence of impri-
sonment not exceeding one month, and
{iii} where a Court of Session or District Magistrate or
other Magistrate of the first class passes a sentence of
fine not exceeding Rs. 50/-.

The Explanation to the section is to the effect that no appeal shall
jic from a sentence of imprisonment passed by such Court or
Magistrate in default of payment of fine when no substantive sen-
tence of imprisonment has also been passed.

In our view, there should be a general upward revision in
the non-appealable limit as regards fine in view of the change
in the value of the rupee, and also because it would be a recogni-
tion, though indirect, of the modern tendency to consider fine as
a good deterrent punishment and a means of compensating the
victim of the offence. We recommend that the non-appealable
limit of fine be raised from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 1,000/- in the case
of High Courts and from Rs. 50/- to Rs. 200/- in the case of
Sessions Judges and Magistrates of the first class. (Rs. 200/-
is now the limit under section 411 in the case of Presidency

Magistrates).

As regards the non-appealable limit of imprisonment the
present term of six months in the case of a High Court does not
call for any change. But the limit of one month in the case of
a Court of Session should be raised to three months. We have
recommended under section 411 that the non-appealable limit of
imprisonment in trials by a Presidency Magistrate should be re-
duced from six months to three months.

We are further of the view that there should be no appeal
where there is a combination of imprisonment and fine within
the limits prescribed in section 413. That is to say, if a sentence
of imprisonment upto the period specified in section 413 is com-
bined with a sentence of fine upto the amount specified in that
section, there should be no appeal.

¥t was suggested that there should also be no appeal when
the accused person though convicted is not sentenced but re-
leased on a bond or probation under the: provisions of section
562 of the Code. We are unable to accept the suggestion. No
doubt, being released on bond or on probation may not be as

\
“+


261

serious a matter as a sentence; neverthciess, the conviction does
cast a stigma, and that is sufficient justification for permitting an
appeal, Some of the offences to which section 562 applics are
serious, and may involve moral turpitude. The person convicted
may, therefore, like to clear his reputation, by appealing to a
higher Court.

31.13. Under section 414, no appeal lies from a sentence of
fine not exceeding Rs. 200/- passed in a summazy triat by a first
class Magistrate. No change in substance is necded here.

31.14. Under section 415, an appeal may be brought against
any sentence referred to in sections 413 and 414 whereby any
punishment mentioned in those sections is combined with any
other punishment. The ianguage is cryptic, and has caused some
difficulty in interpretation!’ [or instance, it docs not seem to
apply to a case where two sentences of fine which together do
not exceed the limit mentioned in section 413 are awarded. In
such a case, one has to fall back on section 413, but that section
itself is not clear enough on this point, nor does one get any
help from section 35(3) which covers only sentences of imprison-
ment. The position therefore requires to be made clear.

31.15. In the light of the foregoing discussion, we recom~
mend that sections 408 to 415 be revised and replaced by the
following sections :—

“Appeals from convictions 408. (1) Any person convicted on
a trial held by a High Court......may appeal to the Supreme
Courts cee eee

(2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge
or an Additional Sessions Judge or a Metropolitan Magistrate
may appeal to the High Court.

(3) Any person convicted on a trial held by an Assistant
Sessioas Judge... .or a Magistrate of the first class, or any person
sentenced under section 349 or in respect of whom an Order has
been made or a sentence has been passed under section 562 by
any Magistrate, may appeal to the Court of Session.

(4) Any person convicted by a Magistrate of the second
class may appeal to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.

No appeal in certain cases when accused pleads guilty. 409.
Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, where an accus-
ed person has pleaded guilty and has been convicted on such plea,
there shall be no appeai—

(a) if the conviction is by a High Court, or
(b) if the conviction is by,a Court of Session, Metropolitan

Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class, except as to
the extent or legality of the sentence.

4 See discussions or case-law in Banwari v. Rex ALR. 1949 Ail. 216.

Section 414.

Section 415.

Revision of
Section “408 to
415 recommended.


262

No appeal in petty cases. 410. Notwithstanding anything
contained in section 408 there shall be no appeal by a convicted
person in any of Mie joliowine caves, namely :—

(a) where a High Court passes only a sentence of imprison-
st jor a term not exceeding six months or of fine
noi exceeding one thousand ees, or of both such
inprisonment and jute;

‘out of Session or a Metropclitan Magistrate

ence of impris nent for @ term not
ne pot exceeding two
mprisonment and fine;

(0) where, : summarily, a Magistrate em-
rod to act under section 260 nasses oniy a sen~
oj fine not exceed '0 huadred rupees :

Provided that an anpeal may he brought against any such
sentence if any cther puaishiment is combined with it, but such
sentence shall not be appeatable merely on the ground—

(i) that the person convicted is ordered to furnish security
1 Keep the peace; or

Gi) thata a for imprisonment in default of payment
of fine ts inchuded in the शाह: or

(hi) that more than one sentence of fine is passed in the

ce the total ana ie imposed does not exe
ceed Sie amount hereinkelore spe din respect of
the case

Appeais to Courts oF Szssion how heard. 411. (1) Subject
lo the provisions of sud-secticn (2), an appeal to the Court of
Session or Sessions Judge shal! be heard by the Sessions Judge or

(2) An Additional Sessions Judge .... shall hear only such
appeals 85 the Sessions Judge ‘of the division may. hy gerieral or
special order, make over to him or as the High Court may, by
special order, direct him to hear.”

ction 415A.

so is required i

Section 415A, 31.46. No cna

31.17. Section 417 deals with appeals in case of acquittai

Section 417 Ap-

Deals against: sub: 1) vives the State Government unrestricted right

acquittal. of appeal against ary Grder of acquittal waether original or appel-
late. and a similar power is given to the Central Government by
sud-section (2) in cases investizated by the Delhi Special Police

Establishment. The Courts expect. however, that these powers
will bo exercised with restraint, and since the Courts are as 8
rule rehictant to. interfere with acquittal orders. such appeals
are in fact filed after a good of scrutiny. Sub-section (3)
permits a private complainant in a case instituted on complaint
to appeal against acquittal, but only after obtaining special leave

from the High Court : all the appeals under section 417 lie to

the High Court. The provisions for acquittal appeals are, in
a sense, unusual, but experience shows that in the existing set up

Me

ve

eed


263 .

of our Courts they are necessary to avoid miscarriage of justice,
and that 15 why the Code requires that all such appeals must be
heard by the High Court. The suggestion’ that Sessions Judges
could be entrusted with the responsibility of deciding such appeals
has not attracted us, as it is, we think, only in the High Courts
that a uniform standard for dealing with such appeal can be
maintained.

It has also been suggested that, apart from the State and the
complainant in complaint cases, other interested persons such as
ibe firse informer to the police? or the victim of a crime’ or his
relatives may be given a right of appeal, in suitable cases. We
are unable to agree. as in criminal proceedings we do not want
to reccgnise any interest except that of the public, and of course,
to some extent. that of a complainant who actually initiates the
proceedings in court. It is, therefore, not necessary to expand
the scope 7 section 417 in that direction.

31.18. Sub-section (5) of section 417 says that if an appli-
cation for special leave by a complainant has been refused by the
High Court, no appeal by the State in that same cases will lie, —
and quite properly, for while considering the application for special
leave, the High Court will have examined the judgment under
appeal and presumably found it good. It has been suggested*
that there should be an express provision for the converse case,
namely, that when an appeal by the State has been dismissed, no
application for special leave by a complainant should be compe-
tent. This, however, is already a necessary consequence, for, if
an appeal has been dismissed, no question of admitting or consi-
dering another appeal on the same matter can arise, and it is
unnecessary to burden the code with any express provision to that
effect.

31.19. Another suggestion for our consideration is a pro-
posal’ (in a Private Member's Bill), that in case a single Judge of
a High Court accepts an appeal against acquittal and convicts the
respondent, he should have a right to appeal to two Judges of the
same High Court. The idea here is to introduce what in civil case
is called a “Letters patent” appeal. We are not convinced that
any useful purpose will be served by making any such provision
in the Code. It is quite simple for any High Court to provide by
rule that acquittal appeals should be heard by the Judges, and the
object behind this proposal can be amply served by that arrange-
ment.

_ 31.20. The time allowed for an acquittal appeal by the State
is now ninety days®. Some time ago, it was six months. It has
been suggested? that the period should be extended, but we are
unable to find any justification for it.

LE, 3(2)/55-..0., Part 1, page 231, 5. No. 3060), (Suggestion of a
Collector).

2F.3(2)/55, Part II, 5. No, 69 and F.3(2)/55, Part 1. S. No. 72.

3 (९. 3(2)/55, Part ¥, S.No. 49.

4, 3(2)/55-L.C., Part HE, $. No. 52 (Bar Council of Madras).

5 Bill of Shri K. V. Raghunath Reddy (No. 11 of 1963) clause 8,
and Rajya Sabha Debates, 3-9-1965, col. 162. 182-184, 207.

& Article 114, Limitation Act, 1963 (Old article 157).

TE, 3(2)/S5-L.C., Part HF, S. No. 50(b). [One 1. G. Police].
L33HA/69

Section 417 (पु

Further — appeal
to Bench from
decision of a
single Judge not
necessary.

Limitation need
not be extended,


Provision

appcal

“Appeal

to
hance Sentenc:

by the

Government
against sentence.

Section 418
Omission recom-

mended,

Section 419, 420
421 Jait appeals
and appeats pre

sented

pleaders.

through

264

21. it will be noticed that although section 417 permits the
ate Government to appeal against an order of acquittal, it does
sta conviction when the punishment
05519 inadequate. Any ciror 1” sé:
of the revisional powers of the
Story. विक्षए :
not be wi i
9 an appeal cannot be
$ Of inadequate
occurring, and we consider the erdiaary
in each case where the State considers it
‘al, de able to deal with it. We, there-

Proper to
jore, pre
ihus :

“AI7A. (1) The State Government may, in any case of
conviction on @ trial held by any Court other than a High
Court, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal
against the sentence on the ground of its inadequucy.

(2) If such conviction is in a case in which the offence has
been investigated by the Dethi Special Police Establishment
constituted under the Dethi Special Police Establishment Act,
1946, the Central Government may also direct the Public Pro-
secutor to present an appeal against the sentence on the ground
of its inadequacy.

(3) An appeal under this section shall lie to the Cusurt to
which an appeal by the person convicted in the case would
lie under section 408.”

31.22. Section 418 contains provisions which will be entirely
superfluous with the abolition of jury trials. The Statement with
which the section opens, namely, that an appeal may lie on a
matter of fact as well as a matter of law, derives relevancy
from the exception that follows to the effect that, in the case of a
jury trial, the appeal shall lic only on a matter of 129.
The explanation is again with reference to jury trials, making
it clear that there could be an appeal in such trtals for reducing
kk sentence on the footing that the alleged severity of ihe sen-
shall be decmed to be a matter of law. Sub-section (2)
only to trials by jury. We recommended the omissian of
the entire section 418.

31.23. An appeal has to be presented either by the appellant
or his nleader as section 419 requires, but in case the appellant is
॥ jail, he can present it to the officer in charge of the jail who has
to forward it to the appellate court as is provided in section 420.
Such appeals are usuatly called “jail appeals”. Section 421 pro-
vides that the appellate court may, after reading the petition of
appeal and the copy of the judgment accompanying it, find that
there is no eround for interference and on that the court can dis-
miss the anneal summarily, but before doing so, the Court must
afford opnortunity to the appellant or the pleader to be heard ex-
cept in the case of a jail appeal. In other words, a jail appeal can
be summarily dismissed without hearing any one, but an appeal pre-
sented in person or through a pleader cannot be so dismissed.


265

24. Tt is obvious that ihe right vested in the appellant is
h there ace different methods of
, if ene method is availed of

owever, it appears that frequently both
d arc dealt with as two appeals about
at appellant in jail sends an appeal
later a pleader instructed on
al against the same order, No
normally the case, both the
wc same time. Sometimes, however,
Lis dispo.ed of and then the other
using considerable embarrassment
९ appellate Court.) At Umes 3 jail appeal is summarily dis-
id then an appeal filed thro counsel comes up for
hearing when some arguable question is raised, and the Court is
not certain if it can proceed with the appeal. 11 ute appeal is in
inherent jurisdiction can perhaps be invoked,®

pra

RTeys
क्र

हज

with at
sit, one

Veomes wp for

31.26. In a recent case, the Supreme Court’ has ruled that if
4 jail appeal under section 420 is summarily dismissed, then after
the dismissal of that appeal, no appeal under section 419 is com-
pet in that particular case, the second appeal was presented
after the jail anneal had been dismissed; but it is not unlikely that
the Courts will apoly the same rule to a pending appeal and hold
that if a jail apnea! missed summarily, no other appeal,
although pending at Chat time, can be heard. This. we think, may
lead to hardshin. If we were satisfied that a jail appeal received
she sume attention by the epnellate Court as any other appeal,
we would have been contect to leave the matter as it stands, hoping
that the aoneltste Courts will so arrange their work that such two
apneals are always heard together. We have information, however,
that excerpt nerhans in the High Courts, “jail anneal” are not
ecensidered with partizular care, and in many cases, the eronnds of
appeal drafted in jail do not attract sufficient attentinn and, even if
there be any neint in the anneal, it is Hable to he missed. Our
Taw, entitles an oer nerson to abtoin legal assistance avd pre-
sent his case in Court throueh a competent nlesder.4 and we are
anxious that the spirit of this rule should be preserved.

31.27. We therefore propose to make a Iegal provision that a
jail anneal most not be summarily dismissed till the time for filing
an ordinary apneal has expired. This will ensure that an appel'ant
wishing to avail of teaal assistance will have presented an appeal
under section 419 before his anpeal, if any, presented under sec-
tiny 420 comes up for disnasal. We are further providing that,
if in svite of this. a iail anncal happens to be dismisced summarily.
that would not debar the Court from considering an appcai under

161 Sunder Fal, AUR. 1968 All, 429

2 Section S61A

3 Pretan Siok, (1961) 2 S.C.R. $09, 512: ATR. 196F S.C. 588.
4Scetion 340.

Right to present
one appeal only.

Position — when
two appeals are

presented.

Supreme Court's
ruling and possi-
ble hardship
therefrom.

Recommendation


Reason for sum-
mary dismissal to
be recorded.

Provision of sec-
tion 421 recom-
mended.

Section 422.

266

section 419 oa the merits, provided such appeal is otherwise duly
presented and the Court is satisfied “that the interests of justice
require that it should be heard”.

31.28. It will be noticed that section 421 authorises the appel-
late Court to summarily dismiss an appeal without stating | its
reasons. In the case of High Courts, this causes no difficulty; but
jn the case of Sessions Courts, it does, as their orders are liable
to be revised by the High Court, and it would be very helpful if
their reasons existed on the record. We suggest therefore that
an appellate Court, other than a High Court, should record. its
reasons.

31.29. Section 421 may accordingly be revised as follows :—

“Summary dismissal of appeal. 421. (1) If upon exam-
ining the petition of appeal and ccpy of the judgment received
under section 419 or section 420, the Appellate Court... .
considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering, it
may dismiss the appeal summarily :

Provided that—

(a) no appeal presented under section 419 shall be dis-
missed unless the appellant or his pleader has bad
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in support
of the same; and

(b) no appeal presented under section 420 shall be
dismissed summarily until the period allowed for
preferring such appeal has expired.

(2) Before dismissing an appeal under this section the
Court may call for the record of the case, but shall not be
bound to do so.

(3) An Appellate Court other than the High Court dis-
missing an appeal under this section shall record its reasons
for doing so.

(4) Where an appeal presented under section 420 has
been dismissed summarily under this section and the Appellate
Court finds that another petition of appeal duly presented
under section 419 on behalf of the same appellant has not
been considered by it, that Court may, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in section 430, if satisfied that it is necessary
in the interests of justice so to do, hear and dispose of such
appeal in accordance with law.”

31.30. Section 422 provides that if an appeal is not dismissed
summarily, the Court shall give notice of the appeal to the appel-
lant or his pleader and to the Public Prosecutor, and in case of
an appeal under section 411A(2) or section 417, to the accused.
Tf the Public Prosecutor applies, he will be furnished with a copy
of the grounds of appeal; but nothing is said about the accused
being given such a copy. No mention is made of a private com-
plainant who may have instituted the proceedings in the trial
Court. We think it proper that in such cases, he should be entitled
to appear. It would also be proper to provide that, along with
the notice of hearing, a copy of the grounds of appeal should be


268

e only ground for appeal from a conviction
ty of the sentence, tie appellant shall not
the izave of the Court, अ be heard in supe
wtier शत

५ Cannes (a) and (b} of section 423(1) deal _with
acquittal and appeals from conviction respec ively,
cal with the e two clauses separately.
wal from the Appellate
power is not

Appeal against
acquitial convic-
tion for a diffe-
rent uile:

ect to aa im-
power is wide
2 accused guilty

pointed out by tie Supreme Court in the case
36 and 237 control the exercise of Appel-
That court cannot convict the accused
the appeal is against

Power to order Pp of the appellate court, in an appeal from
rerhearing of an order of acquittal, ure to “reverse such order and direct that
peal. further inguiry be made, or that the 8००७-८७ be reirizd OF commit-
ted for as the case may be, or find hia guilty, and pass sen-

tenes on accordig to Iw.” In this cocnection, the question

7 the appellate court can, 10 cases where the appeal
pellate order of acquittal, direct a se-heasing of the
appeal? The answer depends on the meaning of the expressions
inquiry” and “re-tried”. Where the defect is not in the proceed-
of the trial court. but in those of the first appellate court, the
‘ovcs material. There is a su 09 of the Madras
+ the insestion of a provi-ion enadting the High
sta ve-hevring of the appeal, so as te save the time
const and avoid unnecessary ssment of the
when the mictoke lies with the arreliate court, owing 7

faz a wron order.

Court to
of the

lauses (a)

The Hieh Court

2 or, a 58

5 Fue ‘ #1889) EAR. 13 Rom. 516, $15: Chandran Singh,
(912 18 6८.5 Cans

8 Emo.

ang 369. 370.
Y L ATR 194

hv. Pati Ram, ALR. 1937 Nae. 394, 396.

Sinoh v, Backache, AYR. 1925 Oudh 321

0. 50. 51

a


269

: ty che jower appellate court to re-hear an appeal

Such Gireetio::
rare cases where there is 2 pronounced

are is
tenden Court to deny to the appeliaat a reason-
able op? tty heard or to write 5:

#
he questions of Jaw and fact that
under appeal. We do act consider
for this purpose. This muy be
Court,

the powers of the
b-section

inder sus
sentence,

0 COUFScs Opens it ma:
the uccused to be
portant judgment of the Sup”
eter of the appellate proceedings
2९ determined by the nature of the
\ppcilate Court. i ४:
‘al, and no appeal is filed against the
which is considered by
he other hand, if the order of conviction
nucd and the order of tal is net challen: ]
of eoaviclion which is consideved by the Appellate

Furtier, the Supreme Court held that except under section
429, it is not open to the High Court, in an appeal against convic~
tion, to order re-trial of the accused on charges of which the
accused had been acquitted by the trial Court, though it could
Teverse convict and order a re-trial for the offence 0:
which ihe uccused had been convicted.

34.27, As resards sub-clause (2) alsa, in the same juctement
of the eme Court, the meaning of the expression “alter th
ainda \ been diseuysed at length, and the coestr
place! on it is that the newer te r the finding is confined to

could have been convicted under

offences

words

(0) 4
धर “the exorssion “alter the
15 “alter the finding of conviction
४ fo reverse a findine of not cuilty
m acquittal are dealt with separately in clause
d to the judgment of the Sunveme Court

It dose
becatis:

52 in which the accused is convicted
an that for which he was nroxccuted.
27 is that he is deemed to have beer
Thas, where a person is shareed

tal of the

(1962) 2 SCR. 904.

Emp, LLR, (1942) Lah. 129, ALR, 1941
sim v, Emp., ABR. 1944 All, 137, 355,

Appeal against
cenviclion-
Reversing finding
and ordering re-
wial.

Meaning of “al-
tering the finding”.

eal from con~
on for Tess
sevious offences
implied acquittal
oi offence char-
ged.



Section 423 (1A)
enhancement of
sentence of
Appellate Courts
otber than the
High Court.

Power to appeal
for enhancemeat
of sentence.

Limit of seatenc-
ing powers of the
Appellate Court.

270

first offence. If, therefore, the accused appeals against the con-
viction and the State does sot appeal against the acquittal, the
Appellate Court cannot “alter the finding” into one of conviction”
under section 392, Indian Penal Code.

31.39. As a general rule, the Appellate Court hearing an
appeal against a conviction has no power to enhance the sen-
fence. But an exception was made by the amendment of 1955.
Under sub-section (1A), as inserted by that amendment, where the
High Court is the Appellate Court, it can enhance the sentence
after giving notice to the accused. The High Court can also
enhance the sentence under its revisional jurisdiction.*

Daring our consideration of section 423(1A), the question
of giving power to the Sessions Judge (when hearing appeals) to
enhance the sentence was raised. it was stated that Magistrates
often award very Icnicnt sentences. When the Session Judge,
while hearing an appeal from a conviction, especially for an anti-
social offence, finds that the sentence is grossly inadequate, he is
required to refer the qucstion of enhancement to the High Court,
causing undue delay and additional expense to the parties
concerned,

It may be mentioned here, that in the 14th Report) while
proposing widening of the revisional jurisdiction of the Sessions
Judge, petitions against acquittal and petitions for enhancement
of sentence were specifically excluded from the scope of the pro-
posaJ. But, it appears to us that the arguments set out in that
Report for widening the revisional jurisdiction of Sessions Judges
apply as much to the enhancement of sentence as to the widen-
ing of revisional jurisdiction. Power to hear appeals against
acquittal is an extraordinary power, and it is understandable that
it may not be proper to give it to a lower court. But the power
of enhancement of sentence does not stand on the same footing.
Sessions Judge and Chief Judicial Magistrates may be safely en-
trusted with this power, and the High Court need not be troubled
by frequent references,

We recommend that sub-section (1A) of section 423 may be
omitted and clause (b) of sub-section (1) amended, conferring
on all appellate courts a power to enhance the sentence after
giving the accused an opportunity of showing cause against such
enhancement.

31.40. We have proposed above® the insertion of a new
section under which the State Government may, where there is
a conviction, appeal on the ground of inadequacy of the sentence.
The powers of the Appellate Court in such appeals should be the
same as in appeals from a conviction. Accordingly, clause (b)
of section 423(1) should begin with the words “in an appeal
from a conviction or for enhancement of sentence.”

31.41. While on the question of sentence. we may refer to
the recent judgment of the Supreme Court where it was held®
that the Appellate Court cannot impose a higher sentence than

c Kishan Singh v. Emp. $5 1.3, 390; 12.8. 59 All. 722: ALR. 1928
. 1962 5.0. 139. 131 paragraph 5.

2 a Chand v. The State, AY.
3 Section 43966).
414th Report. Vol. 2, p. 826. paragraph 6.
% See para. 31.21.
sc. Jonge Bahadur vy. State of M.P., (1966) S.C.R. 322; AIR. 1966



271

that which could have been inflicted by the Court of the first
instance. We recommend the insertion of an express provision
in the section giving statutory recognition to this decision in order
that the point may not be lost sight of by the lower appellate
courts.

31.42. Sub-section (2) of section 423 may be omitted, as
it relates to trials by jury.

31.43. Section 423 may accordingly be revised as follows :—

“423. After hearing the appeal, the Appellate Court may,
if it considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfer-
ing, dismiss the appeal, or may—

(a) in an appeal from an order of aquittal, reverse
such order and direct that further inquiry be made, or that
the accused be retried or committed for tral as the case
may be, or find him guilty and pass seatence on him accord-
ing to Jaw;

(0७) in an appeal from a conviction or for enhancement
of sentence—

(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge
the accused, or order him to be retried by a Court of
competent jurisdiction subordinate to such Appellate
Court or committed for trial, or

(ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or

Gii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature, or

the extent, or the nature and the extent, of the sentence,
whether so as to enhance or to reduce the same :

(०) in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse
such order;

(d) make any amendment or any consequential or inci
dental order that may be just or proper;

Provided that in an appeal from a conviction, the sentence
shal! not be enhanced under sub-clause (iii) of clause (b)
unless the accused has had an opportunity of showing cause
against such enhancement,

Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict
greater punishment for the offence which in its opinion the
accused has committed, than might have been inflicted for
that offence by the Court passing the order or sentence under
appeal,

31.44. With reference to section 424, we considered the
question whether an order under section 421 dismissing an
appeal summarily is or is not a “judgment” for the purposes of
section 424. In a Supreme Court decision* relating to section
439(6), the maiority view was that the order under section 421
was a “final order”, while 5.7. Das J. (as be then was) described
it as a “judgment”. In another Supreme Court decision?
holding that the summary dismissal of a jail appeal was a bar
to hearing a represented appeal, the dismissal of an appeal
under section 421 was described as an “order”. and held to be
“nal” within the meaning of section 430. In yet another
Supreme Court case’, holding that a high Court was not bound

TU. 7. S. Chopra, (1955) 2 SCR. 921; AER. 1955 S.C. 633 (Bhag-
wati_and Immam 33) (Das J, contra).

3 Pratap Singh, (1961) 2 S.C.R. 509, 512; ALR. 1961 S.C, 586, 588.
8 Chintaranjan, A..R. 1963 S.C. 1696, 1700.

Section 423(2).

Revision of sec-
tion 423 recom-
mended.

Powers of Appel-
ate Court in dis-
posing of appeal.

Section 424 Is
order dismissing
appeal summarily
a judgment


Section 425.

Section 426.

272

to give reasons for the summary dismissal of an appeal, section
421 did not fall to be considered

The question whether, in the case of a dismissal of an
appeal under section 421, a “judgment” should be recorded by

tts other than High Courts, bas not yet been settled by the
Supreme Court. There has been in the past a sharp conflict of
judicial opinion’ as to whether an order under section 421 was
a “judgment” or not. it is, however, unnecessary to discuss
them at length, since the amendment we have suggested above?
in section 421 (requiring every Appellate Court, other than 3
High Court, to record reasons for the order) will render the
question academic,

31.45. 10 was suggested by a High Court Jud; ige* that the
proviso to section 424 should be amended requinng the upper
lant to remain in attendance in court on the date on which the
apoellate judgment was delivered, It was said that this would
facilitate his recommittal to jail Promptly if his appeal was

dismissed. We do not, however, consider it necessary to make
such an amendment. The proviso to section 424 is in the
nature of an exception to the general rule enacted in section
366(2). It is ays open to the Appellate Court to direct
the attendance of the appellant on the date fixed for the judg-
ment or to dispense with his attendance if it is not required, The
existing Jaw is thus quite sufficient to meet the purpose.

31.46. Section 425(1) requires the order of the High Court
on appeal to be certified to the lower court when it is that of a
Magistrate, through the District Magistrate. No amendment in
this respect has been made by the Bombay and Punjab Acts
by which separation was introduced, bul it seems to desir-
able that where the order appealed against was recorded or
passed by a judicial Magistrate, the order of the High Court
should be sent through the Chisf Judicial 116 कुछ and where
it wes by an Execuiive Magistrate, the Hi Court’s order
should be sent through the District Magistrate. The secoad
sentence of s, 425(1) may be revised to read as follows :—

“If the finding, sentence or order was recorded or passed
by a Judicial Magistrate, other than the Chief Yudicial
Mazistrate, or by an Executive Magistrate, other than the
District Magistrate, the certificate shall be sent throug:
the Chicf Judicial Magistrate or the District Magistrate, as
the case may be.”

31.47. No changes are needed in sub-sections (1) and (2)
of section 426,

| Rosh, Behari Das v, Bal Cops (1898), EER. 21 Cal. 92, 95, pe
. Bhimanpa. (1894) EL.R 19 Bom. 732, 3 iperor ५४. ‘hari,
काशी Se Ant 393, 308 Sine e, Rate RES” Yas ea,
Bharat 81, 90.
2 See paras; 31.28 and 31.29.

SR. 3(2)/55-L.C, Part पे, 8. No. 33(a), p. 126.


273

With recrence to sub-section (2A}, the following sugees-
tion? of the जाए of Home Affairs was duly consider:d by
us ता

hy two

to release on
ch the sentence may be enly
ersons eccussd of non-
or retion io release an
the offerce is one

imprisonment. — Tt
: ion should be
n2 power. under sec. 426(2A)
sidered when the Code was mended
19: it was considered that sub-section 2(A) of
nan 4 Sy a view to authorise the con-
victing court to release the canvicted person on bail for a
shart perind. not exceoding 14 days, in order to erable
him to appeal and obtain an order of bail from the Aprel-
fav: Court provided that--

(1) icted person was on bail ०

vietion; and

of imprisonment is not more than two

nm the 0!

1 did not find a place
is reverred 10 th.

fetes. cho been
section ADS(2AY

somenes
Moths ey

hes been st

ae oF ihe
reiers to

pointed out that the ४

v

non-bailable offences shor
We are. further. of the view that

subs. spply only where inmrisonment sto

one © ble ot non. b
offe: ars’ Emit (suggested by the Home Min:
try) undaly high. An Appellate Court would

3 Govt. of Yadia. Ministry of Home Affairs. F.3(2)/5S5-L.C, S, Ne.
27, Home Ministry File No. 14/8/57-Judl. If.



Section 426(2B).

Application
section 426
security cases.

of
to

274

not ordinarily release the appellant on bail, where he has been
sentenced to imprisonment for two years. We recommend

that the opening clause of the sub-section may be amended to
Tead—

“When any person **** is sentenced by a Court to
dmprisoament for a term not exceeding one Year, and an
appeal lies from that sentence . .

In our view this sub-section does not exclude cases where in

addition to imp: onment, a sentence of fine also is awarded
and hence we suggest no alteration jn that respect.

31.48. Sub-section (2B) was inserted in 1945, when special
104५९ could be granted only by the Privy Council which was
far away. The Adaptation Order of 1950 substituted ‘Supreme
Court” tor “Privy Council” without considering whether there
is any practical need for the provision. The Supreme Court is
not fir away, and when the party has taken the trouble and
incurred the necessary expense in obtaini ig special leave trom
the Supreme Court, he could casily request that Court, while
granting special leave, to give appropriate interim relict, We
recommend the omission of the sub-section (2B).

We have also considered the suggestions’ to amend sub-
section (2B) enabling the High Court to grant interim relief to
a person during the interval between the date of the dismissal of
his appeal by the High Court and the date of grant of special
leave by the Supreme Court. In our view any such widening of
the scope of the sub-section is neither necessary nor desirable.
With the quick means of transport available nowadays, it should
not be di ih icult lor a party to approach the Supreme Court and
obtain appropriate interim relief without delay.

31.49. There is a sharp confiict of judicial opinion as regards
the applicability of section 426 to persons who have becn directed
to execute bonds for keeping peace or maintaining good behaviour
under sec. 118 and to those who have been committed to prison
on failure to execute such bonds. The cases? noted below may
be seen. It is unnecessary to discuss the relative merits of those
decisions. An order under sec. 118 undoubtedly affects the liberty
of a subject, and we consider it pro; per that during the pendency
of an appeal against that order, the ppellate Court and the High
Court should have power to stay the execution of the order and,
if the appellant is in custody, to direct his release on bail. Kt is
true, as pointed out by a High Court Judge‘ that there should be
some safeguard for keeping peace or maintaining good behaviour
when the appellant is on bail. This can be provided by requiring

2Gore Let v. State, ALR. 1958 AH. 657. 672

2B3(2)/55-L.C., 5. No. 8, 26. (Home Ministry file No. 16/16/56-
J.Ht). (Suggestion of the Ministry of Home Affairs regarding grant of
bail to person to whom certificate of fitness for application has been
granted).

v. Emp., AAR. 1930 Pat. 274. (Macpherson and Dhavie 33.}: Katwareo
‘mp. A.F.R. 1932 Ail. 680; Ram Nath v. Nanak Chand, A.¥.R. 1932
686: Darsu v. Emp. 3.1. ..8. 57 All. 264: A.IR. 1924 All. 845
(Bennett 1.) : Emp. v. Masnria, ALR. 1936 All. 107, 109.

4F. 3(2)/55-L.C. Part I. 5. No, 33(a).



275

the interim bail bond in such cases to be of the same type as Forms
X and XI of Schedule ५, with slight alterations so as to provide
also for his appearance on the date fixed by the Appellate Court.
It is, however, expected that before accepting such bail bond, the
Court wil! satisfy itself not only about the solvency of the bailor
and the sureties but ako about their power, to control the actions
of the appellant.

We recommend the addition of a sub-section to section 426
as follows :—

(4) When any person is ordered to give security for
keeping the peace or for maintaining good behaviour under
section 118, the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2)
shall, so far ६5 may be, apply in relation to such person as
they apply in relation to a person convicted of an offence.”

31.50. No change 15 needed in section 427 except the omis-
sion of the reference to “section 411A, sub-section (2)”.

31.51. With reference to section 428, it was pointed out that
the Sessions Judge. sitting in appeal from a judgment of the
Assistant Sessions Judge, has no power to direct the latter to
record additivnal evidence. He can either record it himself, or
direct a Magistrate to do so. We do not think that the position
Tequires any change. Such instances would be rare, and there
is no anomaly if the function of recording evidence is entrusted
to a Mazistrate. Moreover Magistrates are available in many
outlying places where an Assistant Sessions Judge is not posted,
It will be more convenient and less expensive to the parties if
they are required to bring their witnesses before the nearest Magis-
trate rather than before the Assistant Sessions Judge.

34.52. Section 429 is intended to provide for a contingency
where a Bench of two Judges of a High Court are equally divided
in their opinion rding an appeal heard by them. The “case”
is required to be iid before a third Judge, and the judgment or
order shall foliow his opinion. ‘There is a sharp difference of
judicial opinion regarding the true scope and content of the word
‘case’. Does it include the entire appeal or is it restricted only to
those charges i respect of which difference of opinion has
arisen? Is it restricted only to those convicted or acquitted per-
sons regarding whom the Judges have differed? Will it also apply
to those instances where, though the two Judees may agree about
the final order to be passed, yet they may differ in respect of the
findings ? Thus, one Judge may desire to acquit the accused on
the ground that he exercised the right of private defence. whereas
his cofleague may be inclined to acquit on the ground that the
Prosecution has failed to establish its case beyond reasonable
doubt. The Allahabad and Calcutta decisions, where — these
questions have been discussed, are cited below.!

31.53. We arc unable to accept a suggestion? that an Ex-
planation should be inserted to clarify that the expression “case”
means only the poinis in respect of which the Judges are divided.
USubedar ४. State. ALR. 1956 All. $29, $38, 539 Subedar Sinch v.
Emp., A.LR. 1943 All. 272 Nemai v. State, AU.R. 1966 Cal. 194.

ig
2 F.3(2)-55-L.C. Part If, S. No. 33(a)—Suggestion of a High Court
Judge.

Section 427

Section 418

Section 429
Meaning, of the
Scage.”

Explanation of
term not desir.
able.


276

it is Detter to leave this question to the discretion of
the Bech hearing the case, rather than enact a rigid statutory
Ptuv-sion On a subject whicn primariy pertains to. and cin be
ly dealt with oy, the pr: gh Courts.

Is third Judge
bound to #००८७६ क्र
conciarent view by
of relerrin: 2 ६४0 reierring on which there

ludges on other wus no dilicrence vetween the two Jud, 303. Ashutosh Mookerjee

+ Nad observed in one case!, that ८ in section 429
S are equally
Mt or puiits on which
zr Caicutta case, Weadrofie
at the tird Judee could not
with the two Judges on a pint agreed unoa by them, un-
re strong rea ing so. Our attention was
in this connecticn, to the corresnc 2 provisions in
5 Pateot,? and in the Code of Civil Procedure,’ under
he view of the majority of all the Judges, including those
॥ heard the case, iv to prevail

views

The subject is one in respect of which a general rule appli-
cable to al: cases may not be advisabie. The position in criminal
cases is different from that in civil cases, where clearcut issues
can be framed, and a demarcation of the points of difference can
be done more easily. This is not practicable in most of the
criminal cises where the findings are closely intermixed and
not castiy severabic. The position as now understood is that the
third Judge brings to bear his independent opinion.’ As was
observed by the Supreme Court,® it is for the third Judge to decide
on what points he shall hear arguments if any, and this postulates
that the third Judge is completely free in resotving the difference
as he thinks fit

In uur view, no change in the Code is needed on this point.
It should be left (as at present) to the discretion of the third
Judoe 70 decide how far he will or will not disturb the view ex-
pressed unanimously by the two Judzes on particular points,

2 is 002 aspect of the matter which requires
£ the third Judee is to prevail, an
sionally be crested. For example,
Pe: 0 100 A may be for acquitting
the accused; Judge B_ may be for convicting the accused for a
nce; Judse C (the third Judge to whom the matter is
referred under section 429), may be for maintaining the convic-
tion. जी such cases, the third Judge's view would be really a
minority view, and yet would prevail,

Possite anomaly
A cenain cases,

VSarar Chandra v. Emp., (1911) ULR. 38 Cal. 202.

2 Grande Venkata Ratnam v. Corporation of Calcutta, AJR. 1919
Cal. 862

3506 clause 36. Letters P:
Courts.

4Section 98. Cade of Civil Procedure, 1908:

8 C1. Repana, ALR. 1961 AP. 70.

8 Dharom Sinch v. State, (1962) Suppl. 3 5.0.10 769, 772, 782, 783
seo also Babu ४. State. A.E.R. 1965 S.C. 1467, 1470.

ent of Bombay. Calcutta and Madras High



277

ed that efforts have been made in the
9 A

the Court of Appeal are
shall / ‘ard be:
5, and meat OF

Judges

Liens for,

t present w
4 39 the 111,
Said
the possibility of

udges composing the Court of
are equally divided ia opinion
. In order to prevent
10 third Judge interferring with the unani-
० previous two on any point of the
nat the whole case should be re-heard
ir Judge and the judgment given in accordance
with the fon of This matter was consi-
deted by Lowndes Committee which suggested? that,
instead o, the amendment mentioned above, the following
proviso be added to secticn 429 :--

“Provided that, if cither of the Judges composing the
Court of Appeal so require, the appeal shall be re-heard
before them and another Judge, or if the Chief Justice or
the Judicia! Commissioner so directs, before three other
Judges and the judzment or order shall follow the opinion
of the majority of the Judges so te-hearing the case."

The Committee stated that they would prefer to retain section
429 in its existing form, out would add a proviso on the lines of
the amendment proposed hv them to section 378 and for the same
Feasons.¢ This amendment. however, was not accepted by the
Select Committee which considered the Bill in 1922. पा view
of the fact that the difficulty which the amendment is intended to
meet is probably of rare occurrence”, they preferred to Ieave the
Kew as if wast

31.57. Subsequent experience* has, however, shown that the
problem is not so rare as was thought in 1922. White in most
cases, the procedure laid down in sect satisfactory,
it has led to difficulties in special cases. We think it i¢ desirable
to provide that if cither of the Tudges first hearine the appeal
50 requires, or if after reference the third Judse so reauires, the
case should be re-heard and decided by a Bench of three or
more Judges. 10 will be for the Chief Justice to decide who will

1 Gazette of India, (1914). Part V. page 211.
“Gazetie of Indis, (1914), Part V. page 111.
® Gazette of India, (1917). Part V. pace 107.
4 See para. 27.9 above.

४ Gazette 61 India, (1922). Part V, pages 263 and 264; Report of the
Select Committee, under clauses 99 and 113.

529 See the case-law discussed in Subedar ४, The State, ALR. 1956 All.

Amendment of
section 429 con-
sidered in the past.

Amendment
recommended.


Procedure where
judges of court of
appeal are equally
divided

Section 430-—
Meaning of
“Final!”

Cross appeals,

278

constitute the fulier Bench. We recommend that section 429
be amended on exactly the same lines as section 378,! to read
as follows :—

429. When any such appecl is heard before a Bench of
two Judges, and they are. . . divided in opinion, the appeal
with their opinions . . . . shall be laid before another
Judge of the same Court, and that Judge, after such hear-
ing. . . . as he thinks fit, shall deliver his opiaion, and
the judgment or order shall follow that opinion :

Provided that if either of the Judges constituting the
Bench, or where the appeal is taid before another Judge
under this section, that Judge, so requires, the appeal shall
be re-heard and decided by a Bench of three or more
Judges.

31.58. Section 430 reads as follows :—

“Judgments and orders passed by an Appellate Court
upon appeal shall be final, except in the cases provided for in
section 417 and Chapter XXXII.”

The exact scope and significance of the provision that judg-
ments and orders shall be “final” has been the subject of interest-
ing discussion in courts, and much ingenuity has gone into its
interpretation. Primarily, the object of the provision would
appear to be to make it clear that there is no further appeal
trom an appellate decision, re-emphasising the principle of section
404. But section 430 has apparently been regarded as of some
relevance in emphasising also that 8 review or reconsideration
of an appellate decision is not permissible, though the langua:
of section 430 is different from that of section 369 which is tl be
main provision prohibiting a review. Section 430 has also been
construed as emphasising that the summary disposal of an appeal
bars the matter being re-opened, at least where no question
jurisdiction is involyed*.

31.59. Though section 417 has been expressly mentioned in
section 430, controversy has arisen as to whether the final dis-
posal of an appeal against conviction bars the hearing of an
appeal against acquittal arising out of the same case. The
decisions of the Punjab High Court and the Gujarat High Court
noted below may be seen.*-* It is desirable to clarify the law
by inserting an explanation. In view of the new provision we
have recommended giving the Government a right to appeal
against the inadequacy of sentence. This explanation has also
to provide that the disposal of the appeal of the accused against
his conviction shall not bar the hearing of the appeal of the
Government regarding sentence. Further, it is necessary to make

See ws 27.6. 27.7.

2 Sre discussion as to section 421.

3 State ९. Mansha Singh. ALR. 1958 Punjab 233 (F.B.).

4 State ९. Diwanji, AR. 1963 Gujarat 21. 27. paragraphs 13. 15 and
16 (D.B.).

5 Section 417A (Proposed).

a



279

it clear that section 30 does not affect the mew provision’
proposed by us whereunder, notwithstanding the summary dis-
missal of a jail appeal, the power of the appellate court to hear
a represented appeal is saved.

31.60. Section 430 may be re-drafted as follows :—

“430, Judgments and orders passed by an Appellate Court
upon an appeal shail be final, except in the cases provided
for in section 417, sub-section (4) of section 421 and Chapter
XXXIL

Provided that notwithstending the final disposal of an appeal
against conviction in any case, the Appellate Court may hear and
dispose of, on the merits—~

(a) an appeal against acquittal under section 417, arising
Out of the same case, or

(b) @n appeal for the enhancement of sentence under sec-
tion 417A, arising out of the same case, except where
the question of enhancement has already been consi-
dered by the Court in the appeal against conviction.*”

31.61. Section 431 deals with the abatement of appeals. The
section deals in the first part with appeal against acquittals, and
in the second part with other appeals under the Chapter, but
excluding an appeal from a sentence of fine. The first class of
appeals abates on the death of the accused, and presents no diffi-
culty. The second class of appeals finally abates on the death of
the appellant, except an appeal from a sentence of fine. A scn-
tence of fine does not abate on the death of the person sentenced,
as it is not a matter which affects a pe rson only, but affects his
property. This principle was enacted in the section to override
an earlier decision of the Bombay High Court’ on the Code of
1882, holding that the appeal of the person sentenced by the
Sessions Judge to imprisonment and fine abated on his death
during appeal.

31.62. In an appeal to the Supreme Court under article 136
of the Constitution in respect of a sentence of imprisonment for
life, the appellant died during appeal and his legal representatives
sought leave to continue the appeal. The Supreme Court refused
to grant leave, on the principle that such a sentence would not
affect his property.t Though section 431 did not apply in terms
to the case, the Court said that it would not recognise a kind
of interest which the legislature had not recognised. The English
tule that law courts do not recognise any interest other than
pecuniary interest seems to be the basis of this decision. Though
in a majority of cases, where the appellant, who is sentenced

1 Section 42164).

2 See section 423(1)(b)
n » in re Nati Shah. (1894) LL.R. 19 Bom. 714 (Jardine and Ranade
4B. Gajapathi Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AJR. 1964 S.C. 1645,
1647, 1653, paragraphs 3, 4, 5, 18; (1964) 7 S.C.R. 25.
33M of HA/69

Amendment
recommended,

Finality of judg-
ments and orders
on appeal.

Section 431—
Principle under-
lying.

Decision of
Supreme Court
following the
English 176.


Amendment
suggested in 8
Private Member's
Bu.

Amendment *
recommended.§

286

to imprisonment, dies during the pendency of the appeal, the
interest of his legal representatives in the appeal may be purely
sentimental, there are exceptional cases, where the interest may
also be pecuniary. Thus, if the conviction is on a charge of
murder of a near relation, whose heir or one of whose heirs is
the alleged murderer, be (if the conviction is not set aside) will
be disqualified from inheriting his property. If be dies during
the pendency of the appeal, bis heirs have a pecuniary interest
in prosecuting the appeal. If the appeal succeeds, their right
of inheritance 10 the property of the deceased through the appellant
will be saved.

So far as revision is concerned, it has been held by the
Supreme Court? that the High Court can exercise the power of
revision in respect of an order made against the accused person
even after his death. The decision of the Madras High Court
cited below may not be correct in view of the decision of the
Supreme Court which does not appear to have been cited before
that High Court.

31.63. An amendment to section 431 was suggested in a
private Member's Bill as follows :—

“11. Section 431 of the principal Act shall be 1०-
pumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and—

(i) in the sub-section as so renumbered, after the words
“except an appeal from a sentence of the
words and figures “and an appeal under section
417” shall be inserted;

(ii) after the section as so re-numbered, the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely,—

“(2) On the death of the appellant, an appeal
under sub-section (3) of section 417 may be prose-
cuted by any aggrieved person with the permission of
the court to which an appeal lies.”

he reasons for the amendment were elaborately explained
by the mover of the Bill®, but we need not quote them in full.

31.64. The main object of the amendment was to provide
a machinery whereby the children or the members of the family
of a convicted person who dies during appeal could test the con-
viction and get rid of the odium which would otherwise attach
to them. We think that the principle of the amendment is
‘eminently sound, and recommend that the law should be amend-
ed accordingly. We would, however, give the right to continue

1 Section 25, Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

2 As to Muslim law, see Mulla, Mubammadan Law, (iSth Edn.)
article 58.

3 State of Kerala v. Naravani Amma, (1962) Supp. (I) SCR. 63;
ALR. 1959 S.C. 144, 148, para 7.

३ Balasubramania Mudaliar v, Doraikannu Ammal, ALR. 1966 Mad.
154.

5 Shri K. V. Raghunatha Reddy’s Bill (The points made in the Bill have
been referred to the Law Commission).
6 Raiya Sabha Debates. 3rd September. 1963, columns 185 to 187.


Bi

the appeal not to an “aggrieved person” (as was proposed in the
amendment), but to near relatives, viz. the parents, spouse,
children, brother and sister of the deceased appellant.

We would also provide a time-limit within which the near
relative should seek the leave of the appellate court to continue
the appeal. The new section! recommended by us as to appeal
by the Government for enhancement of sentence may also be
included in the proposed amendment. Reference to section
411(2) may be omitted, as it is unnecessary now.*

Section 431 may, in the light of the discussion above, be
amended to read as follows :-~

“431. (1) Every appeal under . . . . section 417
or section 417A shali finally abate on the death of the
accused.

(2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an
appeal from a sentence of fine) shall finally abate on the death
of the appellant :

Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction
and sentence of imprisonment and the Appellant dies during
the pendency of the appeal, any of his near relatives may,
within thirty days of the death of the appellant, apply to the
appellate court for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave
ts granted, the appeal shall not abate,

Explanation—In this section, “near relative’ means a
parent, spouse, lineal descendent, brother or sister.”

31.65. Before finishing with this Chapter on appeals, we
have to consider a suggestion with reference to Article 134(i) (a)
of the Constitution. This provides that an appeal shall lie to
the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence
in a criminal proceeding of a High Court if the High Court bas
on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person
and sentenced him to death. In a Private Member’s Bill®
recently introduced in Parliament, it is proposed that this very
limited jurisdiction of the Supreme Court should be enlarged to
cover cases where the High Court has, after reversing an order
of acquittal, sentenced a person to imprisonment for life or for
ten years or more. This Bill also proposes an identical enlarge-
ment of the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under
Article 134(1)(b).

31.66. A study of the Constituent Assembly Debates on
article 134 of the Constitution shows that initially the idea of the
Constitution-makers was not to confer on the Supreme Court
any right of appeal in criminal matters except by special leave.
The Supreme Court was to have only the jurisdiction which the
Privy Council used to have in criminal matters, namely, to inter-
vene when it felt there was a miscarriage of justice, and to exer-
cise this jurisdiction on the basis of a special leave to appeal.
Subsequently, two exceptions were made and incorporated in

YSection 417A.
2 See para 31.10 above.
3 Bill No. 81 of 1968 by Shri Anand Narain Mulla, M.P.

Abatement of
appeals

Constituent
Assembly
Debates on Arti-
cle 134,


Commission's
view on proposed
enlargement of
Supreme Court’s
junsdiction,

‘New section pro-
posed,

282

sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (1) of the article. Though
2 number of suggestions were made that the Supreme Court should
have a considerable appellate jurisdiction over the High Courts
in criminal matters, they were all tured down by the Consti-
tuent Assembly. It decided to leave any such proposal to
Parliament to consider in due course and, if necessary, to legis-
jate under clause (2) of the article.

31.67. The High Court has thus been made the final court
in criminal matters subject to two very limited exceptions. The
first is that if the High Court on appeal reverses an order of
acquittal of an accused person and sentences him to death, he
has a right of appeal to the Supreme Court. The obvious inten-
tion is to restrict such appeals broadly to capital offence cases.
ven where the man has been acquitted by the trial court of a
capital offence and on appeal the High Court finds him guilty
but sentences him to imprisonment for life instead of death,
article 134(1)(a) does nor give him a right of appeal. We feel
that this further limitation is too stringent and not easily justifi-
able and that the convicted person sought to have a right of appeal
in such cases. It has to be remembered that their number is
bound to be much larger than the number of cases in which the
death sentence is passed by the High Court after setting aside
an order of acquittal by the Court of Session.

We, however, do not think it would be wise to extend further
this right of appeal to cases where the High Court after revers-
ing an order of acquittal sentences the accused person to imprison-
ment for ten years or a longer period. Offences for which the
law prescribes a punishment of ten years’ imprisonment or more
are quite numerous, and if the proposal in the Bill is to be
accepted, it will certainly lead to a large increase in the number
of appeals to the Supreme Court making it, more or less, an
ordinary court of sccond appeal in criminal matters. In our
opinion, the High Courts’ position as the final court in all
criminal matters, subject to appeal only in exceptional citcume
stances should be maintained. We may mention here that in
an earlier Report! the Law Commission did not agree with 2
proposal to extend the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court to all cases where the death sentence had been awarded
and confirmed by the High Court. They stated that “for over
a century such cases have been dealt with by the High Courts
subject to the superintendence of the Privy Council under its
special Jeave jurisdiction and there is no reason why the High
Court should not continue to deal with such cases in the same
manner.”

31.68. We accordingly propose the following new section :—

“417B. Where a High Court has on appeal reversed
an otder of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced
him to imprisonment for life, he may appeal to the Supreme
Court.”

114th Report, Vol. I, page 52.


283

31.69. Cases of the type mentioned in article 134(1) (9)
are of such rare and infrequent occurrence that, apart from
principic, it will not make any material difference whether its
scope is widened to include cases where the High Court sen-
tences the accused to imprisonment for life or for a long term
or even for a short period. We have, therefore, recommended
above that any person convicted in a trial held by a High
Court may apeal to the Supreme Court unless the sentence pass-
ed by the High Court is one of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months or of fine not exceeding one thousand
rupees.

1 See paras 31,10 and 31.12 above.

Jurisdiction under
article 134 (2) (0),


Introductory.

Section 432(1).

Section 432 (2).

Reference’ by
High - Court to
Supreme Court
200 necessary.

CHAPTER XXXII
REFERENCE AND REVISION

32.1. Ordinarily, the judgment or order of a criminal court
is Open to correction only appeal; but all such orders are not
under the law appealable, and to avoid the possibility of any
miscarriage of justice, in such cases, another process called
‘revision’ has been devised by the Criminal Procedure Code, and
detailed rules governing the exercise of the reversional power
are contained in sections 435 to 440.

32.2. Before, however, considering those powers, it is
necessary to mention two other provisions contained in section
432 which enable an inferior court to consult the High Court on
a@ matter of law in certain circumstances. Sub-section (1) of
that section provides that if a criminal court (not being a High
Court) has to decide whether a particular enactment is consti-
tutionally valid, and feels that it is not, but finds that neither
the High Court to which the court is subordinate nor the
Supreme Court has pronounced on that enactment, the court
should make a reference to the High Court for the decision
of that question. The intention here is that the validity of laws
possibly in conflict with the Constitution should be decided
authoritatively and quickly. This is a satisfactory method,
although of course not many occasions arise for the adoption of
this course.

32.3. Sub-section (2) of section 432 provides that a Presi-
dency Magistrate may refer any question of law arising before
him ‘to the High Court for decision. Other Magistrates and
courts have no such power to consult the High Court. The
reasons for confining this method to the Presidency Magistrate
are that their judgments are directly appealable to the High
Court and many judgments are not appealable at all; and, 2 art
from this, these courts are located in the same place as the High
Court. It has been said that this distinction between Presidency
Magistrates and others should discontinue, the suggestion being
that all courts should have the power of consulting the High
Court on questions of law. We are satisfied that such a course
would place too heavy a burden on the High Courts, without
any corresponding advantag e. The reference to “Presid
Magistrate” wilt be replaced by “Metropolitan Magistrate”.

32.4. Another suggestion! requiring more careful considera-
tion is that a High Court should be empowered to refer a
question of law to the Supreme Court if the High Court finds
that other High Courts have, on that question expressed different
views. Jt does, of course, happen,—and not infrequently—
that a particular provision of law is understood by one High

2 Suggestion of Shri B. C. Sen, Retired Public Prosecutor, Calcutta;
3020 %,0 Part Il, S.No. 11, and his book “Crimioal Trials", pages


285

Court in one sense and by another High Court in a different and
possibly opposite sense; and since there are a number of High
Courts, differences of opinion on such matters are bound to arise.
The argument behind the present suggestion is that conflicting
opinions of different High Courts make the law uncertain, and
the uncertainty should be quickly resolved at the instance of
the High Court itself and not left to the initiative of the parties
who may or may not be disposed to approach the Supreme
Court. It is, of course, desirable that the law should be certain;
but it is even more important that the law should be settled
in a satisfactory manner. Our High Courts are competent
enough to settle the most difficult questions of law that may
arise, and there is no reason to think that they need the assis-
tance of the Supreme Court at every step. That different High
Courts may, on occasions, entertain different views on the same
matter is inevitable; but we do not consider it such a calamity
as the suggestion scems to assume. On the other hand, the
entertainment and expression of different views leads to a clari-
fication of the real problem to be solved, and the Supreme Court
should be allowed the advantage of considering ail the different
views when a sufficiently important case actually arises and one
or other of the parties feels sufficiently interested to move the
Supreme Court. Meanwhile, of course, the law in each State
or area subject to the jurisdiction of a High Court remains clear
and certain.

Looking at the suggestion from the practical point of view,
we feel that, if accepted, it might well flood the Supreme Court
with references of this kind, which may have to be decided
hastily and somewhat unsatisfactorily. We are, therefore, not
disposed to accept the suggestion.

32.5. In section 433 the reference to “the Magistrate” should
be replaced by reference to “the Court”.

32.6. We then come to the revisional powers. In general
terms, the scheme for the exercise of revisional powers, is this.
Under section 435, the High Court, the Sessions Judge and the
District Magistrate have concurrent power to call for and
examine the record of proceedings before a Magistrate, and see
if any illegality or impropriety has been committed. (The sec-
tion also mentions the Sub-divisional Magistrate, but he is now
to be deleted from the scheme). If it is found that any com-
plaint has been wrongly dismissed under section 203 or any
accused person wrongly discharged, then a further inquiry into
the case can be ordered by the examining authority (section
436). Further, if it is found that any accused person should
have been committed for trial to the sessions court but has been
wrongly discharged, the authority examining the record can order
a committal to be made (section 437). In case the illegality or
impropriety is of some other kind, the matter has to be con-
sidered by the High Court (section 438), and the High Court
can make any order it thinks proper. The powers of the High
Court under section 439 are very wide; it has all the powers
of a court of appeal and may enhance the sentence. The only
restriction is that is cannot chango an acquittal into a conviction.
although of course it can order a re-trial. There is little doubt

Section 433,

Sch

eme of rove

sional

Secti

xs powers-
ious EeS ०


‘Suggestion to vest
powers in Session
Courts,

Commission's
view.

286

that it is necessary that the High Court should have these wide
revisional powers, and experience shows that they are being
exercised with care and in the interest of justice.

32.7. It has been suggested that some of these powers can
be safely entrusted to the Session Courts and that would relieve
some of the congestion of work in the High Courts. In the
14th Report,? the Law Commission said :

“A further measure which will relieve congestion in
this category of work needs consideration. Could some
of the revisional powers now being exercised by the High
Courts be entrusted to sessions judges? The Judicial
Reforms Committee of Uttar Pradesh? recommended that
sessions judges should be given full powers to bear and
determine all criminal revisions except revisions against
orders of acquittal and revisions for enhancement of sen-
tences.

The evidence before us generally favoured the grant
of revisional jurisdiction to this extent to the sessions judge.
There was general agreement that in most petty matters
a patty applying for revision labours under a disadvantage
in that he has to take the matter to the High Court. The
view was also expressed that there was no reason why
sessions judges who are entrusted with the trial of every
important case and are competent to impose even the
penalty of death should not be empowered to deal with
minor matters in revision and be required to submit them
to the High Court for its final orders. It is anomalous
that a sessions judge should be able to deal with and
dispose finally an appeal from a sentence passed by a first
class magistrate, but that he should not be competent to
revise an order passed by a third class magistrate.

We arc, therefore, of the view that sessions judges
may well be invested with powers to pass final orders in
revision in all matters other than petitions against orders
of acquittal and for enhancement of sentence.”

32.8. Somewhat similar views have been expressed in some
suggestions received by us. %-*-8 We have given a good deal
of thought to this matter, and considered in detail the implications
of the recommendation, but we have considerable doubt its prac-
tical value. As we have said, the revisional power given to the
High Courts is wide; not only are the judgments and final orders
subject to examination, but also interlocutary decisions. The
High Court is able to maintain one single standard for inter-
ference in such matters; but if this power descends to the courts

114th Report, Vol. 2, page 826.

2.Report of the U.P. Judicial Reforms Committee, (1950-51), page 63.

3 Report of the U.P. Committee for Investigation into the Causes of
Cormuption (1963), page 55 and pages 242.243.

4F.3(2)/S55-L.C. Pt. Il, B.No. 33 and 35 (Suggestion of two State
Governments).
F sp (26576 Pt. TH, S.No. 49(9) (Suggestion of a High Court
jadge).


287

of session, it is very doubtful if a uniform standard can be
maintained. There is, then, the plain fact that the High Court
can and does, by its prestige, make its decisions acceptable to
a large number of people, which would not be the case with
the courts of scssion. At the same time, we think that if session.
courts are allowed to interfere with the proceedings in the
magistrates’ courts while they are pending, the result would be
large number of revision petitions for that purpose. Tt is true,
that a sessions court can, on appeal, reverse the decision of a
magistrate of the first class but cannot revise the decision of
the third class magistrate. This seeming anomaly, however,
loses its point when it is remembered that the decision of a court
of session is still open to correction by the High Court, as is
the judgment of the Magistrate of the third class. The fact is,
that a party who can afford the expense, is generally not satis-
fied till it has obtained the verdict of the High Court, and the
delegation of any power of the High Court to the sessions
court might merely mean that the same work will have to be
done twice over at two levels. It has to be remembered that
po statutory provision can bar the right of a party to approach
the High Court for doing justice in a criminal matter; and if,
at present, that power of the High Court under articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution is not freely invoked, it is because the
revisional power under section 439 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure vests in the High Court, and is enough for practical
purposes. Nor are we satisfied that criminal revisions form
such a large part of the congestion of work in the High Courts
that some relief in that respect would justify disturbing the

resent scheme, which is not shown to have worked unsatis-
Facto iy.

32.9, Because of the separation of the judiciary from the
executive, some changes have to be made in the _revisional
powers of the courts. The Chief Judicial Magistrate will, of
course, in respect of the judicial magistrates exefcise the powers
now vesting in the District Magistrate; but 10 respect of exe-
cutive magistrates exercising certain judicial functions, power
must remain with the District Magistrate, and we are providing
for that. It is not, however, proper that the Magistrate, who
will now be an executive officer only, should have the power
to finally decide anything. His power will be limited to send-
ing a report to the High Court for decision, with his recom-
mendation. The Sessions Judge, however, will have power in
-respect of all Magistrates. In the result, section 435 will have
‘to be revised as follows :—

“435. (1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge or

Chief Judicial Magistrate may call for and examine the
record of any proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court
situate within its or his local jurisdiction for the purposes
of satisfying itself or himself as to the correctness, legality
or propriety of any finding. sentence or order recorded
or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings of
such inferior Court and may, when calling for such record,
direct that the execution of any sentence or order be suspend-
ed, and, if the accused is in confinement, that he be released
on bail ‘or on his own bond pending the examination of the
record.

0008.
sary in. view of
se] of jude
ciary,

Power to call fos
records of inferior
Courts,


Revision of orde: aint 5 4
dismissin; 8 2 com was that, before an order dismissing a complaint under section

Pl

aint,

288

Explanation—Ali Magistrates, whether exercising original
or appellate jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be inferior to
the Sessions Judge for the purposes of this sub-section and
of section 437.

(2) If an application under sub-section (1) has been
made either to the Session Judge or to the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, no further application shall be entertained by the
other of them.

(3) The District Magistrate shall have and may exer-
cise all the powers of the Sessions Judge under sub-section
(1) in respect of any proceeding before an Executive
Magistrate.

(4) If an application under this section has been made
either to the Sessions or to the District Magistrate, no fur-
ther application shall be entertained by the other of them.

32.10. One suggestion made to us regarding section 436

203 is disturbed, notice should go to the accused person so
that he can urge what he likes in support of the dismissal order.
This was sought to be supported by the principle of natural
justice. We do not, however, see how such an accused person
can be called a “party to the proceedings” at that stage, and
the Supreme Court has ruled* that it is hardly proper to permit
him to intervene in the Proceedings. Further, in a number of
cases, it will happen that notice to him will mean unnecessary
trouble and expense to a person who may be wholly innocent,
If a Magistrate has, on considering the facts, found that there
is no ground for proceeding against any person and therefore
dismissed the compliant summarily, there is hardly any reason for
the revising Court to call any one to Court as an accused or as
a respondent until of course, after a further inquiry has been
made, and that inquiry justifies the issuing of Process,

32.11. Only a few formal amendments are required in
section 436, 437 and 438, as follows :—

(i) In section. 436, for the words “District Magistrate”
the swords “Chief Judicial Magistrate” shall be
substituted.

(ii) In section 437, for the words “District Magistrate”
the words “Chief Judicial Magistrate” shall be
substituted; for the words “committed for trial” the
words “committed to the Court of Session for trial”
shall be substituted; and in the proviso for the
words “why the commitment should not be made”
the words “why the order should not be made” shall
be substituted,

(iii) Ta section 438(1), after the words “Sessions Judge”
the words “Chief Judicial Magistrate” shall be
inserted.

1Chandre Deo, AIR. 1963 S.C. 1430; (1964) 1 S.C.E., 639,

n

~


28 9

32.12. Section 439 empowers to revise any order made by a
Criminal Court, and to do so not only if moved by a party or by
the Sessions Judge or the District Magistrate, but also on
its own motion irrespective of how the order may have come
to its notice, Sub-section (3) provides that the Higib Court
may fot impose any sentence heavier than might have been
inflicted by a first class Magistrate, unless the sentence
under revision was passed by a Magistrate acting under
section 34, in which case there is no such limitation, The
ordinary rele in respect of an appellate court is that it cannot
impose a sentence heavier than the trial court could have done’;
and we think that the same limitation should apply when the
revisional power of the High Court is exercised. We propose
to do this by deleting sub-section (3) from section 439, and
thus leaving the High Court with the ordinary powers of an
Appellate Court. As all such Courts will have the power to
enhance a sentence on proper appeal,? the words “and may
enhance the sentence” will be omitted from section 439(1).

32.13. Sub-section (6) of section 439 says that a person
required to show cause why his sentence should not be enhanced
is entitled to show that his conviction is unsustainable although
he may not have appealed against his conviction. The principle
underlying this rule is sound; but as we are separately providing
for “enhancement of sentence” through an appeal? this sub-
section would be redundent, and we, therefore, propose to omit
it.

There was a suggestion‘ that the High Court should have
power under section 439 to convert an order of acquittal into
one of conviction. We do not think that that would be at all
proper. An order of acquittal is, on appeal, capable of being
altered to an order of conviction’, and that is sufficient for
dealing with erroneous acquittals.

No other change is necessary in the scheme of revisional
powers.

32.14. Section 440 may be finally revised to read as
follows :—

“440. Save as otherwise expressly provided by _ this
Code no party has any right to be heard
either personally or by pleader before any
Court when exercising its powers of revision
but the Court may, if it thinks fit, when exer-
cising such powers, hear any party either per-
sonally or by pleader.......... ”

32.15. Section 441-442 need no change.

1 Jagat Bahadur, ALR. 1966 S.C. 945, 947; (1966) 2 S.C.R. 822.

2See para 31.39 to 31.43 above.

3See para 31.39 to 31.43 above.

+Home Ministry File No. F. 27/3/55-Judl, वा, App. रु
gestion of the Inspector of Police, Oriewe). PP. 1, Hom 76 (Sus

5 Section 417.

section 4393) to
omitted.

Section 43%(6);t0
Brome

Section * 440
finally revised.

option of Court
to hear parties.

Sections 441-442,


Introductory,

rt
ap against
finding of unfit-
0683 to plead con-
sidered,

CHAPTER XXXIV
LUNATICS

34.1. Chapter XXXIV comprising sections 464 to 475 deals
with the case of lunatics accused of crime. The procedure to
be followed where the accused is unfit to stand trial due to
unsoundness of mind is laid down in sections 464 to 468 and
473, while the case of accused persons who are fit to stand trial
but has been insane at the time of committing the crime is
dealt with in sections 464 to 471. The remaining two sections
474 and 475 contain provisions common to both cases.

34.2. No changes of substance are required in the first five
sections, In section 465, the reference to “commitment” and
“jury” will have to be omitted. This section may be revised
as follows :—

“465. (1) If at the trial of any person before a Court
of Session or a High Court, he appears to the Court to be
of unsound mind and consequently incapable of making his
defence x x x, the Court shall, in the first instance, try the
fact of such unsoundness and incapacity, and if x x x the
Court, x x x is satisfied of the fact, it shall record a finding
to that effect and shall postpone further proceedings in the
case x X 5.

(2) The trial of the fact of the unsoundness of mind
and incapacity of the accused shall be deemed to be part
of his trial before the Court.”

34.3. A question of some importance which arises for con-
sideration in this connection is whether the accused should be
given the right to appeal from a finding that he is unfit to stand
trial due to insanity.

A plea of insanity is usually taken by the accused. But such
a ples can be taken by the prosecution also and if the court
upholds the plea, the result may be detention of the accused
under section 466. It was suggested before us that in such a
case, it is desirable that the accused should be given a right of
apeal. it is seen that in England, a recommendation for giving
the accused a right of appeal, in such a situation was made by
the Criminal Law Revision Committee? and has been carried
out by the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act of 1964.

In our opinion, however, there is no need for such a provi-
sion in India. Almost invariably the plea of insanity is taken by
the defence and it can have no grievance if its plea is accepted
by the Court. In the rare event of such a plea being raised by
the prosecution, and accepted by the Court. the general power
of revision provided in the Code will be sufficient to safeguard
the interest of the accused. We, therefore, do not recommend
any provision for appeal in this matter.

23rd Report of the Criminal Law Revision Committee— “Criminut
Procedure (Insanity)” (1963), Cmd. 2149. page 12, para 29.



291

34.4. Section 469 deals with inquiries and trials before
Magistrates of an accused person who, though fit to stand trial,
is found to have been insane at the time he committed the crime,
while section 470 lays down that when such a person is acquit-
ted on the ground of insanity, the finding shall state specifically
whether he committed the act alleged. Here also, the question
whtcher the accused should be given a right of appeal against
such a finding has to be considered. Where the accused is
declared guilty but insane, he cannot appeal against the finding,
because he is acquitted. It was suggested to us that the accused
should be given a right of appeal against such a finding. It was
stated that there are two special considerations to be borne in
mind in this connection. The first is that though the plea of
insanity is ordinarily taken by the accused (in which case he
would not appeal when the decision is in his favour), it is possi-
ble that the prosecution may take the plea, and in such a case,
the absence of a right of appeal against the finding of “guilty
but insane” may mar his whole life. Secondly, the defence
might take not only the plea of insanity, but also a plea of in-
nocence on the merits; and if the plea of insanity succeeds, the
accused cannot appeal even if he has been found guilty on the
merits.

Our attention was drawn, in this connection, to a number of
English decisions! and it was stated that similar situations can
occur in India also. The Criminal Law Revision Committee
in England had recommended? giving the right of appeal to the
accused in such cases and the recommendation has been carried
out by the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act, 1964.

In our opinion, the power of revision given by the Code is
wide enough to cover such cases, and a change in the law is
not needed. As we have already stated, cases where courts
enter a finding of insanity against the accused except on his own
plea are too rare to merit any special provision to cover them.

34.5. Under section 471(1), when a person is acquitted on
the ground that he was insane at the time of the commission of
the offence and the finding states that the accused did commit
the act alleged, the Magistrate or Court shall order such person
to be detained in safe custody in such place and manner as the
Magistrate or Court thinks fit, and shall report the action taken
to the State Government. Under the proviso to the section the
detention of the accused in a lunatic asylum must be in accord-
ance with rules made by the State Government.

An order of the Court delivering the accused to the custody
of his relatives appears to be illegal® as the Jaw stands at pre-
sent. The contrary view taken in an earlier case,4 was based

3 Felstead v. R., (1914) AC. $34 (HL); R. ५४. Duke, (1963) 1 0.४.
120: (1961) 3 All Eng. Report 737. 738, 739 (C.C.A.); R. v. Jefferson.
(1908) 1 Criminal Appeal Reports 95; R. ४. Larkins, (1911) 6 Criminai
Appeal Reports 194; 55 S.J. 501.

2 Criminal Law Revision Committee, Third Report, “Criminal Proce-
dure (Insanity)”, (1963), Cmd. 2149, page 5, paragraph 9.

5 Superintendent and Legal Remembrancer v. Srish Chandro, LL.R. 56
Cal, 308; ALR. 1928 Cal. 653, 654; Public Prosecutor ४. Kandaswaml,
TLR. 1952 Mad. 485; ALR. 1953 Mad. 355,

44. 8. Mahammad v. Emp., ALR. 1922 Mad. 54, 55.

Section 469 and
470,

Section 471,


Person acquitted
‘on such ground to
be ied in
safe custody,

292

on the language of the section as it stood then, where the word
“kept” was used. The word now used is “detained” and implies
curtailment of liberty.?

It has been suggested that if the person found guilty is
sane at the time of acquittal, his friends and relatives should be
allowed to keep him, after executing a bond with suitable con-
clusion for keeping the peace for five years thereafter. Delivery
of the convicted person to the relatives is a matter which can,
at present, be dealt with under section 475 by the State Govern-
ment only. The Court can, 20 doubt, state in its report, that
it will be safe to release the accused.» But even if the accused
is sane throughout the trial, he cannot be released under section
471.

Ja England, the Criminal Law Revision Committee* while
observing that the Home Office is in a better position than a
Court to iavestigate questions relating to treatment of the accus-
ed, and that in such matters uniformity of practice was desirable,
nevertheless recommended that in both cases i.e, when there
is a “special verdict” (guilty but insane), and when there is a
finding of unfitness to plead, the Court should have a discretion
not to make an order for detention if it considers on medical
evidence that it is safe for the public to order the immediate
release of the accused.

We feel that the recommendations of the English Committee
are applicable to Indian conditions also. At least, the manda-
tory provision in section 471 should be replaced by a provision
which would leave some discretion to the Court. The primary
object of the detention order under section 471 is rehabilitation
of the accused (now acquitted) and to prevent any trouble if be
should relapse into insanity. It cannot be denied that the
accused will receive more personal attention and care from his
own relatives and friends than in a public lunatic asylum; and
where his relatives or friends are ready to look after him and
also undertake to ensure that he causes no injury to himself or
others, there seems no reason why the accused should not be
released to their custody. It can, no doubt, be said in favour
of the present provision that if it is found after observation in
the hospital that the person concerned is not a danger to others,
he would be released under section 475. Even then, there
should be no objection to a discretion being given to the Court.

We recommend that sub-section (1) of section 471 be revis-
ed and amplified, and sub-section (2), which contains a provi-
sion common to sections 466 and 471, be made into a separate

section, as follows :—
“471. (1) Whenever the finding states that the accused

person committed the act alleged, the Magistrate or Court
before whom or which the trial has been held, shall, if such

1 Public Prosecutor v. Nallyyappa, 1L.R. (1948) Mad. 827; A.LR.
1948 Mad. 291.
2 Provisional Government v, Krishna Gopal Maratha, L.L.R. 1945 Nag.

551; ALR. 1945 Nag. 77, 78.
8 Criminal Law Revision Third Report, “Criminal Proce-

Committee, Third
dure (Insanity)”, Cmd, 2149, pages 13, 14, paras, 30-34.


293

act would, but for incapacity found, have constituted an
offerce,—

(a) order such person to be detained in safe custody in
such place and manner as the Magistrate or Court
thinks fit; or

(b) order such person to be delivered to any relative or
friend of such person.

(2) No order for the detention of the accused in a
lunatic asylum shall be made under clause (a) of sub-sec-
tion (1), otherwise than in accordance with such rules as
the State Government may bave made under the Indian
Lunacy Act, 1912.

(3) No order for the delivery of the accused to a rela-
tive or friend shall be made under clause (b) of sub-sec~
tion (1) except upon the application of such relative or
friend and on his giving security to the satisfaction of the
Magistrate or Court that the person delivered shall—

(a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing
injury to himself or to any other person; and

(0) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at
such times and places, as the State Government may
lirect.

(4) The Magistrate or Court shall report to the State
Government the action taken under sub-section (1).

471A. The State Goverament may empower the offi-
cer in charge of the jail in which a person is confined under हम te
the provisions of section 466 or section 471, to discharge empower officer
all or any of the functions of the Inspector’ General of ia charge to dis
Prisons under section 473 or section 474.” charge.

No changes are required in the remaining sections of this
Chapter.


Analysis of chap-
tex,

CHAPTER XXXV

PROCEEDINGS IN THE CASE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES
AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE

35.1. Chapter 35 of the Code deals with proceedings relat-
ing to certain offences affecting the administration of — justice.
Having already provided that! a criminal court shall oot take
cognizance of certain offences except on a complaint made by
the court concerned, the Code now lays down what procedure
the court concerned should adopt when such on offence appears
to have been committed. There are, broadly speaking, three
types of procedure provided in the Chapter for these offences :—

(i) complaint by the court concerned, dealt with in sec-
tions 476, 476A, 476B, 479A and 482;

(ii) commitment to the High Court or Court of Session,
after inquiry by the ccurt concerned, provided in
sections 478 and 479; and

(iii) punishment by the Court itself, dealt with in sec-
tion 480, 481, 485, 485A and 486.

As regards the last type of procedure, the specific provisions
on the subject are followed by a general rule,? providing that
in other cases, po criminal court (other than a Judge of a High
Court) shall try any person for any offence referred to in sec-
tion 195, whea such offence is committed before itself or in
contempt of its authority or is brought under its aotice etc. in
the course “of a judicial proceeding.

It may also be noted that punishment of the offender is not
obligatory, and the court is not bound to carry to its conclusion
a proceeding initiated under these types of procedure. In cer-
tain cases,? the court may, in its discretion, discharge the offender
or remit the punishment, on his submission to the order or re-
quisition of such court or on apology being made to its satisfac-
tion.

For certain purposes, registering officers appointed under the
Indian Registration Act can also be given powers of civil courts*
under the specified sections.

The offences to which the Chapter applies are, broadly
speaking, of three types—(i) perjury; (ii) forgery; and (iti) dis-
Obedience to orders of the court or other species of contempt
of the authority of the court. Of the three types of procedure
which we have mentioned above, the first-—complaint to a
criminal court—is permissible in all cases, while the second aad
third types of procedure are permissible for certain specified

1Section 195(1), Clauses (b) and (०).
2Section 487
3 Section 484.
4 Section 483.

जज


295

offences—depending upon the gravity of the offence,! nature
of the offence—i.e. aced for prompt action so as to remove
obstructions which hinder the progress of the case* or the cix-
cumstances in which the offence is committed,’ rendering im-
mediate punishment necessary in order to maintain the dignity
and prestige of the court-for example, where offences consti-
tuting certain types of contempt are committed in the view or
presence of the court.

Bearing the scheme of the Chapter in mind, we shall now
consider the changes nceded in each section.

35.2. Section 476 is intended to be complementary to sec-
tion 195. The scope should, therefore, be neither wider nor
narrower than that of clauses (b} and (०) of sub-section (1)
of section 195. But there is a discrepancy between the word-
ing of section 195 and section 476; and this has led to a contro-
versy as to the exact scope of section 476; and this controversy
has given rise to another controversy whether the presiding
officer of a court can make a complaint under section 476 in
cases not strictly falling within the earlier section. We propose
certain verbal changes in section 476 in order to emphasise that
this section 476 applies only to the offences to which clause (b)
or clause (९) of section 195(1) applies. We also think it
desirable that section 476 should specifically cover abetment etc.
of those offences, since section 195 applics to them also.?

Section 476 speaks of “a civil, revenue or criminal court”,
while section 195 uses the expression “court”, and defines it.4
We propose to use the expression “court” in section 476 also,
and to provide that it has the same meaning as in section 195.

The last paragraph of section 476(1) provides that for the
purposes of sub-section (1), a Presidency Magistrate shall be
deemed to be a Magistrate of the first class. This can be pro-
vided for briefly and more directly in the main paragraph. We
recommend a drafting change for the purpose.

Under the proviso to section 476(1), the complaint in the
case of a High Court is to be signed by such officer as the High
Court may appoint. In the case of other courts, the complaint
is to be signed by the presiding officer as provided in section
476(1), main paragraph. We wish to deal with both these
matters in one sub-section, as they relate to the same subject.
We recommend a verbal alteration to achieve this object.

3

3. Under section 476(2), the Court to which a complaint
is made under section 476 shall proceed “as if upon complaint
under section 200”. It was suggested during our discussions
that since a complaint is made under section 476 by a respon-

TE. (५. section 478, applicable to offences exclusively triable by the
High Court or Coust of Session.

"EG. sections 485 and 485A.

3Section 480 and 482.

3 See section 195(4).

4See section 195(2).

Section 476,

Section 476 (2)


Section 476 (3).

Section 476A.

Sesion 668
of af
की

296

sible judicial officer (and after inquiry in most cases), the
Court to which the complaint is-made need not and should not
hold another inquiry under Chapter 16 but should issue process
under section 204. It was urged that when a superior Court
had made a complaint, it was inappropriate that a Magistrate
should again hold an imquiry or dismiss it under section 203.
We, however, felt that there was no justification for totally dis-
peusing with an inquiry under section 202. The Court making
the complaint uader section 476 may not have made a thorough
inquiry, and the Court taking cognizance of the offence under
section 195 might like to have more materials before issuing
process. The nature of the jurisdiction to be exercised by the
Magistrate under sections 202 and 203 is not always similar
to the mature of the proceedings held by the complaining Court
under section 476. For instance, under section 202, further
“Investigation” may be ordered, whereas an “inquiry” under
section 476 is of a limited nature. It would not be correct to
assume that one will serve the purpose of the other in every
case.

35.4, Under section 476(3), the trying Magistrate has a dis-
cretion to adjourn the case if there is an appeal in the main
case. Some delay is caused by such stay; but we think that the
nature of the proceedings under section 476 is such that such delay
js inevitable. We do not recommend apy change in this respect.
It has even been suggested! to us that stay should be mandatory
in case of appeal but we would not like to substitute such a rigid
provision either.

35.5. No change of substance is required in section 4766.

35.6. Section 4768 provides for an appeal when a_ court
makes or refuses to make a complaint under section 476. It
has been suggested? by a High Court Judge that the tight of
appeal should be taken away. We are unable to accept the
suggestion. We recognise that the existing provision may cause
some delay. Nevertheless, it is a salutary one, and should not
be disturbed. Abolition of the provision relating to appeal’ may
lead to an anomalous position. If, for example, a court makes a
complaint under section 476 to the effect that a document pro-
duced in evidence before the court was a forged one, and the
appellate court, after hearing the appeal in the main case, comes
to the conclusion that it was not a forgery, then the position of
the appellate court would be helpless, if its power to direct a
withdrawal of the complaint already made under section 476 is
taken away (as proposed). Complaint of forgery is an offshoot
of the main case, and its fate will in most cases depend on the
view taken on the merits in the main case. This position is
inescapable. We are conscious of the fact that where the
offence of forgery is alleged to have been committed in a civil
suit, that suit may take a decade for its final disposal, and till
then the complaint filed after an inquiry under section 476 may
have to be kept pending. However unfortunate the effect of
prolonged proceedings may be on the effective punishment of
पि हि 3(2)/55-L.C. Part ज्या, 5. No. 808 (Suggestion of a High Court
judge
हि हि 3(2)/55-L.C. Part If, 5, No. 33a) (Suggestion of a High Court
iudge

3Section 476B.



297

the offender, the difficulty is inherent in the nature of the
offence and in the procedure contemplated by section 195. The
only satisfactory solution seems to be to speed up the hearing
of civil appeals and revisions.

35.8. It has been held by the Supreme Court! that an
appeal lies under section 476B to the Supreme Court from an
order of a division bench of the High Court directing a com-
plaint under section 476. In our view, this position should be
altered by excluding the High Court from the scope of section
476B. So far as the High Court is concerned, there is no need
for an independent right of appeal against its decision to make
a complaint.

35.9. Orders under section 476, 476A and 476B are, at
present, regarded as subject to revision, In our view, the right
of appeal confered by section 476B is enough, and there
should be no further proceeding by way of revision against such
orders. An order under section 476 or under section 476A
should be final, subject to the appeal provided for by section
476B; and an order under section 476B should be final, being
itself an order passed on appeal. It is also necessary to set at
fest the controversy as to whether the provisions of the Code
of Civil Procedure or of the Code of Criminal Procedure will
apply where the order of a Civil Court passed under section 476
is challenged in revision.

35.10. We accordingly propose that section 476, 476A and
4768 should be recast as follows :—

“476. (1) When, upon an application made to it in this
behalf or otherwisc, any...... Court is of opinion that it is
expedient in the interests of justice that an inquiry should
be made into any offence referred to in sub-section (1)
or sub-section (4) of section 195? which appears to bave
been committed in or in relation to a proceeding in that
Court or, as the case may be, in respect of a document
produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in that Court,
such Court may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as
it thinks necessary—

(3) record a finding to that effect;

(b) make a complaint thereof in writing;

(०) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having juris-
diction;

(d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the
accused before such Magistrate, or if the alleged
offence is non-bailable and the Court thinks it
fecessary so to do, send the accused in custody to
such Magistrate;

(९) bind over any person to appear and give evidence
before such Magistrate.

1M. S. Sheriff, (1954) S.C.R. 1144, 1147; ALR. 1954 S.C. 397.
?The reference is to the revised section 195; see para 15.101 above,

Section 4768 and
appeals to Sup-

treme Court.

Section 476 and

revision.

Sections 476,

476A and 4768

recast.
Procedure

io

cases mentioned
in Section 195.


Appeal.

Procedure of
Magistrate taking
cognizance.

Power to order
costs.

298

(2)? The power conferred on a Court by  sub-scction
(1) in respect of an offence may, in any case where that
Court has neither made a complaint under sub-section (1)
in respect of that offence nor rejected an application for °
the making of such complaint, be exercised by the Court
to which such former Court is subordinate within the
meaning of sub-section (2) of section 195.

_ (3)? A complaint made under this section shall be
signed—

{a) where the Court making the compiaint is a High
Court, by such officer of the Court as the Court
may appoint; and

(b) in any other case, by the presiding officer of the
Court.

(4) In this section, “Court? has the same meaning as in
section 195.

476A. (1)% Any person on whose application any Court
other than a High Court has refused to make a complaint under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 476 or against
whom such a complaint has been made by such Court, may appeal
to the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within
the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 195, and the superior
Court may thereupon, after notice to the parties concerned,
direct the withdrawal of the complaint or, as the case may be..
make the complaint which such former Court might have made
under section 476, and if it makes such complaint, the provisions
of that section shall apply accordingly.

(2)* An order under this section, and subject to any such
order, an order under section 476, shall be final, and shall not
be subject to revision.

476B. (1)5 A Magistrate to whom a complaint is
made under section 476 or section 476A shall proceed to
deal with it in the manner provided in Chapter XVI,

(2)® Where it is brought to the notice of such Magistrate, or
of any other Magistrate to whom the case may have been trans-
ferred, that an appeal is pending against the decision arrived at
in the judicial proceeding out of which the matter has arisen,
he may, if he thinks fit, at any stage adjourn the hearing of the
case until such appeal is decided.”

35.11. A Bombay Amendment? of the Code makes 8 useful
provision conferring power to award costs in proceeding under

lef. Section 476A.

2 cf. Proviso to section 476(1).

Sef. section 4769.

4. New provision.

Bef, sections 476(2) and 482(2).

cf. section 476(3)

7TSection 476-C, inserted by Bombay Act 46 of 1948, reads as
follows :
‘476-C. A Criminal Court dealing with an application made to
it for filing a complaint under section 476 or 476A, and a Court
dealing with an appeal under section 4768 and the High Court dealing
with an application in revision shall have power to make such order

as to costs as mav be just : .
Provided that no such order shall be made against the Government
or any public servant acting on behalf of the Government.



299

section 476 and connected sections. We propose to adopt it
with a few modifications. The new scction which should come
next after section 476A may be as follows :—

“476AA. Any Court dealing with an application made
to it for filing a complaint under section 476 or with aa
appeai under section 476A shali have power to make such
order as to costs as may be just.”

35.12. Sections 478 and 479, which deal with commitment
by civil courts, may be omitted. These sections are rarely resort-
ed to. The Civil Court can make a complaint to the Magistrate
even where the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of
Session.

35.13. Section 479A was inserted in 1955 with the object of
“eradicating the evils of perjury”. The section has brought into
being a procedure for making a complaint in case of perjury—
@ procedure which excluded? that provided by section 476. Ever
since its introduction the section has been 8 source of trouble.
First, there was a controversy as to whether it was exclusive of
section «76 or merely provided an additional alternative. That
the former is the correct view is now well-settled. But the main
question which naturally arises is whether this section marks an
improvement over section 476. If specdy punishment of perjury
is the aim, then the section does not go far enough, because,
though it bars an appeal against a complaint made by the court,
it does not give power to the court itself to punish perjury.

Morcover, action under the section cannot be taken after
judgment is pronounced. Where a complaint “can be” made
under the section, action cannot be taken? under section 476, so
that if the court, by reason of forgetfulness or insufficient material,
does not make a complaint on the termination of the proceedings,
action cannot be subsequently taken under section 476, and the
offender escapes unpunished—a result hardly intended by the
legislature. This is a positive harm done by this section.

35.14. A mere repeal of the section, however, without some
provision for punishing perjury will not be a satisfactory solution.
Some provision whereby perjury of a flagrant and unchallengable

type could be effectively punished summarily without seriously -

prejudicing a fair trial of the person concerned, is desirable.
Adopting the recommendation made by the Commission in the
14th Report, for the insertion of a section for punishing Perjury
committed by a witness making contradictory statements on oat
00 two different occasions, we propose the insertion, in place of
section 479A, of a different section the salient features of which
are as follows :—

(i) any criminal court, other than that of a Magistrate of
the second class should have power to punish summarily
the offence of giving false evidence committed by a wit-
ness who makes contradictory statements on oath;

2 See section 479A(6).
2 Section 479A(6).
314 Report, vol. 2, page 833, paragraph 5.

Power to order

costs.

Section 478 and
479, omitted,

Section 479A une
satisfactory.

New
Jury

provision

for flagrant pere
posed,

Proj


Summary proce -
dure for punisb-
ment for giving
fale 0० evidence by

contra-

dictory statements.

300

(ii) maximum punishment should be 6 months’ imprisonment
or fine up to 500 rupees or both;
(iii) the court’s order should be appealable;

(iv) the new procedure should be without prejudice to action
under section 476;

(v) it should be limited to contradictory statements on
oath made on two different occasions and should not
cover contradictions between statements made in exami-
nation and cross-examination.

We are not unaware of the risks involved in giving power to
punish perjury to the very Court before which it is committed.
The original section 477 (deleted in 1923) gave a power to
the Court of Session to punish perjury. The Select Committee
in 1922 deliberately! omitted this section on the ground that it
is not desirable that a court which has instituted the proceed-
ings should dispose of the case itself. The provision which we
recommend is of a very limited character, being confined to
obvious cases of perjury and authorising a small punishment.
Even this procedure will be discretionary, so that where the
Court is of opinion that perjury, even though committed by
contradictory statements on oath, is likely to raise complicated
questions, or deserves more serious punishment than that per-
missible under the proposed section, or is otherwise of such a
nature that the ordinary procedure* is more appropriate, the
court will not proceed under the proposed section.

It may also be noted that the proposed section is confined
to contradition between the statement on oath of the witness
in court at the trial and his previous statement on oath recorded
under section 164 or section 200 or section 202 in the same
case. It was suggested in our discussion that various other kinds
of statements, such as statements made in the affidavit in the
same case under section 145 or in the course of additional evi-
dence recorded under the orders of the Appellate Court, etc.
might also be covered, but in our view these contradictions
should be left to be dealt with by the ordinary procedure for
punishment of perjury by way of complaint under Section.

We accordingly propose the following revised section 479A—
punishment of perjury by way of complaint under section 476.

“479A. (1) If in any trial before a Court of Session
or of a Magistrate of the first class, a witness makes on oath
a statement which contradicts his previous statement on
oath recorded under section 164 or section 200 or section
202 and it appears to the Court that the witness has, by
making such contradictory statements, committed an offence
punishable under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code,
it may, ig satisfied that it is expedient in the interests of
justice that the witness should be tried summarily for the
offence, take cognizance of the offence, and, after giving the
offender an opportunity of showing cause why he should

1 Report of the Select Committee (26th June. 1922) under clause 126.
2Section 476.


301

not be punished under this section, sentence him to impri-
sonment for a term not exceeding six months or fine not
exceeding five hundred rupees or both.

(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly
as may be practicable, the procedure prescribed for sum-
mary trials.

(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of
the Court to make a complaint under section 476 for the
offence where it does not choose to proceed under this
section.”

35.15. Sections 480 to 482 which prescribe the procedure
for punishing contempt when committed ex facie curiae do not
Tequire any changes or comments.

35.16. Section 483 empowers the State Government to direct
that any Registrar or Sub-registrar shall be deemed to be a Civil
Court for the purposes of sections 480 to 482. It was suggested
that similar power should be given to the State Governments to
apply sections 480 and 482 to all Tribunals. We are unable
to accept this suggestion. If such a provision is considered neces-
sary, it should be included in the special law constituting such
Tribunals.

35.17. No change is needed in section 484.

35.18. In section 485, the words “and in the case of a Court
established by Royal Charter, shall be deemed to be guilty of
a contempt” occurring at the end may be deleted. The power of
a State High Court to punish for contempt is governed by article
215 of the Constitution and need not be provided for again in
this section.

35.19. In section 4858 (2) the words “in which an appeal
lies” may be omitted in view of the changes which we propose? in
section 263.

35.20. In section 486(1), which provides for appeals from
convictions for contempt, we propose to exclude the High Courts
but add a reference to the proposed new section 479A, In
regard to sub-sections (3) and (4) we are of the view that
appeals from all the authorities mentioned therein should lie to
the Court of Session. Although City Sessions Courts in the presi-
dency towns are not ordinarily vested with appellate jurisdiction,
we think that in this particular case the power should vest in
them instead of in the High Courts.

Section 486, amended on the above lines, will read as follows—

“486. (1) Any person sentenced by any Court other Appeals

than a High Court under section 479A, section 480, section
485 or section 485A may, notwithstanding anything herein-
before contained, appeal to the Court to which decrees
or orders made in such Court are ordinarily appealable.

(2) The provisions of Chapter XXXI shall, so far as
they are applicable, apply to appeals under this section, and

1 See para 22.8 above.

Sections 480 to
482.

Section 483,

Section 484.
Section 485.

Section 485A,
amended,

Section 486 re
vised,

from
convictions = 19
contempt cases.


302

the Appellate Court may alter or reverse the finding, or
reduce or reverse the sentence appealed against.

(3) An appeal from such conviction by a Court of Small
Causes... . shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions
division within which such Court is situate.

(4) An appeal from such conviction by any.... Regis-
war or sub-Registrar deemed to be a civil court by virtue of
a direction issued under section 483 shall lie to the Court oj
Session for the sessions division within which the office of
such Registrar or Sub-Registrar is situate.”

Section 487 35.21. In sub-section (1) of section 487, a reference to the

amen proposed new section 479A may be added. In view of the aboli-
tion of commitment proceedings, sub-section (2) is not necessary
and may be omitted.


CHAPTER XXXVI
MAINTENANCE OF WIVES AND CHILDREN

36.1. The primary justification for placing in the Criminal Introductory.
Procedure Code provisions relating to maintenance of wives and
children, which is a civil matter, is that a remedy more speedy
and economical than that available in civil courts is provided for
them. It may also be said that these provisions are aimed at
preventing starvation and vagrancy leading to the commission of
crime.
36.2. As the functions of Magistrates under section 483 aro Section 488 (3).
of a judicial character, the reference to the District Magistrate
and Sub-divisional Magistrates in sub-section (1) may be
omitted.

36.3. Section 488(1) speaks of neglecting or refusing tO Does “child”
maintain the “wife” or “child”. Some controversy! exists as to meana minor ?
whether the expression “child” means a minor, or whether it
includes any son or daughter unable to maintain himself or
herself. It has been suggested? that a daughter or son of what-
ever age should be entitled to maintenance under section 488.

No doubt, the right under section 488 will, if this view _is
adopted, be wider than that enjoyed under personal Jaw. For
example, under the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act,
19563 a child can claim maintenance only so long as the child
is a minor. This was also the rule of Hindu Law regarding
sons.* According to Muslim law also, a father is bound to
maintain his sons until puberty and daughters until marriage, but
not adult sons unless disabled by infirmity or disease.6 But,
having regard to the primary object of section 488—namely, pre-
vention of vagrancy—a wider view on the subject is desirable.
The emphasis should be on the inability to maintain itself and
not on the age of the child.

Jn fact, the existing wording amply supports a wider inter-
pretation. The position was lucidly explained in the under-
mentioned Patna case® with which we agree. Other cases on the
subject are also noted? below.

1 See Saraswati v. Madhavan, AIR. 1961 Ker. 297 (reviews case-law).

a Amendment Bill inroduced by, Shri Ajit Singh Sarhadi. (Lok Sabha

Bill 41 of. 1959) imroduced on 14th August, 1959, (Discussed in Lok

Sabha on 2-12-1961 and referred to the Law Commission, F.3(2)/55-L.C.
Part I, S.No. 39).

3 See section 20(2)

4Trevalyan, Hindu Law, (1912), page 200; Chanviragavda v. District
Magistrate, AJR. 1927 Bom. 91, 92; Bhoopati v. Basant Kumari, (1936)
LLR. 63 Cai. 1098, 1111.

5 Mulla, Mahamedan Law, (1961), page 303; Fyzee, Outlines of
Mobhammadan Law, (1963), page 205. vee .

6 Khidani v. Legan Singh, AJR. 1921 Pat, 379(1).

7 Bhagat Singh ४, Emp., (3910) 26 P.R. 1910 Crs 6 1.0. 960; 11 Cr.
LJ, 427; Krishnaswamy Iyer v. Chandravadana, (1918) LER. 37 Mad.
565; 25 M.LJ. 349; Thambuswamy Pillay v. Ma Louse, (1917) 9 L.BR.
37 1.6. 311; 10 Bur. L.T. 209.



Married
daughters.

Aged parents.

Appeals.

304

36.4. Another question that has arisen is, as to how far
section 488 applies to married daughters. According to one
view, a person who can claim maintenance from another source
cannot apply under section 488. On this reasoning, a married
daughter cannot claim maintenance from her father. But a con-
trary view has been taken in a Bombay case,? in which a married
daughter of 15 years was awarded maintenance against the father
under section 488. The Bombay case cites other cases to the
same effect.* Here again, we think that the controversy should
be set at rest by amending section 488(1) so as to ensure that
a married daughter can claim maintenance from her father. No
doubt, she has got her rights against the husband. A Hindu wife
is entitled to be maintained by her husband during her life-time.*
Under Muslim law® also, the husband's duty to maintain com-
mences when the wife attains puberty. Section 488 also gives her
a right against her husband. But there may be hard cases where
the husband is not willing to maintain her, and a power to make
an order against the father is desirable to meet such hard cases.

36.4. A suggestion® has been made to the effect that a provi-
sion for maintenance of parents should be made in cases where
they are unable to maintain themselves. It is true, that under
section 20{1) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act,
1956, a Hindu is bound to maintain his or her aged or infirm
parent so far as the parent is unable to maintain himself or her-
self out of his or her own earning of other property. Under the
Muslim law also’. there is an obligation to maintain one’s parents
{subject to certain exceptions not material here). We are, howe
ever, of the view that the Criminal Procedure Code is not the
proper place for such a provision. There will be considerable
difficulty in the amount of maintenance awarded to parents
apportioning amongst the children in a summary proceeding of
this type. It is desirable to leave this matter for adjudication by
Civil Courts.

36.5. Several persons have suggested that an order under
section 488 should be made appealable. A right of appeal will,
however, result in unduly protracted proceedings and "feat the
primary object of this section, which is to provide a speedy
for destitute wives and children. The aggrieved party has the
remedy of moving the Civil Court to get the order modified or
varified*. Hence. a right of appeal is not desirable.

ra Chanditan v. Chakkayayyan. ¥.L.R. 39 Mad. 957; ALR. 1917 Mad.
2 Banchhod Das v. Emp. ALR. 1949 Bom. 36, 37 (Jabagirdar and
n 31.) .

SADR. 1925 Mad. 491; LL.R. 48 Mad. 503 (Girl of 14 years).
19610 1811), Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance etc. Act (78 of

SMulla, Mahomedan Law. (1961), page 238; Fyzee, Outlines of
Mohammadan Law. (1964), page 202.

Suggestion of Shri Ajit Singh Sarhadi. vide his Amendment Bill intro-
duced on 14th August. 1959 (Lok Sabha Bill 41 of 1959) discussed in
kot Sapba and referred to the Law Commission, F.3(2)/55-L.C. Pt. It,

४०. 39.

7 Mulal, Mahomedan Law, (1968), paras. 371. 372: Fyzee. Outlines
of Mohammadan Law. (1964). pare 206.
5 Section 489(2).

4


305

36.6. In the light of the above discussion. sub-section (1)
of section 488 may be amended to read as follows :-—

“(1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or
refuses to maintain his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate
child of any age unable to maintain itself, whether the child
be married or unmarried, a Magistrate of the first class
may (rest as in the present sub-section).””

36.7. It has been suggested by two High Court Judges with
reference to section 488(3), that if the husband suffers from any
contagious venereal disease it should be considered just ground
for the wife’s refusal to live with him, and this should be ex-
pressly mentioned in the section. We do not consider it neces-
sary or desirable to enumerate exhaustively the various grounds
which would justify a wife’s refusal to live with her husband.
These may be left to the decision of the courts. The Madras
decision noted below may be seen in this connection.

36.8. A suggestion has been made? that the words “or if
they are living separately by mutual consent” occurring in section
488(4) should be omitted, but we do not think this can be
accepted. If the parties are living separately by mutual consent,
they may be expected to make the necessary arrangement regard-
ing their maintenance, and if the husband does not carry out the
arrangement, the remedy in the Civil Court should be sufficient.

In section 488(4), the words “living in adultery” have been
almost uniformly interpreted as indicating an adulterous course
of life, as distinguished from a single lapse from virtue. It has
been suggested? that a single act of adultery should be enough
to disentitle the wife to maintenance. We are unable to accept
the suggestion. Hardships are bound to arise if the wife is
totally debarred from the remedy under this section because of a
single lapse from virtue. Further, to deprive her of maintenance
for an occasional lapse may force her to lead a sinful life and
give her no chance to redeem herself.

39.9. Section 488(5) requires the Magistrate to ०४४०९ his
order in certain contingencies. The question whether in a case
where the wife has obtained an extra-judicial divorce sanctioned
by custom, the Magistrate can cancel his order at the instance
of the husband has arisen. Conflicting decisions of High Courts
on this point are mentioned below‘. To resolve this controversy,
we suggest that the Magistrate should decide the question under
section 488(5). For this purpose after the words “live with
ber husband” in this section, the words “or has been lawfully
divorced by her husband otherwise than by order of a Court”
may be inserted.
Se

1Sellammal v. Muthuvira, AIR. 1943 Mad, 647. (Kuppuswamy
Ayyar J.)

2 Suggestion of Shri 5. 5. More, received through the Home Ministry.

% Amendment Bill introduced by Shri Ajit Singh Sarhadi (Lok Sabha
Bill 41 of 1949); introduced on 14th August, 1959 (referred to Law
Commission, F.3(2)/55-L.C. Pi. If, S.No. 39).

+ Shah Abu _v. Ulfat Bibi, (1896) LLR. 19 Al. 50. 55 (FB); In
re Punjalal ALR. 1928 Bom. 224; Janni Bibi, A.IR. 1955 Andbra Pradesh
i; In re Mohammed Rahimulla, A.LR. 1947 Mad. 46, Mohomed Ismail
v. Sarammal, ALR. 1960 Ker. 262.

Section 488( 1)
amended.

Section 488 (3).

Section 488 (4).

Section 488 (5).


Section 488 (8.)

306

36.10. Under sub-section (8), the place where the wife
resides after desertion by the husband is not material as regards
the venue of the proceedings, though the place where the hus-
band resides—cven temporarily—is relevant. Often deserted
wives arc compelled to live with their relative far away from
the place where the husband and wife last resided together. They
would be put to great harassment and expenditure, unless the
venue of the proceeding is enlarged so as to include the place
where they may be residing on the date of the application.

With reference to sub-section (8), there is the following
controversy. Is it sufficient if the husband resides in the district
in which the proceedings are taken, or is it further necessary that
the court in which the proceedings are instituted must itself be
one having jurisdiction over the place where the husband resides?
The Bombay view! is, that a proceeding under section 488 insti-
tuted in any competent court within the district in which the
husband resides, or is, or in which he last resided with his wife.
This is also the Patna view? and the Kerala view’, The Madras
High Court! has, however, taken a different view. In our opinion,
the Bombay view is correct, as the wording of the sub-section
docs not seem to justify the addition of any further restriction.
We think that the language is clear and aceds 90 amendment on
this point.

Sub-section (8) of section 488(8) may be redrafted as
follows :—

“(8) Proceedings under this section may be taken
against any person in any district—

(a) where he is, or
(b) where he or his wife resides, or

(०) where he last resided with his wife or, as the
case may be, with the mother of the illegitimate
child.”

1 Shantabai_v. Vishnupant Atmaram, ALR. १965 Bom. 107, 108,
paragraph 4 (Kotval J.).

2 Baleshwari Devi ४, Bikram Singh, ALR, 1968 Pat, 383, 384, para-
graph 2 (K. K. Dutta J.).

SELR. (1961) 2 Ker. 702; (1962) 1 Cr. LF. 40, 41.

* Sakuntala v. Thirumalayya, (1966) 2 Mad. L.J. 326.

ye


CHAPTER XXXVII

DIRECTIONS OF THE NATURE OF A HABEAS CORPUS

37. 1. Chapter 37 consists of a single section which confers
on the High Courts the power to issue directions of six different
types, all of them being in the nature of a habeas corpus. The
section, as originally enacted in 1898, conferred the power only
igh Courts of Judicature at Fort William, Madras and
and the territorial limits within which any of these
three High Courts could exercise the power were “the limits of
its ordinary original civil jurisdiction” which coincided with the
limits of the presidency-towns. The scope of the scction was
considerably widened by the Criminal Law Amendment Act,
1923. Instead of only the three High Courts at Calcutta, Madras
and Bombay, all the High Courts in British India were conferred
the power of issuing these directions. Furthermore, instead of
being restricted in territorial extent to the limits of the ordinary
original civil jurisdiction of the High Court, the power was made
exercisable within the limits of its appellate criminal jurisdiction,
i.¢., within the limits of the Province or Provnces over which the
High Court had authority.

37.2. The first two of the six directions which may be issued
under section 491 (1) correspond to the well-known writ of habeas
corpus and are described in clauses (a) and (b) of the section
as foliows :—

“(a) that a person within the limits of its appellate
criminal jurisdiction be brought up before the Court
to be dealt with according to law;

(b) that 8 person Wegally or improperly detained in
public or private custody within such limits be set
at liberty,”

The next three clauses (०), (d) and (e) describe the circum-
stances in which, and the purposes for which, prisoners detained
in any jail within the jurisdiction of the High Court could be
directed to be brought up before the High Court itself or before
some other Court or authority. The last clause (f) empowers the
High Court to direct “that the body of a defendant within such
limits be brought in on the Sheriff's return of cepi corpus to a
writ of attachment”.

37. 3. It will be noticed that article 226 of the Constitution
confers wide and comprehensive powers on the High Courts of
States “to issue to any person or authority, including in appro-
priate cases any Government, directions, orders or writs, in-
cluding writs in nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohihi-
ti0, quo warranto and certiorari” for any purpose. In view of
this provision, clauses (a) and (b) of section 491(1) have been
practically rendered superfinous and can be safely omitted.

History of seo
tion 491,

Types of direo
tions under, seo
tion 491.

Clauses tet} and
1000 by ard
1008

226. 2


308

Clauses (©), (०0) 37.4. We have another Report? considered in detail the pro-

and () omission visions of clauses (c), (d) and (९) relating to the production of

‘ "prisoners in Court for various purposes and recommended that
these clauses (and also section 542 of the Code) should be
omitted and more detailed provisions on the lines of those con-
tained in the Prisoners (attendance in Courts) Act, 1955, should
be included in this Chapter as section 491A.

(18४5९ (f) to be 37.5. Clause (1) which is couched in archaic and obscure

omitted, language relates to “a writ of attachment” which the High Court
may have issued and in regard to which the Sheriff of the presi-
dency-town has submitted “a return of cepi corpus”. This writ
of “attachment” is really a writ of arrest in cxecution of a civil
decree directed to the Sheriff, requiring him to arrest a person
named in the writ and to have the “body” of the person produced
before the Court on a given date. On this writ the “retum” by
the Sheriff sets forth what has been done by him under it. The
literal meaning of cepi corpus is “I have taken the body”; and in
its full form cepi corpus et paratum habec, it means “I have taken
the body and have it ready”? Since the power of arrest in exe-
cution of a civil decree is exhaustively dealt with in the Civil
Procedure Code and since the original civil jurisdiction of the
three Presidency High Courts has been practically abolished, the
power under clause (f), section 491(1), is seldom, if ever,
required to be used.

Chapter 37 to be 37. 6. We, therefore, propose that section 491 be omitted

replaced by a and in its place provisions for securing the attendance of prisoners

different Chapter. in Criminal Courts be included in this Chapter as recommended
in the 40th Report. The existing Chapter XXXVHM may be 18०
placed by the following Chapter :—

टऋणाएर XXXVI
ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED
IN PRISONS

“491. In this Chapter,—
Definitions, (a) ‘detained’ includes detained under any law providing
for preventive detention;
(9) ‘prison’ includes—

(i) any place which has been declared by the State
Government, by general or special order, to be
a subsidiary jail; and

(ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution or otber
institution of a like nature.

491A. (1) Whenever, in the course of an inquiry, trial ial or

Powersto require other proceeding under this Code, it appears to a ii

attendance of Court,—

Prisoners. (a) that a person confined or detained in a prison should
be brought before the Court for answering to a charge
of an offence, or

1 40th Report on the Law relating to Attendance of Prisoners in Courts.

paaras 27 ef seq.
2See Jowit?'s Dictionary of English Law, 1959, Vol. 3, 9. 332.



309

(b) that it is necessary for the ends of justice to examine
such person as a witness,
the Court may make an order requiring the officer in charge of
the prison to produce such person before the Court for answering
to the charge or, as the case may be, for giving evidence.

(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made by a
Magistrate of the second class, it shall not be forwarded to, or
acted upon by, the officer in charge of the prison unless it is
countersigned by the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom such
Magistrate is subordinate.

(3) Every order submitted for countersigning under sub-
section (2) Shall be accompanied by a statement of the facts
which in the opinion of the Magistrate, render the order neces-
sary, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom it is submitted
may, after considering such statement, decline to countersign
the order.

491B. (1) The State Government may, at any time, having
regard to the matters specified in sub-section (2), by general or
special order, direct that any person or class of persons shall not
be removed from the prison in which he or they may be confined
or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains in force,
no order made under section 491A, whether before or after the
order of the State Government, shall have effect in respect of such
person or class of persons.

(2) Before making an order under sub-section (1), the State
Government shall have regard to the following matters, namely :---

(a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds
on which, the person or class of persons has been
ordered to be confined or detained in prison;

(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if
the person or class of persons is allowed to be re-
moved from the prison, and

(c) the public interest, generally.

491C. Where the person in respect of whom an order is
made under section 491A—
(a) is by reason of sickness or infirmity unfit to be
removed from the prison; or

(b) is under committal for trial or under remand pend-
ing trial or pending a preliminary investigation; or

(c) is in custody for a period which would expire before
the expiration of the time required for complying
with the order and for taking him back to the prison
in which he is confined or detained; or

(d) is a person to whom an order made by the State
Government under section 491B applies,
the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out

the Court’s order and shall send to the Court a statement of
reasons for so abstaining:

Provided that where the attendance of such person is required
for giving evidence at a place not more than twenty-five kilometres

Power of State
Government

to
exclude certain
persons from ope-
ration of section
4914.

Officer. in chi
of prison: to ae
tain from

ing out onder ta
certain cases,


Prisoner to be
brought to Court
in custody.

Power to issue
commission for
examination of
witness in prison.

310

distant from the prison, the officer in charge of the prison shall
not so abstain for the reason mentioned in clause (b).

491D. Subject to the provisions of section. 491९, the officer in
charge of the prison shall, upon delivery of an order made
under sub-section (1) of section 491A and duly countersigned,
where necessary, under sub-section (2) thereof, cause the person
named in the order to be taken to the Court in which his attend-
ance is required, so as to be present there at the time mentioned
in the order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody in or near
the Court until he has been examined or until the Court authorises
him to be taken back to the prison in which he was confined or
detained.

491£. The provisions of this section shall be without pre-
judice to the power of the Court to issue under section 503 a
commission for the examination, as a witness, of any person con-
fined or detained in a prison; and the provisions of Chapter XL
shall apply in relation to the examination on commission of any
such person in the prison as they apply in relation to the examina-
tion on commission of any other person.”

<


’

CHAPTER XXXVIII
THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR

38.1. The appointment and functions of the Public Prose-
cutor are dealt with in this short Chapter consisting of only 4
sections. The Chapter does sot give any indication of the actual
organisation of the prosecuting agency in the districts. Under
section 492, there could be any number of Public Prosecutors;
some appyinicd by the Central Government, others by the State
Governmeal, «and yet others by the District Magistrate or, subject
to his control, by the Sub-divisional Magistrate. Then under
section 495, any Magistrate inquiring into or trying a case may
permit the prosecution to be conducted by any person who may
do so personally or by a pleader.

38.2. In practice, however, there is in every district an officer
appointed by the State Government who is designated the Public
Prosecutor and who, with the assistance of one or more additional
Public Prosecutors, conducts ali prosecutions on behalf of the
Government in the Court of Session. These senior Public Prose-
cutors are under the genera} control of the District Magistrate.
Prosecution in the magisterial courts is, generally speaking, in
the hands of either the police-officers or of persons recruited from
the bar and styled Police Prosecutors or Assistant Public Prose-
cutors all of whom work under the directions of the Police
Department.

38.3. In an earlier Chapter,t we have recommended that in
every district a separate prosecution department should be con-
stituted and placed in charge of a Director of Public Prosecutions,
or, if this is not considered feasible, of the Public Prosecutor of
the district who should be given a greater authority, a higher
status and a wider range of functions than he has at present, and
approximating to those envisaged for the Director. Now, section
492 provides for the appointment of several Public Prosecutors
in a district all of whom can apparently function at the same
time. No qualifications are laid down in the law for a Public
Prosecutor and the Government is empowered to appoint any
one it likes to be a Public Prosecutor. We think that the Code
should provide a better frame-work for organising the prosecuting
agencies in the district in a systematic way, and for this purpose,
we propose the following two sections in place of section 492 :—

“492. (1) For every district the State Government shall
appoint a Public Prosecutor. It may also appoint one or more
additional Public Prosecutors for the district.

(2) A person shall only be eligible to be appointed a Public
Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor under sub-section
(1) if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate and
is recommended by a High Court for appointment.2

1 566 paras. 18.24 and 18.25 above.
2C}, art. 233(2) of the Constitution,

Introductory.

Existing Prose
cuting agency
the districts,

Section 492,

Appointment of
Public = Prose-
cutor,


Appointment of
Assistant Pubtic
Prosecutors.

Section 493
amended.

Appearance — by
Public | Prosecu-
tors.

Section 494 with-
drawal from pro-
secution only by
Public Prosecu-
tor in charge of
case.

312

(3) The Central Government or the State Government may
appoint, for the purposes of any case or class of cases, an
advocate of not 1255 than ten years’ standing as a Special Public
Prosecutor.

_ 492.A(1) The State Government shall appoint in every
district one or more Assistant Public Prosecutors for conducting
prosecut:ons in the Courts of Magistrates.

(2) No potice-officer shall be eligible to be appointed as
Assistant Public Prosecutor under sub-section (1).

(3) Where no Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under
sub-section (1) is available for the purposes of any particular
case, the District Magistrate may appoint any other person to be
the Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of that case:

Provided that a police-officer shall not be so appointed—
(५) if he has taken any part in the investigation into the
ofience with respect to which the accused is being
prosecuted; or
(०) 16 he is below the rank of Inspector.”

The Public Prosecutors appointed under section 492 will
ordinarily conduct cases on behalf of Government in the Sessions
Court, While the Assistant Public Prosecutors appointed under
section 492A will be for conducting cases in the Courts of
Magistrates. Although it is not expressly provided in the latter
section that Assistant Public Prosecutors should be legally quali-
fied, we have no doubt that the present trend of appointing, as far
as possible, qualified legal practitioners as Assistant Public Prose-
cutors or Police Prosecutors or Police Prosecutors will be main-
tained in all States and the provision made in sub-section (3)
above (corresponding to sub-section (2) of section 492) will be
resorted to 1055 and less in future years.

38.4. Section 493 does not require any change of substance,
but an express reference to the Assistant Public Prosecutor
besides the Public Prosecutor will be necessary. The section may
be modified to read as follows :—

“493. (1) The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prose-
cutor in charge of a case may appear and plead without any
written authority before any Court in which that case is under
inquiry, tcial or appeal.

(2) If in any such case any private person instructs a pleader
to prosecute any person in any Court, the Public Prosecutor or
Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of the case shall conduct
the prosecution, and the pleader ४3 instructed shall act therein
under his direction.”

38.5. Section 494 seems to authorise any Public Prosecutor
to withdraw from the prosecution with the consent of the Court.
The Supreme Court has held* that the reasonable interpretation
to be placed on this section is that it is only the Public Prosecutor
who is in charge of a particular case and is actually conducting

1 State of Punjab v. Surjit Singh, (1967) 2 S.C.R. 347; ALR. 1967
S.C, 1214.


313

prosecution that can file an application under this section
sevking permission to withdrew from the prosecution. If a Public
Prosecutor is not in charge of a particular case and is not con-
ducting the pro:ccution, he will not be entitled to ask for with-
drawal from prosecution of that case under section 494. Tf any
Public Presecuior who ha: nothing to do with a particular case is
held entiticd to file an application under section 494, the result
will be anomaious. The contrary view viz., that the section gives
an unquanfied right to any on who, in law, is a “Public Pro-
secutor” io fie ap application for withdrawal from prosecution
it appears, strongly urged in the case supported by a few
devisions of Hich Courts. “That view was negatived ‘by the
Supreme Court.

38.6. We have elsewhere referred to a conflict of interests that
may possible arise between the Central Government and the State
Government in the matter of remitting or commuting sentences.?
A similar conflict of interests can arise under section 494 in
respect of withdrawal of prosecutions. A State Public Prosecutor
appointed by the State Government can, if he is in charge of the
case, withdraw from the prosecution, though the Central Govern-
ment may be much concerned in the prosecution of the offenders.
This could happen where the offence relates to a matter to which
the executive power of the Union extends, or was investigated by
the Delhi Special Police Establishment, or involved the misappro-
priation of destruction of, or damage to, Central Government pro-
perty, or was committed by a Central Government servant in the
course of his official duty.2 We are of the view that in such
cases it is desirable that the consent of the Central Government
should be obtained before the Public Prosecutor seeks permission
of the Court to withdraw from the prosecution. We recommend
the insertion of a proviso to that effect in section 494.

38.7. Section 494 may accordingly be revised to read as
follows :—

“494. (1) The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prose-
cutor in charge of a case may, with the consent of the Court, at
any time before the judgment is pronounced, withdraw from the
prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any
one or more of the offences for which he is tried; and, upon such
withdrawal,—

(a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the
accused shall be discharged in respect of such
offence or offences;

(b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when
under this Code no charge is required, he shall be
acquitted in respect of such offence or offences:
Provided that where such offence—

(i) was against any law relating to a matter to
which the executive power of the Union extends,
or

3 See paragraph 29.13 above.
2 C7, revised section 4028 proposed in para. 29.14 above.

Previous consent
of Central
Government 7705
vided for in cer-
tain cases,

Section 494 re-
vised.

Withdrawal from
prosecution,


Section 495 te-
vised,

Permission to
conduct prosecu-
tion,

314

(ii) was investigated by the Delhi Special Police
Establishment under the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946, or

(iii) involved the misappropriation or destruction of,
or damage to, any property belonging to the
Central Government, or

(iv) was committed by a person in the service of the
Ccniral Government while acting or purporting
to act in the discharge of his official duty,

and the prosecutor in charge of the case has not been
appointed by the Central Government he shall not
withdraw from the prosecution without the previous
permission of the Central Government.”

38.8. In view of the new section 492A regarding Assistant
Public Prosecutors and the changes made in section 494, section
495 may be revised as follows :—~

“495. (1) Any Magistrate inquiring into or trying a case may
permit the prosecution to be conducted by any person other than
a police-officer below the rank of Inspector, but no person, other
than the Advocate-General or Government Advocate or a Publie
Proecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, shall be entitled to do
so without such permission:

Provided that no police-officer shall be permitted to conduct
the prosecution if he has taken part in the investigation into the
offence with respect to which the accused is being prosecuted.

(2) Any person conducting the prosecution may do so per-
sonally or ty रू pleader.” P y Per

+

4

7


CHAPTER XXXIX
BAIL

39.1. The broad principles adopted in the Code in regard to
bail are—
(i) bail is a matter of right, if the offence is bailable;

(ii) bait is a matter of discretion, if the offence is non-
bailable;

(iii) bail shall not be granted by the Magistrate if the offence
is punishable with death or imprisonment for life; but
if the accused is a woman, or a minor under the age
of 16 years, or a sick or infirm person, the court has
a discretion to grant bail;

(iv) the Court of Session and the High Court have a wider
discretion in granting bail, even in respect of offences
punishable with death or imprisonment for life.

39.2. Under section 496, the right to bail is absolute in case
of bailable offences. It has been suggested? that where a person
released on bail has absconded or has failed to appear before
the Court on the date fixed, he shail not be entitled to bail, whea
brought to court on any subsequent date. We recommend the
acceptance of this suggestion, and further recommend that refusal
of bail under such circumstances shall be without prejudice to any
action । that may be taken under section 514 for forfeiture of the

il bond.

Accordingly, section 496 may be re-numbered as sub-section
(3) and the following sub-section may be added as sub-section
(2) :--

“(2) Notwithstanding anythin, fg <comained in sub-section
(1), where a person who having 3 released on bail, has
failed to comply with the condition .of the bail bond as
regards the time and place of attendance, the court may
refuse to release him on bail when, on a subsequent occa-
sion in that case, he appears before the Court or is brought
in custody. Any such refusal shall be without prejudice to
the power of the Court to call upon any person bound by
such bond to pay the penalty thereof under section 514.”

39.3. With reference to section 497(1), a State Government?
has suggested that the words “there appears sufficient ground for
inquiry into his guilt” te substituted for the words “if there appear
reasonable grounds for believing” (that he has been guilty of an
offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life). The
reason given was, that persons accused of serious offences again
committed scrious offences during release on bail. We cannot
accept the suggestion. It would be unduly restrictive of the power

1F.3(2)/S5-L.C. Pt. II, $. No. 36, page 178 (Suggestion of Shri A. K.
Roy, Additional Sessions Judge, Asansol).

2 F.3(2)/55-L.C. Pt, Il, S. No. 28 (Amendment Bill proposed by
the Government of U.P.).

Broad_ principles
regarding bail.

Section 496 per-
son breaking bail
bond not to be
released on bail.

Section 497 (1).


316

to grant bail. H the test of “sufficient ground for inquiry” is
substituted, it would amount to denial of bail in almost every
case. Hf in a particular case, a person released on bail was re-
ported to have committed a fresh offence, or otherwise misused
his liberty, the court may be moved to cancel his bail bond.

A Bar Association’ has suggested that section 497(1) should
be made more lidcral by providing that if the offence is not
punishable with death, bail ought to be granted. We are afraid
that this would be a radical and undesirable change in the law.
Offences punishable with imprisonment for lifc are serious enough
to justify the present provision.

Another suggestion* is to the effect that in scction 497(1),
for the wards “he may be released on the bail”, the following
words may be substituted—“he shail be released on bait unless
the Court for reasons recorded in writing otherwise directs”. We
are unable to accept this suggestion either. Its acceptance would
practically amount to an abolition of the distinction between bail-
able and non-bailable offences.

Section 497 (3A) 39.4, Tt has been stated in certain suggestions? sent to us that
sub-section (3A) of section 497 has Created difficulties and
should be deleted. This sub-section was inserted in order to
avoid hardship to accused persons in non-bailable cases where
the proceedings are prolonged beyond a certain period (sixty
days). In such cases, the sub-section provides, that the accused
shall be released on bail (unless the Magistrate otherwise directs).
Having regard to the fact that this provision was inserted only
in 1955, we think that much more experience of its working is
required before its deletion on the ground of practical difficulties
can be recommended.

Grant of bail with 39.5. Cases often arise under scction 497, where, though the

conditions | ay court regards the case as fit for the grant of bail, it regards the

in section 497, imposition of certain conditions as necessary in the circumstaaces.
fo an earlicr Report* the Commission examined the position as to
whether such a power exists now and recommended an amend-
meat of section 497 for the purpose. We agree with the recom-
mendation and propose that the following sub-section may be
added in the section after sub-section (1) :--

“(1A) When a person accused or suspected of the com-

mission of an offence punishable with “imprisonment which

पु may extended to seven years or more or of an offence under
Chapter VI, Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII of the Indian
Penal Code, or of the abetment of, or conspiracy or attempt

to commit, any such offence, is released on bail under sub-

1P.3(2)/55-L.C, Part II, 5. No. 34{a) (Delhi Bar Association).

2 Home Ministry File No. 27(5)/S4Judl. App. IV, Item (8).

3 F.3(2)/55-L.C, Pt. 1, $. No. 17 (Views of certain Inspector Gene-
rails of Police as summarised in the consolidated note sent by the Intelli-
gence Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs).

436th Report on sections 497 and 498 of the Code and grant of bali
with conditions.

¥


317

section (1), the Court may impose any condition which it

considers necessary—

(a) in order to ensure that such person shall attend in
accordance with the conditions of the bond executed
under this Chapter, or

(b) in order to ensure that such person shali not comunit
an oifence similar to the offence of which he is accused
or of the commission of which he is suspected, or

(c) otherwise in the interests of justice.”

39.6. It has been suggested? that a sub-section should be
inserted in section 497 to the effect that where the investigation
is delayed beyond 60 days, the accused {in non-bailable cases)
should be released on bail. We may, in this connection, point
out that where the investigation is delayed*, the question of the
detention of the accused will come up for review automatically
before the Court; the Court will be free to pass such orders as
it thinks fit, and is not precluded from ordering release on bail
if that is an appropriate course in the circumstances of the case.
We do not think that a rigid provision is necessary on this
subject.

39.7. Section 497(5) and section 498 relate to similar mat-
ters, and can be considered together. Further, section 498 is a
composite section in which two distinct maters, which are not
closely connected, have been put in one sentence. In the
interests of clarity? a rc-casting of these provisions appears to
be desirable. The main ideas found in section 497(5) and
section 498 are—

(i) power of a Court which has released a person on bail
to direct his arrest and to commit him to custody—
section 497(5), in part;

(ii) special powers of the High Court and Court of Session—

(a) to order release of any person section 498(1),
second part; and

(b) to order that a person released on bail under
section 497 or section 498(1) be arrested and
to commit him to custody—earlier part of section
497(S) and section 498(2);

(iii) amount of the bond not to be excessive, and power
of the High Court or Court of Session to reduce the
bail required by a police officer or a Magistrate—
section 498(1), in part.

It will be noticed that the first is a general power conferred
on all courts; the second is a special power of the superior courts;
and the third is an ancillary power.

Pt. Hi, S. No. 21 (Suggestion of Himachal Pradesh

YF3(2)/55-L.
Adaiinistration}

2See discussion relating to section 344.

३८1. criticism of section 498 in Amir Chand, ALR. 1950 EP. 33, in
tha judgment of Khosla 3.

Delay in Investi-
gation.

Section 497 (5.
and section 498)


318

We propose to put the first as section 497(3A), so that it
will appear immediately after the first three sub-sections,—the
sub-sections which relate to release on bail. [ln consequence,
existing sub-section (3A) will require re-numbering as sub-
section (3B)).

The second will, in view of its importance, form a separate
section—section 497B.

The third may be retained in section 498,

Along with this re-arrangement of the provisions, some
changes in their content are also desirable.

First, as regards the power of a court to cancel bail granted
by it, the relevant part of section 497(5) is obviously
intended to apply to the High Court or Court of Session also,
when bail is granted by that Court. The words “every other
Court", however, create a contrary impression, and we propose
to substitute the words “any court” in their place, to correet
this impression. .

As regards the second proposition stated above, the power
of the superior courts fails under two heads—

(a) power to direct release on bai" and
(b) power to direct arrest of a person released on bail.

The power under head (a) above is expressed in section
498(1) where it says that “the High Court or Court of Session
may, in any case whether there be an appeal on conviction or
not, direct that any person be admitted on bail”. The words
“in any case” are, apparently, intended to emphasise that the
power is wide enough to embrace both bailable and non-bailable
Offences. We think that the language should be made more
precise. The power is meant to apply to a person accused of ap
offence and in custody, and the words “admit to bail” have been
judicially construed as having the same meaning as “release on

]77,

Lastly, the words “whether there be an appeal on conviction
or not” are unnecessary and confusing, and should be omitted.

The power under head (b) is now contained partly in sub-
section (5) of section 497, where it authorises the superior
courts to “cause any person who has been released under this
section to be arrested” and “to commit him to custody”—-and
partly in sub-section (2)—where it authorises the superior courts
to “cause any person who has been admitted to bail (under
section 498) to be arrested” and “to commit him to custody”.
Together, these two cases cover cancellation by a superior courts
of the bail granted to a person—

(i) released on bail by an inferior court? in a case relating
to non-bailable offence; or

2 See discussion in Amir Chand, A.LR, 1950 E.P. $3,
2 Section 497(5), in so far as it relates to cancellation of bail by the
court which granted it, has been already dealt with.

¢


319

Gi) released on bail ia a case where the release was ordered
under its special power by the superior court itself.

They do not cover concellation of bail granted in a case relating
to a bailable offence! under section 496.

Now, it is well-established that the High Court has power
to cancel bail even where it was granted 18 a case relating to
a bailable offence. The existence of this power of the High
Court has been put beyond doubt by a series of decisions of
the Supreme Court®, and of the High Courts’. The absence
of an express provision in this respect was described as a
“lacuna” in one of the judgments of the Supreme Court‘, and
we think that, instead of leaving the matter to the inberent
powres of the High Courts, it should be expressly provided for
in this Chapter, and the power could be given to Courts of
Session as well. For this reason, release under section 496 is
expressly proposed to be mentioned in the amendment which
we suggest regarding section 498.

As regards the third proposition—amount of bail and reduc-
tion thereof—no changes are necessary in the substance of the
powers as provided in section 498(1).

A suggestion has been made by two High Court Judges? to
the effect that the trial court should also have power to cancel
bail at the close of arguments, even if the bail was granted by
a superior court. We presume that the object behind the sug-

stion is to cover cases where, at the close of the arguments,
hs fe court considers it very likely that it will sentence the accused
to imprisonment. We would, however, prefer to leave the law
as it is. When the judgment is pronounced, the accused wilh
be required to attend the court to hear the judgment pro-
nounced? Ordinarily, no serious mischicf could be caused by the
accused remaining on bail in the interval.

Where a Court ‘A’ grants bail in a case and the case is
subsequently transferred to Court ‘B’, can Court ‘B’ cancel the
bail granted by court ‘A’ ? This question arose in a Bombay
case’, where the High Court approved of the cancellation by
the transferee court. But the judgment lays stress on the in-
herent power of the court, and it was suggested to us that this
leaves the position doubtful, and that some clarification may be
desirable. We do not, however, think it necessary to suggest
an amendment. As a general rule, it is implied that a trans-

1The scope of section 496 is somewhat wider. as it applies to “any
person other than a person accused of a non-baitable offence”. But we
are concerned here with a person accused of a bailable offence.

2Talab, (1958) S.C.R. 1226; ALR. 1958 S.C. 376; Ratilal Bhanji
A.ER, 1967 S.C. 1639 (judgment of Bachawat 3.) .

Pampapathy (1967) 1 5.08. 115; ALR. 1967 S.C. 286 (Judgment
of Ramaswami J.).

8 See for example Panna Lal AIR 1967 All. 394, 397.

4Talab (1958) SCR 1226; ATR 1958 SC 376.

9 F,3(2)/55-L.C. Pt. गा, 5. No. 33(b), page 137, (Su ti
High Court Judges). page (Suggestion of two

6 Section 366(2).

7 Emp. v. Routmal, LR. 1941 Bom, 38; A.LR. 1940 Bom. 41.



Revised
497 (३७
4984.

Special

sections
), 498 and

wer of
ut oF

Court of Sessions
regarding bail.

Amount
a

thereof.

tof bond
reduction

Anticipatory bail.

320

feree court can deal with the case in the same manner as the
original court, and this implication need not be expressed.

in the light of the above discussion, we recommend

that in Gon 497, after sub-section (3), the following sub-
section tied :--

“(3A} Any Court which has released a person on

bail ox sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may, if it

it _accessary so to do, direct that such person be
arrested and commit him to custody.”
Existing section (3A) may be renumbered as sub-section

(3B) and caistirg sub-section (5) may be omitted. Instead of
section 498, we may have the followmg sections—

(1) A High Court or Court of session may

ct——

(a) that any person accused of an offence and in
custody be released on bail; or

(9) that any condition imposed by the Magistrate
when releasing any person on bail be set aside or
modificd?, or

(९०) that any person who has been released on bail
under clause (a) or under section 496 or section
497 be arrested and commit him to custody,

(2) ५ a person accused or suspected of the commission
of an off punishable with imprisonment for a period which
may extemi to soven_ years or more or of an of fence under

Chapter ७४. Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII of the Indian Penal
Cods, or of the ‘abetment of, or conspi ‘acy Or attempt to com-
mit, any such offence, is released on bail under sub-section (1)
by the Hish Court or Court of Session, that Court may impose
any cond.tion which it considers necessary—

(9) in order to ensure that such person shall attend in
accordance with the conditions of the bond executed
under this Chapter, or

(89) in order to ensure that such person shail not commit
an offence similar to the offence of which he is accused
or of the commission of which he is suspected, or

(c) otherwise in the interests of justice®.

“498A. (1) The amount of every bond executed undet
this Chapter shall be fixed with due regard to the circums-
tances of the case and shall not be excessive.

(2) The High Court or Court of Session may direct
that the bail required by a police officer or Magistrate be
reduced.”

39.9. The suggestion for directing the release of a person
on bail prior to his arrest (commonly known as “anticipatory

३ See 36th Report.
2 See 36th Report. oe


Directivs:
grant of !
Person apprehend
ing arrest.

321

bait} was carefully considered by us. Though there is a con-
flict of jucicial opinion about the power of a Court to grant
anticipatory bail, the majority view is that there is no sach
power under the existing provisions of the Code, The neceasity
‘or granting anticipatory bail arises mainly becauso sometimes
injluentiat persons try to implicate their rivals in false causes
for the purpose of disgracing them or for other purposes by
getting them detained in jail for some days. In recent times,
with the accentuation of political rivalry, this tendency is show-
ing signs of steady increase. Apart from false cases, where
there are reasonable grounds for holding that a person accused
of an offence is not likely to abscond, or otherwise misuse his
liberty while on bail, there seems no justification to require him
first to submit to custody, remain in prison for some days and
thea apply for bail.

We recommend the acceptance of this suggestion. We are
further of the view that this special power should be confesred
only on the High Court and the Court of Session, and that the
erder should take effect ct the time of arrest or thereafter.

In order to settle the details of this suggestion, the following
draft ef a new section is placed for consideration :—

497A. (1) When any person has a reasonable appre-
2 Mat he would be arrested on an accusatiog of bav-
'0 3 non-bailabic offeace, he may apply to the
Court or the Court of Session for a direction under
this section. That Court may, in its discretion, direct that
in the event of his arrest. he shall be released on bail.

(2) A Mugistraie taking cusnizance of an offence
mst that person sha'l, while taking steps under section
204(1), either issue summons or a bailable warrant as in-
dicated in the direction of the Court under sub-section (1).

(3) If any person in respect of whom such a direction
is tuade is arrested without warrant by an officer in charge
of a police station on an accusation of having committed
that offence, and is prepared either at the time of arrest
or at any time while in the custody of such officer to give
bail, such person shall be released on bail.”

We considered carefully the question of laying down in the
statute certain conditions under which alone anticipatory bail
could be granted. But we found that it may not be practicable
to exhaustively enumerate those conditions; and moreover, the
laying down of such conditions may be construed as pre
judging (partially at any rate) the whole case. Hence we
would leave it to the discretion of the court and prefer not to
fetter such discretion in the Statutory provision itself. Superior
Courts will, undoubtedly, exercise their discretion properly, and
not make any observations in the order granting anticipatory
bail which will have a tendency to prejudice tho fair trial of
the accused.


Section 499.

Sections $00 to 502.

322

39.10. With reference to section 499, various suggestions*-?
have been received by us regarding the procedure for verifica-
tion of sureties, e.g., that in every case the court must make an
inquiry regarding sufficiency of the sureties; or that house tax
and income tax receipts should be enough to vouch for solvency
‘of the sureties. In our opinion, these are matters which can
be more conveniently dealt with by rules and practice rather
than by elaborate provisions in the Code. We do not, there-
fore, suggest any amendment in this respect.

In consequence of the recommendation? regarding grant of
bail with a condition, it is desirable to add the following sub-
section in section 499 :—

“(1A) Where any condition is imposed for the release
of any person on bail, the bond shall also contain that
condition.

39.11. No changes are needed in sections 500 to 502.

1 Suggestion of the Intelligence Bureau, Home Ministry F.3(2}/55-L.C.
Pt. 1५, S. No. 122.

2F,3(2)/S5-L.C, Part व, S. No. 33, page 99 (Suggestion of the
Government of U.P.)}.

3 See para. 39. above.


CHAPTER XL
COMMISSIONS FOR THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES

40.1. Chapter 40 lays down the procedure for issuing com-
missions for the examination of witnesses and for the execution
of such commissions. Different Provisions are made in the
Chapter for witnesses in the territories to which the Code
extends, wittesscs in arcas in India but outside those territories
and witnesses outside India. It also provides for the execution
in India of foreign commissions.

40.2. Section 503 is the main section under which a com-
mission may be issued when the examination of a witness is
necessary for the ends of justice and his attendance cannot be
procured without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience
which under the circumstances of the case, would be unreason-
able. It has been suggested! that the following proviso may be
added to section 503 :—

“Provided that the accused’s counsel is present and the
expenses of the same are borne by the Prosection or the
Government.”

As regard presence of the Pleader, the Code already contains
a provision.* As regards expenses, while we do not think that
an order for paying expenses should be made a condition prece-
dent to the issue of a commission in every case, we do appre-
ciate that the Court should have a discretion to require payment
by the prosecution of such expenses? as the Court considers
reasonable to enable the accused and his counsel to participate in
the examination on commission. Such payment should however
be confined to cases where a commission is issued for the exami-
nation of a prosecution witness, We recommend the addition
of a sub-section (2) as follows :—

“(2) The Court may, when issuing a commission for
the examination of a witness for the Prosecution, direct that
such amount as the Court considers reasonable to meet the
expenses of the accused, including the pleader’s fees, be
paid by the prosecution.”

40.3. While the issue of a commission is discretionary under
the main paragraph of section 503, the proviso makes it manda-
tory where “the examination of the President or the Vice-Presi-
dent or the Governor of a State as a witness is necessary for
the ends of justice.” The principle on which the Proviso seems
to be based is that the head of the State should not be summon-
ed in Court. The proviso is mandatory. Even if the President,
the Vice-President or the Governor wishes to be examined in

1 Home Ministry. File No. 25/5/S4-Judl. Appendix I, Item 43 (Sug.
gestion of Shri P. S. Sundarayya). (Sug

* Section 506(2),
27° For the present law as to costs, see Abdul, Aziz, ALR. 1958 Raj,
A 1

Introductory.

Section 503 pro-
vision for paye
ment of expenses
of accused,

Section 503,
Prov 80.


324

ine Court, thai cannot be done. The proviso was enacted in
1954 to override the view taken in a Punjab case! in which
rerusal by a special judge to issue a commission for the cxami-
nation of a Governor was upheld by the High Court. No change
i, necessary ia the proviso.
section Sut ection (1) of section 504 provides that a com-
ination of a witness ia the territories to
is shall be directed to the District Magis-
leacy Magistrate within the local limits of
the witness is to be found. In view of the
ts such commissions should be issued to the
Chief Judicial M: rate. Even im the very rare cases in which
wo Cxccuiive Magitrate thinks it proper to issue a commission,
it can be addressed to the Chief Judicial Magistrate. Sub-section
६1) may be umendcd to read as follows :—

trate or Chief
whose jurisdic!
separation of pi

“(1) If the witess is within the territorics to which
this Code extends, the commission shali be directed to the
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate,
as the case may be, within whose local jurisdiction the
witness is to be found.”

No amendments are needed in sub-sections (2) and (3) of
the section.

Section sus 40.5. In section 505(1), which relates to the execution of

revised, commissions, for “District Magistrate”, it will be necessary to
substitute “Chief Judicial Magistrate”, as a consequence ¢f the
change proposed! to section 504(1). There seems to be no
need for a slightly different wording in sub-section (2) and the
two sub-sections may be combined.

Accordingly, section 505 may be revised to read as
follows :—~

“SOS. Upon receipt of the commission, the Chicf
Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate, or
such Metropolitan or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint
in this bebalf, shall summon the witness before him or pro-
ceed to the place where the witness is, and shall take down
his evidence in the same manner, and may for this purpose
exercise the same powers, as in trials of warrant cases
under this Code.”

Sections 506 10 ‘The remaining sections of this Chapter do not call for any
. comments or amendments.

Execution © of
commission,

1 State v, Krishnaswami, ALR. 1954 Punjab 294,
2 See para. 40.4 above.


CHAPTER 211
SPECIAL RULES OF EVIDENCE

1.1. The framers of the Code were aware that the evidence Introductory.
of certain experts in the service of G would be ire-
quently required in criminal courts, and if these cxperts were to
be ueated as ordinary witnesses whose sworn stat:
alone could be lezal evidence, thcy would be spending most of
their time giving evidence. Also, the number of h experts
was so smail that they could not be always conveniently spared
for attending the courts. Sp: ‘ules of evidence were therefore
framed for them. ‘They are placcd in Chapter 41 of the Code.

In framing them, the cardinal rules of evidence have been
kept in view and the number of experts kept af the minimum.
Thus, uccordiag to section 509, a civil surgeon or other medical
witness is now exempted from appearing in the Court of Session
if he has given evidence in the committing court; and his recorded
statement in that court is by a special rule made evidence at the
trial, the safeguard being that the trial court (i.e., the Court of
Session} can, if it thinks fit, summon and examine the witness.
By section 510, the report of a Chemical Examiner is made
evidence without the Chemical Examiner beiag at all called to
give evidence in Court, again the safeguard being that he can
at the discretion of the Court be called and examined. ‘The same
rule applies to the report of the Chief Inspeciar of Explosives,
the Director of Finger Print Bureau or an officer of the Mint.
Various suggestions have been made to include other experts in
this list. It is, we think, necessary that we proceed in this

की direction with some caution, for, although past experience does
not show any abuse of these special provisions, it would he
unwise to make them general.

41.2. Regarding section 509, which enables the Court of Section 509,
Session 10 accept as evidence the statement of a medical witness
made in the committing court, it has been suggested’ that the
time of such experts could be further saved, if the report could be
treated as evidence without the expert’s appearance in Court, We
do not think there is anything to be gained by such a procedure.
In a serious case, medical evidence can be all important, and a
court will rarely find it unnecessary to call the medical witness to
court to give oral evidence. On the other hand, there is consi-
derable danger that the opinion of such experts may in such cir-
cumstances become somewhat irresponsible. An extreme sugges-
tion? made is that the report of a medical witness should be made
conclusive evidence, a suggestion not worthy of serious considera.
tion.

1 Suggestion received through the Home Ministry—F. 3(2)/55-L.C.
Pt. V, C. No. 200,

2 Suggestion received through the Home Ministry—F, 3(2)/55-L.C,
Pt. ५. ८. No. 200.



‘Suggestions 5. (0

326

41.3. Regarding section 510, the main suggestion is that many

include reports of other experts could with advantage be included, so that they could

other experts in
section 510,

Recommendation
in 25th Report.

be saved the need of appearing in Court. Thus, suggestions have
been received for adding the following officers to those mentioned
ig section 510(1) :--

(i) Technical staff of the Veterinary College, Matbura!
(in reiation to reports as to whether flesh is of a cow or other
animal with reference to the Prevention of Cow Slaughter
Act);

(1) Government handwriting experts? and Government
medicai officers* (the latter 10 relation to injuries report and
Post mortem report);

Gii) Director-General of Central Forensic Laboratories
and Dircetors of State Forensic Laboratories. (It is stated
that though the term “Chemical Examiner” may include a
good portion of the work of the Director of Forensic Labo-
ratory, there may be other investigations like ballistics, phy-
sics or biology, which may not call for chemical examina-
tion);

(iv) Director and other technical experts of the Haffkeins
Institute ;5

(v) Any expert of the Finger Print Bureau, instead of
only the Director.

41.4. As we have said$, it would not be wise to make this
special provision applicable to every expert. The present provision
takes in only those experts who, because of their small number
and situation, require special treatment, and we are satisfied that
this consideration alone would justify it. In the present list are :-—

(i) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical
Examiner;
(ii) the Chief Inspector of Explosives;
(iii) the Director of the Finger Print Bureau; and
(iv) any officer of the Mint.

The report of any of these experts on any matter duly submitted
to him for examination or analysis is good evidence. We think that
responsible officers in the Government Security Press and _ the
office of the Controller of Stamps stand in a very similar position.
The Commission has, in an earlier Report,7_ recommended that
a new section (section 5098) should be inserted in the Code,

Fee

2 Suggestion of Government of U.P., received through the Home
Ministry—F. 3(2)/55-L.C. Pt. Vi, 5. No, 308.

2F, 3(2)/55-L.C, Pt. प्र, 5. No. 33, page 99.

SSugeestion of Shri S. K. Sengupta District Prosecutor, Bibar. rR
3(2)/S5-L.C. Pt. 1, $. No. 72.

4 Resolution of Conference of Inspectors-General of Police and com-
ment of the State Government of Madhya Pradesh thereon (received
through the Home Ministry). दि

Suggestion of the Government of Bombay, received through the
Home Ministry—F. 3(2)/55-L.C. Pt I, S. No. 3.

6 566 para. 41.1. above.

725th Report (Report on Evidence of Officers about forged stamps,
currency notes etc.).

aa


327

covering the case of such officers. The need for a separate sec-
tion arose because the Commission felt it necessary to provide
that if any such expert is calied to court, he should not be com-
pelled to disctose any confidential information on which the report
might be based, the resaon being that the disclosure of such infor-
mation may facilitate the forging of currency notes or revenue
stamps. Thé same consideration applies to the officers of the Mint.

We propose that the new section 509A should be in the
following term

©“50°4. (1) Any document purporting to be 4 report
under the hand of any such gazetted officer of the Mint or of
the India Security Press' (including the office of the Con-
troller of Stamps} as the Central Government may, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazeite, specify in this behalf, upon
any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination
and report in the course of any proceeding under this Code,
may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other pro-
ceeding under this Code, although such officer is not called
as a Witness.

(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine
any such officer as to the subject-matter of his report:

Provided that no such officer shall bc summoned to
produce any records on which the report is based.

(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 123
and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, no such officer
shall, except with the permission of the Master of the Mint,
the Controller of the India Security Press or the Controller
of Stamps and Stationery, as the case may be, be permitted—

(a) to give any evidence derived from any unpublished
records on which the report is based; or

(0) to disclose the nature or particulars of any that appli-
ed by him in the course of the examination of the
matter or thing.”

41.6, Section 510 will deal with other expert reperts where
security is not a consideration. We propose to add two more
experts in that fist, namely,—

(i) the Director of the Haffkeins Institute, Bombay; and
(ii) the Director of the Central Forensic Laboratory,

We are not convinced that handwriting experts employed by
Government should be treated in the same way. Their evidence
is almost always subject to controversy and no special value can
be attached to their reports merely because the expert is employed
by Government. Nor can we justify the extension of this provi-
sion to cover ordinary medical or veterinary experts. The pro-
cedure here is very special and must be confined to special experts.

1 The Controller of Stamps who is in charge of distribution is a part
of the India Security Press. Printing of stamps is also done there.

33MofHA/69

New section 509A.
proposed,

Evidence of offi-
cers of Miat etc.

Section S10 re
vised.


Reports of cers
iain Government
scientific experts,

Section SIOA and
Section 512.
amended,

328

In an cartier Report’, the Commission noted that section
510(2), as amended in 1955, makes it obligatory for the Court to
summon the Chemical Examiner or other officer mentioned in sub-
section (1), if cither party so desires. The Commission regarded
this provision as unsatisfactory and recommended that it should
be left to the discretion of the court to summon such officers. We
agree with this recommendation and are sugycsting an amendment
io implement it.

Section 530 may be revised to read as follows :—

“510. (1) Any document purporting to be a report
under the hand of a Government scientific expert 10 whom
this section applies, upon any matter or thiog duly submitted
to him for examination or analysis and report in the course
of any proceeding under this Code, may be uscd as evidence
in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code.

(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit. summon and examine
any such expert as to the subject-matter of his report.

(3) This section appiies to the following Government

scientific experts, namely,—
(a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Bxa-
miner to Government;

(9) the Chief Inspector of Explosives;

(०) the Director of the Finger Print Burcau;
(d) the Director, of the Haffkeins Institute, Bombay;

(c) the Director of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory
or a State Forensic Science Laboratory*.”

41.7. No change is needed in sections 5108 and 511.

41.8. Section 512 deals with a case which cannot be tried
because the accused person has absconded and there is no prospect
of his arrest in the near future. A Magistrate competent to try
or commit him for trial can, in such circumstances, record the
evidence produced by the prosecution; and thit evidence can be
later used at the trial of the accused when he is arrested, in case
the witness who made that statement is not available to give evi-
dence. This provision has proved useful. and does not need
amendment.

The situations in which evidence recorded under sub-sections
(1) and (2) of section 512 can be later utilised are described in
different terms in each sub-section, but it appears that the distinc-
tion is deliberate. Sub-section (2) is meant for « case where the
offender is unknown and the offence is a serious one. We do not
propose to disturb the distinction,

We propose, however, that in sub-section (1), the words
“cannot be found” be added after the words “if the deponent is

3 140 Report, Vol. 2, puges 848-849, para. 26.

= There are, at present, three Central Forensic Science Laboratories
at New Delhi, Calcutta and Hyderabad, and State Forensic Science
Laboratories at several places.

1


dead or is incapabie of giving evidence”. in order to make the
provision comprehensive, and also, for the word “attendance”,
the word “presence” be substituted. These two amendments will
bring the wording of this provision into conformity with that of
section 33 ef the Puidense Act.

Jt was further suggested to us that the situation where the
deponent is kept out of court by an adverse party should also be
covered by this provision. It would obviously be difficult to
determine who is an adverse party and there would be alicga-
lions and counter-allegations which are bound to ercate difficulties.
‘This suggestion was therefore not accepted.



introductory.

Section 514(1)

CHAPTER XLU
BONDS

42.1. Chapter 42 of the Code contain provisions tor bonds,
or rather for the forfeiture of bonds, while the provisions for
the execution oi bonds of various kinds are to be found scatter-
ed al! over the Code. The main provision regarding forfeiture
is in section 514, which, im substance, says that if a bond is fer-
feited to the satisfaction of the court concerned, the penalty
mentioned in the bond may be recovered from the party liable
zo pay it, and the mede of recovery mentioned is attachment
and sale of movable property, and, failing that, by sending the
party concerned to civil jail for six months.

42.2. Sub-section (1) of section 314 empowers the Court
oy which a bond has been taken or a Presidency Magistrate
or Magistrate of the first class, to order its forfeiture, if satisfied
that its terms have becn violated; and when the bond is for
appearance before a Court, the Court has similar powers. A
doubt has sometimes arisen? whether, in the case of a bond
for appearance in a particular Court, that Court alone can for-
feit it or whether any Magistrate of the first class has the power.
As a matter of policy, we think that this power should, in the
case of bond for appearance before a Court. be confined to
that Court, ss that Court is in the best position to judge the
gravity cf the breach of condition causing forfeiture. Occasion-
ally, some doubt has also arisen? whether a bond for appearance
before 8 Court can be forfeited by the order of a Court to
which the case was Jater transferred. {t is only proper that
the transferee Court should have the same power to deal with such
a bond as the first Court had when the case was in that Court.
We propose to clarify both these points by a suitable amend~
ment.

It has been suggested* that, apart from the bends mentioned
in the Code—and they are mainly for appearance in Court or
for good behaviour or for keeping the peace—a__ provision
should he made to authorise the police to take a bond ‘or the
production of movable property in Court in case the nrcperty,
beceuse of its bulk or other reason, cannot conveniently be
removed from where it happen to be. The normal preceduret
is that the potice seizing any property must report the seizure
to a Magistrate who can then make such order as he thinks fit.
Tt may, however, happen in certain circumstances that the pro-
perty cannot be at once seized in a physical sense, and it may

व Hardwari Lat v. The State, ALR. 1989 All, 751.

2 Afustaci-Mud-Din, ATR. 1926 Alf, 297, Rallabh Das, AIR. 1943
Bom. 198, 179 (D.B.); Karali Charan Charerjee. ALR. 1949 Pat. 196,
197

3 Suggestion of the Government of Madhya Pradesh received through
the Home Ministry (F. 3(2)/S5-L.C. Pt. IV, $. No. 65}.

4 Sce section 523.


S31

if to provide that the police may let it remain in the
wwe of @ surety on his executing 8 bond to produce the pro-
peny ia Court wher asked to do so. Once such a provision
is made, it would be quite simple to provide for the iorfeiture
of the hond. We suggest, therefore, that section 523 should
ae suitably amended to provide for such a bond. As far as
section 514(1) is concerned, any such bond sbould be equated
fo a bord for appearance before a Court.

We may meniina two more suggestions which we have
not found it aceessary to adopt. One is? that a provision should
be made for the forfeiture of a bond which Government some-
fimes takes wader section 401 from a person whose sentence
Government decides to suspend Or remit. Such a bond is not
mentioned in the Code, nor is it taken by a Criminal Court,
and i would be hardly proper to provide for its forfeiture
through a Criminal Court. The second suggestion is that the
liability oi a surety in respect ‘of a bond should not be enforced
if the principal bas in respect of that bond paid the penalty.”
We de net think, however, that the ordinary rule? that the

liabiiry of a surety should be co-extensive with the principal's
liabiliiy should be applied to criminal jurisdiction, where the
object of a bond is different.

3. We note that a Maltarashtra amendment of the Code
has replaced the existing sub-soctions (2) and (3) of section
514 by a simple provision which equates the procedure for
recovery of the penalty under a forfeited bond with the procedure
for the recovery of a fine imposed by a Court. We propose to
adopt this amendment in the Code.

42.4
and (3

We propose accordingly that sub-sections (1), (2)
ह section S14 be replaced by the following:—

“(1) Where a bond under this Code is for appearance,
or for production of property, before a court and it is
proved to the satisfaction of that Court, or of any Court
to which the case has subsequently been transferred, that
the bond has been forfeited,

or where, in respect of any other bond under this Code,
it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court by which the
bond’ was taken, or of any Court to which the case has
subsequently been transferred, or of the Court of any
Magistrate of the first class, that the bond has been  for-
ited,

the court shall record the grounds of such proof, and
yaay call upon any person bound by such bond to pay

14S, Homi v, Deputy Commissioner, ALR. 1953 Pat. 302, 305. The
case Wont up 40 the Supreme Court on appeal: AR, 1955 S.C. 478;
7198s) 2 SC.R. 78: but this point was in issue. As to another case in
अधि) seb 8 hond was taken, see Sohan Singh, ALR. 1955 Punj. 156
‘D.B.).
See Neroin Sahai ४, Emp., ALR. 1946 AR. 333, 336, (FB) in
which conflicting decisions on the point are discussed.

3 See section 128, Contract Act.

4See Maharashtra Act 22 of 1960, section 2.

Section 514,
are, 20 @

Revised sub-seo-
tions (1) and (2).


332

the penalty thereot or to show cause why it should not be
paid.

Explanation —S condition in a bond for appearnace,
or for production of property, before a Court shall be
construed us including a condition for appearance, or as
the case may be. fer production of property, before any
Court to which the case may subsequently be  transfer-
red

(2: if sufficient cause is not shown and the penalty
is not paid, the Cour: shail proceed to recover the same
as में such penalty were a fine imposed under this Code.”

Section 514 (4). 42 O-section (4) of section 514 provides that if the
penalty is not paid and cannot be recovered by attachment and
sale of property, the Court may order the person, who is bound
under the bond, to imprisonment in civil jail for six months.
We fect that imprisonment in these circumstances is out of
veeord with modern thinking and propose to omit sub-section
(4).

Section $15 42.6. Section 515 provides for appeals against orders passed

under section 514 by Magistrates. These are, at present, made
appealable to the District Magistrates, but in view of the sepa-
tion of the judiciary we consider that ail such appeals should
lie to the Session Judge.

Section 515 may accordingly be reviscd to read as follows :—~

“515. All orders passed under section 514 by any
Magistrate shall be appealable to the Sessions Judge, or, if
not »0 appealed, may be revised by him.”

yv


CHAPTER XLII
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY

43.1. Regardine the disposal of property, Chapter 43 pro-
vides ior the passing of interim orders for the custody and
disposal of the property pending inquiry or trial and of final
orders at the conclusion of the inquiry or trial.

The property in respect of which such orders can be passed
may be—(i) property regarding which an offence appears to
have been committed, or (ii) property which appears to have
been used for the commission of an offence, or (iii) any property
or document produced before the court or in its custody.

There are detailed provisions in regard ta property seized
by the police. Such property, again, may be of various classes,
such as?, articles found upon search of a person arrested,? pro-
perty alleged or suspected to be stolen, or? property found under
circumstance which create suspicion of the commission of an
offence.

The modes of disposal of the property are, again, numerous,
and the particular mode is, for obvious reasons, left to the
discretion of the court. Thus “disposal” of the property may
be by destruction. confiscation delivery to any person claiming
to be entitled to possession of the property, restoration to per-
son dispossessed, or 51९. etc.

43.2. Section 516A provides that when any property regard-
ing which an offence appears to have been committed or which
appears to have been used for the commission of any offence,
is produced before any Criminal Court during any inquiry or
irial, the court may make such order as it thinks fit for the
proper custody of the property pending the conclusion of the
inguiry or trial. The court is empowered to make such interim
order because, in some cases, it becomes necessary ta preserve
the property either as evidence* or in order to make a_ proper
order after the case is over.

43.3. In a suggestion® received by us, it is stated that some-
times property attached (i.e. property seized) in criminal cases of
cheating. criminal breach of trust etc. is attached by civil courts
also and appropriated in execution of decrees collusively obtained

1See sections 51. 53 and 153(2).

2See sections 51, 54(1), fourthly, 94(1), 98¢€1), 165(1) read with
163 wnd 550, The chronological order is sections 54, 51, 550 and 528.
See discussion in Kasturi Lal, ALR. 1965 S.C. 1039, 1043, (1965) 1
S.C.R. 375. As io procedure, see section 103(2).

3 See sections 94/1) to 99A, 165 and 554, As to procedure see
section (3, ..

4 ५९९ Rajendra v. Sama. 1.1, 1931 Cal. 455, 456 (Rankin C.J. and
Costello J.). ee

99, 4(2)/55-LC. Part I, S. No. 59 (Suggestion of District Govern-
ment Counsel, Moradabad).

Introductory.

Section 5168.

Suggestion to bar
attachment by
civil court in cer-
tain cases.


Documentary and

material exhibits

in the inguiry
trial,

Amendment
soetion SI6A,

Section 517(1).

Disposal of
money.

or

of

334

against the accused. It is suggested that it is necessary to pro-
tect such money ‘rem attachment by civil courts, and for this
purpose provision should be made in section 516A, that pend-
ing the conclusion of the inquiry or trial, such property shall
not be liable to attachment under orders of a civi] court, and
aiter the conclusion of the trial, it shall be subject to the arders
of the criminal court.

We are not in favour of the suggestion. The correct pro-
cedure in such cases would be for the complainant or inform-
ant (or other person claiming to be the owner) to file a claim
or Objection under the Code of Civil Procedure,! in the pro-
ceeding for attachment. There is no need to amend section
SI6A, for the purpose.

43.4. Section 516A does not cover all property that comes
into possession of the Court for the purposes of an inquiry
or uial. For instance, property which is produced merely as
evidence of crime is not covered. In many States, express
provision for the disposal of such property is not necessary
since the High Court Rules provide for interim custody and
final disposal of all documents and articles produced before
any Court for the purpose of evidence. These are marked as
documentary exhibits or material exhibits, But it will be
noticed that this class of property is expressly mentioned in
section 517(1). There may be some States where the High
Court Rules do not provide for the custody and disposal of
such property. We therefore suggest that section 516A should
be made comprehensive so as to include material and docu-
mentary exhibits in the case which may not have been used
for the commission of the offence or regarding which no offence
may appear to have been committed.

43.5. The opening clause of section 51648 may accordingly
be amended to read—-“When any property is produced before
any criminal court during any inquiry or trial

43.6. Section 517 empowers the Court to make, at the
conclusion of an inquiry or trial, orders for the disposal of
any property or document (i) produced before it, or (ii) ia
its custody, or (iii) regarding which any offence appears to
have been committed, or (iv) which has been used for the
commission of any offence. The terms of the section are wider
than those of section 516A. The four classes of property are
listed disjunctively, so that. provided the inquiry or trial has
come to an end, and the property falls within any one of the
four ca‘egories, the Court has jurisdiction to pass orders under
this section?

43.7. Difficulties arise in practice when a Criminal Court
has occasion to pass orders under section 517 for the disposal
of money, e.g. bank notes or currency notes. Where there is
doubt as to who is really entitled to possession, and the Criminal

1566 Order 21, Rule 58, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
2See Bhimji v. Emp., AIR. 1944 Nag. 366, 367, The history of the

section is traced in “Disposal of Property” (1903) 8 C.W.N. (Journal)
43, which criticizes Surendra २. Rai Mohan, 1.L.R. 30, Cal. 690, 692.



335

Court maxzs an ander to the best of its judgment leaving tas
doudtial cuestion ef ute to be decided by the Civil Court,
the property may jppear before an efiective decision cf the
Civil Court j ed. fo quote from a judgment! of the
Andhra Pradesh High Court :—

“tn cases fike the present. where it is extremely doubt-
petitioner and his co-acc are really
ssess.on of the currency notes, ॥। they should
be, in pursuance ० the normal rule, allowed to take back
bese 0005. the persons who might really be entitled there-
to may, even if they succeed ip the Civii Court, be
unable to recover the property from the petitioner. The
property may. in the meanwhile, vanish into thin air. it
ig doubtful even if the Civil Court could direct the dis-
posal of se moneys with it, pending adjudication of the
right to them.

I think it is desirable that the Criminal Procedure
Code should make a provision applying to cases like this
one, for instance, enabling a Mazsistrate to keep the pro-
erly with him for a definite periad of time, pending the
fy of a civil suit relating to it, and directing him to
cliver the property to the Civil Court on being asked
by that Court, aiter the institution of the suit. ‘There mav
gliernatively be a provision placing it at the dsposal of
the Government, pending a suit. If very valuable movable
property is, under the general rule, returned to persons
who may not be really entitled to it, serious loss may
result to the true owners, because it can disappear very
casily

a power ulready existed, and dissented from the cases? cited
in support of that argument.

In that case, the High Court rejected the argument that such

43.8. A Bar Council has suggested that section 517 to 520
should be simplified on the following lines. In cases of convic-
tion of the accused, the property should be directed to be hand-
ced over to the owner. If there is a dispute as to ownership,
the court should hold 8 summary inquiry and, if unable to
come to a decision, refer the matter to 28 civil court whose
decision will be followed. If the trial ends in acquittal, the
property should be handed over to the person from whose
possession it was taken. But if such person was an accused
and he disclaims any ownership of property, the property should
be handed over to the owner. In such a case security should
be taken from the party to whom it is given. The appellate
or revisional court may be statutorily required to pass an order
cither of confirmation or reversal Of the order passed by the
trial court when such court disposed of the main criminal case.
A right of appeal may be given to the party aggrieved by the

1 Tenali Sitio v. State, ALR. 1987 AP. 1024, 1026 paragraph W
(Bhimasankaran J.)

9Muttiah v, Vairaperumal ALR, 1954 Mad. 214, Kedar Nath v.
Mohamed Siddig ALR. 1924 Cai. 455, 456.

Suggestion by @
Bar Council.


disposat.

Conmission’s
views.

Ssction 517 (2).

ciples regaru-

336

order, in case no appesl or revision petition is filed against the
conviction or acquittal of the accused.

43.9. The principles to be deduced from reported decisions
regarding the Courts power under this section may be sum-
muarised ay follows :—

(i) The ordinary rule is, that if the accused is acquitted

60: an offence regarding property, the court must
estore the property to him if it was recovered

from his possessien.! he criminal court should
pot enter imo questions of title in respect of pro-
perty.

(ii) The ruic is the sume as regards cash and currency

(ii) ly, the court would not be justified in de-
taining the property till the decision of the Civil
Courts.

(iv) An order for indefinite detention in court custody
or in the custody of one of the parties conditional
on a civil suit. would not be desirable.‘ The
various possible courses to be adopted were apalysed
in a Madras case.5

(v) Even a cenditional order of restoration does not
scem 10 be contemplated in ordinary cases. The
contrary view was. however, taken in one case.®

43.10. In our opinion. it is not advisable to insert a pro-
Vision as suggested in the Andhra Pradesh case. Such a pro.
vision would go against the scheme of the Code, which con-
templates final orders as to disposal by the criminal court cither
under section 517 or under section 518 read with section $23.
It may be left to the discretion of the agericved party to move
the civil court and obtain interim protection of the — property,
til final adjudication about its title. For the same reason we
are not in tavour of the radical revision of the existing section
suggested by the Bar Council.

43.11. Sub-section (2) of section 517 provides that when
a High Court or a Court of Session makes an order under sub-
section (1) and cannot deliver the property to the person
entitled through its own officers, the Court may direct the order
to be carried into effect by the District Magistrate. Since a

VSuttar Ali ४. Afcal Mohammed, (1927) LLR. 54 Cal. 283, 285;

AJR, 1927 Cal. $32) Srinivasamoorthi v. Narasimhulu Naidu, (1927)
5 ALR. 1927 Mad. 797, 798.

ushiior Singh ४. Stale, AIR. 1953 S.C. 508; In re Pandhariah,
Bom. 186: ALR. 1915 Bom. 265, distinguished in Akshoy
Kumar ४. 1४ mar ALR. 1949 Cal. 346.
Kasivcin v. Makhanji Dwarka Prasad, ALR. 1937 Pat, $91, 592
Koni Mf Himacksl Pradesh Administration, ATR, 1963 HP. 45

tReviews 1४७०३.
ACh © fons in Afend. Yusuf vo Krish: Mohan. ALR. 1938
Cu 47, 24.

Muthiah v. Vairuperuma’, AR. 1954 Mad. 214, 215 (Reviews
case-law).
8 Chenega Reddi v. Ramaswamy, A.1.R. 1915 Mad. 588

vy


337

High Court scldom trics a case itscif and the ordinary original
jurisdiction of Hieh Courts is to be completely abolished, this
provision iy practically unnecessary for them. A Sessions Court
alse sfouki have no d y in getting its order for the delivery
of proverty to a speciticd person effected through its own officers.
We therefore prev omit sub-section (2).

743), the period of cne month may
aths, since the period of limitation is
for certain criminal appeais. Though
lays, an increase to two months will
sieved by an order passed under

2. fn sec
cased to two
ore than one था

dispesal of property as well as an appeal in the main case. No
claboration in this recnect 5 necessary here, in view of the re-
vralt of section # We are prop:

43.13. Sub--cetion (4) is put in a negative form and
suites that nothing in this section shall be deemed to pro-
hibit any Court from detivering any property etc. The object
is to enable a Court 13 deliver the property to any person on
his furnishing sufficient security to produce the property if and
when required. it appears desirable to put this in the positive
jorm. Since an ord nder sub-section (1) is liable
to be modified or set aside in revision as well as on appeal, the
words “or in revisen” should he added at the end.

43.14. Section 518 empowers a Court, instead of inquiring
a definite order under section 517

into the matter and peso!
(१) id on the property to the district. Magistrate of to
u Sub-divisional Magistrate, and the Jatter is authorised to dis-

pose _of the property in the manner provided in sections 523
to 525. Fun nder the latter sections are 2. present
exercisable 09५ Exee + well as Judicial Mavistrates, but
since these ate essca: judicial fuactions, we ate proposing
that the police should repost any seizure of property to the
appropriate Jud:ciat Mazistrate and not to an Executive Magis-
trate. Consequently. the delegation under section 518 should
also he to the Chief Judicial! Magistrate instead of “to the
District Magistrate or to a Sub-divisioral Magistrat With
this change it i: clear thet the delegation should be available
omy to # Court of Session and not to any subordinate Court
separate section, this provision for delegation
propaty se mate in xection 517 itself.

#315. Ht is accordinaly proposed that sections 517 and 518
Moy be combir i das follows :—

517. Ct cn inquity or a trial in any Criminal

Court is conctuded. the Court may & such crder as it

thinks fit

the disposal, by desiruction, confiscation or
delivery 0: i

to be ent'tled to possession
thereef or ० . of any property or document pro-
cuced before it or in its custody, or regarding which any
offence appears to have been committed. or which has
heen uset for the commission of any offence.

Section 517 (3).

Section 517 (4).

Section 518 M,

Section 517 and
518 combined and
revised.

Order for dispo-
sal of property at
conclusion of
trial


Section 519.

Section $20 con-
flict of decisions.

Commissions’
view-independent
right of appeal
necessary,

338

(2) An order may be madc under sub-section (1) for
the delivery of any property to any person claiming to be
entitied to the possession thereof, without any condition
or on con he executes a bond, with or without
surities, tO ihe satisiaction of the Court. engaging to res-
tore such propery to the Court if the order made under
cclion (15 modified or set aside on appeal or
revision.

(3) A Court of Sessioa may, instcad of itself making
an order under sub-section (1). direct the property to be
delivered to the Chicf Judicia! Magistrate who shall there-
upon deal with it jn the manner provided in sections 523,
$24 and 525.

(4) Except where the property is Livestock or is sub-
ject to speedy end natural decay, or where a bond has
been executed in pursuance of sub-section (2), an order

ade under sub-section (1) shall not be carried out for
two months. or when an appeal is presenied, until such
appeal has been disposed cf.

(5) In this se 3, the term “property” includes, in
the cuse ©. property regarding which an offence appeats
to have been committed, not only such property as has
been originally in the possession or under the control of
any party, but also any property into or for which the
sume may have been converted or exchanged, and anything
acquired by such conversion oc exchange, whether imme-
diately or otherwise.”

43.16. No changes are required in section 519.

43.17. The language of section 520 is somewhat ambiguous,
and there is a conflict of judicial decisions’ on its interpretation.
One vicw is that no independent right of appeal is conferred
on any party against an order passed under any of the three
preceding sections, but where a regular appeal is filed against
the judgment of the trial court, the 2ppellate court, while dis-
posing of the appeal, may exercise the powers conferred on the
trial court by these sections. The other view is, that section
520 confers an independent right of appeal on a party aggrieved
by an order passed under those sections. irrespective of whether
the judgment of the trial court is or is not challenged in appeal.
There is a similar conftict of decisions? on the interpretation
of section 522(3).

43.17a, 4 there was no intention to confer an independent
right of appeal on an aggrieved party, there would have been
no necessity to make an express provision as in section 520.
Every appellate court has the power to pass censequential and
incidental orders by virtue of clause (d) of sub-section (1) of

UShartuddin ९. Sirainddin. AUR. 1961 Orissa 121, 123, (Reviews
cases): Sheodas ४. Pir Dan, ALR. 1963 Pun. 167, 168 (Reviews cases):
Shantaram vy. State. AJR, 1961 M.P. 1, 2, Ram Abhilakh v. The Stare,
ALR, 1961 All. 96.

2 Savlaram v. Dhyaneshwar, ALR. 1942 Bom. 148 (Reviews cases);
Subramania Ganesan, AX.R. 1950 Mad. 665 (Reviews cases}; Hari Sahu,
ALR. 1951 Orissa 30 (Reviews cases).


339

section 423. Similarly, a coust of revision, by virtue of section
439(1), has the sa: powers as an appellate court, and hence

where the main judgment of the trial court is challenged by
way of revision, that court also may pass consequential and

inicidental orders tor dispozal of the property, even though such
orders may invoive modifying or altering the order of the trial
cour! passed under section 517.

Apart from these considerations, we think that an indepen-
dent right of appeal must be given, because the party aggricved
by an order under section 517, 318 or 519 may not be the same
as the party aggrieved by the main judgment. ‘1 bus, if ia a prose~
cution under section 411 of the Indiau Penal Code, the case ends
im acquittal and the trial court directs the alleged stoien property
to be returned to the accused, the State may not care to prefer
an appeal aguinst the order of acquittal. But the informant
may desire to chailenge the order for disposal of property on
the ground that it was his property and wrongfully taken away
from his possessic Unless an independent right of appeal
under section 517 is conferred on him, he will be without any
direct remedy. ‘Then aguin, there may be insiances where,
apart [rom the informant or complainant and the accused, there
may be a thitd party who may be entitled to possession of the
property or to compensation as provided in section 519. He
may be aggrieved by the order passed by the trial court under
any of tie three preceding sections, and he will be without any
remedy unless an express right of appeal is conferred.

43.18. We therefore propose that section 520 should 0७६
altered, conicrring a right of appeal on any person aggrieved
by a court's order under section $17 or 519. This appeal
should Jig to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from
convictions by the trial court, ard on such appeal, the Appellate
Court should have the powers now specified in section 520.
At the same time. ४ the main judgment or final order in the
original case goes up in appeal or in revision or in a death
sentence ease for confirmation by the High Court, the Court of
appeal. confirmatis:: or revision should obviously have che same
powers. [From the practical point of view, it does not scem
necessary that a Court of reference should be included in section
$20 or in sub-section (3) of section 522].

43.19. 10 making this proposal we are conscious of the
awkwatdness invoived in two courts dealing with the same subject
which may happen in some cases. Thus, when an appeal
against the main judgment is pending before the appellate court
and the aggrieved party also files an appeal under section 520
against the order passed under section 517, it is to be expected
that both the appeals wil! be heard and disposed of by the same
court at the same time. This will avoid conflict of findings on
the main issues involved in the case. But it may sometimes
happen that the appeal under section 520 is heard after the main
appeal is disposed of. In the former appeal, the court will be
concerned solely with the correctness or othcrwise of the order
for disposal of the property, and not with the findings of the trial
court in the main case. In any event, the appellate Court’s order
for disposal of the property under section 517 or 519 cansot
affect the finality of the order of acquittal or conviction passed in

Proposal for
altering section
520.

Possibility of two
courts dealing
with the matter.


340

the main case either by the tial Court or by the Court of appeal.
confirmation or revision.

Where a first class Magistrate passes an order of acquittal
and an order ior disposal of prcperty under section 517, appeal
against the order of acquittal will be to the High Court, whereas
the appeal against the latter order will be to the Court of Session
Again, where the Magistrate passes a non-appealable sentence,
it may be challenged in revision in the High Couvt, whereas the
order under section 317 will be challenged before the Court of
Session, In such contingencies, it should be left to the discre-
tion of the superior court concerned, (whether moved by the
parties or not), to pass appropriate orders with a view to avoid-
ing prejudice to any party ll the final disposal of all matters in
controversy. ‘There are decided cases where principles have been
Jaid down for meeting these contingencies, and it will be inadvis-
able and also impracticable to incorporate them in section 520.

Section 520 43.20. We accordingly propose that the existing section 520
revised be replaced by the following :---

Appeal against “520. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a
orders winder sec- Court under section 517 or section 519, may appeal against it
tion 517 or $19. to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lic from convictions

by the former Court,

(2) On such appeal, the Appellate Court may direct the
order to be stayed pending disposal of the appeal, modify.
alter or annul the order and make any further orders that
may be just.

(3) The powers referred to in sub-section (2) may also
be exercised by a Court of appeal, confirmation or revision
while dealing with the case in which the order referred to in
sub-section (1) was made.”

Section 521. 43.21. No changes are required in section 521.

Section 522 not to 43.22, Under section 522 the Criminal Court is empowered

apply where dis- to restore possession of immoveable property to any person who

possession is not has been dispossessed of it by force, show of force or criminal

by force. intimidation. A suggestion has been made to us that in many
cases possession is taken without use of force in the absence of
the original owner and consegucntly he cannot get the speedy
remedy provided for in section $22. “We, however, consider that
the essential requirements laid down in the section before a Cri-
minal Court could order restoration of possession of immoveable
property ought not to be interfered with. because we feel that
any whittling down of these requiremenis is likely to result in
the misuse of the power.

Power to res 43.23. White section 522 enables the Criminal Court to order

tore possession restoration of possession to the person who has been forcibly

after evicting by dispossessed of the property, it does not indicate how exactly

force. this order is to be carried out. In the absence of an express
power to evict by force, if necessary, the person in actual pos-
session of the property, it appears that the order of the Court
under this section may remain ineffective. We think this defect
should be removed by a suitable amendment.


341

43.24. Sub-section (3) of section 522 provides that an order When Court at
under sub-section (1) may be made by any Court of appeal, appeal may order
confirmation, reference er revision. “Chis is to meet cases where ;3),
the tial court has failed to make an order under sub-section (1)
and it ears to the Court of appeal or revision that such an
order ought to be made in the interests of justice. There is a
conflict of decisions as to whether the period of one month from
the date of the conviction which is mentioned in sub-section (1)
also applics to the Court of appeal or revision.’ This conflict
should be set at rest by a slight re-woiding of sub-section (3)
indicating that the Court of appeal, confirmation, reference or
revision mgy make such an order while disposing of the appeal,
reference or revision, as the case may be,

43.25. As in the case of orders for the disposal of property [ndependent right
under section 517 and 519, it is desirable that an independent of appeal desir
right of appeal should be conferred upon any person aggrieved able.
by an order made under section 52260); so also the Court of
appeal, confirmation or revision dealing with the main case
should have the power to modify, alter or annul an order made
by the trial court under this section.

43. 26. We accordingly propose that section 522 be revised a. Section 522 rex
follows :-- vined,

“522. (1) Whenever a person is convicted of an offence power to restore
attended by criminal force or show of force or by criminal intimi- possession of
dation, and it appears to the Court that by such force or show immoveable pro-
of force or intimidation any person has been dispossessed of any PTY
immoveable property, the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that

Possession of the same be restored to that person after evicting
vy force, if necessary any other person who may be in possession
of the property.

Provided that no such order shall be made by the Court more
than one month after the date of the conviction.

(2) Where the Court trying the offence has not made an
order under sub-section (1), the Court of appeal, confirmation or
revision may, if it thinks fit, make such order while disposing of
the appeal, reference or revision. as the case may be.

(3) Where an order has been made under «ub-scction (1).
the provisions of section $20 shall apply in relation thereto as
they apply in relation to an order made under section 519.”

43, 27. Section 523(1) deals with two different matters. First Section $23
it lays down that seizure of property by a police-officer shall be
forthwith reported to a Magistrate in certain circumstances, and
then it goes on to provide for the disposal of such property by
the Magistrate.

Seizure of property is to be reported by the police-cfficer
when it is either under section 51 upon searching का. arrested
person. or under section 550 which empowers any police-officer
to seize any property which may be alleged or suspected to have

3 (8) Hari Sake. ALR. 1951 Orissa 30;

(b) Krishnan v. Krishnakuthy, ATR. 1960 Kerala 348 (Reviews
cases).


Section 524
amended,

Section 525.

342

been stolen or which may be found under circumstances which
create suspicion of ihe commission of any offence. There are
various other sections in the Code which also empower the police
during the investigation of an offence, and
ns contain the requirement that the police-
often shoud 7:90 scizure to a Magistrate. It would there-
scetion 523(1) generally referred to all cases
of property by a potice-officer is reported to a
trate a ly to seizure under sections 51 and 550.
> such property js produced before any Criminal Court
an inquiry or trial, it will be dealt ४ under sections
nis class of property may be excluded from the
scope of ४1 523(1). This sub-section may accordingly be
revised as follows —

“(1) Whenever the seizure of property by any police-
officer is reported to a Magistrate under the provisions
of this Code, and such property is not produced
before a Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial,
the Magistrate may make such order as he thinks
fit respecting the disposal of such property or the
delivery of such property to the person entitied to
the po-session thercof, or if such person cannot be
ascertained, respecting the custody and production
of such property.”

43. 28. Sub-section (1) of section 524 provides that where
no person is able to establish his claim to the property or where
the person in whose possession the property was found is unable
to show that it was Iegally acquired by him, the property shall be
at the disposal of the State Government and may be sold under
the orders of the Magistrate. Sub-section (2) further provides
that every order passed under this section shall be appealable.
From the wording of sub-section (2) it seems that it is the order
of the Magistrate directing sale of the property that is made
appealable: whereas it is really the implied and antecedent direc-
tion of the Macistrate placing the property at the disposal of the
State Government that is, and has to be. appealable. After the
Magistrate has made a lawful order that the property shall be
at the disposal of the State Government. there is no need to pro-
vide expressly it may be sold under the orders of a Magistrate.
It is accordingly proposed that section 524 may be revised as
follows :—

“524. (1) If no person within such period establishes
his claim to such property, and if the person in whose posses-
sion such property was found is unable to show that it was
legally acauired by him, the Magistrate may by order direct
that such property shal! be at the disposal of the State Gov-
ernment.

(2) An appeal shall lie against any such order to the
Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from convictions by
the Maaistrate.”

43.29. No changes are required in section 525.


CHAPTER XLIV
TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES

44.1, Sub-section (1) of section 526 sets out elaborately the
circumstances in which a High Court may order transfer of a
case or appeal from one subordinate Court to another or from
any subordinate Court to itself. In contrast, the analogous pro-
vision made in section 527(1) empowering the Supreme Court to
transfer criminal cases and appeals is very simple: it may direct
transfer whenever it is “expedient for the ends of justice”. Of the
five clauses in section 526(1), clause (c)—“that a view of the
place in or near which any offence has becn committed may be
required for the satisfactory inquiry into or trial of the same”—
would seem to be a minor and unimportant matter, and in any
event covered by the more general provision in clause (d). By
way of simplification, clauses (c), (d) and (e) may be combined
as follows :—

“(c) that an order under this section is required by
any provision of this Code, or will tend to the general con-
venience of the parties or witnesses, or is expedient for the
ends of justice”.

With reference to clause (i) of sub-section (1), which cn-
ables the High Court to order that any offence be inquired into or
tried by any Court not empowered under section 177 to 184, a
controversy exists! as to whether the High Court can order
transfer of a case from a Court which does not have jurisdiction
under those sections. There, however, seems to be no need to
alter wording of clause (i). In view of the abolition of commit-
ment proceedings as such, clause (iv) may be formally amended
to read—

“(iv) that any particular, case be committed for trial to
a Court of Session.”

While no changes of substance are required in sub-sections
(1A) to (7) of section 526, a few drafting changes and a more
logical re-arrangement of the provisions seem desirable. Sub-
sections (1) to (7) may be revised as follows :—

“526. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the High Court—

(a) that a fair and impartial inquiry or trial cannot be
had in any Criminal Court subordinate thereto, or

(0) that some question of law of unusual difficulty is
likely to arise, or

(c) that an order under this section is required by any
provision of this Code, or will end to the general
convenience of the parties or witnesses, or is expe-
dient for the ends of justice,

tPokker, ALR. 1950 Kerala 53 (Reviews cases).
33HA/69

Section $26-eub-
sections @ to to
formally revi

Power of High
Court to transfer
cases and appeals.


344

it may order—

{i) that any offence be inquired into or tried by any
Court not qualified under sections 177 to 184 (both
inclusive) but in other respects competent to inquire
into or try such offences;

(ii) that any particular case or appeal, or class of cases
or appeals be transferred from a Criminal Court sub-
ordinate to its authority to any such Criminal Court
of equal or superior jurisdiction;

(iit) that any particular case be committed for trial to a
Court of Session; or

(iv) that any particular case or appeal be transferred to
and tried before itself.

(2) The High Court may act’either on the report of the
Jower Court, or on the application of a party interested, or on its
own initiative :

Provided that 0० application shall lie to the High Court for
transferring a case from one Criminal Court to another Criminal
Court in the same sessions division, unless an application for
such transfer has been made to the Sessions Judge and rejected
by him.

(3) Every application for an order under sub-section (1)
shall be made by motion, which shall, except when the applicant
is the Advocate General, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.

(4) When such application is made by an accused person,
the High Court may direct him to execute a bond, with or without
sureties, for the Bayment of any compensation which the High
Court may award under sub-section (7).

(5) Every accused person making such application shall give
to the Public Prosecutor notice in writing of the application,
together with a copy of the grounds on which it is ma de, and no
order shall be made on the merits of the application unless at
least twenty-four hours have elapsed between the giving of such
notice and the hearing of the application.

(6) Where the application is for the transfer of a case or
appeal from any subordinate Court, the High Court may order
that, pending the disposal of the application, the proceedings in
the subordinate Court shall be stayed, on such terms as the
High Court may think fit to impose :

Provided that such stay shall not affect the subordinate Court’s
power of remand under section 344,

(7) Where an application for an order under sub-section (1)
is dismissed, the High Court may, if it is of opinion that the
application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay
by way of compensation to any person who has opposed the
application such sum not exceeding one thousand rupees as it
may consider proper in the circumstances of the circumstances of
the case.


345

(8) When the High Court orders under sub-section (1) that
a case be transferred from any Court for trial before itself, it
shall observe in such trial the same procedure which that Court
would have observed if the case had not been so transferred.

(9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect any
order Government under sub-section (2) of section 197.”

44.2. Section 526(8) is a peculiar provision whereby a subor-
dinate Court is obliged to stop all proceedings on the more inti-
mation by an inicrested party that he intends to apply to the High
Court for a transfer of the case. The principle that if an accused
person has reasonable cause to believe that he may not receive
a fair trial at the hands of a particular Judge, he should have
the righ: to have his case transferred to another Court is unob-
jectionable, as also the corollary that the proceedings should not
be continued while such an application for transfer is pending
before a higher Court. However, the provision for a mandatory
stay of the case on his mere intimation to the Court that he in-
tends so to apply has been subject to gross abuse.

44,3. This provision has came in for scrutiny and criticism
on several occasions. As far back as 1916, the Lowndes Com-
mittee which scrutinised the 1914 Bill to amend the Code
observed :— .

“There is no doubt that some of the provisions of section
526 are subject to constant abuse, and that a party, against
whom a criminal case is apparently going, will frequently
apply for a transfer on manifestly insufficient grounds. We
are also satisfied that advantage is frequently taken of the
section to obtain an adjournment which would otherwise be
tefused, without the least intention of making any applica-
tion to the High Court. It is reported to us, for” instance,
that in the Dacca Division during three years, adjournments
were obtained in no less than 125 cases in which no attempt
was made to move the High Court.”

That Committee was of the opinion that “penalising an im-
proper application” would put an end to the widespread abuse of
the provision.

44.4. This criticism by the Lowndes Committee was endorsed
by the Select Committee on the 1921 Bill to amend the Code. It
observed :—

“We have found section 526 somewhat difficult to deal
with. One class of opinions presses for greater safeguards
against frivolous, vexatious or dilatory applications for
transfer. Another class depreciates any measure which
makes a transfer more difficult to obtain. We think it is un-
avoidable to retain in the Code some provision for the com-
pulsory adjournment of a case when an intention to apply for
a transfer has becn notified. But we recognise that the pro-
visions of the section, as they stand, have lent themselves
to gross abuse, and, therefore, we feel that greater safeguards
ate necessary.”

Section $26 (8)

compulsory
adjournment on
application for
transfer.

Lowndes
Commitiee’s
criticism of the
provision,

Select
Committee's
views,


Further amend-

ment in 1932,

Sub-sections (8),
(9) and (10) to be

omitted.

Section 526 A to

be omitted
obsolete.

as

346

The section was amended in 1923 whereby a new sub-section
(6A) was added giving the High Court power to order costs if
the application for transfer was found to be frivolous or vexa~-
tious.

44.5. However, the expected improvement did not take place,
and a further amendment had to be resorted to in 1932. The
Statement of Objects and Reasons for the 1932 Bill mentioned
that “the practical working of this new procedure has been care-
fully observed by Government over a considerable period, and
they have come to the conclusion that it lends itself to grave abuse
and is calculated to defeat the ends of justice.” In a judgment! of
the Calcutta High Court, in was forcefully observed :--

“The position created by section 526(8) is truly amazing,
one effect being that no accused person can be convicted
except with his own consent. No discretion is given to the
Court by the section. If the accused notifies his intention to
make an application to the High Court for transfer, the trial
must be adjourned immediately. There is no limit to the
number of such notifications which may be given during the
course of any trial. X X X The abuse of process which sub-
section (8) makes possible obviously may be aggravated to
almost any extent, where there is a joint trial and each
accused person is represented by a different pleader.”

The provision was amended is 1932, whereby sub-section (8)
was re-cast in more or less its present form and sub-section (6A)
was amended providing for payment of compensation not exceed-
ing Rs. 250/- to the opposite party if the application for transfer
was found to be frivolous or vexatious.

44.6. These changes also have failed to improve the situation.
In fact, the amendment of 1955 giving the power of transferring
cases to Sessions Judges has naturally led to an increase in the
number of transfer applications and consequent delay in the dis-
posal of a larger number of cases. Instances where after securing
adjournment applications for transfer are cither not made or not
seriously pressed have not decreased in number. We are, there-
fore, of the opinion that sub-sections (8), (9) and (10) of section
526 which provide for a mandatory stay in trials and appeals
should be deleted. In their place, power should be given to the
Court hearing the application for transfer to stay the proceedings
in the lower court pending the disposal of the application. This
should not lead to any practical difficulties since, after the 1955
amendment, most applications for transfer are filed in the Sessions
Courts and stay could be obtained without delay. We would also
recommend that the maximum compensation that can be awarded
by a High Court under sub-section (6) should be raised from
Rs, 250/- to Rs. 1000/, and that a Sessions Court should be
empowered to award compensation upto Rs. 250/-.

44.7. Section 526A requires the High Court to transfer the
case for trial to itself, where any person subject to the Naval
Discipline Act, the Army Act or the Air Force Act is accused of
any suca offence as is referred to in proviso (a) to section 41 of

1 Neamat Shah, LR. 59 Cad. 482.

~


347

the Army Act, and the Advocate-General applies for such trans-
fer. The three Acts mentioned in this section are Acts of the
British Parliament which governed the British personnel serving
in India. The section has become obsolete after independence
and should be omitted.

44.8. Section 527 deals with the transfer of cases by the Sup-
reme Court. Sub-section (3) provides that the court to which
a case has been transferred under this section may act on the
evidence aircady recorded by the former court unless the accused
demands a re-trial. We do not think that any such special provi-
sion is required. Sub-section (3) may be omitted, so that the
position as regards re-trial of the case after a transfer by order
of the Supreme Court will be exectly the same as in a transfer
under any other provision of the Code.

We considered the question whether a provision similar to
section 25(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure (about the law
applicable to the transferred proceedings) should be inserted in
section 527. Since it is fairly clear that the substantive law ori-
sinally applicable to the cuse will continue to apply, no express
provision is necessary.

44.9. Under sub-section (1) of section 528 any Sessions Judge
may withdraw any case or appeal from, or recall any case or
appeal which he has made over to, any Assistant Sessions Judge
subordinate to him. Earlier in this Report! we have recommend-
ed that Assistant Sessions Judges need not exercise any appellate
jurisdiction. The mention of “appeal” in this sub-section may,
therefore, be omitted.

44.10. Sub-section (10), inserted by the Amending Act of
1955, confers on Sessions Judges the power to transfer cases from
one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in the same sessions
division whenever “expedient for the ends of justice.” The Sessions
Judge may, however, act only on aa application made to him in
this behalf by an interested party, The sub-section does not con-
Be any details of procedure similar to those contained in section

26.

We consider it desirable that a Sessions Judge should be
authorised to transfer cases, not only on the application of an
interested party, but also on the report of the lower Court or on
his own initiative. The procedural provisions contained in sec-
tion 526 should be applicable mutatis mutandis to applications
for transfer made to a Sessions Judge, should have the power to
order payment of compensation when he finds that the application
for transfer was frivolous or vexatious. The maximum amount
ef such ¢ compensation may, however, be Rs. 250 instead of

s. 1,000.

We have in an earlier Chapter proposed? that appeals from
convictions by Magistrates of the second class should lie to the
Chief Judicial Magistrate, In view of this proposal, it is desirable
that the Sessions Judge should have the power to transfer a parti-

1See para. 31.7 above.
2 See para, 31.5 2bove.

Section $27 sub
section (3) omit-
ted.

Section 528 (1).

Section 5282(10).


Section 528 (2).

Section $28 (5).

Section 528 (6).

Section $28 te-
vised and split
imto five sections.

Power of Sessions
Judge to transfer
cases and appeals

348

cular appeal from the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate te
himself, and decide the appeal.

44.11. Sub-section (2) of section 528 has to be read with
section 192 which empowers a District Magistrate or a Sub-divi-
sional Magistrate to transfer a casc after taking cognizance of it
to another Magistrate subordinate to him. In our discussion? of
the earlier section, we have recommended that section 192 should
be confined to making over of cases relating to offences and pro-
vision for transferring other kinds of cases should be: placed
elsewhere. The proper place for such a Provision would appear
to be in section 528.

44.12. Sub-section (5) of section 528 Provides that a Magis-
trate making an order under this section shall record his reasons
in writing for making the same. We consider that this provi-
sion, which is sound in principle, should apply equally to orders
Of a Sessions Judge recalling, withdrawing or transferring a case
or appeal under this section.

44.13. Sub-section (6) of section 528 provides that the head:
of a village under the Madras Village-police Regulation, 1916, or
the Madras Vitlage-police Regulation, 1821, is a Magistrate for
the purposes of this section. It appears that this provision is prac-
tically obsolete and can be omitted.

44.14. Section 528, as it stands, is a composite provision
dealing with different classes of Courts and with two or three diffe-
rent matters. It is desirable to split it up into five scctions as
follows :--

“528. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to a Sessions Judge
that an order under this sub-section is expedient for the ends of
justice, he may direct—

(8) that any particular case be transferred from one Cri-
minal Court to another Criminal Court in his sessions
division;

(b) that any particular appeal be transferred from the
court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate in his sessions
division to his own court.

(2) The Sessions Judge may act cither on the report of the
lower Court, or on the application of a party interested, or on
his own initiative.

(3) The provisions of sub-sections (3), (4), (5), (6), (7)
and (9) of section 526 shall apply in relation to an application to
the Sessions Judge for an order under sub-section (1) of this
section as they apply io relation to an application to the High
Court for an order under sub-section (1) of section 526, except
that sub-section (7) of that section shall so apply after substitut-
ing for the words “one thousand rupees” occurring therein, the
words “two hundred and fifty rupees”.

1 See para. 15.83 above,


343

5284 (1) A Sessions Judge may withdraw any case from,
or recall any case which he has made over to, any Assistant Ses-
sions judge subordinate to him.

(2) At any time before the trial of the case or the hearing of
the appeal has commenced before the Additional Sessions Judge,
a Sessions Judge may recall any case or appeal which he has made
over to any Additional Sessions Judge.

(3) Where a Sessions Judge withdraws or recalls a case or
appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), he may either
try the case in his own Court or hear the appeal himself, of make
it over in accordance with the provisions of this Code to another
Court for trial or hearing, as the case may be.

528B. (1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may withdraw any
case from, or recall any case which he has made over to, any
Magistrate subordinate to him, and may inquire into or try such
case himself, or refer it for inquiry or trial to any other such
Magistrate competent to inquire into or try the same.

(2) Any Judicial Magistrate may recall any case made over by
him under sub-section (2) of section 192, to any other Magistrate
and may inquire into or try such case himself.

528C. Any District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate
may—

(४) make over any case, of which he has taken cogni-
zance, for inquiry to any Magistrate subordinate
to him;

(b) withdraw any case from, or recall any case which
he has made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to
him, and inquire into such case himself ot refer it for
inquiry to any other such Magistrate.

528D. A Sessions Judge or Magistrate making an order under
section 528, 528A, 528B or 528C shall record his reasons for
making it.”

Withdrawal of
cases and appeals
by Sessions
Judges.

Withdrawal of
cases by Judicial
Magistrates.

Making over or.
withdrawal of
cases by Execur
tive Magistrates.

Reasons to be
recorded,


Introductory.

Section $29,

Section 530,
Section 531.
Section 532
Omitted.

Section $33
mature of evidence
that may be taken,

CHAPTER XLV
IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS

45.1. Chapter 45 deals with the effect of irregularities in pro-
cedure on the validity of the procecdings in which they occur.
The Code recognizes the principle that is-not every deviation from,
or neglect of, procedural formalities and technicalities that would
vitiate the proceedings of a Court. Broadly speaking, only irregu-
larities that have caused substantial prejudice to the accused will
render the proceedings invalid, while minor or inconsequential
errors or omissions are considered curable. The Chapter contains
specific provisions saving irregularities on certain matters, as also a
residuary provision saving irregularites in general. At the same
time, there are certain provisions of the Code which are considered
so vital that their disregard must vitiate a fair and proper trial
and, therefore, destroy the validity of the proceedings.

45.2, Section $29 enumerates the irregularities committed by
a Magistrate which do not vitiate the proceedings, where the
Magistrate crroncously, but in good faith, takes a proceeding
though not empowered to do so. No changes seem to be neces-
sary in this section. Though the specific enumeration of certain
proceedings naturally leaves out others, and may occasionally
cause difficultics, it does not appear to be desirable to insert 2
blanket provision saving all irregularities where no injustice has,
in fact beem caused,

45.3. Scction $30 enumerates the irregularities which, when
committed by a Magistrate not empowered by law to do a particu-
Jar thing, vitiate the proceedings. The section seems to need no
change. :

45.4. Section 531 saves the validity of a proceeding held in
a wrong place unless the error has 17 fact occasioned a failure
of justice. No changes are necessary in the section.

45.5. Section 532 validates irregular commitments in certain
circumstances. In view of the proposed abolition of commitment
proceedings, this section will be rendered unnecessary and may

'८ omitted.

45.6. Section $33 provides that if the Court before which a
statement or confession of the accused person Purporting to be
recorded under section 164 and section 364 is tendered in evi-
dence, finds that any of the provisions of such sections have not
been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement,
it shall “take evidence that such person duly made the statement
recorded”. This expression seems to have created some difficulty
in interpretation, as is evidenced by the conflicting decisions of the
various Courts.

One has to distinguish between two questions, (1) whether the
confession or other statement was “duly made”, that is to say,
made after giving the necessary warning and after putting the re-


351

quired questions undcr scction 164, and (ii) whether the confes-
sion or other statement, duly made, was properly recorded.

In the first case, section 533 should noi apply. because, to
apply the section in such cases would defeat the very object of
sections 164 and 364, thereby depriving the accused of a bene-
ficial provision on a matter on which the law has always shown
its anxior 1६ is only the second kind of defect—defect
i g—that should be curable. The Magistrate should
have complied with the substantial provisions of section 164, and
there can be no saving for a non-compliance on that account. If
such compliance is not apparent from the record, it can be proved
otherwise. That is all that section 533 is intended to provide for.

As observed by the Supreme: Court!—

“Now a statement would not have been ‘duly made’ unless
the procedure for making it laid down in section 164 had
been followed. What section 533 therefore does is to permit
ora! evidence to be given to prove that the procedure laid
down in section 164 had in fact been followed when the
Court finds. that the record produced before it dces not show
that that was so. Jf the oral evidence establishes that the
procedure had been fotlowed, then only can the record be
-d. Therefore, far from showing that the procedure
jaid down in section 164 is not intended to be obligatory,
section 533 really emphasises that that procedure has to be
followed. The section only permits oral evidence to prove
that the procedure had actually been followed in certain cases
here the record which ought to show that docs not on the
face of it do so.”

45.7. We would, therefore, recommend that sub-section (1)
of section 533 be amended as follows to clarify that the evidence
given should relate te the apparent non-compliance with the statu-
tory provisions :--

“(1) If any Court before which a confession or other
statement of an accused person recorded or purporting to be
recorded under section 164 or section 364 is rendered or has
been received in evidence finds that any of the provisions of
either of such sections has not been complied with by the
Magistrate recording the statement. it may notwithstanding
anything contained in section 91 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, take evidence in regard to such non-compliance, and
may, if satisfied that such non-compliance has not injured
the accused in his defence on the merits and that he dulv
made the statement recorded, admit such statement.”

_ 45.8. It may be noted in this connection that the effect of
irregularities in the recording of a confession on its admissibility
in evidence is also dealt with in section 29 of the Evidence Act.
This section which saves inter alia the omission to warn the accus-
ed as provided for im section 164 of the Code seems to mun
counter to the principle underlying section 533 as explained above,

1 State of U.P. v. Singhara Singh, (1964) 4 S.C.R. 385; ALR. 1964
5. ९. 358 at page 362.

Sub-section (1).
amended to cla-
rify the position,

Section $33 of
the Code and sec-
tion 29 of the
Evidence Act.


Section 535 ex-
panded and re-
vised.

Effect of omission
to frame, or
absence of,
or error in,
charge.

352

This has given rise to some difficulty in deciding the admissibility
of such contessions, resulting in a number of conflicting de-
cisions’, The cause of the trouble may be traced to the omission
to amend section 29 of the Evidence Act when section 164(3)
of the Criminal Procedure Code was amended in 1923. The
matter will have to be considered when the Evidence Act comes
up for revision.

45.9. Section 535 deals with the effect of omission to frame
a charge while clause (b) of section 537 deals with the effect of
“any error, omission or irregularity in the charge, including any
misjoinder of charges”. The same matter is also dealt with in
section 232 which provides that if any appellate Court or the
High Court in the exercise of its powers of revision or confirma-
tion is of the opinion that the absence of a charge or an error ip
the charge has misied the accused in his defence, it shall order a
re-trial section also provides that if the facts proved in the
case are such that no valid charge can be proved against the
accused, the Court shall quash the conviction. We recommend
that sections 232, 535 and 537(b) which deal with the same sub-
ject, should be combined into one. We are also of the opinion
that a re-trial should not be mandatory as at present. In several
reported cases, Courts have in the interests of justice refrained
from ordering a re-trial, as for instance, when the accused had
already undergone sufficient punishment? or when the evidence
was considered insufficient to support a conviction.® It would be
better to make the provision for ordering retrial discretionary so

that a Court could pass an order appropriate in the particular
circumstances of a case.

=)

Section 535 may accordingly be amplified and revised as
follows :

“335. (1) No finding, sentence or order by a Court of
competent jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid merely on the
ground that no charge was framed or on the ground of any
error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any
misjoinder of charges unless, in the opinion of the Court of
appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in
fact been occasioned thereby.

(2) It the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision is
of opiaion that a failure of justice has in fact been occasion-
ed, it may,—

(a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order
that a charge be framed and that the trial be re-
commenced from the point immediately after the
framing of the charge;

(0) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity im
the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a
charge framed in whatever manner it thinks fit;

1 Rangappa v. State, A. 1. R. 1956 Bombay 285; Bala Majhi v. State,
A. 1, R. 1951 Orissa 168; Karuthambi, A. 1. R. 1951 Madras 579; Velle,
Mauji, A. 1. R. 1932 Madras 431.

2See Hosseni Sardar v. Kalu Sardar (1902), 1. L. R. 29 Cal. 481, 482

3Nemain Adak v. State, ALR. 1966 Caicutte 89. .

4

A,


353

Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the facts of
the case are such that no valid charge could be preferred
against the accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall
quash the conviction.”

45.10. Section 536 which relates to jury trials may be deleted.

45.14. Scction 537 is a general provision regarding irregula-
rities in complaints, summons, warrants, orders, judgments and
other proceedings. Clauses(c) and (0) which relate to jury
trials may be deleted. Clause (b) has been incorporated in the
revised section 535(1). The rest of section 537 may be revised
as follows :—

“337. (1) Subject to the provisions hereinbefore con-
tained, no finding, sentence or order passed by a Court of
competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or altered by a Court
of appeal, confirmation or revision op account of any error,
omission or irregularity in the complaint, summons, warrant,
proclamation, order, judgment or other proceedings before
or during trial or in any inquiry or other proceedings under
this Code, unless in the opinion of that Court, a failure of
justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.

(2) In determining whether any error, omission or irre-
gularity in any procecding under this Code has occasioned a
failure of justice, the court shall have regard to the fact
whether the objection could and should have been raised at
an earlier stage in the proceedings.”

_ 45.12. Section 538 provides that no attachment shall be
illegal on account of any defect in the proceedings. No change
is necessary here.

Section 536.
omitted.

Section $37

Finding or sen-
tence when re-
versible by reae
son of error,
omission or itres
gularity,

Section 538.


introductory.

Sections 539 and
539 AA(1).

‘Section 539A and
section $39AA(2)

CHAPTER XLVI
MISCELLANOUS

46.1, The last Chapter of the Code is a real hotch-potch and
deserves the title ‘Miscellaneous’. A number of provisions rele~
gated to this Chapter could more appropriately and quite easily
have been put in carlier Chapters along with connected or ama-
Jogous sections.

46.2. Section 539 lists the persons before whom affidavits and
affirmations to be used before any High Court or any officer of
a High Court may be sworn or affirmed, Then section 539AA(1)
provides that an affidavit to be used before any Court, other than
a High Court, under section 5104 (evidence of a formal charac-
ter) or under section 539A (evidence regarding conduct of public
servants), may be sworn or affirmed in the manner prescribed in
section 539 or before any Magistrate.

According to one view,? section 539A(i)} does not cover
affidavits under section 145 since they are not of a formal cha-
racter So as to fail under section 510A. A Magistrate also does
not seem to possess a general power to administer oath to any
person who wishes to swear an affidavit before him. The provi-
sions of section 4 of the Indian Oaths Act, 1873, do not confer
such a power.* In an earlier Report,’ the Law Commission has
suggested an amendment of this Act for this purpose. We see
no good reason why section 53933 (1) should be limited in its
scope, nor why there should be two szparate and slightly different
provisions for the High Court and other Courts on this sub-
Ject.

As regards the authoritics referred to in section 539, the
Clerk of the State, Commissioners to administer oaths in England
or Ireland and Magistrates authorised to take affidavits or affir-
mations in Scotland should obviously be omitted. On the other
hand, it is desirable to add notaries as they have been expressly
authorised by law to administer oaths.t We note that a sugges-
stion to add notaries in the Code of Civil Procedure was rejected
by the Law Commission in its earlier Report’ on that Code on
the ground that the matter should be left to be dealt with by the
High Court under section 139 of that Code. We would, how-
ever, prefer to mention notaries expressly in the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure.

46.3, While no change is required in sub-section (1 )of section
539A (regarding affidavits in proof of the conduct of public
servants), there is no reason why the provisions in sub-section

1 Hemdan vy. State, ALR. 1966 Raj. 5.
2 Wahid v. State 4.LR. 1963, All. 256; Nandlal Ghose ५. Emperor 354.
ATR. 1944 Cal. 28:

Report on the Oaths Act.
*Section 8(1){a), Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952).

© 27th Report, page 125.

a


385

(2) prescribing the essential requirements of an affidavit should
be limited to this class of affidavits. Similarly, the provision in
section 539AA(2) that the Court may order any scandalous and
irrelevant matter to be struck out or amended should be applic-
able in r lation to all affidavits and all Courts. These two general
provisions relating to affidavits may be put together in the same
section.

46.4. We propose accordingly that sections $39, 539A and
532A be combined and revised as follows :—

“539. (1) Affidavits to be used before any Court under
this Code may be sworn or affirmed before—

{a) any Judge or Magistrate;

(b) any Commissioner of Oaths appointed by a High
Court; or

(c) any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952.

(2) Affidavits shall be confined to, and shall state sepa-
rately, such facts as the deponent is able to prove from his
own knowledge and such facts as he has reasonable ground
to believe to be true, and in the latter case, the deponent
shall clearly state the grounds of such belief.

(3) The Court may order any scandalous and irrelevant
matter in the affidavit to be struck out or amended.

539A. When any application is made to any Court in
the course of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under
this Code, and allegations are made therein respecting any
public servant, the applicant may give evidence of the facts
alleged in the application by affidavit, and the Court may,
if it thinks fit, order that evidence relating to such facts be
50 given.”

These two sections should be put in the Chapter relating to the
taking of evidence.

46.5. Sub-section (1) of section 539B empowers any Judge
or Magistrate to visit and inspect any place “ for the purpose of
properly appreciating the evidence given at the inquiry or trial”.

henever he does so, he is required to record without delay “a
memorandum of any relevant facts observed at such inspection”.
While it may not always be possible to draw a sharp distinction
between “relevant facts” and impressions or opinion formed bya
Judge at a local inspection, the requirements of the section are
fairly clear. The purpose of the inspection, as indicated in the
sub-section, is neither unduly restrictive nor unduly lax. No
change is required in the sub-section,

46.6. The proviso to section 539B(2) relating to jury trial
will have to be omitted.

46.7. With reference to section S40A, it was suggested during
our discussion that there should be a provision for continuing
the proceedings in the absence of the accused in cases where he
persistently disturbs the proceedings and has therefore to be kept
out. If such an accused is represented by: counsel, it is possible

Authorities bee
fore whom affi-
davits may be
sworn.

Affidavits in proof
of conduct of
public servants.

Section 53986).

Section 539B(2).

Section 540A,


‘Section 54403).

Section 542.

Section 543.

Section 544.

Section 545.

Section 546A

356

for the Court, even under the present section, to proceed with
the inquiry or trial in the absence of the accused person. Cases
of extreme contumacious behaviour on the part of accused per-
sons are extremely rare and we do not therefore think it necessary
to make a special provision for those cases.

This section and the two preceding sections could well be
included in the Chapter on general provisions as to inquiries and
trials.

46.8, In section 541(3), the references to sections 341 aad
342 of the former Code of Civil Procedure should be replaced
by “section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or section
23 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920, as the case may
be.”

46.9. We have earlier in this Report recommended! that this
section may be omitted.

46.10. Section 543 which lays a duty on every interpreter to
interpret truthfully is a general provision relating to the taking
and recording of evidence and should be included in the appro-
priate Chapter.

46.11. No change is required in section 544 which provides
for payment by Government of the reasonable expenses of com~-
plainants and Witnesses. As a general provision relating to in-
quiries and trials, this section could be put in Chapter 24.

46.12, Under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 545,
the Court may direct “payment to any person of compensation
for any loss or injury caused by the offence when substantial
compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by
such person in a Civil Court”. The significance of the require-
ment that compensation should be recoverable in a Civil Court
is that the act which constitutes the offence in question should
also be a tort. The word “substantial” appears to have been
used to exclude cases where only nominal damages would be
recoverable, We think it is hardly necessary to emphasise this
aspect, since in any event it is purely within the discretion of the
Criminal Courts to order or not to order payment of compensa-
tion, and in practice they are not particularly liberal in utilising
this Provision. We propose to omit the word “substantial” from
the clause.

46.12a. Section 546A applies only to complaint cases where
the accused is convicted of a non-cognizable offence. In such
cases, the Court may, in addition to the penalty imposed on
the accused, order him to pay to the complainant the fee paid
on the petition of complaint and the process fee for summoning
witnesses and the accused. These fees are small amounts com-
pared to the total expenses properly incurred by the complainant
in prosecuting the offender. We consider that the Court should
have the power to award full costs. Sub-section (1) of section
546A may be revised to read as follows :-—
“(1) Whenever any complaint of a non-cognizable offence
is made to a Court, the Court, if it convicts the accused,

1See paragraph 37.4 above.


357

may in addition to the Penalty imposed upon him, order
him to pay to the complaint in whole or in part the cost
mcurred by him in the Prosecution, and may further order
that in default of Payment, the accused shall suffer simple
imprisonment for a period not excecding thirty days. Such
costs may include any expenses incurred in respect of process
fees, witnesses and Pleader’s fees which the Court may consi-
der reasonable.’ .

46.13, Section 549(1) refers to “the Army Act, the Naval
Discipline Act, the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934, and
the Air Force Act”, all of which are no longer in force. This
may be substituted by “the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act,
1957 and in the Air Force Act, 1950” which are relevant Acts
now in force,

The sub-section refers to “commanding officer of the regi-
ment, corps. ship or detchment, to which he (the accused)
belongs”. As suggested by the Ministry of Defence, it is proposed
that after the word “ship” the word “unit” should be added in
order to include the basic organisation of the Air Force.

The Ministry of Defence have also suggested that an expla-
nation be added to the effect that Court-martial includes a dis-
ciplinary Court constituted under section 95 of the Navy Act,
1957 and also a summary trial by the commanding officer of the
ship under section 93(2) of that Act. This suggestion appears to
Proceed on a misconception of the object of section 549. Every
offence triable under the Navy Act may, according to section
93(1), be tried and punished by Court-martiall; and under sec-
tion 549(1) of the Code the Central Government has the power
to make such rules as may be appropriate for the Navy con-
sistent with the provisions of the Navy Act. No change ap-
Pears to be necessary in section 549 on this point.

46.14. In_our Report? on the law relating to attendance of
prisoners in Courts we had recommended that clause (d) of sec-
tion 491(1) be omitted and the provision incorporated in a modi-
fied form in section 549. The following sub-section may accord-
ingly be added to this section—

“(3) A High Court may direct that a person detained in
any jail within the State be brought before a Court-martial
for trial or to be examined touching any matter pending before
the Court-martial.”

46.15. We have in an earlier Chapter® recommended that
sections 550 and 552 should be put in Chapter VII of the Code
as sections 104A and 100A respectively.

46.16. Section 553 provides for compensation to “persons
groundiessly given in charge in Presidency-towns”, Where any
Person causes a police-officer in a Presidency-town to arrest an-
other person and it appears to the Magistrate by whom the case is
heard that there was no sufficient ground for causing the arrest,

2 Cf. section 148(3},
2Fortieth Report, para. 29.
*See paras. 7.9 and 7.10 above.

Section 549 (3)
amended,

Provision for
securing atten-
dance of a priso-
ner before a
Court-martial.

Sections $50 and
552.

Section $53,


Section 554 omit-
ted in view of
Article 227.

Section 555
amended,

Section 557.

Section 558.

Section 559(2).

358

the Magistrate can order payment of compensation as provided
in the section. The section is at present confined to arrests in
presidency-towns but we think that it is a salutary provision and
should be extended to all places. ‘Accordingly sub-section (1) of
section 553 may be amended by omilting the words “in a presi-
dency-town”.

46.17. The subject-matter of section 554 is fully covered by
clauses (2) and (3) of Article 227 of the Constitution under which
every High Court has power to call for returns, mak: and issue
general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the practice and
procecdings of courts ctc. This Article applies also to Courts
Of Judicial Commissioners.* Section 554 is therefore redundant

and may be omitted.

46.18, Consequentially, in section 555, the reference to sec-
tion 554 may be omitted.

46.19, Section 557 prohibits a pleader practising in a crimi-
nal court from “sitting as a Magistrate” in that court or, in any
court subordinate to that court. Practically this prohibition is
in relation to pleaders appointed as honorary Magistrates, The
section cnables a pleader practising in the civil courts to accept
such an appointment and function as a Magistrate. The words
“in a pr-sidency-town OF district” are superfluous and may be
omitted from the section,

46.20, Under section 558, the State Government may deter-
mine whit shall be the language ‘of each Criminal Court in the
Staie other than a High Court (not being the Court of a Judicial
Commissioner), ‘The analogous provision of Civil Courts is con-
tained in section 137 of the Civil Procedure Code. Some States
have issued notifications under section 558 determining the lan-
guage of subordinate Criminal Courts, Although article 345 of
the Constitution specially empowers the tegislature of a State to
determine by law what language shall be used for all or any of
the official purposes of the State, there does not appear to be
any real conflict between that article and section 558 of the
Code. As 3 pre-cxisting law, this section has been continued
in force by article 372 of the Constitution “until repealed, altered
or amend d by a competent legislature”. No change of substance
is necessary in the section, but as a formal amendment. for the
words “territories administered by such Government”, the word
“State” may be substituted.

46.21. Sub-section (2) of section 559 requires to be formally
revised as follows :-—

“(2) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor
jn office of any Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate
or Executive Magistrate, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the District Magistrate, as
the case may be, shall determine by order in writing the
Magistrate who shall, for the purpose of this Code or of any
proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the succes~
sor in office of such Magistrate.”

pO See the Judicial Commissioners (Declaration as High Courts) Act,



359

46.22. Section 561 contains two special provisions with res-
pect to the oftence of rape where it is committed by a man on
his wife. Under sub-section (1) only a Chief Presidency Magis-
trate or District Magistrate is competent to take cognizance of
the offence and to commit the man for trial, if necessary, to the
Court of Session. Under sub-section (2), when a police investi-
gation is ordered. no police-officer of a rank below that of a
police-inspector may take part in the investigation. The object
of these spe provisions appears to have been to prevent harass-
ment by unirieadly neighbours, but considering that prosecutions
‘or this offence have been extremely rare, these special provi-
sions appear to be practically unnecessary, We propose that the
section may be omitted.

46.23. Section 561A recognises the inherent power of the
High Court to do real and substantial justice between parties.
Assuming its existence, the section provides that nothing in the
Code shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent power of the
High Court to give effect to any order under the Code (whether
made by itself or by a subordinate Court) or to prevent abuse
of the process of any Court (including subordinate Courts) or
otherwise to secure the ends of justice,

{a an earber Report, the Law Commission observed :-—

“This statutory recognition, however, extends only to
the inherent powers of the High Court, One may compare
it with the recognition of the inherent cores of all civil
courts by section 151, Civil Prfocedure .

In a number of decisions before and after the enactment
of section 561A, various High Courts have also recognised
the existence of such power in subordinate Courts? We
would, therefore, recommend a statutory recognition of such
inherent power which has been recognised as vesting in all
subordinate criminal courts.

However, the general principle of law is that the inherent
power of a court can be exercised only to give effect to orders made
by it or to prevent abuse of its own processes.”

We ugtve with this recommendation. We do not, however,
consider it necessary or desirable to go further and recognise an
“inherent power” in Courts of Session and other Courts of Appeal
to pass appropriate orders to prevent the abuse of the process of
any sabordinute Court.

We prapose that the section may be expanded as follows :—
1A. Nothing in this Code shall be deemed 10 !imit or
© inherent power—

> of the High Court to make such orders as may be
necessary to give effect 10 any order under this Code
or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or
otherwise to secure the ends of justice, or

“1 "Rourteonth Report, Vol. II, page 829.
2 tchambit Mondal v. Mahatab Singh and others, A. 1. R. 1915 Cal.

119; Nagen Kundu y. Emperor, 61 Cal. 498; Krushna Mohan v. Sudhakur
Dass, A. 1, R. 1953 Orissa, 281.

Section 561

Section Sola,

Saving ०1 inhe-
rent Powers ot
Criminal Courts,


360

(b) of any other Criminal Court to make such orders as
may be necessary to prevent abuse of its process or
otherwise to secure the cnds of justice.” :

46.24. With icleronce to the pro
anter! recommended

Section 562 (1),
proviso, and 85९-
tion 380 combined,

jon 552(1) we

“Provided thai where any firs
Magistrate of the sccoad class not s
High Court ia behalf, and the 3. f
the powers conierred by this scction '3 be exorcised,

(a) he shall record his opinion १ -aat effect and submit
the proceedings-to a Masistru‘e of the first class,
forwarding the accused to, or teking bail for his
appearance before, such Magistrate; and

(8) such Magistrate may thercupon pass such sentence or
make such order as he might have passed or made if
the case had originally been heard by him, and, if he
thinks further inquiry or additional evidence on any
point to be necessary, he may make such inquiry or
take such gvidence himself or direct such inquiry or
evidence to be made or taken.”

Section 562 (1A) 46.25. Under sub-section (1A) of section 562, it is permis-

amended, sible to release a first offender after admonition only in ihe care
of certain offences punishable under the Indian Penal Code. It
has been stated? that Courts very often release first offenders after
admonition in cases under various laws other than the Indian
Penal Code, की this is not strictly covered by section 562.
Ia principle, however, there is no reason why section 562 should
not apply also to other laws. We accordingly propose that the
words “under the Indian Penal Code” may be omitted from sub-
section (1A).

Occasionally doubts have been raised whether an offence
punishable only with fine is covered by the . expression “any
offence punishable with not more than two years’ imprisonment”.
Although the Courts* have answered this question in the affirma-
tivo, it seems desirable to make the position clear by adding the
words “or with fine only” after the words “not more than two
years’ intprisonment”. .

Section 565, 46.26, Section 565 empowers the Courts to order previously
convicted Offenders to notify their place of residence and any
change of, or absence from, such residence after their release.
As the section is at present worded, it has been held* that it does

not apply to persons convicted of attempts, abetments and con-
spiracies to commit any of the offences listed. in clause {a} of

1 See para. 27.11 above.
2F3(2)/SS-L.C, Pt. TI, $. No. 17 (Shri N. 0. Chstterjeo, Ghose Lane,

Calcutta).
8 See Emperor v. Manchershaw, AIR: 1935 Bom. 156.
4 Dorainwamy, A. LR. 1942 Mad, 521,



361

section 565( 1). 10 18 obviously desirable that the section should -

‘also to such persons. Clause (b) of the section is prac-
ea, ‘obsolete because of lapse of time and may be omitted.
‘Sub-section (1) of section 565 may accordingly be revised as
follows :-—

*(1) When any person having been convicted by a Court

in India of an offence to which this section applies is again

~ convicted of any such offence by any Court other than that

of a Magistrate of the second class, that Court may, if it

thinks fit, at the time of passing sentence of imprisonment on

_ such person, also order that his residence and avy change of,

‘or absence from, such residence after release be notified as

hereinafter provided for a term not exceeding five years from
the date of the expiration of such tence.

(JA) This section applies to any of the following
offences, namely :-— .
(i) any offence _ punishable under Chapter XH or
Chapter XVIE of the Indian Penal Code with
imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards;
(ii) any offence punishable under section 215, 489A,
489B, 489C or 489D of the same Code;
1. Gii) an abetment of, or attempt to commit, of conspiracy
to commit, any of the aforeseid offences.”


Five-fois
classifiction
ander the
Second Set

Omission of
columns 4 and 6
recommended,

Cognizability of
offences under
cofuma 2.

Offences against
State to be cog-
nizable,

Offence unde:
section 324 should
be cognizable.

CHAPTER XLVI

10% OF OFFENCES IN THE SECOND
SCHEDULE

CLASSIFIC.

47.3. the Second Schedule to the Code classifies offences
under the Indian Penal Code and also offences against other
laws from five stand-points. The Schedule has to be referred
to for a:

whether an offence is cognizable or non-cognizable
tcolumn 3);

(ii) whether a summons or a rant shall ordinarily
issue in the first instance (column 4):

(1) whether an offence is bailuble or not (column 5);

(iv) whether an offence is compoundable or not (column
6); and

(२) by what Court an offence is triable (cohuma 8).

47.2. We have recommended? in Chapter 17, while discussing
section 204, that column 4 of the Second Schedule may be dis-
pensed with by providing in section 204 itself that in all sum-
mons-cases, a summons should ordinarily issue in the first instance
and in a warrant-<case, a warrant. We consider that since the
coryeet position regarding the compoundability of an offence can
be readily ascertained by looking up section 345, there is ro
need for repeating this information in a tabular form 10 column 6
of the Second Schedule. The ommission of these two columns
will simplify the Schedule to some extent.

47.3. Column 3 of the Schdeulc indicates the offences for
which the police may arrest without warrant and the offences for
which a warrant of arrest must be obtained by them. On a
detailed scrutiny of the Schedule we find the present classification
to be generally sound in principle. and have few changes to
propose

47.4. One such change is in regard to offences against the
te specified in Chapter VI of the Indian Penal Code. it is
curious that. in spite of the fact that all of them are grave offences
punishable with heavy sentences and, except in two cases, triable
exclusively by the Court of Session, they are made non-cognizable
under the Schedule. We are unable to see any real justification
for this and recommend that. with these two exceptions (siz.,
sedition punishable under section 124A and the minor offence
punishable under section 129), offences under this Chapter
should be cosnizihle.

47.5. It has been suggested that the offence of voluntary
tsing hurt hy dangerous weapons ar means punishable under
section 324 of the Code need not be a cognizable offence since
it is compoundable with the permission of the Court and the:

1 See para 17.3. above.

na

»


363

maximum punishment fur it is only three years’ imprisonment.
The actual injury caused might not be serious, but having regard
to ils potentialities, it is clearly an offence for which the police
should have the power to act promptly to prevent senous con-
sequences. In our opinion. the offence is rightly made cogniz-
able.

47.6. We nave con 2G ६ suggestion rom a merecatile
ation of Calcuua that the fraudulent disposals of property
able under secuons 421 and 422 of the Indian Penal Code
be maiz cozal It is said that these offences are
steadily ier vod persous purchasing goods on credit are
taking undue advant of the system of sale on credit and
defrauding the’ While there may be a case for increas-
ing the punish ‘3 in the Penal Code (now two years
punishment er 3. we do not think business morality
is likely to be merely by making the offence
Ie. The offesces are in the nature of things dificult to
te by the ordinary police and the result of meking them

and undue harassment by the police at the instance of jealous
business rivels. For similar reasons, we consider that the
offences of forgery and counterfeiting trade and property marks
described in sections 465 to 4774 of the Code should remzin
non-coanizable

47.7. The offence of enticing away a married woman for
iicit purposes punishable vader section 498 of the Indian Penal
Code is, in our view. quite rightly a non-cognizable offence. It
stands on ९ different footie from kidnapping or abduction which
are cognizable offences.

47.8. A State Government has suggested that the offence of
intentiona!!y insulting the modesty of a woman by word or
gesture punishable under section 509 of the Penal Code, should
be made cognizable s0 that in the changed social circumstances
of the day, when women are coming out in larger numbers and
taking greater pert in various professional and business acti-
vitics, they inay have a sense of security. The States of Madhya
Pradesh. Maharashtra and Mysore have already amended this
item in the S:cond Schedule making the offence cognizable. We
agree that umendment should be made in the Code so as to
be of all-India application.

47.9. The classification in column 5 of the Second Schedule
is of bailabte 2nd non-bailable offences. We do not chink that
afy changes are required in this column,

47.10. The last column of the Schedule shows the Court
by which st offence is viable. Jt will be noticed that against a
number of ofonces, the entry in column है. reads, “Court of
Session, Presidency trate or Magistrate of the first class”,
and ¢ “Court ¢ ion. Presidency Magistrate or Magistrate
of the first or second class”. Since it is clear from section 28
that any offence under the Indian Penal Code may be tried by
the Uourt of Sessions, whether it is expressly mentioned in
column 8 or not, it is sufficient to mention the Court of Session

Fraudulent dise
position of pro-
perty, forgery and
counterfeiting
trade and छा0-
perty marks to
temain non-cog-
nizable.

Offence under
section 498
should be
non-cognizable

Offence under
section 509 to be
cognizable,

No change in
column

Nature of changes
proposed in
column है.


364

in that colunm against those offences which are triable exclu-
sively by that Court. After a carefel scrutiny of the Schedule we
have consid:rably ieduced the number of cnivies in which the
Court of Se figures in the last column. ‘ais will have the
effect of tram ig some of the work which now goes up to
the Sessions Ca on commitment to ihe Courts of Magistrate
which, usder our proposals, will have exit cd powers of
4. We have also deleted थी rofen: to Presidency
Magistrates, sivce in metropolitan arcas, th. repolitan Magis-
trates will be competent to try all offences trixb’e by any Judicial
Magistrate, whether of the first class or of the second, in a
district

47.11. The cnanges proposed by us are indicated below :

Section 120B—The first entry in column 8 should read,
“Court by which abetment of the offence which is the object
of conspiracy is triable’; and the second entry should read
“Magistrate of the first class”.

Section 124A—Since the offence of sedition is not only
serious but also likely to involve complicated questions of
law and fact. we propose that it should be triable exclusively
by the Court of Session.

Sections 151 to 169—Alll these offences may be triable by
a Magistrate of the first class. It is not veccssary to bring
the Court of Session for offences under sections 161 to 164.
A second class Magistrate should not be authorised to try
offences under sections 165 and 166.

Section 193—--First part triable by Magistrate of the first
class end second part by any Judicial Mazistrate.

Sections 196 to 200—Triable by “the Court by which the
offence of giving or tabricating the false evidence is triable”.

Section 201, 3rd paragraph—Triable by the Court by
which ‘the offence is triable. “Presidency Magistrate or
Magistrate of the first class” to be omitted,

Sections 212 to 216--May be triubie by a Magistrate of
the first class in all cases. Even where a capital olfence is
involved, since the maximum punishment for the offence is
7 years, it need not be triable exclusively by the Court of
Session.

Sections 246 to 263—Court of Scssion may be omitted for
offences in this group where the maximum punishment is 7
years. The offence under section 251 which is punishable
with 10 years’ imprisonment may be trinble exviusively by
the Court of Session.

Section 2634—May be triable by aay Magistrate since
the offence is punishable with fine of Rs. 200.

Section 292—Any Magistrate should have jurisdiction to
try this offence. No doubt, it is sometimes difficult to decide
whether a publication is obscene; but in the bulk of cases


36S
| there is no doubt about the nature of the publica-
tion.! .
tion 295—Any Magistrate should have jurisdiction to
try this offence which is punishable with 2 ycars’ imprison-
mnt.

ion 295A—At present, wiable by “Court of Ses-ion
dency Muzivrate™, Should be triah’s by “Magis'rate

ctions 317 ard 318—These may be triable by Magis-
of the first class. Reference to the Court of Session

Sections 335, 345 and 346—Considering -he nature these
Offe.ices and the punisament provided for them triable by
Magzistcute of tis fits: class only.

Section 3634, first pari—Court of Sessicn may be omitted,
and the offence may be triable by Magistrate of the first class.

Svetion 365-——Court of Szssion or Magistrate of the first
cla. . accordiny as the offence ¢f kidnappinz or abduction
is t i.ble, should have jurisdiction.

offences should

S ction 376, fis: part—The offence should be made triable

ly by the Court of Session (Hike the offerce ucder
cond and third parts of the section), even though the
m::imum punishment is 2 years only.

Section 377—Cox + of Seision may be omitted. Though
the m-ximum punishment is 10 years, onty a light punish-
Ment is awarded in practice,

Sections 386 to 389—These are non-crgriz:b'e offences,
and u'though the punishment is 7 years or 10 years and in
twc instances mav be impri-onment for lif:, we propose that

7 20 by Magistrate of the first ci:ss (ordinarily
f Jucial Magistrate) instead of the Court of

६ tions 406 and 408—Should be triable by Magi.trate
017... first ctase only,
 ctions 429 and 432—Should be triable by Magistrate of
the fst cla ५ enly, second class Magistrates may be omitted.
Scion 454—Titt part should be triable by any Magis-
fr t+ and sec, part. for which the punishment may go up
te i} vears, be M: fe Of the first class.

an Chim गे 1 915 Bill, as report:d ty tie Select Com
bh: nl Select Committee, Lok Sabha (ist May, 1969)

ion 292 ६६ proposed to be raised to 2 years for the
ion ant 5 years for a subsequent convictin. offence
eo ively triabie by the High Court or Court of Sesion. The



vader

366

Section 457, second part—Second class Magistrate may be
omitted, in view of the gravity of ihe offence.

Sections 465 to 477A—Most of the offences are triable
exclusively by the Court of Session, but they are non-cogaiz-
adie. In order to reduce the pressure on the Court of Session,
we propose that all offences under this Chapter muy be
triable by Magistrate of the first class. Serious or
cated cases will be tried by the Chie? Judicial Magis

Section 305—May be triable by any Magistret:
the punishment is only 2 years.

Section SO9—As the maximum punishment is ene yeur,
any Magistrate should be competent to try it.

47.12. ‘ihe fatter part of the Schedule dealing with offences
under other laws puts them in four groups according to the
severity of the punishment prescribed for the offence. Since the
third class of Magistrates is to be abolished, the last two groups
will have to be combined. In the third group, offences punish-
able with more than one year’s but less than three years’ impri-
sonment, the Court of Session is mentioned as onc of the Courts
competent to try the offence. We propose to omit the mention
of Court of Session here. Under section 28, the Court of
Session does not get automatic jurisdiction so far as offences
under other laws are concerned, but this would not be material
in practice.

In the first group, we propose, to exclude offences punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to scven years. These
would go into the next group, so that they might be triable
either by a Court of Session or a Magistrate of the first class.
The last group of o!:eces-—those punishable with imprisonment
for less than 3 years or with fine only--would be triable by any
Magistrate.

In the second group of offences under column 5 (witether
bailabie or not), we propose to omit the exception which reads
“except in cases not relating to fire arms under the Indian Arms
Act, 1878, section 19, which shall be bailable”. The proper
place for this exception is m the Arms Act, 1959, which has
replaced the Arms Act of 1878


CHAPTER XLVI

cd study of the
ti we have made funisrous recom~
verual changes
ferlying ideas.
५. simplica-

We have ¢
the course of
Mtioss for ity improvemeat. ranging fi
dovigwd to remove i

19 sue Gntial chy

with a vicw

ven and the av Tare object of the Code is to
ensues that an accused pers ets a fw and fair ial along
PevstaMished and veli-understood ling. that sccard

Serta

stice. Tt may be at by saying
detaiicd rules of procedure for mecting every — possible
seney. the Code makes one tose sight of the main objec-
live, but it is obvious!y not se. As observed by Justice Vivian
Bore ia tae Supreme Court.)

The Code is cmphatic that whatever the irregu-
larity, it ix not to he regarded fatal unless there
is prejudice. {tis the substance that we must seek.
Courts have to administer justice. and justice in-
cludes the punishment of guilt jusi as much as the
protection. of innocence. Neither can be done if the
shadow is mistaken for the substance and the goal is
lest in a labyrinth of unsubstantial technicalities.
Broad vision is required, a nice balancing of the
rights of the State and protection of society in gene-
ral agains: >retection from harassment to the indivi-
dual and > risks ef unjust conviction.”

We have kept 1 है ves in view while revising the

vn. sider it necessary tag a complete
ary of ail the mendations made in she foregoing
pages. We have ind in each Chapter of this Revort. corres-
ponding to a Chapter of the Code. the provisions which should
be made in fiew of, or in addition to. the existin provisions, and
amendments. both major and minor. to he made in them
S Proposed by us are set out below in broad

(1) The extent clause should state the factual position,
vic, that the Code extends to the whole of India

cept the State of Iammu & Kashmir, the State of
Nagaland and the Tribal Areas in the State of
Assam.

(2) Steps should be taken te have the vatic Penal
Code end Crimizat Procedure Code operating in
Jammu & K: as in the rest of India.

(3) The jurisdiction of Criminal C relation to
territorial waters should be cla

“1 Wide (William) Slaney v. The State of Madhya Pradesh, (1955)
2 ५5.6 8, 1140, 1168.

Obie. 0 ree
sigh

Sumastey v4 main
chang

Proposed,


ro)

(6)

m

The rvaed Code should, while gig eet 1०

the:
separation of the executive from the
administration of cziminal jj jasticn, अवगत for
uniformity in the set-up of Crimi Courts, the
distinction een «Executive and Judiciat
Magistrates and their respective fonctions under

Exccutive Magistrates in, a istript should 7722:
the control of the State Government and 01
Distt Mest एकांत Magistrate, i
District tes (where necessary) and

i z
ढ़ i

;
ii
| E

z
Mii

jurisdiction,

Bombay;

Ahmedabad,

The institution should
extended. to other cities
one milion, है



(11)

६12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

369

When a person is arrested by the police without
warrant, he should be informed immediately of the

५ arrest and, if the arrest be for 8
5 Fight to be released on bail.

made for service by post of
10 witnesses.

or है, security procecdings under section
shou'd be the goncern of Executive
ad those under section 108, 109 and
oe handied by Judiciai Magistrates.

ard to abatement of public nuisances under
should be with the Executive
Assistance by jury provided for in
should be dispensed with.

tive Masistrates alone should have the power
09.3 uader sections i44, 145 and 147,

In regard to proceedings under sections 145 and
1 as to. immoveable property), the
prior to the amendments made in
1 be cestored.

161 relating to the examination of
s by the police, two changes should be
“ nersons shall be bound to answer truly
ut to them, and secondly when the

ment ©” a literate person is reduced to writing,
he should be cllowed to read and sign the state-
ment so recorded.

Section 167(2) should be amended to provide for
remands in custody during an investigation for a
period not exceeding 15 days at a time and 60 days
in the whole.

The duty of furnishing copies of police report,
statements of witnesses and documents to the
accused under section 173(4) should be assigned
to the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence.

In regard to petty offences adequately punishable
by a small fine. provision should be made for the
offender to send a plea of guilty and the proposed
fine instead of appearing before the Court.

Commitment proceedings in sessions cases should
be abolished. When the case is instituted on police
report, the Magistrate taking cognizance will only do
the preliminary work of supplying the accused with
copies of the police report. statements of witnesses,
documents etc.. and then send the case to the Court
of Session. When the case is instituted otherwise
than on a police report, the Magistrate should make
a preliminary inquiry as provided in section 202,
and then commit the case to the Court of Session.


(22)

423)

26)

(28)

(29)

(301

(31)

(321

433)

370

All provisions relating to trial by jury should be
ommitted.

Provision should be made that whe> the sccused is
i i Or a warrant-case he

on of sentence before

GL 1५ pass

Section 250 should b.

mia

sation up to the maximum
taf fine he is empowered to impose, when he
ied that there wis 00 reasonuble ground for

२ procedure to be followed in a cise where an
rporated company or ovher body corporate or 8
ader the Societies Registration
avcuscad. should be laid down in

The right of indigent accused person te assign-
ment of counsel at State expense should be  recog-
nised in the Code. at least in all sessions cases in the
n for extending it to other
istrates,

In order te avoid unnecessary commitment of cases to
the Court of Session, provision should be made for
subordinate Magistrates to submit cases to the Chief
Jedicial Magistrate for imposing adequate punish-
sient,

The provisions reining to the mode of recording
evidence and the language of the record in different
classes of cases should be systematised.

In regard to judgments in capital cases. the Judge
shoukl be required to state his reasons for award-
ing the particular sentence whether it be 2 sentence
of death or one of imprisonment for life.

Provision should be made for postponement of
execution of a death sentence in case of appeal to
the Supreme Court

5: '0 396(1) should be amended to authorise the
recovery of fine by the Collector as an arrear of
land revenue.

In cases where the Centra} Government is imme-
diately concerned. the State Government should
exercise its power to remit or commute the
sentences only in consultation with the Central
Government.

The right of appeal to the Supreme Court conferred
by article 134(1)(a) of the Constitution should be
extended to cases where a Hish Court has on appeal
reversed an order of acquittal and sentenced the
accused to imprisonment for life. ‘There should
also be a right of appeal when a person is convicted



(36)

(37)

(39)

(40)

an

(43)

37k

on a trial heid by a High Court and sentenced tc
imprisonment for more than six months ot to fine
exceeding Rs. 1,000. .

should be made for appeal by the
ament avactsi sentencs on the ground of वीर
inadequacy.

in order to combat pe

jury of a blatant kind, 5
recommended for punishing a
ex contradictory statements on oath

“ase

summary procedure
person who gi
in the same

Provisions for securing the attendance in Criminal
Courts of persons confined or detained in prisons.
whether for answering to a charge or for giving
evidence, should be included in the Code.

The Public Prosecutor of the district. should be
given 4 greater authority. a higher status and 8
wider range of functions than he has at present.
approximating to those of a Director of Public
Prosecutions. He should be an advocate of nat fess
than seven years’ standing and should have been
recommended by the High Court for appointment

‘The Code should provide the frame work for orga-
nising the prosecuting agencies in the district in a
systematic way

In order to prevent any conflict of interests bet-
ween the Centre and the State in the matter of
withdrawal from prosecutions, the State Public
Prosecutor in charge of a case of substantial con-
cero to the Central Government shoald obtain its
previous permission before withdrawing from the
prosecution.

Provision should be made enabling a person to
obtain “anticipatory bail order” from the High Court
or Court of Sessien in certain circumstances.

The provision in section 526(8) which obliges a
subordinate Court to stop all proccedin; # on the
mere intimation by a party that he intends to move
the High Court for transfer has tent itself to gross
abuse and should be repealed

Section S6TA which recognise, the “inherent
power” of the High Court should be expanded to
cover the inherent power of other Criminal Courts
to prevent abuse of their process or to secure the
ends of justice.

The Second Schedule which classifies offences from
five stand-points should be simplified. The number
of offences triable exclusively by the Court of
Session should be reduced,


€nactment of
new Code Re-
foniniznded,

372

48.3. It was observed by Sjr James Stephen in 1872 when
the Code was being first revised that con-tact revision and re-
enactment*was “as necessary as repairs cassary to @ railway.
1 do rot think any Act of impoctaace 0 to last for more than
ton or twelve you: ms oi UY 2 it shozid be care-
5 possible
d, it should

rd it fas besa
a:ions. The ८: recemmecdcd by us
are both so substantial atd numerous that “an Act further to
‘amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", as the draftsman
will crisply call the patchwork legislation, wil! not be satisfactory
We recommend that the Code should he replaced by a new Cri-
minal Procedure Code. and annex a draft for the purposc.

Chairman
1. K, V. K. SUNDARAM.

Members
2. $. $. DULAT,
3. MRS. ANNA CHANDI,
4. R. L. NARASIMHAM,*
5. $. BALAKRISHNAN, *

Secretary
Pp. M. BAKSHI.

‘New Delhi,
“The 24th September, 1969.

1 Gazette of India Supplement, May 4, 1872, page 534. Quoted in the
149 Report, Vol. 2, page 700. है

“Shri 2. 1... Narasimbsin and Shri 5. Balakrishnan have signed the
“Report, subject to the note eppended.



=

te

16163) and 162 €
5., Ne

The existing p.
(002 have hoon
the Couris and
tial changes in
sion but we two the recommenda-
tions of the m: amendments jn sec-
tion 151(3) and 162. leer opi . th: p . posed amendments
.do not solve uny of the tebe २६ 874 anomelics that
exist ut prescnt. Ner do thay deal with the root of the problem.

the contrary the prop.scd amerdaients may create further
difficulties and anomulics.

2. The fundamental anomaly in the existing provisions of
section 162 is that thoueh the statute orohibits th: use of the
‘Statements made to the police during inve' tiestia for the purpose
of corroboration (on the basic assumption th>t the police cannot
be trusted in this vd and that being sc‘f-se-ving statements
they cannat be relict! upon), meverth.izss pcrmits their use for
contradicting prosccution witnesses. Obvicusly, the earlier state-
ment to the police should have been cvrrectiv recorded even for
contradicting witnesses. If such statements can be considered to
be correctly recorded for the limited purpose of contradicting the
witness when he deposes in court, it seems to be wholly illogical
to say that they cannot be relied upon as accurate for the purpose
of corroboration. A record cannot at the same time be correct
and incorrect.

3. The second anomaly is that the use of these statements for
contradiction is permitted only for pro.ccution witnesses and not
for defence witnesses. There is no basis for this differentiation.
During police investigation no one can say whether a person
examined by the police will eventually figure as a prosecution wit-
ess or 2 defence witness. ff the statements made before the
Police by a person, who becomes a witness for the defence during
the trial, cannot be relied upon to contradict him, it is difficult to
understand how the same statement can be relied upon if the
person is examined as a prosecution witness. The tejority
opinion appears to be that it is not desirable to allow a witness


374

police Officer's record cannot be trusted so far as this class of
witnesses is concerned, how can it be trusted as regards the state-
menis of the other class of witnesses?

4. Again there is considerable difference of opinion as to
what is meant by “contradiction”. The Supreme Court has 20
doubt settled that a “material omission” may amount to a con-
wadiction, but there will alwavs be controversy as to whether a
particular omission is “material” or not. In our opinion, the
occasion for the revision of the Code should be taken to remove
alt doubts on the matter. The recommendations of the majority
would necessitate the continuance of the existing provisions and
would, theretore. perpetuate the difficulties.

5. According to the recommendations of the majority section
16113) is proposed to amended so as to permit 2 literate wit-
ness to sign his staterscnt as recorded by the police. The existing
prohibition in sect: 162 against the police taking the signature
‘of any person examined by them is proposed to be deleted. In our
opinion, this would make matters much worse than at present.
With the removal of the statutory ban on the police to get the sig-
natures of witnesses. there is nothing to prevent the police from
compelling a witness, either literate or illiterate, to sign or to give
his thamb impression on what purports to be the statement of
the witness. A signed statement will certainly discourage even
a truthful witness from departing from it even if he wishes to tell
the truth before the court. At present he can at least say that
what is recorded bv the police is not what he stated. But if he
were to sien the statement, this stand would be very difficult
for him to take and he has to sacrifice truth at the alter of con-
sistency

6. We are, therefore. of opinion that the recommendations ot
ihe majority would not improve matters and we, therefore, have
an alternative suggestion in this regard, which is explained fully
in the succeeding paragraphs.

7. At the outset it is desirable to refer to some sections of the
Indian Evidence Act which have a bearing on police investiga~
tion. Section 157 of that Act enables a party to corroborate the
testimony of its witness by proof of a former statement made by
jim before an officer authorised to investigate a fact. Section
145 read with section 155(3) of that Act enables the adverse
party to discredit that witness by proof of previous statements in-
consistent with his deposition in court. These provisions have
been made with a view (0 ensure fair trial—fair both for the party
producing that witness and for the adverse party. In a criminal
case the prosecution is, therefore, entitled to show that the version
5 put forward by a witness before the court is not a belated ver-
sion but that it was pat forward at the earliest opportunity dur-
ing investigation. Similarly, the defence is entitled to bring out
contradictions between the deposition of that witness in Court
and his earlier statements for the purpose of discrediting him.
These two rights of the rival parties should be carefully bome in
mind by the authorities in revising Chapter XIV of the
Criminal Procedure Cede it is true that the Legislature can
take away or abridge these rights conferred by the Evidence Act:

aa

74


~*~

875

but as the primary objective ef a Criminal Procedure Code
in any country (where the rule of law prevails) is to ensure fair
trial of an accused, it is clear that nothing in the Criminal Pro-
cedure Code should substantially take away or abridge | these
rights. For the proper exercise of these rights it is essential that
the earlier statement of a witness should be recorded accurately.
The agency employed for the purpose and the mode of recording
the same should be such as to ensure the accuracy of record,

8. A word of caution is necessary at this stage. Merely by
providing for an accurate record of the earlier statement of a
witness the framers of the Code cannot obviously guarantee its
truth. A witness may consistently prejure on oath whereas a
truthful witness may make inconsistent statements on two occa-
sions, but when an opportunity is given, he may be able to explain
the inconsistency to the satisfaction of the Court. The truth or
otherwise of the statement of a witness will have to be judged
by the Court concerned not only on the basis of his consistency,
or contradictions, but also on other considerations such as the
inherent improbabality of the story, the divergent versions put
forward by different witnesses, the interestedness or cnmity of
the deponent and such other factors. It is not the function of
the framers of the Code to deal with these in the Code, They
tuust be left to be decided by the Court in each case.

9, For the same reason, it is not the function of the framers
of the Code to provide for complete elimination of all influences
when a witness makes his statement on oath. It may be that his
earlier statement during police investigation is made under police
influence, or else it may be given voluntarily or under the in-
fluence of the informant’s party. Similarly, his subsequent depo-
sition in Court may be made when the influence mentioned in the
Proceeding sentence continues to persist, or else it may be made
under the influence of the accused who has pained him over to
his side. These again are matters for the Court to consider while
iudging about the credibility of the witness. The revision of the
Criminal Procedure Code should not be mixed up with these irre-
Jevant considerations which tend to confuse the real issues,

10. It is true that confessions made under police infiuen

held to be inadmissible in law but the Caminal Procedure Code
while providing for the record of a confession in section 164 has
made adequate provisions for removal of such influence. The
Evidence Act nowhere says that the statement of a witness is in-
admissible in law merely because it is made either under the in-
fluence of the police or of the informant or of the accused and
hence these matters should be ignored while Tevising the Code
for this purpose.

11. Police investigation under Chapter XIV
divided into the following two aspects : may be broadly

{a) tracing out of the culprit and the collecti

tials to be used against him dariog trial; ange mater
(b) preparation of a record durin; investigatic

wil be of aid or assistance dating trial, on which


376

12. Under the first will come the F.LR,, the tracing out and
questioning of the witnesses whose statements would lead to the
detection of the criminal, the seatch and recovery of incrimina-
tory articles and the preparation of the search list etc. Under the
second will come the facts observed by the ९ police officer at the
spot during investigation, the work done by bim every day includ-
jag the dates on which the various witnesses were examined by bim
and a summary of their statements made to him. The F.LR. is
admissible as corroborative evidence under section 157 of the
Evidence Act when the informant comes to Court and repeats
the version given in the F.LR, It may also be used by the ad-
verse party to contradict him if there is a material discrepancy.
Similarly, the search list is admissible in Court as corroborative
evidence if the officer conducting the search comes forward as
a witness and proves the search and recovery of the incriminat-
ing articles. These two documents, namely, the F.LR, and the
search list, are prepared by the investigating police officer but the
Code contains adequate safeguards to ensure their accuracy.
Thus section 154 requires the F.LR. to be recorded verbatim in
the very language of the informant (as far as possible}, to be
read over and explained to him and to be signed by him. In
some States the Police Manual further requires the Investigating
Officer to get the F.LR, attested by some respectable witnesses
who may be present at the time of the lodging of the F.I.R. Sec-
tion 157(1) turther requites the 1.0. to send the F.LR. at once
to the Magistrate taking cognizance on police report. Hence,
though subsequent interpolations in the F.1.R, are not unknown,
nevertheless the aforesaid provisions, to a large extent, ensure
their accuracy. Similarly, the search list is required to be pre-
pared in the presence of two respectable witnesses who are 16-
quired to attest the same. A copy of it must be sent forthwith to
the nearest Magistrate taking cognizance on police report and
the occupier of the house searched is required to be given a cop)
of the same [section 165(4) read with sub-section (3) and (4
of section 103].

__13, The most unsatisfactory section in Chapter XIV is sec-
tion 162, The 3.0. is authorised to record the statement of 2
wwitbess without even disclosing to the witness what he has written.
The witness is not required to sign the same nor is a copy required
to be sent to the nearest Magistrate with a view to prevent inter-
polation. In consequence, there is no guarantee of the accuracy
of the record of the statement of a witness as made by the 1.0,
It is a notorious fact (which has been admitted by almost all the
persons examined by us) that the statement of a witness recorded
under sections 161 and 162 is not necessarily what the witness
actually said but is a record of what the LO, wants the witness to
say. Indeed, cases were brought to our notice in which so called
statements were recorded without examining the witness at all.
The 1.0. is enabled to do so by the language of the section.
Moreover, while such statement is considered unreliable for the
purposes of corroboration, it suddenly becomes and is treated as
reliable for the ‘purpose of contradiction | Even if a witness
speaks the truth before the court, his evidence becomes unworthy
of credence if what he says in court contradicts what the police
officer chose to record as a so-called statement,


377

14, There is a well reconnised charge that the non-gazetted
police staff is generally corrupt. To quote the Report of the
Dethi Police Commission, 1966-68, Vol. I, at page 490 :—

“Corruption to a large extent is, to be found among the
non-gazetted staff of the ‘Delhi Police. Among the higher
staff there is lack of proper supervision, control and discip-
fine. To this must be added the distressing fact, that though
the improbity of the subordinate police and the misdeme-
anours committed by the Jower ranks are fully within the
knowledge of the senior officers of the department, no really
effective or determined effort to efadicate this evil is being
made.”

The Police Commissions of other States also have observed on
similar lines. But strangely enough the definition ‘of an “officer
incharse” of the police station in the Criminal Procedure Code
refers to the Sub-Inspector of Police and his subordinates who are
all non-gazetted police officers. ‘Thus, under the existing provi-
sions of the Code, the preparation of the earliest record of the
statement of a witness is left in the hands of an agency whose
integrity is highly doubtful and the mode of recording as provided
in section 162 does not ensure the accuracy of the record. It is
well known that many good cases are spoilt by the insidious in-
correct entries made in the diary by the 1.0. at the instance of
the accused and it is also well ‘known that many innocent persons
are sent up along with the guilty of the I.O. is gained over by the
informant’s party.

15. In Western Europe it is generally considered an essen-
tial guarantee of the impartiality of the preliminary investigation
that it be conducted independently of the ‘prosecuting afm and
subject to the control of the courts. ‘This means that the French
judge d’ instruction of the German Untersuchungsrichter is
(theoretically, at least) not subject to the influence of the prose-
cuting arm in determining whether or not to indict; it also means
that any abuses of the rights of the accused by the judge 0" ins-
truction or Untersuchungarichter may ‘be appealed to the courts.
(See Soviet Criminal Law and Procedure by Harold J. Berman,
p. 75). In Russia, however, investigation is controlled not by the
judiciary but by a quasi-judicial independent body under the con-
trol of the Procurator-General and his subordinate staff who are
also independent of the executive. In India, at present, it may
not be practicable to adopt wholly either the French or the Ger-
man system or the Russian system ‘of controlling investigation.
Nevertheless, an important step towards effective control of in-
vestigation may be made if the preparation of the record of the
statement of witnesses during investigation is taken out of the
police and entrusted with the Magistracy.

16. In our opinion the most satisfactory solution for the pre-
sent difficulties and anamolies would be to amend section 164 so
as to make it mandatory for the 1.0. to send to the nearest Magis-
trate all material witnesses questioned by him during the course
of investigation and have their statements recorded on oath by
that magistrate. If the Magistrate is the, Magistrate taking cogni-
that 0285५ 0५ report he will Keop the depositions along wilt


378

the F.LR. [which must have been received by him under section
157(1}} and await further report from the 1.8. such as charge-
sheet or finat report under section 173. He should also be re-
quired to grant copies of the depositions to the 1.0. (so that his
papers may be complete) and also to deponents and other parties
who mav ask for the same. If, however, he is not the Magistrate
taking cognizance on police report but some other Magistrate,
he should be required to send the depositions after record to the
former Magistrate for further action. The necessity for making
this provision arises because some of the places af the commis-
sion of crime though somewhat distant from. the place where the
Magistrate taking cognizance on police report is stationed, mav
be more proximate to another Magistrate stationed close by. The
witness should not be harrassed bv being required to proceed to
a tonger distance than is absolutely necessary. With quick means
of transport available nowadavs. it will be practicable to produce
the witness before the Magistrate within a dav or two after their
questioning by the police so that the record of the statement under
section 164 mav be made at the earliest onportunity. Tt will be
a statement made on oath in oven court recorded by the Magis-
trate in his own hand. read over and exvlained to the witness and
after havine been admitted as correct. siened by him. Its accu-
racy therefore will be bevond question.

17. There can really be no objection to thie suogestion on
princinle because section 164 even now enables the recording
of statements of witnesses bv a Macistrate during investiestion.
All that we suesest is that the provisione of this section should
be resorted to in respect of all material witnesses instead of leav-
ing it ta the sweet will of the police to choose the witnesses who
should be examined under section 164,

18. Tt mav. however. be urged that instead of sending the
witnesses to the nearest Magistrate if section 162 is amended and
the laneuage of section 154 is adovted. accuracy of the record
mav be ensured. Bnt, the number of witnesses examined during
investigation of a case fs sufficiently large and if in resvect of
every such witness the 1.0. is required to record his statement in
his own language. read it over and exolain it to him and obtain
his stenature and if possible to get the same attested by two
witnesses, considerable time will be taken by the 1.0, for this
purvose and to some extent investization will be hampered.
Moreover. the record by the 1.0, is not made in public as is done
by a Magistrate and there will alwavs be reasonable grounds to
suspect that the record as prepared bv him is not a true record
especially where the witnesses are illiterate. An alternative sug-
gestion has been made that.a gazetted police officer may be re-
quired to record the statements of witnesses during investigation.
Tt is true that the eazetted police officers’ reputation for intecrity
is much higher than that of the non-gazetted staff but we consider
that it is much better to have the statements recorded by Magis-
trates as this will ensure greater confidence in the public. The
statements before the Magistrates are made on oath and they are
recorded in open court whereas even before gazetted police offi-
cers these salutary checks will be lacking,

19, One of the distinct advantages of our recommendation is
that 2 person accusing another person of the commimion of @

Na


379

cognisable offence is required to make his statement on cath in
public. It is on his statement along with other materials collected
by the police during investigation that the latter person is placed
on trial. Under modern conditions the mere placing on trial of
a person on a criminal charge causes great harrasment, mental
agony, loss of reputation and heavy expenditure to that person.
His subsequent acquittal after trial is not sufficient consolation or
adequate compensation for the trouble and expenditure to which
he is put in defending himself. It is, we think very unfair that
a person should be put in jeopardy of his liberty by having to face
8 trial unless his accuser is prepared to incriminate him on oath
jn public. At present enemies of an innocent person may give
his name along with the names of the guilty to the police during
investigation and their statements will be recorded confidentally
by the police under section 162. If they can induce the police
to believe their statements, that innocent person also will have to
face trial. Thus the existing provisions of the Code encourage
the placing on trial of a person on mere confidential information
given to the police by persons who at that stage are not required
to make their accusation on oath. This type of harrasment of 8
person on the basis of confidential information is in the nature
of a stab in the back and should be avoided.

20. It fs true that the investication and the tracing out of a
culprit should be facilitated and the sources of information given
to the police should not be disclosed as otherwise many crimes
can not be detected. But it is also necessarv that until the cul-
prit is traced out and accused of the commission of an offence his
accuser must be prepared to say so before a Magistrate prior to
his beine placed on trial to prevent irresponsible statements to
the Police,

21. This principle has been recognised in the Code in respect
of a non-cognisable offence. Ona mere complaint of an non-
cognisable offence, the Magistrate will not summon the accused.
Under section 200 the complainant is required to substantiate his
statement on oath. The witnesses, if any, brought by him to the
Magistrate are required to be examined on oath. Even there-
after if the Magistrate entertains some doubt, a judicial enquiry
is made under section 202 where other witnesses of the complain-
ant are examined on oath. It is only then that the accused is
summoned to face a trial. Thus, when for 8 minor non-cognis-
able offence the Code requires the accuser to make his statement
‘on oath before the accused is placed on trial, it seems grossly
unfair that for serious cognisable offences a person should be
asked to face a trial on the basis of confidential information given
to the police during investigation. This inconsistency will be re-
moved if our suggestion is accepted.

22, We may now refer to possible criticism against the sugges~
tion and meet them. Firstly, it may be urged that during investi-
gation it will be very difficult to know who are the material wit-
nesses and the 1.0. will have to be given wide discretion in pick-
ing out and choosing those persons who should be seat to the
Magistrate under section 164. By “material witnesses” is meant
those witnesses who either by direct evidence or circumstantial
evidence incriminate an accused. They need not necessarily be


380

eye witnesses to the actual commission of the crime. We agree
that some discretion would necessarily remain with the 1.0., but,
with a view to prevent the LO. from deliberately withholding
those witnesses who may not support his view of the prosecution
case, provision may be made in section 164 to enable anyone,
other than those sent up by the 1.0., to appear, of his own
accord, before the Magistrate and state on oath what he knows
about the crime and the offender. Secondly, if may be urged
that bv requirine the witness to make his statement on oath at
the time when he is under notice influence his mouth is, as it
were. sealed and if the earlier statement is an untrue statement
made under police influence, he will find it difficult to speak out
the truth during the trial because of the threat of prosecution for
perjury. This argument assumes that a statement on oath made
while under police influence is untrue and that the subsequent
deposition of the witness in Court is true. Such an assumption
is not wholly justified. In a large number of instances the earliest
statement of a witness whether under police influence or other-
wise is true and his subsequent deposition in Court is untrue
havine been brought about by the influence of the accused, In
any case, the question whether the first or the second statement
is the correct one, should be decided by the Court. If in some
of the cases the trying court finds that the earlier statement is an
untrue statement made under police influence it will refuse to
prosecute him for perjury. These questions must be left for the
consideration of the trying court and should not weigh with the
framers of the Code. Thirdly, it may be urged that the witnesses
who are taken to a Magistrate for recording their statements would
be overawed bv the police and commelled to sav that the police
want them to say. Our attention was also drawn to the observa-
tions of the Supreme Court on the need to exercise utmost caution
in using statements under section 164. We are auite alive to all
these but would noint out that even now section 164 is there on
the statute book and no one has suevested 4ts deletion on the
grounds stated above. Further, we are not for a moment suggest-
ine that the statement under section 164 would have any more
probative vate than what it has today.

23. Fourthlv. it may be urged that investieation will be very
much hampered if the Investizating Police Officer is reauired to
take the material witness everv time to the nearest Magistrate for
recording his statement under section 164. This objection seems
to have weighed to some extent with the majority of our colleagues.
With great respect, however, we would point out that it is not
alwavs necessary for the Investigating Police Officer to personally
escort the material witnesses to the nearest Macistrate and there-
by interrunt his investigation. It is sufficient if he either directs
them to appear before the Magistrate or sives them assistance
such as Police escort and reasonable expenses so that they Teay
arrive at the Court of the Magistrate as soon as possible. He may
send a confidential note to the Assistant Public Prosecutor or
Police Prosecuting Agency who are nowadays stationed in all
courts so that during examination of these witnesses under section
164 they may be questioned by such an agency while their state-
ment is being recorded by the Magistrate. With a view to com-
pel these witnesses to appear before the Magistrate under section
164 provision may be made in that section on lines similar to


section 160 requiring their appearance before the Magistrate if
80 intimated by the IO. Provision may be made for the pay-
ment of his reasonable expenses including transport charges.

24. The other objections against the aforesaid suggestion are
all of an administrative nature. Difficulties of xansport, cost of
bringing the witnesses to the Magistrate’s Court, the extra labour
that will have to be put in by the Magistrate, are all referred to.
But, in our opinion, these difficulties are not insurmountable apd
they should not, stand im the way of the Code fulfilling one of
the essential requirements of a fair trial, namely, the preparation
of an accurate record of the earliest statement of a witness. It
is true that in one sense the record of the statement made under
section 164 is not the earliest statement of a witness, that state-
ment having been made earlier before the Investigating Police
Officer. But the interval between the two statements will not
exceed a day or two in a large number of instances as pointed
out in paragraph 16. The statement recorded by the police
should be made wholly inadmissible for any purposes of the Code
and hence the earliest statement for the purposes of the Code may
be held to be the statement recorded under section 164.

25. To sum up, the main advantages of our recommendations
are i

i. An accurate record of the earliest statement of a witness
is made available for both the prosecution and the defence.

ii, A person who makes a statement accusing anybody of
the commission of a copnisable offence is required to make his
accusation on oath in public. This prevents stabbing people in
the dark as is now possible.

By making a statement on oath at the earliest opportunity
the witness is put under some check with a view to discourage
him from making a different statement on oath during trial under
the influence of the accused, It is true that there are some harden-
ed perjuters whom no threat of perjury would deter a larger pum-
ber of witnesses having made statements on oath would not agree
to go back on those statements at the instance of the accused. It
is not unlikely that the police may welcome such a suggestiun.
Allegations that diaries are manipulated, that the police officer
writes what he wants to write in the diary etc. will no longer be
made and the police will be free to complete the investigation
and decide on submitting final report or chargesheet on the basis
of the statements on oath made by witnesses and other facts and
circumstances such as recovery of incriminating articles, facts
observed during local inspection, presence of injury on the ac-
cused and other corroborative pieces of evidence.

26. We shall now briefly mention the various sections of
Chapter XIV which will have to be amended for implementing
the suggestion :

(1) In section 161, sub-section (3) should be omitted,

(2) Section 162 should be recast by omitting the proviso to
sub-section (1). Sub-section (2) should be retained.

Note:—This exception in favour of dying declarations and

section 27 of the Evidence Act is by way of neces-

sity. sone

hee oat


(3) Section 164 should be recast so as to make it obligatory
for the Investigating Police Officer to sead up to the Magistrate
ail material witnesses examined by him during investigation. Pro-
vision should aiso be made requiring those witnesses if summoned
by the 1.0. to appear before the Magistrate mentioned in the
Notice. There will also be a further provision to the effect that
apart from witnesses either sent up or summoned to appear be-
fore the Magistrate, any person will be entitled to appear befcre
the Mapistrate, and make his own statement as regards the
offence under investigation and the identity of the culprit.

(4) If the Magistrate is the Magistrate taking cognisance on
Police report of the offence under investigation, be should after
recording the statements of the witnesses on oath send copies
of the same to the investigating police Officer and also grant 1
copies to the deponent and other persons who may ask for the
same. He should keep the original depositions along with the 1

original F.L.R. seat to him under section 157(1). Lf, however,

he is not the Magistrate taking cognisance on police report in
respect of the offence under investigation, he should, after record- ~
ing the statements, forward the same to that Magistrate.

(5) In section 172 it should be expressly provided that the .

statements of witnesses if recorded by the police during investiga-
tion shall not form part of the diary mentioned in this section
and 00 court or any party will be entitled to call for the same.
That record must remain a confidential paper accessible only to
the superior police officers who may supervise the investigation
made by the 1.0. and also to the Police Prosecutors and the
A.P.Ps and P.Ps., if they so desire,

(6) Consequential amendment should be made to sub-section
(4) of section 173. As all material papers will be with the
Magistrate taking cognizance on police report, the duty of grant-
ing copies must be left with him and not with the LO, mam

27. Many other sections of the Code may have to be amended '
as a consequential step but it is not necessary to refer to them |

ee

in this Note,

R. L. NARASIMHAM
Member

S. BALAKRISHNAN
Member

LSSHAO-—GIPP. a